***Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Scarecrow of Oz by Baum****
#9 in the L. Frank Baum's Wonderful World Of Oz Series
We are now naming the files as they are numbered in the books--
i.e. This is #9 in the series so the file name is 09wozxxx.xxx,
where the x's are place holders for editon # and file type such
as 09woz10.txt and 09woz10.zip, when we do a .htm, 09woz10h.htm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Scarecrow of Oz

by L. Frank Baum

June, 1997  [Etext #957]


***Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Scarecrow of Oz by Baum****
*****This file should be named 09woz10.txt or 09woz10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 09woz11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 09woz10a.txt.


This Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Anthony Matonac.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





THE SCARECROW of OZ

Dedicated to

"The uplifters" of Los Angeles, California, in
grateful appreciation of the pleasure I have derived
from association with them, and in recognition of
their sincere endeavor to uplift humanity through
kindness, consideration and good-fellowship. They are
big men--all of them--and all with the generous
hearts of little children.

L. Frank Baum




THE SCARECROW of OZ
by L. Frank Baum


"TWIXT YOU AND ME

The Army of Children which besieged the Postoffice,
conquered the Postmen and delivered to me its imperious
Commands, insisted that Trot and Cap'n Bill be admitted
to the Land of Oz, where Trot could enjoy the society
of Dorothy, Betsy Bobbin and Ozma, while the one-
legged sailor-man might become a comrade of the Tin
Woodman, the Shaggy Man, Tik-Tok and all the other
quaint people who inhabit this wonderful fairyland.

It was no easy task to obey this order and land Trot
and Cap'n Bill safely in Oz, as you will discover by
reading this book. Indeed, it required the best efforts
of our dear old friend, the Scarecrow, to save them
from a dreadful fate on the journey; but the story
leaves them happily located in Ozma's splendid palace
and Dorothy has promised me that Button-Bright and the
three girls are sure to encounter, in the near future,
some marvelous adventures in the Land of Oz, which I
hope to be permitted to relate to you in the next Oz
Book.

Meantime, I am deeply grateful to my little readers
for their continued enthusiasm over the Oz stories, as
evinced in the many letters they send me, all of which
are lovingly cherished. It takes more and more Oz Books
every year to satisfy the demands of old and new
readers, and there have been formed many "Oz Reading
Societies," where the Oz Books owned by different
members are read aloud.  All this is very gratifying to
me and encourages me to write more stories. When the
children have had enough of them, I hope they will let
me know, and then I'll try to write something
different.

L. Frank Baum
"Royal Historian of Oz."
"OZCOT"
at HOLLYWOOD
in CALIFORNIA, 1915.



LIST OF CHAPTERS
 1 - The Great Whirlpool
 2 - The Cavern Under the Sea
 3 - Daylight at Last:
 4 - The Little Old Man of the Island
 5 - The Flight of the Midgets
 6 - The Dumpy Man
 7 - Button-Bright is Lost, and Found Again
 8 - The Kingdom of Jinxland
 9 - Pan, the Gardener's Boy
10 - The Wicked King and Googly-Goo
11 - The Wooden-Legged Grasshopper
12 - Glinda the Good and the Scarecrow of Oz
13 - The Frozen Heart
14 - Trot Meets the Scarecrow
15 - Pon Summons the King to Surrender
16 - The Ork Rescues Button-Bright
17 - The Scarecrow Meets an Enemy
18 - The Conquest of the Witch
19 - Queen Gloria
20 - Dorothy, Betsy and Ozma
21 - The Waterfall
22 - The Land of Oz
23 - The Royal Reception




Chapter One

The Great Whirlpool


"Seems to me," said Cap'n Bill, as he sat beside Trot
under the big acacia tree, looking out over the blue
ocean, "seems to me, Trot, as how the more we know, the
more we find we don't know."

"I can't quite make that out, Cap'n Bill," answered
the little girl in a serious voice, after a moment's
thought, during which her eyes followed those of the
old sailor-man across the glassy surface of the sea.
"Seems to me that all we learn is jus' so much gained."

"I know; it looks that way at first sight," said the
sailor, nodding his head; "but those as knows the least
have a habit of thinkin' they know all there is to
know, while them as knows the most admits what a
turr'ble big world this is. It's the knowing ones that
realize one lifetime ain't long enough to git more'n a
few dips o' the oars of knowledge."

Trot didn't answer. She was a very little girl, with
big, solemn eyes and an earnest, simple manner.
Cap'n Bill had been her faithful companion for years
and had taught her almost everything she knew.

He was a wonderful man, this Cap'n Bill. Not so
very old, although his hair was grizzled -- what there
was of it. Most of his head was bald as an egg and
as shiny as oilcloth, and this made his big ears stick
out in a funny way. His eyes had a gentle look and
were pale blue in color, and his round face was rugged
and bronzed. Cap'n Bill's left leg was missing, from
the knee down, and that was why the sailor no longer
sailed the seas. The wooden leg he wore was good
enough to stump around with on land, or even to take
Trot out for a row or a sail on the ocean, but when it
came to "runnin' up aloft" or performing active
duties on shipboard, the old sailor was not equal to
the task. The loss of his leg had ruined his career
and the old sailor found comfort in devoting himself
to the education and companionship of the little girl.

The accident to Cap'n Bill's leg bad happened at
about the time Trot was born, and ever since that he
had lived with Trot's mother as "a star boarder,"
having enough money saved up to pay for his weekly
"keep."  He loved the baby and often held her on
his lap; her first ride was on Cap'n Bill's shoulders,
for she had no baby-carriage; and when she began
to toddle around, the child and the sailor became
close comrades and enjoyed many strange adventures
together. It is said the fairies had been present at
Trot's birth and had marked her forehead with their
invisible mystic signs, so that she was able to see and
do many wonderful things.

The acacia tree was on top of a high bluff, but a
path ran down the bank in a zigzag way to the water's
edge, where Cap'n Bill's boat was moored to a rock
by means of a stout cable. It had been a hot, sultry
afternoon, with scarcely a breath of air stirring, so
Cap'n Bill and Trot had been quietly sitting beneath
the shade of the tree, waiting for the sun to get low
enough for them to take a row.

They had decided to visit one of the great caves
which the waves had washed out of the rocky coast
during many years of steady effort. The caves were
a source of continual delight to both the girl and the
sailor, who loved to explore their awesome depths.

"I b'lieve, Cap'n," remarked Trot, at last, "that
it's time for us to start."

The old man cast a shrewd glance at the sky, the
sea and the motionless boat. Then he shook his head.

"Mebbe it's time, Trot," he answered, "but I don't
jes' like the looks o' things this afternoon."

"What's wrong?" she asked wonderingly.

"Can't say as to that. Things is too quiet to suit
me, that's all. No breeze, not a ripple a-top the water,
nary a gull a-flyin' anywhere, an' the end o' the hottest
day o' the year. I ain't no weather-prophet, Trot, but
any sailor would know the signs is ominous."

"There's nothing wrong that I can see," said Trot.

"If there was a cloud in the sky even as big as my
thumb, we might worry about it; but -- look, Cap'n! --
the sky is as clear as can be."

He looked again and nodded.

"P'r'aps we can make the cave, all right," he agreed,
not wishing to disappoint her.  "It's only a little way
out, an' we'll be on the watch; so come along, Trot."

Together they descended the winding path to the
beach. It was no trouble for the girl to keep her
footing on the steep way, but Cap'n Bill, because of
his wooden leg, had to hold on to rocks and roots now
and then to save himself from tumbling. On a level path
he was as spry as anyone, but to climb up hill or down
required some care.

They reached the boat safely and while Trot was
untying the rope Cap'n Bill reached into a crevice of
the rock and drew out several tallow candles and a box
of wax matches, which he thrust into the capacious
pockets of his "sou'wester."  This sou'wester was a
short coat of oilskin which the old sailor wore on all
occasions -- when he wore a coat at all -- and the
pockets always contained a variety of objects, useful
and ornamental, which made even Trot wonder where they
all came from and why Cap'n Bill should treasure them.
The jackknives -- a big one and a little one -- the bits
of cord, the fishhooks, the nails: these were handy to
have on certain occasions. But bits of shell, and tin
boxes with unknown contents, buttons, pincers, bottles
of curious stones and the like, seemed quite
unnecessary to carry around. That was Cap'n Bill's
business, however, and now that he added the candles
and the matches to his collection Trot made no comment,
for she knew these last were to light their way through
the caves. The sailor always rowed the boat, for he
handled the oars with strength and skill. Trot sat in
the stern and steered. The place where they embarked
was a little bight or circular bay, and the boat cut
across a much larger bay toward a distant headland
where the caves were located, right at the water's
edge. They were nearly a mile from shore and about
halfway across the bay when Trot suddenly sat up
straight and exclaimed: "What's that, Cap'n?"

He stopped rowing and turned half around to look.

"That, Trot," he slowly replied, "looks to me mighty
like a whirlpool."

"What makes it, Cap'n?"

"A whirl in the air makes the whirl in the water. I
was afraid as we'd meet with trouble, Trot. Things
didn't look right. The air was too still."

"It's coming closer," said the girl.

The old man grabbed the oars and began rowing with
all his strength.

"'Tain't comin' closer to us, Trot," he gasped; "it's
we that are comin' closer to the whirlpool. The thing
is drawin' us to it like a magnet!"

Trot's sun-bronzed face was a little paler as she
grasped the tiller firmly and tried to steer the boat
away; but she said not a word to indicate fear.

The swirl of the water as they came nearer made a
roaring sound that was fearful to listen to. So fierce
and powerful was the whirlpool that it drew the surface
of the sea into the form of a great basin, slanting
downward toward the center, where a big hole had been
made in the ocean -- a hole with walls of water that
were kept in place by the rapid whirling of the air.

The boat in which Trot and Cap'n Bill were riding was
just on the outer edge of this saucer-like slant, and
the old sailor knew very well that unless he could
quickly force the little craft away from the rushing
current they would soon be drawn into the great black
hole that yawned in the middle. So he exerted all his
might and pulled as he had never pulled before. He
pulled so hard that the left oar snapped in two and
sent Cap'n Bill sprawling upon the bottom of the boat.

He scrambled up quickly enough and glanced over the
side. Then he looked at Trot, who sat quite still, with
a serious, far-away look in her sweet eyes. The boat
was now speeding swiftly of its own accord, following
the line of the circular basin round and round and
gradually drawing nearer to the great hole in the
center. Any further effort to escape the whirlpool was
useless, and realizing this fact Cap'n Bill turned
toward Trot and put an arm around her, as if to shield
her from the awful fate before them.  He did not try to
speak, because the roar of the waters would have
drowned the sound of his voice.

These two faithful comrades had faced dangers before,
but nothing to equal that which now faced them. Yet
Cap'n Bill, noting the look in Trot's eyes and
remembering how often she had been protected by unseen
powers, did not quite give way to despair.

The great hole in the dark water -- now growing
nearer and nearer -- looked very terrifying; but they
were both brave enough to face it and await the result
of the adventure.




Chapter Two

The Cavern Under the Sea



The circles were so much smaller at the bottom of the
basin, and the boat moved so much more swiftly, that
Trot was beginning to get dizzy with the motion, when
suddenly the boat made a leap and dived headlong into
the murky depths of the hole. Whirling like tops, but
still clinging together, the sailor and the girl were
separated from their boat and plunged down -- down --
down -- into the farthermost recesses of the great
ocean.

At first their fall was swift as an arrow, but
presently they seemed to be going more moderately and
Trot was almost sure that unseen arms were about her,
supporting her and protecting her. She could see
nothing, because the water filled her eyes and blurred
her vision, but she clung fast to Cap'n Bill's
sou'wester, while other arms clung fast to her, and so
they gradually sank down and down until a full stop was
made, when they began to ascend again.

But it seemed to Trot that they were not rising
straight to the surface from where they had come. The
water was no longer whirling them and they seemed to be
drawn in a slanting direction through still, cool ocean
depths. And then -- in much quicker time than I have
told it -- up they popped to the surface and were cast
at full length upon a sandy beach, where they lay
choking and gasping for breath and wondering what had
happened to them.

Trot was the first to recover. Disengaging herself
from Cap'n Bill's wet embrace and sitting up, she
rubbed the water from her eyes and then looked around
her.  A soft, bluish-green glow lighted the place,
which seemed to be a sort of cavern, for above and on
either side of her were rugged rocks. They had been
cast upon a beach of clear sand, which slanted upward
from the pool of water at their feet -- a pool which
doubtless led into the big ocean that fed it. Above the
reach of the waves of the pool were more rocks, and
still more and more, into the dim windings and recesses
of which the glowing light from the water did not
penetrate.

The place looked grim and lonely, but Trot was
thankful that she was still alive and had suffered no
severe injury during her trying adventure under water.
At her side Cap'n Bill was sputtering and coughing,
trying to get rid of the water he had swallowed. Both
of them were soaked through, yet the cavern was warm
and comfortable and a wetting did not dismay the little
girl in the least.

She crawled up the slant of sand and gathered in her
hand a bunch of dried seaweed, with which she mopped
the face of Cap'n Bill and cleared the water from his
eyes and ears. Presently the old man sat up and stared
at her intently. Then he nodded his bald head three
times and said in a gurgling voice:

"Mighty good, Trot; mighty good! We didn't reach Davy
Jones's locker that time, did we? Though why we didn't,
an' why we're here, is more'n I kin make out."

"Take it easy, Cap'n," she replied. "We're safe
enough, I guess, at least for the time being."

He squeezed the water out of the bottoms of his loose
trousers and felt of his wooden leg and arms and head,
and finding he had brought all of his person with him
he gathered courage to examine closely their
surroundings.

"Where d'ye think we are, Trot?." he presently asked.

"Can't say, Cap'n. P'r'aps in one of our caves."

He shook his head. "No," said he, "I don't think
that, at all.  The distance we came up didn't seem half
as far as the distance we went down; an' you'll notice
there ain't any outside entrance to this cavern
whatever. It's a reg'lar dome over this pool o' water,
and unless there's some passage at the back, up yonder,
we're fast pris'ners."

Trot looked thoughtfully over her shoulder.

"When we're rested," she said, "we will crawl up
there and see if there's a way to get out."

Cap'n Bill reached in the pocket of his oilskin coat
and took out his pipe. It was still dry, for he kept it
in an oilskin pouch with his tobacco. His matches were
in a tight tin box, so in a few moments the old sailor
was smoking contentedly. Trot knew it helped him to
think when he was in any difficulty. Also, the pipe did
much to restore the old sailor's composure, after his
long ducking and his terrible fright -- a fright that
was more on Trot's account than his own.

The sand was dry where they sat, and soaked up the
water that dripped from their clothing. When Trot had
squeezed the wet out of her hair she began to feel much
like her old self again. By and by they got upon their
feet and crept up the incline to the scattered boulders
above. Some of these were of huge size, but by passing
between some and around others, they were able to reach
the extreme rear of the cavern.

"Yes," said Trot, with interest, "here's a round
hole."

"And it's black as night inside it," remarked Cap'n
Bill.

Just the same," answered the girl, "we ought to
explore it, and see where it goes, 'cause it's the only
poss'ble way we can get out of this place."

Cap'n Bill eyed the hole doubtfully

"It may be a way out o' here, Trot," he said, "but it
may be a way into a far worse place than this. I'm not
sure but our best plan is to stay right here."

Trot wasn't sure, either, when she thought of it in
that light. After awhile she made her way back to the
sands again, and Cap'n Bill followed her. As they sat
down, the child looked thoughtfully at the sailor's
bulging pockets.

"How much food have we got, Cap'n?" she asked.

"Half a dozen ship's biscuits an' a hunk o' cheese,"
he replied. "Want some now, Trot?"

She shook her head, saying:

"That ought to keep us alive 'bout three days if
we're careful of it."

"Longer'n that, Trot," said Cap'n Bill, but his voice
was a little troubled and unsteady.

"But if we stay here we're bound to starve in time,"
continued the girl, "while if we go into the dark hole
--"

"Some things are more hard to face than starvation,"
said the sailor-man, gravely. "We don't know what's
inside that dark hole: Trot, nor where it might lead us
to."

"There's a way to find that out," she persisted.

Instead of replying, Cap'n Bill began searching in
his pockets. He soon drew out a little package of fish-
hooks and a long line. Trot watched him join them
together. Then he crept a little way up the slope and
turned over a big rock. Two or three small crabs began
scurrying away over the sands and the old sailor caught
them and put one on his hook and the others in his
pocket. Coming back to the pool he swung the hook over
his shoulder and circled it around his head and cast it
nearly into the center of the water, where he allowed
it to sink gradually, paying out the line as far as it
would go. When the end was reached, he began drawing it
in again, until the crab bait was floating on the
surface.

Trot watched him cast the line a second time, and a
third. She decided that either there were no fishes in
the pool or they would not bite the crab bait. But
Cap'n Bill was an old fisherman and not easily
discouraged. When the crab got away he put another on
the hook. When the crabs were all gone he climbed up
the rocks and found some more.

Meantime Trot tired of watching him and lay down upon
the sands, where she fell fast asleep. During the next
two hours her clothing dried completely, as did that of
the old sailor. They were both so used to salt water
that there was no danger of taking cold.

Finally the little girl was wakened by a splash
beside her and a grunt of satisfaction from Cap'n Bill.
She opened her eyes to find that the Cap'n had landed a
silver-scaled fish weighing about two pounds. This
cheered her considerably and she hurried to scrape
together a heap of seaweed, while Cap'n Bill cut up the
fish with his jackknife and got it ready for cooking.

They had cooked fish with seaweed before. Cap'n Bill
wrapped his fish in some of the weed and dipped it in
the water to dampen it. Then he lighted a match and set
fire to Trot's heap, which speedily burned down to a
glowing bed of ashes. Then they laid the wrapped fish
on the ashes, covered it with more seaweed, and allowed
this to catch fire and burn to embers. After feeding
the fire with seaweed for some time, the sailor finally
decided that their supper was ready, so he scattered
the ashes and drew out the bits of fish, still encased
in their smoking wrappings.

When these wrappings were removed, the fish was found
thoroughly cooked and both Trot and Cap'n Bill ate of
it freely. It had a slight flavor of seaweed and would
have been better with a sprinkling of salt.

The soft glow which until now had lighted the cavern,
began to grow dim, but there was a great quantity of
seaweed in the place, so after they had eaten their
fish they kept the fire alive for a time by giving it a
handful of fuel now and then.

From an inner pocket the sailor drew a small flask of
battered metal and unscrewing the cap handed it to
Trot.  She took but one swallow of the water although
she wanted more, and she noticed that Cap'n Bill merely
wet his lips with it.

"S'pose," said she, staring at the glowing seaweed
fire and speaking slowly, "that we can catch all the
fish we need; how 'bout the drinking-water, Cap'n?"

He moved uneasily but did not reply. Both of them
were thinking about the dark hole, but while Trot had
little fear of it the old man could not overcome his
dislike to enter the place. He knew that Trot was
right, though. To remain in the cavern, where they now
were, could only result in slow but sure death.

It was nighttime up on the earth's surface, so the
little girl became drowsy and soon fell asleep. After a
time the old sailor slumbered on the sands beside her.
It was very still and nothing disturbed them for hours.
When at last they awoke the cavern was light again.

They had divided one of the biscuits and were
munching it for breakfast when they were startled by a
sudden splash in the pool. Looking toward it they saw
emerging from the water the most curious creature
either of them had ever beheld. It wasn't a fish, Trot
decided, nor was it a beast. It had wings, though, and
queer wings they were: shaped like an inverted
chopping-bowl and covered with tough skin instead of
feathers. It had four legs -- much like the legs of a
stork, only double the number -- and its head was
shaped a good deal like that of a poll parrot, with a
beak that curved downward in front and upward at the
edges, and was half bill and half mouth. But to call it
a bird was out of the question, because it had no
feathers whatever except a crest of wavy plumes of a
scarlet color on the very top of its head. The strange
creature must have weighed as much as Cap'n Bill, and
as it floundered and struggled to get out of the water
to the sandy beach it was so big and unusual that both
Trot and her companion stared at it in wonder -- in
wonder that was not unmixed with fear.




Chapter Three

The Ork


The eyes that regarded them, as the creature stood
dripping before them, were bright and mild in
expression, and the queer addition to their party made
no attempt to attack them and seemed quite as surprised
by the meeting as they were.

"I wonder," whispered Trot, "what it is."

"Who, me?" exclaimed the creature in a shrill, high-
pitched voice. "Why, I'm an Ork."

"Oh!" said the girl. "But what is an Ork?"

"I am," he repeated, a little proudly, as he shook
the water from his funny wings; "and if ever an Ork was
glad to be out of the water and on dry land again, you
can be mighty sure that I'm that especial, individual
Ork!"

"Have you been in the water long?" inquired Cap'n
Bill, thinking it only polite to show an interest in
the strange creature.

"why, this last ducking was about ten minutes, I
believe, and that's about nine minutes and sixty
seconds too long for comfort," was the reply. "But last
night I was in an awful pickle, I assure you. The
whirlpool caught me, and --"

"Oh, were you in the whirlpool, too?" asked Trot
eagerly

He gave her a glance that was somewhat reproachful.

"I believe I was mentioning the fact, young lady,
when your desire to talk interrupted me," said the Ork.
"I am not usually careless in my actions, but that
whirlpool was so busy yesterday that I thought I'd see
what mischief it was up to. So I flew a little too near
it and the suction of the air drew me down into the
depths of the ocean. Water and I are natural enemies,
and it would have conquered me this time had not a bevy
of pretty mermaids come to my assistance and dragged me
away from the whirling water and far up into a cavern,
where they deserted me."

"Why, that's about the same thing that happened to
us," cried Trot. "Was your cavern like this one?"

"I haven't examined this one yet," answered the Ork;
"but if they happen to be alike I shudder at our fate,
for the other one was a prison, with no outlet except
by means of the water.  I stayed there all night,
however, and this morning I plunged into the pool, as
far down as I could go, and then swam as hard and as
far as I could. The rocks scraped my back, now and
then, and I barely escaped the clutches of an ugly sea-
monster; but by and by I came to the surface to catch
my breath, and found myself here. That's the whole
story, and as I see you have something to eat I entreat
you to give me a share of it. The truth is, I'm half
starved."

With these words the Ork squatted down beside them.
Very reluctantly Cap'n Bill drew another biscuit from
his pocket and held it out. The Ork promptly seized it
in one of its front claws and began to nibble the
biscuit in much the same manner a parrot might have
done.

"We haven't much grub," said the sailor-man, "but
we're willin' to share it with a comrade in distress."

"That's right," returned the Ork, cocking its head
sidewise in a cheerful manner, and then for a few
minutes there was silence while they all ate of the
biscuits. After a while Trot said:

"I've never seen or heard of an Ork before. Are there
many of you?"

"We are rather few and exclusive, I believe," was the
reply. "In the country where I was born we are the
absolute rulers of all living things, from ants to
elephants."

"What country is that?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Orkland."

"Where does it lie?"

"I don't know, exactly. You see, I have a restless
nature, for some reason, while all the rest of my race
are quiet and contented Orks and seldom stray far from
home. From childhood days I loved to fly long distances
away, although father often warned me that I would get
into trouble by so doing.

"'It's a big world, Flipper, my son,' he would say,
'and I've heard that in parts of it live queer two-
legged creatures called Men, who war upon all other
living things and would have little respect for even an
Ork.'

"This naturally aroused my curiosity and after I had
completed my education and left school I decided to fly
out into the world and try to get a glimpse of the
creatures called Men. So I left home without saying
good-bye, an act I shall always regret. Adventures were
many, I found. I sighted men several times, but have
never before been so close to them as now. Also I had
to fight my way through the air, for I met gigantic
birds, with fluffy feathers all over them, which
attacked me fiercely. Besides, it kept me busy escaping
from floating airships. In my rambling I had lost all
track of distance or direction, so that when I wanted
to go home I had no idea where my country was located.
I've now been trying to find it for several months and
it was during one of my flights over the ocean that I
met the whirlpool and became its victim."

Trot and Cap'n Bill listened to this recital with
much interest, and from the friendly tone and harmless
appearance of the Ork they judged he was not likely to
prove so disagreeable a companion as at first they had
feared he might be.

The Ork sat upon its haunches much as a cat does, but
used the finger-like claws of its front legs almost as
cleverly as if they were hands. Perhaps the most
curious thing about the creature was its tail, or what
ought to have been its tail. This queer arrangement of
skin, bones and muscle was shaped like the propellers
used on boats and airships, having fan-like surfaces
and being pivoted to its body. Cap'n Bill knew
something of mechanics, and observing the propeller-
like tail of the Ork he said:

"I s'pose you're a pretty swift flyer?"

"Yes, indeed; the Orks are admitted to be Kings of
the Air."

"Your wings don't seem to amount to much," remarked
Trot.

"Well, they are not very big," admitted the Ork,
waving the four hollow skins gently to and fro, "but
they serve to support my body in the air while I speed
along by means of my tail. Still, taken altogether, I'm
very handsomely formed, don't you think?"

Trot did not like to reply, but Cap'n Bill nodded
gravely. "For an Ork," said he, "you're a wonder.
I've never seen one afore, but I can imagine you're
as good as any."

That seemed to please the creature and it began
walking around the cavern, making its way easily
up the slope. while it was gone, Trot and Cap'n Bill
each took another sip from the water-flask, to wash
down their breakfast.

"Why, here's a hole -- an exit -- an outlet!"
exclaimed the Ork from above.

"We know," said Trot. "We found it last night."

"Well, then, let's be off," continued the Ork, after
sticking its head into the black hole and sniffing once
or twice. "The air seems fresh and sweet, and it can't
lead us to any worse place than this."

The girl and the sailor-man got up and climbed to the
side of the Ork.

"We'd about decided to explore this hole before you
came," explained Cap'n Bill; "but it's a dangerous
place to navigate in the dark, so wait till I light a
candle."

"What is a candle?" inquired the Ork.

"You'll see in a minute," said Trot.

The old sailor drew one of the candles from his
right-side pocket and the tin matchbox from his left-
side pocket. When he lighted the match the Ork gave a
startled jump and eyed the flame suspiciously; but
Cap'n Bill proceeded to light the candle and the action
interested the Ork very much.

"Light," it said, somewhat nervously, "is valuable in
a hole of this sort. The candle is not dangerous, I
hope?"

"Sometimes it burns your fingers," answered Trot,
"but that's about the worst it can do -- 'cept to blow
out when you don't want it to."

Cap'n Bill shielded the flame with his hand and
crept into the hole. It wasn't any too big for a grown
man, but after he had crawled a few feet it grew
larger.  Trot came close behind him and then the
Ork followed.

"Seems like a reg'lar tunnel," muttered the sailor-
man, who was creeping along awkwardly because of his
wooden leg. The rocks, too, hurt his knees.

For nearly half an hour the three moved slowly along
the tunnel, which made many twists and turns and
sometimes slanted downward and sometimes upward.
Finally Cap'n Bill stopped short, with an exclamation
of disappointment, and held the flickering candle far
ahead to light the scene.

"What's wrong?" demanded Trot, who could see nothing
because the sailor's form completely filled the hole.

"Why, we've come to the end of our travels, I guess,"
he replied.

"Is the hole blocked?" inquired the Ork.

"No; it's wuss nor that," replied Cap'n Bill sadly.
"I'm on the edge of a precipice. Wait a minute an' I'll
move along and let you see for yourselves. Be careful,
Trot, not to fall."

Then he crept forward a little and moved to one side,
holding the candle so that the girl could see to follow
him. The Ork came next and now all three knelt on a
narrow ledge of rock which dropped straight away and
left a huge black space which the tiny flame of the
candle could not illuminate.

"H-m!" said the Ork, peering over the edge; "this
doesn't look very promising, I'll admit. But let me
take your candle, and I'll fly down and see what's
below us."

"Aren't you afraid?" asked Trot.

"Certainly I'm afraid," responded the Ork. "But
if we intend to escape we can't stay on this shelf
forever. So, as I notice you poor creatures cannot fly,
it is my duty to explore the place for you."

Cap'n Bill handed the Ork the candle, which had now
burned to about half its length. The Ork took it in one
claw rather cautiously and then tipped its body forward
and slipped over the edge. They heard a queer buzzing
sound, as the tail revolved, and a brisk flapping of
the peculiar wings, but they were more interested just
then in following with their eyes the tiny speck of
light which marked the location of the candle. This
light first made a great circle, then dropped slowly
downward and suddenly was extinguished, leaving
everything before them black as ink.

"Hi, there! How did that happen?" cried the Ork.

"It blew out, I guess," shouted Cap'n Bill. "Fetch it
here."

"I can't see where you are," said the Ork.

So Cap'n Bill got out another candle and lighted it,
and its flame enabled the Ork to fly back to them.
It alighted on the edge and held out the bit of candle.

"What made it stop burning?" asked the creature.

The wind," said Trot. "You must be more careful, this
time."

"What's the place like?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"I don't know, yet; but there must be a bottom to it,
so I'll try to find it."

With this the Ork started out again and this time
sank downward more slowly. Down, down, down it went,
till the candle was a mere spark, and then it headed
away to the left and Trot and Cap'n Bill lost all sight
of it.

In a few minutes, however, they saw the spark of
light again, and as the sailor still held the second
lighted candle the Ork made straight toward them. It
was only a few yards distant when suddenly it dropped
the candle with a cry of pain and next moment alighted,
fluttering wildly, upon the rocky ledge.

"What's the matter?" asked Trot.

It bit me!" wailed the Ork. "I don't like your
candles. The thing began to disappear slowly as soon as
I took it in my claw, and it grew smaller and smaller
until just now it turned and bit me -- a most
unfriendly thing to do. Oh -- oh! Ouch, what a bite!"

"That's the nature of candles, I'm sorry to say,"
explained Cap'n Bill, with a grin. "You have to handle
'em mighty keerful. But tell us, what did you find down
there?"

"I found a way to continue our journey," said the
Ork, nursing tenderly the claw which had been burned.
"Just below us is a great lake of black water, which
looked so cold and wicked that it made me shudder;
but away at the left there's a big tunnel, which we
can easily walk through. I don't know where it leads
to, of course, but we must follow it and find out."
"why, we can't get to it," protested the little girl.
"We can't fly, as you do, you must remember."

"No, that's true," replied the Ork musingly. "Your
bodies are built very poorly, it seems to me, since all
you can do is crawl upon the earth's surface. But you
may ride upon my back, and in that way I can promise
you a safe journey to the tunnel."

"Are you strong enough to carry us?" asked Cap'n
Bill, doubtfully.

"Yes, indeed; I'm strong enough to carry a dozen of
you, if you could find a place to sit," was the reply;
"but there's only room between my wings for one at a
time, so I'll have to make two trips."

"All right; I'll go first," decided Cap'n Bill.

He lit another candle for Trot to hold while they
were gone and to light the Ork on his return to her,
and then the old sailor got upon the Ork's back, where
he sat with his wooden leg sticking straight out
sidewise.

"If you start to fall, clasp your arms around my
neck," advised the creature.

"If I start to fall, it's good night an' pleasant
dreams," said Cap'n Bill.

"All ready?" asked the Ork.

"Start the buzz-tail," said Cap'n Bill, with a
tremble in his voice. But the Ork flew away so gently
that the old man never even tottered in his seat. Trot
watched the light of Cap'n Bill's candle till it
disappeared in the far distance. She didn't like to be
left alone on this dangerous ledge, with a lake of
black water hundreds of feet below her; but she was a
brave little girl and waited patiently for the return
of the Ork. It came even sooner than she had expected
and the creature said to her:

"Your friend is safe in the tunnel. Now, then, get
aboard and I'll carry you to him in a jiffy."

I'm sure not many little girls would have cared to
take that awful ride through the huge black cavern on
the back of a skinny Ork. Trot didn't care for it,
herself, but it just had to be done and so she did it
as courageously as possible. Her heart beat fast and
she was so nervous she could scarcely hold the candle
in her fingers as the Ork sped swiftly through the
darkness.

It seemed like a long ride to her, yet in reality the
Ork covered the distance in a wonderfully brief period
of time and soon Trot stood safely beside Cap'n Bill on
the level floor of a big arched tunnel. The sailor-man
was very glad to greet his little comrade again and
both were grateful to the Ork for his assistance.

"I dunno where this tunnel leads to," remarked Cap'n
Bill, "but it surely looks more promisin' than that
other hole we crept through."

"When the Ork is rested," said Trot, "we'll travel on
and see what happens."

"Rested!" cried the Ork, as scornfully as his shrill
voice would allow. "That bit of flying didn't tire me
at all. I'm used to flying days at a time, without ever
once stopping."

"Then let's move on," proposed Cap'n Bill. He still
held in his hand one lighted candle, so Trot blew out
the other flame and placed her candle in the sailor's
big pocket. She knew it was not wise to burn two
candles at once.

The tunnel was straight and smooth and very easy to
walk through, so they made good progress. Trot thought
that the tunnel began about two miles from the cavern
where they had been cast by the whirlpool, but now it
was impossible to guess the miles traveled, for they
walked steadily for hours and hours without any change
in their surroundings.

Finally Cap'n Bill stopped to rest.

"There's somethin' queer about this 'ere tunnel, I'm
certain," he declared, wagging his head dolefully.
"Here's three candles gone a'ready, an' only three more
left us, yet the tunnel's the same as it was when we
started. An' how long it's goin' to keep up, no one
knows."

"Couldn't we walk without a light?" asked Trot. "The
way seems safe enough."

"It does right now," was the reply, "but we can't
tell when we are likely to come to another gulf, or
somethin' jes' as dangerous. In that case we'd be
killed afore we knew it."

"Suppose I go ahead?" suggested the Ork.  "I don't
fear a fall, you know, and if anything happens I'll
call out and warn you."

"That's a good idea," declared Trot, and Cap'n Bill
thought so, too. So the Ork started off ahead, quite in
the dark, and hand in band the two followed him.

When they had walked in this way for a good long time
the Ork halted and demanded food. Cap'n Bill had not
mentioned food because there was so little left -- only
three biscuits and a lump of cheese about as big as his
two fingers -- but he gave the Ork half of a biscuit,
sighing as he did so. The creature didn't care for the
cheese, so the sailor divided it between himself and
Trot. They lighted a candle and sat down in the tunnel
while they ate.

"My feet hurt me," grumbled the Ork.  "I'm not used
to walking and this rocky passage is so uneven and
lumpy that it hurts me to walk upon it."

"Can't you fly along?" asked Trot.

"No; the roof is too low," said the Ork.

After the meal they resumed their journey, which Trot
began to fear would never end. When Cap'n Bill noticed
how tired the little girl was, he paused and lighted a
match and looked at his big silver watch.

"Why, it's night!" he exclaimed. "We've tramped all
day, an' still we're in this awful passage, which mebbe
goes straight through the middle of the world, an'
mebbe is a circle -- in which case we can keep walkin'
till doomsday. Not knowin' what's before us so well as
we know what's behind us, I propose we make a stop,
now, an' try to sleep till mornin'."

"That will suit me," asserted the Ork, with a groan.
"My feet are hurting me dreadfully and for the last few
miles I've been limping with pain."

"My foot hurts, too," said the sailor, looking for a
smooth place on the rocky floor to sit down.

"Your foot!" cried the Ork. "why, you've only one to
hurt you, while I have four. So I suffer four times as
much as you possibly can. Here; hold the candle while I
look at the bottoms of my claws. I declare," he said,
examining them by the flickering light, "there are
bunches of pain all over them!"

"P'r'aps," said Trot, who was very glad to sit down
beside her companions, "you've got corns."

"Corns? Nonsense! Orks never have corns," protested
the creature, rubbing its sore feet tenderly.

"Then mebbe they're - they're - What do you call 'em,
Cap'n Bill? Something 'bout the Pilgrim's Progress, you
know."

"Bunions," said Cap'n Bill.

"Oh, yes; mebbe you've got bunions."

"It is possible," moaned the Ork.  "But whatever they
are, another day of such walking on them would drive me
crazy."

"I'm sure they'll feel better by mornin'," said Cap'n
Bill, encouragingly. "Go to sleep an' try to forget
your sore feet."

The Ork cast a reproachful look at the sailor-man,
who didn't see it. Then the creature asked plaintively:
"Do we eat now, or do we starve?"

"There's only half a biscuit left for you," answered
Cap'n Bill. "No one knows how long we'll have to stay
in this dark tunnel, where there's nothing whatever to
eat; so I advise you to save that morsel o' food till
later."

"Give it me now!" demanded the Ork. "If I'm going to
starve, I'll do it all at once -- not by degrees."

Cap'n Bill produced the biscuit and the creature ate
it in a trice. Trot was rather hungry and whispered to
Cap'n Bill that she'd take part of her share; but the
old man secretly broke his own half-biscuit in two,
saving Trot's share for a time of greater need.

He was beginning to be worried over the little girl's
plight and long after she was asleep and the Ork was
snoring in a rather disagreeable manner, Cap'n Bill sat
with his back to a rock and smoked his pipe and tried
to think of some way to escape from this seemingly
endless tunnel. But after a time he also slept, for
hobbling on a wooden leg all day was tiresome, and
there in the dark slumbered the three adventurers for
many hours, until the Ork roused itself and kicked the
old sailor with one foot.

"It must be another day," said he.




Chapter Four

Daylight at Last


Cap'n Bill rubbed his eyes, lit a match and consulted
his watch.

"Nine o'clock.  Yes, I guess it's another day, sure
enough. Shall we go on?" he asked.

"Of course," replied the Ork. "Unless this tunnel
is different from everything else in the world, and
has no end, we'll find a way out of it sooner or later."

The sailor gently wakened Trot. She felt much rested
by her long sleep and sprang to her feet eagerly.

"Let's start, Cap'n," was all she said.

They resumed the journey and had only taken a
few steps when the Ork cried "Wow!" and made a
great fluttering of its wings and whirling of its tail.
The others, who were following a short distance
behind, stopped abruptly.

"What's the matter?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Give us a light," was the reply. "I think we've come
to the end of the tunnel." Then, while Cap'n Bill
lighted a candle, the creature added: "If that is true,
we needn't have wakened so soon, for we were almost at
the end of this place when we went to sleep."

The sailor-man and Trot came forward with a light. A
wall of rock really faced the tunnel, but now they saw
that the opening made a sharp turn to the left. So they
followed on, by a narrower passage, and then made
another sharp turn this time to the right.

"Blow out the light, Cap'n," said the Ork, in a
pleased voice. "We've struck daylight."

Daylight at last! A shaft of mellow light fell almost
at their feet as Trot and the sailor turned the corner
of the passage, but it came from above, and raising
their eyes they found they were at the bottom of a
deep, rocky well, with the top far, far above their
heads. And here the passage ended.

For a while they gazed in silence, at least two of
them being filled with dismay at the sight. But the Ork
merely whistled softly and said cheerfully:

"That was the toughest journey I ever had the
misfortune to undertake, and I'm glad it's over. Yet,
unless I can manage to fly to the top of this pit, we
are entombed here forever."

"Do you think there is room enough for you to fly
in?" asked the little girl anxiously; and Cap'n Bill
added:

"It's a straight-up shaft, so I don't see how you'll
ever manage it."

"Were I an ordinary bird -- one of those horrid
feathered things -- I wouldn't even make the attempt to
fly out," said the Ork.  "But my mechanical propeller
tail can accomplish wonders, and whenever you're ready
I'll show you a trick that is worth while."

"Oh!" exclaimed Trot; "do you intend to take us up,
too?"

"Why not?"

"I thought," said Cap'n Bill, "as you'd go first, an'
then send somebody to help us by lettin' down a rope."

"Ropes are dangerous," replied the Ork, "and I might
not be able to find one to reach all this distance.
Besides, it stands to reason that if I can get out
myself I can also carry you two with me."

"Well, I'm not afraid," said Trot, who longed to be
on the earth's surface again.

"S'pose we fall?" suggested Cap'n Bill, doubtfully.

"Why, in that case we would all fall together,"
returned the Ork. "Get aboard, little girl; sit across
my shoulders and put both your arms around my neck."

Trot obeyed and when she was seated on the Ork,
Cap'n Bill inquired:

"How 'bout me, Mr. Ork?"

"Why, I think you'd best grab hold of my rear
legs and let me carry you up in that manner," was
the reply.

Cap'n Bill looked way up at the top of the well, and
then he looked at the Ork's slender, skinny legs and
heaved a deep sigh.

"It's goin' to be some dangle, I guess; but if you
don't waste too much time on the way up, I may be able
to hang on," said he.

"All ready, then!" cried the Ork, and at once his
whirling tail began to revolve. Trot felt herself
rising into the air; when the creature's legs left the
ground Cap'n Bill grasped two of them firmly and held
on for dear life.  The Ork's body was tipped straight
upward, and Trot had to embrace the neck very tightly
to keep from sliding off. Even in this position the Ork
had trouble in escaping the rough sides of the well.
Several times it exclaimed "Wow!" as it bumped its
back, or a wing hit against some jagged projection; but
the tail kept whirling with remarkable swiftness and
the daylight grew brighter and brighter. It was,
indeed, a long journey from the bottom to the top, yet
almost before Trot realized they had come so far, they
popped out of the hole into the clear air and sunshine
and a moment later the Ork alighted gently upon the
ground.

The release was so sudden that even with the
creature's care for its passengers Cap'n Bill struck
the earth with a shock that sent him rolling heel over
head; but by the time Trot had slid down from her seat
the old sailor-man was sitting up and looking around
him with much satisfaction.

"It's sort o' pretty here," said he.

"Earth is a beautiful place!" cried Trot.

"I wonder where on earth we are?" pondered the Ork,
turning first one bright eye and then the other to this
side and that. Trees there were, in plenty, and shrubs
and flowers and green turf. But there were no houses;
there were no paths; there was no sign of civilization
whatever.

"Just before I settled down on the ground I thought I
caught a view of the ocean," said the Ork. "Let's see
if I was right." Then he flew to a little hill, near
by, and Trot and Cap'n Bill followed him more slowly.
When they stood on the top of the hill they could see
the blue waves of the ocean in front of them, to the
right of them, and at the left of them. Behind the
hill was a forest that shut out the view.

"I hope it ain't an island, Trot," said Cap'n Bill
gravely.

"If it is, I s'pose we're prisoners," she replied.

"Ezzackly so, Trot."

"But, 'even so, it's better than those terr'ble
underground tunnels and caverns," declared the girl.

"You are right, little one," agreed the Ork.
"Anything above ground is better than the best that
lies under ground. So let's not quarrel with our fate
but be thankful we've escaped."

"We are, indeed!" she replied. "But I wonder if
we can find something to eat in this place?"

"Let's explore an' find out," proposed Cap'n Bill.
"Those trees over at the left look like cherry-trees."

On the way to them the explorers had to walk
through a tangle of vines and Cap'n Bill, who went
first, stumbled and pitched forward on his face.

"Why, it's a melon!" cried Trot delightedly, as
she saw what had caused the sailor to fall.

Cap'n Bill rose to his foot, for he was not at all
hurt, and examined the melon. Then he took his big
jackknife from his pocket and cut the melon open. It
was quite ripe and looked delicious; but the old man
tasted it before he permitted Trot to eat any. Deciding
it was good he gave her a big slice and then offered
the Ork some. The creature looked at the fruit somewhat
disdainfully, at first, but once he had tasted its
flavor he ate of it as heartily as did the others.
Among the vines they discovered many other melons, and
Trot said gratefully: "Well, there's no danger of our
starving, even if this is an island."

"Melons," remarked Cap'n Bill, "are both food an'
water. We couldn't have struck anything better."

Farther on they came to the cherry trees, where they
obtained some of the fruit, and at the edge of the
little forest were wild plums. The forest itself
consisted entirely of nut trees -- walnuts, filberts,
almonds and chestnuts -- so there would be plenty of
wholesome food for them while they remained there.

Cap'n Bill and Trot decided to walk through the
forest, to discover what was on the other side of it,
but the Ork's feet were still so sore and "lumpy" from
walking on the rocks that the creature said he
preferred to fly over the tree-tops and meet them on
the other side. The forest was not large, so by walking
briskly for fifteen minutes they reached its farthest
edge and saw before them the shore of the ocean.

"It's an island, all right," said Trot, with a sigh.

"Yes, and a pretty island, too," said Cap'n Bill,
trying to conceal his disappointment on Trot's account.
"I guess, partner, if the wuss comes to the wuss, I
could build a raft -- or even a boat -- from those
trees, so's we could sail away in it."

The little girl brightened at this suggestion.
"I don't see the Ork anywhere," she remarked, looking
around. Then her eyes lighted upon something and she
exclaimed: "Oh, Cap'n Bill! Isn't that a house, over
there to the left?"

Cap'n Bill, looking closely, saw a shed-like structure
built at one edge of the forest.

"Seems like it, Trot. Not that I'd call it much of a
house, but it's a buildin', all right. Let's go over
an' see if it's occypied."




Chapter Five

The Little Old Man of the Island


A few steps brought them to the shed, which was merely
a roof of boughs built over a square space, with some
branches of trees fastened to the sides to keep off the
wind. The front was quite open and faced the sea, and as
our friends came nearer they observed a little man, with
a long pointed beard, sitting motionless on a stool and
staring thoughtfully out over the water.

"Get out of the way, please," he called in a fretful
voice. "Can't you see you are obstructing my view?"

"Good morning," said Cap'n Bill, politely.

"It isn't a good morning!" snapped the little man.
"I've seen plenty of mornings better than this.  Do
you call it a good morning when I'm pestered with
such a crowd as you?"

Trot was astonished to hear such words from a
stranger whom they had greeted quite properly, and
Cap'n Bill grew red at the little man's rudeness. But
the sailor said, in a quiet tone of voice:

"Are you the only one as lives on this 'ere island?"

"Your grammar's bad," was the reply. "But this is my
own exclusive island, and I'll thank you to get off it as
soon as possible."

"We'd like to do that," said Trot, and then she and
Cap'n Bill turned away and walked down to the shore, to
see if any other land was in sight.

The little man rose and followed them, although both
were now too provoked to pay any attention to him.

Nothin' in sight, partner," reported Cap'n Bill,
shading his eyes with his hand; "so we'll have to
stay here for a time, anyhow. It isn't a bad place,
Trot, by any means."

"That's all you know about it!" broke in the little
man. "The trees are altogether too green and the rocks
are harder than they ought to be. I find the sand very
grainy and the water dreadfully wet. Every breeze makes a
draught and the sun shines in the daytime, when there's
no need of it, and disappears just as soon as it begins
to get dark. If you remain here you'll find the island
very unsatisfactory."

Trot turned to look at him, and her sweet face was
grave and curious.

"I wonder who you are," she said.

"My name is Pessim," said he, with an air of pride.
"I'm called the Observer,"

"Oh. What do you observe?" asked the little girl.

"Everything I see," was the reply, in a more surly
tone. Then Pessim drew back with a startled exclamation
and looked at some footprints in the sand. "Why, good
gracious me!" he cried in distress.

"What's the matter now?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Someone has pushed the earth in!  Don't you see it?

"It isn't pushed in far enough to hurt anything," said
Trot, examining the footprints.

"Everything hurts that isn't right," insisted the man.
"If the earth were pushed in a mile, it would be a great
calamity, wouldn't it?"

"I s'pose so," admitted the little girl.

"Well, here it is pushed in a full inch!  That's a
twelfth of a foot, or a little more than a millionth part
of a mile.  Therefore it is one-millionth part of a
calamity -- Oh, dear! How dreadful!" said Pessim in a
wailing voice.

"Try to forget it, sir," advised Cap'n Bill,
soothingly. "It's beginning to rain. Let's get under your
shed and keep dry."

"Raining!  Is it really raining?" asked Pessim,
beginning to weep.

"It is," answered Cap'n Bill, as the drops began to
descend, "and I don't see any way to stop it -- although
I'm some observer myself."

"No; we can't stop it, I fear," said the man. "Are you
very busy just now?"

"I won't be after I get to the shed," replied the
sailor-man.

"Then do me a favor, please," begged Pessim, walking
briskly along behind them, for they were hastening to the
shed.

"Depends on what it is," said Cap'n Bill.

"I wish you would take my umbrella down to the shore
and hold it over the poor fishes till it stops raining.
I'm afraid they'll get wet," said Pessim.

Trot laughed, but Cap'n Bill thought the little man was
poking fun at him and so he scowled upon Pessim in a way
that showed he was angry.

They reached the shed before getting very wet, although
the rain was now coming down in big drops. The roof of
the shed protected them and while they stood watching the
rainstorm something buzzed in and circled around Pessim's
head. At once the Observer began beating it away with
his hands, crying out:

"A bumblebee! A bumblebee! The queerest bumblebee I
ever saw!"

Cap'n Bill and Trot both looked at it and the little
girl said in surprise:

"Dear me! It's a wee little Ork!"

"That's what it is, sure enough," exclaimed Cap'n Bill.

Really, it wasn't much bigger than a big bumblebee, and
when it came toward Trot she allowed it to alight on her
shoulder.

"It's me, all right," said a very small voice in her
ear; "but I'm in an awful pickle, just the same!"

"What, are you our Ork, then?" demanded the girl, much
amazed.

"No, I'm my own Ork. But I'm the only Ork you know,"
replied the tiny creature.

"What's happened to you?" asked the sailor, putting his
head close to Trot's shoulder in order to hear the reply
better. Pessim also put his head close, and the Ork said:

"You will remember that when I left you I started to
fly over the trees, and just as I got to this side of the
forest I saw a bush that was loaded down with the most
luscious fruit you can imagine.  The fruit was about the
size of a gooseberry and of a lovely lavender color. So I
swooped down and picked off one in my bill and ate it.
At once I began to grow small. I could feel myself
shrinking, shrinking away, and it frightened me terribly,
so that I lighted on the ground to think over what was
happening. In a few seconds I had shrunk to the size you
now see me; but there I remained, getting no smaller,
indeed, but no larger. It is certainly a dreadful
affliction! After I had recovered somewhat from the shock
I began to search for you. It is not so easy to find
one's way when a creature is so small, but fortunately I
spied you here in this shed and came to you at once."

Cap'n Bill and Trot were much astonished at this story
and felt grieved for the poor Ork, but the little man
Pessim seemed to think it a good joke. He began laughing
when he heard the story and laughed until he choked,
after which he lay down on the ground and rolled and
laughed again, while the tears of merriment coursed down
his wrinkled cheeks.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" he finally gasped, sitting up and
wiping his eyes. "This is too rich! It's almost too
joyful to be true."

"I don't see anything funny about it," remarked Trot
indignantly.

"You would if you'd had my experience," said Pessim,
getting upon his feet and gradually resuming his solemn
and dissatisfied expression of countenance.

The same thing happened to me."

"Oh, did it?  And how did you happen to come to this
island?" asked the girl.

"I didn't come; the neighbors brought me," replied the
little man, with a frown at the recollection. "They said
I was quarrelsome and fault-finding and blamed me because
I told them all the things that went wrong, or never were
right, and because I told them how things ought to be. So
they brought me here and left me all alone, saying that
if I quarreled with myself, no one else would be made
unhappy. Absurd, wasn't it?"

"Seems to me," said Cap'n Bill, "those neighbors did
the proper thing."

"Well," resumed Pessim, "when I found myself King of
this island I was obliged to live upon fruits, and I
found many fruits growing here that I had never seen
before. I tasted several and found them good and
wholesome. But one day I ate a lavender berry -- as the
Ork did -- and immediately I grew so small that I was
scarcely two inches high. It was a very unpleasant
condition and like the Ork I became frightened. I could
not walk very well nor very far, for every lump of earth
in my way seemed a mountain, every blade of grass a tree
and every grain of sand a rocky boulder. For several days
I stumbled around in an agony of fear. Once a tree toad
nearly gobbled me up, and if I ran out from the shelter
of the bushes the gulls and cormorants swooped down upon
me. Finally I decided to eat another berry and become
nothing at all, since life, to one as small as I was, had
become a dreary nightmare.

"At last I found a small tree that I thought bore the
same fruit as that I had eaten. The berry was dark purple
instead of light lavender, but otherwise it was quite
similar. Being unable to climb the tree, I was obliged to
wait underneath it until a sharp breeze arose and shook
the limbs so that a berry fell. Instantly I seized it and
taking a last view of the world -- as I then thought -- I
ate the berry in a twinkling. Then, to my surprise, I
began to grow big again, until I became of my former
stature, and so I have since remained. Needless to say, I
have never eaten again of the lavender fruit, nor do any
of the beasts or birds that live upon this island eat
it."

They had all three listened eagerly to this amazing
tale, and when it was finished the Ork exclaimed:

"Do you think, then, that the deep purple berry is the
antidote for the lavender one?"

"I'm sure of it," answered Pessim.

"Then lead me to the tree at once!" begged the Ork,
"for this tiny form I now have terrifies me greatly."

Pessim examined the Ork closely

"You are ugly enough as you are," said he. "Were you
any larger you might be dangerous."

"Oh, no," Trot assured him; "the Ork has been our good
friend. Please take us to the tree."

Then Pessim consented, although rather reluctantly. He
led them to the right, which was the east side of the
island, and in a few minutes brought them near to the
edge of the grove which faced the shore of the ocean.
Here stood a small tree bearing berries of a deep purple
color. The fruit looked very enticing and Cap'n Bill
reached up and selected one that seemed especially plump
and ripe.

The Ork had remained perched upon Trot's shoulder but
now it flew down to the ground. It was so difficult for
Cap'n Bill to kneel down, with his wooden leg, that the
little girl took the berry from him and held it close to
the Ork's head.

"It's too big to go into my mouth," said the little
creature, looking at the fruit sidewise.

"You'll have to make sev'ral mouthfuls of it, I guess,"
said Trot; and that is what the Ork did. He pecked at the
soft, ripe fruit with his bill and ate it up very
quickly, because it was good.

Even before he had finished the berry they could see
the Ork begin to grow. In a few minutes he had regained
his natural size and was strutting before them, quite
delighted with his transformation.

"Well, well! What do you think of me now?" he asked
proudly.

"You are very skinny and remarkably ugly," declared
Pessim.

"You are a poor judge of Orks," was the reply. "Anyone
can see that I'm much handsomer than those dreadful
things called birds, which are all fluff and feathers."

"Their feathers make soft beds," asserted Pessim.
"And my skin would make excellent drumheads," retorted
the Ork. "Nevertheless, a plucked bird or a skinned Ork
would be of no value to himself, so we needn't brag of
our usefulness after we are dead. But for the sake of
argument, friend Pessim, I'd like to know what good you
would be, were you not alive?"

"Never mind that," said Cap'n Bill. "He isn't much good
as he is."

"I am King of this Island, allow me to say, and you're
intruding on my property," declared the little man,
scowling upon them. "If you don't like me --and I'm sure
you don't, for no one else does -- why don't you go away
and leave me to myself?"

"Well, the Ork can fly, but we can't," explained Trot,
in answer. "We don't want to stay here a bit, but I don't
see how we can get away."

"You can go back into the hole you came from."

Cap'n Bill shook his head; Trot shuddered at the
thought; the Ork laughed aloud.

"You may be King here," the creature said to Pessim,
"but we intend to run this island to suit ourselves, for
we are three and you are one, and the balance of power
lies with us."

The little man made no reply to this, although as they
walked back to the shed his face wore its fiercest scowl.
Cap'n Bill gathered a lot of leaves and, assisted by
Trot, prepared two nice beds in opposite corners of the
shed. Pessim slept in a hammock which he swung between
two trees.

They required no dishes, as all their food consisted of
fruits and nuts picked from the trees; they made no fire,
for the weather was warm and there was nothing to cook;
the shed had no furniture other than the rude stool which
the little man was accustomed to sit upon. He called it
his "throne" and they let him keep it.

So they lived upon the island for three days, and
rested and ate to their hearts' content. Still, they were
not at all happy in this life because of Pessim. He
continually found fault with them, and all that they did,
and all their surroundings. He could see nothing good or
admirable in all the world and Trot soon came to
understand why the little man's former neighbors had
brought him to this island and left him there, all alone,
so he could not annoy anyone. It was their misfortune
that they had been led to this place by their adventures,
for often they would have preferred the company of a wild
beast to that of Pessim.

On the fourth day a happy thought came to the Ork. They
had all been racking their brains for a possible way to
leave the island, and discussing this or that method,
without finding a plan that was practical. Cap'n Bill had
said he could make a raft of the trees, big enough to
float them all, but he had no tools except those two
pocketknives and it was not possible to chop down tree
with such small blades.

"And s'pose we got afloat on the ocean," said Trot,
"where would we drift to, and how long would it take us
to get there?"

Cap'n Bill was forced to admit he didn't know. The Ork
could fly away from the island any time it wished to, but
the queer creature was loyal to his new friends and
refused to leave them in such a lonely, forsaken place.

It was when Trot urged him to go, on this fourth
morning, that the Ork had his happy thought.

"I will go," said he, "if you two will agree to ride
upon my back."

"We are too heavy; you might drop us," objected
Cap'n Bill.

"Yes, you are rather heavy for a long journey,"
acknowledged the Ork, "but you might eat of those
lavender berries and become so small that I could carry
you with ease."

This quaint suggestion startled Trot and she looked
gravely at the speaker while she considered it, but Cap'n
Bill gave a scornful snort and asked:

"What would become of us afterward? We wouldn't be much
good if we were some two or three inches high. No, Mr.
Ork, I'd rather stay here, as I am, than be a hop-o'-my-
thumb somewhere else."

"Why couldn't you take some of the dark purple berries
along with you, to eat after we had reached our
destination?" inquired the Ork. "Then you could grow big
again whenever you pleased."

Trot clapped her hands with delight.

"That's it!" she exclaimed. "Let's do it, Cap'n Bill."

The old sailor did not like the idea at first, but he
thought it over carefully and the more he thought the
better it seemed.

"How could you manage to carry us, if we were so
small?" he asked.

"I could put you in a paper bag, and tie the bag around
my neck."

"But we haven't a paper bag," objected Trot.

The Ork looked at her.

"There's your sunbonnet," it said presently, "which is
hollow in the middle and has two strings that you could
tie around my neck."

Trot took off her sunbonnet and regarded it critically.
Yes, it might easily hold both her and Cap'n Bill, after
they had eaten the lavender berries and been reduced in
size. She tied the strings around the Ork's neck and the
sunbonnet made a bag in which two tiny people might ride
without danger of falling out. So she said:

"I b'lieve we'll do it that way, Cap'n."

Cap'n Bill groaned but could make no logical
objection except that the plan seemed to him quite
dangerous -- and dangerous in more ways than one.

"I think so, myself," said Trot soberly. "But nobody
can stay alive without getting into danger sometimes, and
danger doesn't mean getting hurt, Cap'n; it only means we
might get hurt. So I guess we'll have to take the risk."

"Let's go and find the berries," said the Ork.

They said nothing to Pessim, who was sitting on his
stool and scowling dismally as he stared at the ocean,
but started at once to seek the trees that bore the magic
fruits. The Ork remembered very well where the lavender
berries grew and led his companions quickly to the spot.

Cap'n Bill gathered two berries and placed them
carefully in his pocket. Then they went around to the
east side of the island and found the tree that bore the
dark purple berries.

"I guess I'll take four of these," said the sailor-man,
so in case one doesn't make us grow big we can eat
another."

"Better take six," advised the Ork. "It's well to
be on the safe side, and I'm sure these trees grow
nowhere else in all the world."

So Cap'n Bill gathered six of the purple berries and
with their precious fruit they returned to the shed to
big good-bye to Pessim. Perhaps they would not have
granted the surly little man this courtesy had they not
wished to use him to tie the sunbonnet around the Ork's
neck.

When Pessim learned they were about to leave him he at
first looked greatly pleased, but he suddenly recollected
that nothing ought to please him and so began to grumble
about being left alone.

"We knew it wouldn't suit you," remarked Cap'n Bill.
"It didn't suit you to have us here, and it won't suit
you to have us go away."

"That is quite true," admitted Pessim. "I haven't been
suited since I can remember; so it doesn't matter to me
in the least whether you go or stay."

He was interested in their experiment, however, and
willingly agreed to assist, although he prophesied
they would fall out of the sunbonnet on their way and
be either drowned in the ocean or crushed upon some
rocky shore. This uncheerful prospect did not daunt
Trot, but it made Cap'n Bill quite nervous.

"I will eat my berry first," said Trot, as she placed
her sunbonnet on the ground, in such manner that they
could get into it.

Then she ate the lavender berry and in a few seconds
became so small that Cap'n Bill picked her up gently with
his thumb and one finger and placed her in the middle of
the sunbonnet. Then he placed beside her the six purple
berries -- each one being about as big as the tiny Trot's
head -- and all preparations being now made the old
sailor ate his lavender berry and became very small --
wooden leg and all!

Cap'n Bill stumbled sadly in trying to climb over the
edge of the sunbonnet and pitched in beside Trot
headfirst, which caused the unhappy Pessim to laugh with
glee. Then the King of the Island picked up the sunbonnet
-- so rudely that he shook its occupants like peas in a
pod -- and tied it, by means of its strings, securely
around the Ork's neck.

"I hope, Trot, you sewed those strings on tight," said
Cap'n Bill anxiously.

"Why, we are not very heavy, you know," she replied,
"so I think the stitches will hold. But be careful and
not crush the berries, Cap'n."

"One is jammed already," he said, looking at them.

"All ready?" asked the Ork.

"Yes!" they cried together, and Pessim came close to
the sunbonnet and called out to them: "You'll be smashed
or drowned, I'm sure you will! But farewell, and good
riddance to you."

The Ork was provoked by this unkind speech, so he
turned his tail toward the little man and made it revolve
so fast that the rush of air tumbled Pessim over backward
and he rolled several times upon the ground before he
could stop himself and sit up. By that time the Ork was
high in the air and speeding swiftly over the ocean.




Chapter Six

The Flight of the Midgets



Cap'n Bill and Trot rode very comfortably in the
sunbonnet.  The motion was quite steady, for they
weighed so little that the Ork flew without effort. Yet
they were both somewhat nervous about their future
fate and could not help wishing they were safe on
land and their natural size again.

"You're terr'ble small, Trot," remarked Cap'n Bill,
looking at his companion.

"Same to you, Cap'n," she said with a laugh; "but
as long as we have the purple berries we needn't
worry about our size."

"In a circus," mused the old man, "we'd be curiosities.
But in a sunbonnet -- high up in the air -- sailin' over a
big, unknown ocean -- they ain't no word in any
booktionary to describe us."

"Why, we're midgets, that's all," said the little girl.
The Ork flew silently for a long time. The slight swaying
of the sunbonnet made Cap'n Bill drowsy, and he began to
doze. Trot, however, was wide awake, and after enduring
the monotonous journey as long as she was able she called
out:

"Don't you see land anywhere, Mr. Ork?"

"Not yet," he answered. "This is a big ocean and I've
no idea in which direction the nearest land to that
island lies; but if I keep flying in a straight line I'm
sure to reach some place some time."

That seemed reasonable, so the little people in the
sunbonnet remained as patient as possible; that is, Cap'n
Bill dozed and Trot tried to remember her geography
lessons so she could figure out what land they were
likely to arrive at.

For hours and hours the Ork flew steadily, keeping to
the straight line and searching with his eyes the horizon
of the ocean for land. Cap'n Bill was fast asleep and
snoring and Trot had laid her head on his shoulder to
rest it when suddenly the Ork exclaimed:

"There! I've caught a glimpse of land, at last."

At this announcement they roused themselves. Cap'n Bill
stood up and tried to peek over the edge of the
sunbonnet.

"What does it look like?" he inquired.

"Looks like another island," said the Ork; "but I can
judge it better in a minute or two."

"I don't care much for islands, since we visited that
other one," declared Trot.

Soon the Ork made another announcement.

"It is surely an island, and a little one, too," said
he. "But I won't stop, because I see a much bigger land
straight ahead of it."

"That's right," approved Cap'n Bill. "The bigger the
land, the better it will suit us."

"It's almost a continent," continued the Ork after a
brief silence, during which he did not decrease the speed
of his flight. "I wonder if it can be Orkland, the place
I have been seeking so long?"

"I hope not," whispered Trot to Cap'n Bill -- so softly
that the Ork could not hear her -- "for I shouldn't like
to be in a country where only Orks live. This one Ork
isn't a bad companion, but a lot of him wouldn't be much
fun."

After a few more minutes of flying the Ork called out
in a sad voice:

"No! this is not my country. It's a place I have never
seen before, although I have wandered far and wide. It
seems to be all mountains and deserts and green valleys
and queer cities and lakes and rivers --mixed up in a
very puzzling way."

"Most countries are like that," commented Cap'n Bill.
"Are you going to land?"

"Pretty soon," was the reply. "There is a mountain
peak just ahead of me. What do you say to our landing on
that?"

"All right," agreed the sailor-man, for both he and
Trot were getting tired of riding in the sunbonnet and
longed to set foot on solid ground again.

So in a few minutes the Ork slowed down his speed and
then came to a stop so easily that they were scarcely
jarred at all. Then the creature squatted down until the
sunbonnet rested on the ground, and began trying to
unfasten with its claws the knotted strings.

This proved a very clumsy task, because the strings
were tied at the back of the Ork's neck, just where his
claws would not easily reach. After much fumbling he
said:

"I'm afraid I can't let you out, and there is no one
near to help me."

This was at first discouraging, but after a little
thought Cap'n Bill said:

"If you don't mind, Trot, I can cut a slit in your
sunbonnet with my knife."

"Do," she replied. "The slit won't matter, 'cause I can
sew it up again afterward, when I am big."

So Cap'n Bill got out his knife, which was just as
small, in proportion, as he was, and after considerable
trouble managed to cut a long slit in the sunbonnet.
First he squeezed through the opening himself and
then helped Trot to get out.

When they stood on firm ground again their first act
was to begin eating the dark purple berries which they
had brought with them. Two of these Trot had guarded
carefully during the long journey, by holding them in her
lap, for their safety meant much to the tiny people.

"I'm not very hungry," said the little girl as she
handed a berry to Cap'n Bill, "but hunger doesn't count,
in this case. It's like taking medicine to make you well,
so we must manage to eat 'em, somehow or other."

But the berries proved quite pleasant to taste and as
Cap'n Bill and Trot nibbled at their edges their forms
began to grow in size -- slowly but steadily. The bigger
they grew the easier it was for them to eat the berries,
which of course became smaller to them, and by the time
the fruit was eaten our friends had regained their
natural size.

The little girl was greatly relieved when she found
herself as large as she had ever been, and Cap'n Bill
shared her satisfaction; for, although they had seen the
effect of the berries on the Ork, they had not been sure
the magic fruit would have the same effect on human
beings, or that the magic would work in any other country
than that in which the berries grew.

"What shall we do with the other four berries?"
asked Trot, as she picked up her sunbonnet, marveling
that she had ever been small. enough to ride in it.
"They're no good to us now, are they, Cap'n?"

"I'm not sure as to that," he replied. "If they were
eaten by one who had never eaten the lavender berries,
they might have no effect at all; but then, contrarywise,
they might. One of 'em has got badly jammed, so I'll
throw it away, but the other three I b'lieve I'll carry
with me. They're magic things, you know, and may come
handy to us some time."

He now searched in his big pockets and drew out a small
wooden box with a sliding cover.  The sailor had kept an
assortment of nails, of various sizes, in this box, but
those he now dumped loosely into his pocket and in the
box placed the three sound purple berries.

When this important matter was attended to they found
time to look about them and see what sort of place the
Ork had landed them in.




Chapter Seven

The Bumpy Man


The mountain on which they had alighted was not a
barren waste, but had on its sides patches of green
grass, some bushes, a few slender trees and here and
there masses of tumbled rocks. The sides of the slope
seemed rather steep, but with care one could climb up or
down them with ease and safety. The view from where they
now stood showed pleasant valleys and fertile hills lying
below the heights. Trot thought she saw some houses of
queer shapes scattered about the lower landscape, and
there were moving dots that might be people or animals,
yet were too far away for her to see them clearly.

Not far from the place where they stood was the top of
the mountain, which seemed to be flat, so the Ork
proposed to his companions that he would fly up and see
what was there.

"That's a good idea," said Trot, "'cause it's getting
toward evening and we'll have to find a place to sleep."

The Ork had not been gone more than a few minutes when
they saw him appear on the edge of the top which was
nearest them.

"Come on up!" he called.

So Trot and Cap'n Bill began to ascend the steep
slope and it did not take them long to reach the place
where the Ork awaited them.

Their first view of the mountain top pleased them very
much. It was a level space of wider extent than they had
guessed and upon it grew grass of a brilliant green
color. In the very center stood a house built of stone
and very neatly constructed. No one was in sight, but
smoke was coming from the chimney, so with one accord all
three began walking toward the house.

"I wonder," said Trot, "in what country we are, and if
it's very far from my home in California." "Can't say as
to that, partner," answered Cap'n Bill, "but I'm mighty
certain we've come a long way since we struck that
whirlpool."

"Yes," she agreed, with a sigh, "it must be miles and
miles!"

"Distance means nothing," said the Ork. "I have flown
pretty much all over the world, trying to find my home,
and it is astonishing how many little countries there
are, hidden away in the cracks and corners of this big
globe of Earth. If one travels, he may find some new
country at every turn, and a good many of them have never
yet been put upon the maps."

"P'raps this is one of them," suggested Trot.

They reached the house after a brisk walk and Cap'n
Bill knocked upon the door. It was at once opened by a
rugged looking man who had "bumps all over him," as Trot
afterward declared. There were bumps on his head, bumps
on his body and bumps on his arms and legs and hands.
Even his fingers had bumps on the ends of them. For dress
he wore an old gray suit of fantastic design, which
fitted him very badly because of the bumps it covered but
could not conceal.

But the Bumpy Man's eyes were kind and twinkling
in expression and as soon as he saw his visitors he
bowed low and said in a rather bumpy voice:

"Happy day!  Come in and shut the door, for it grows
cool when the sun goes down. Winter is now upon us."

"Why, it isn't cold a bit, outside," said Trot, "so it
can't be winter yet."

"You will change your mind about that in a little
while," declared the Bumpy Man. "My bumps always tell me
the state of the weather, and they feel just now as if a
snowstorm was coming this way. But make yourselves at
home, strangers. Supper is nearly ready and there is food
enough for all."

Inside the house there was but one large room, simply
but comfortably furnished. It had benches, a table and a
fireplace, all made of stone. On the hearth a pot was
bubbling and steaming, and Trot thought it had a rather
nice smell. The visitors seated themselves upon the
benches -- except the Ork. which squatted by the fireplace
-- and the Bumpy Man began stirring the kettle briskly.

"May I ask what country this is, sir?" inquired Cap'n
Bill.

"Goodness me -- fruit-cake and apple-sauce! --don't you
know where you are?" asked the Bumpy Man, as he stopped
stirring and looked at the speaker in surprise.

"No," admitted Cap'n Bill. "We've just arrived."

"Lost your way?" questioned the Bumpy Man.

"Not exactly," said Cap'n Bill. "We didn't have any way
to lose."

"Ah!" said the Bumpy Man, nodding his bumpy head.
"This," he announced, in a solemn, impressive voice, "is
the famous Land of Mo."

"Oh!" exclaimed the sailor and the girl, both in one
breath. But, never having heard of the Land of Mo, they
were no wiser than before.

"I thought that would startle you," remarked the Bumpy
Man, well pleased, as he resumed his stirring. The Ork
watched him a while in silence and then asked:

"Who may you be?"

"Me?" answered the Bumpy Man. "Haven't you heard of me?
Gingerbread and lemon-juice! I'm known, far and wide, as
the Mountain Ear."

They all received this information in silence at first,
for they were trying to think what he could mean. Finally
Trot mustered up courage to ask:

"What is a Mountain Ear, please?"

For answer the man turned around and faced them, waving
the spoon with which he had been stirring the kettle, as
he recited the following verses in a singsong tone of
voice:


"Here's a mountain, hard of hearing,

 That's sad-hearted and needs cheering,
So my duty is to listen to all sounds that Nature makes,

 So the hill won't get uneasy --

 Get to coughing, or get sneezy --
For this monster bump, when frightened, is quite liable to
quakes.


"You can hear a bell that's ringing;

 I can feel some people's singing;
But a mountain isn't sensible of what goes on, and so

 When I hear a blizzard blowing

 Or it's raining hard, or snowing,
I tell it to the mountain and the mountain seems to know.


"Thus I benefit all people

 While I'm living on this steeple,
For I keep the mountain steady so my neighbors all may thrive.

 With my list'ning and my shouting

 I prevent this mount from spouting,
And that makes me so important that I'm glad that I'm alive."


When he had finished these lines of verse the Bumpy Man
turned again to resume his stirring. The Ork laughed
softly and Cap'n Bill whistled to himself and Trot made
up her mind that the Mountain Ear must be a little crazy.
But the Bumpy Man seemed satisfied that he had explained
his position fully and presently he placed four stone
plates upon the table and then lifted the kettle from the
fire and poured some of its contents on each of the
plates. Cap'n Bill and Trot at once approached the table,
for they were hungry, but when she examined her plate the
little girl exclaimed:

"Why, it's molasses candy!"

"To be sure," returned the Bumpy Man, with a pleasant
smile. "Eat it quick, while it's hot, for it cools very
quickly this winter weather."

With this he seized a stone spoon and began putting the
hot molasses candy into his mouth, while the others
watched him in astonishment.

"Doesn't it burn you?" asked the girl.

"No indeed," said he. "Why don't you eat? Aren't you
hungry?"

"Yes," she replied, "I am hungry. But we usually eat
our candy when it is cold and hard. We always pull
molasses candy before we eat it."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the Mountain Ear. "What a funny
idea! Where in the world did you come from?"

"California," she said.

"California! Pooh! there isn't any such place. I've
heard of every place in the Land of Mo, but I never
before heard of California."

"It isn't in the Land of Mo," she explained.

"Then it isn't worth talking about," declared the
Bumpy Man, helping himself again from the steaming
kettle, for he had been eating all the time he talked.

"For my part," sighed Cap'n Bill, "I'd like a decent
square meal, once more, just by way of variety. In the
last place there was nothing but fruit to eat, and here
it's worse, for there's nothing but candy."

"Molasses candy isn't so bad," said Trot. "Mine's
nearly cool enough to pull, already. Wait a bit, Cap'n,
and you can eat it."

A little later she was able to gather the candy from
the stone plate and begin to work it back and forth with
her hands. The Mountain Ear was greatly amazed at this
and watched her closely. It was really good candy and
pulled beautifully, so that Trot was soon ready to cut it
into chunks for eating.

Cap'n Bill condescended to eat one or two pieces and
the Ork ate several, but the Bumpy Man refused to try it.
Trot finished the plate of candy herself and then asked
for a drink of water.

"Water?" said the Mountain Ear wonderingly. "What is
that?"

"Something to drink. Don't you have water in Mo?"

"None that ever I heard of," said he. "But I can give
you some fresh lemonade. I caught it in a jar the last
time it rained, which was only day before yesterday."

"Oh, does it rain lemonade here?" she inquired.

"Always; and it is very refreshing and healthful."

With this he brought from a cupboard a stone jar and a
dipper, and the girl found it very nice lemonade, indeed.
Cap'n Bill liked it, too; but the Ork would not touch it.

"If there is no water in this country, I cannot stay
here for long," the creature declared. "Water means
life to man and beast and bird."

"There must be water in lemonade," said Trot.

"Yes," answered the Ork, "I suppose so; but there are
other things in it, too, and they spoil the good water."

The day's adventures had made our wanderers tired, so
the Bumpy Man brought them some blankets in which they
rolled themselves and then lay down before the fire,
which their host kept alive with fuel all through the
night. Trot wakened several times and found the Mountain
Ear always alert and listening intently for the slightest
sound. But the little girl could hear no sound at all
except the snores of Cap'n Bill.




Chapter Eight

Button-Bright is Lost and Found Again


"Wake up -- wake up!" called the voice of the Bumpy
Man. "Didn't I tell you winter was coming? I could hear
it coming with my left ear, and the proof is that it is
now snowing hard outside."

"Is it?" said Trot, rubbing her eyes and creeping out
of her blanket. "Where I live, in California, I have
never seen snow, except far away on the tops of high
mountains."

"Well, this is the top of a high mountain," returned
the bumpy one, "and for that reason we get our heaviest
snowfalls right here."

The little girl went to  the window and looked out. The
air was filled with falling white flakes, so large in
size and so queer in form that she was puzzled.

"Are you certain this is snow?" she asked.

"To be sure. I must get my snow-shovel and turn out to
shovel a path. Would you like to come with me?"

"Yes," she said, and followed the Bumpy Man out when he
opened the door. Then she exclaimed: "Why, it isn't cold
a bit!"

"Of course not," replied the man. "It was cold last
night, before the snowstorm; but snow, when it falls, is
always crisp and warm."

Trot gathered a handful of it.

"Why, it's popcorn?" she cried.

"Certainly; all snow is popcorn. What did you expect it
to be?"

"Popcorn is not snow in my country."

"Well, it is the only snow we have in the Land of Mo,
so you may as well make the best of it," said he, a
little impatiently. "I'm not responsible for the absurd
things that happen in your country, and when you're in Mo
you must do as the Momen do. Eat some of our snow, and
you will find it is good. The only fault I find with our
snow is that we get too much of it at times."

With this the Bumpy Man set to work shoveling a path
and he was so quick and industrious that he piled up the
popcorn in great banks on either side of the trail that
led to the mountain-top from the plains below. While he
worked, Trot ate popcorn and found it crisp and slightly
warm, as well as nicely salted and buttered. Presently
Cap'n Bill came out of the house and joined her.

"What's this?" he asked.

"Mo snow," said she. "But it isn't real snow, although
it falls from the sky. It's popcorn."

Cap'n Bill tasted it; then he sat down in the path and
began to eat. The Ork came out and pecked away with its
bill as fast as it could. They all liked popcorn and they
all were hungry this morning.

Meantime the flakes of "Mo snow" came down so fast that
the number of them almost darkened the air. The Bumpy Man
was now shoveling quite a distance down the mountain-
side, while the path behind him rapidly filled up with
fresh-fallen popcorn. Suddenly Trot heard him call out:

"Goodness gracious -- mince pie and pancakes! -- here
is some one buried in the snow."

She ran toward him at once and the others followed,
wading through the corn and crunching it underneath their
feet. The Mo snow was pretty deep where the Bumpy Man was
shoveling and from beneath a great bank of it he had
uncovered a pair of feet.

"Dear me!  Someone has been lost in the storm," said
Cap'n Bill. "I hope he is still alive. Let's pull him out
and see."

He took hold of one foot and the Bumpy Man took hold of
the other. Then they both pulled and out from the heap of
popcorn came a little boy. He was dressed in a brown
velvet jacket and knickerbockers, with brown stockings,
buckled shoes and a blue shirt-waist that had frills down
its front. When drawn from the heap the boy was chewing a
mouthful of popcorn and both his hands were full of it.
So at first he couldn't speak to his rescuers but lay
quite still and eyed them calmly until he had swallowed
his mouthful. Then he said:

"Get my cap," and stuffed more popcorn into his mouth.

While the Bumpy Man began shoveling into the corn-bank
to find the boy's cap, Trot was laughing joyfully and
Cap'n Bill had a broad grin on his face. The Ork looked
from one to another and asked:

"Who is this stranger?"

"Why, it's Button-Bright, of course," answered Trot.
"If anyone ever finds a lost boy, he can make up his mind
it's Button-Bright. But how he ever came to be lost in
this far-away country is more'n I can make out."

"Where does he belong?" inquired the Ork.

"His home used to be in Philadelphia, I think; but I'm
quite sure Button-Bright doesn't belong anywhere."

"That's right," said the boy, nodding his head as he
swallowed the second mouthful.

"Everyone belongs somewhere," remarked the Ork.

"Not me," insisted Button-Bright. "I'm half way round
the world from Philadelphia, and I've lost my Magic
Umbrella, that used to carry me anywhere. Stands to
reason that if I can't get back I haven't any home. But I
don't care much. This is a pretty good country, Trot.
I've had lots of fun here."

By this time the Mountain Ear had secured the boy's cap
and was listening to the conversation with much interest.

"It seems you know this poor, snow-covered cast-
away," he said.

"Yes, indeed," answered Trot.  "We made a journey
together to Sky Island, once, and were good friends."

"Well, then I'm glad I saved his life," said the Bumpy
Man.

"Much obliged, Mr. Knobs," said Button-Bright, sitting
up and staring at him, "but I don't believe you've saved
anything except some popcorn that I might have eaten had
you not disturbed me. It was nice and warm in that bank
of popcorn, and there was plenty to eat. What made you
dig me out? And what makes you so bumpy everywhere?"

"As for the bumps," replied the man, looking at himself
with much pride, "I was born with them and I suspect they
were a gift from the fairies. They make me look rugged
and big, like the mountain I serve."

"All right," said Button-Bright and began eating
popcorn again.

It had stopped snowing, now, and great flocks of birds
were gathering around the mountain-side, eating the
popcorn with much eagerness and scarcely noticing the
people at all. There were birds of every size and color,
most of them having gorgeous feathers and plumes.

"Just look at them!" exclaimed the Ork scornfully.
"Aren't they dreadful creatures, all covered with
feathers?"

"I think they're beautiful," said Trot, and this
made the Ork so indignant that he went back into the
house and sulked.

Button-Bright reached out his hand and caught a big
bird by the leg. At once it rose into the air and it was
so strong that it nearly carried the little boy with it.
He let go the leg in a hurry and the bird flew down again
and began to eat of the popcorn, not being frightened in
the least.

This gave Cap'n Bill an idea. He felt in his pocket and
drew out several pieces of stout string. Moving very
quietly, so as to not alarm the birds, he crept up to
several of the biggest ones and tied cords around their
legs, thus making them prisoners.  The birds were so
intent on their eating that they did not notice what had
happened to them, and when about twenty had been captured
in this manner Cap'n Bill tied the ends of all the
strings together and fastened them to a huge stone, so
they could not escape.

The Bumpy Man watched the old sailor's actions
with much curiosity

"The birds will be quiet until they've eaten up all the
snow," he said, "but then they will want to fly away to
their homes. Tell me, sir, what will the poor things do
when they find they can't fly?"

"It may worry 'em a little," replied Cap'n Bill, "but
they're not going to be hurt if they take it easy and
behave themselves."

Our friends had all made a good breakfast of the
delicious popcorn and now they walked toward the house
again. Button-Bright walked beside Trot and held her hand
in his, because they were old friends and he liked the
little girl very much. The boy was not so old as Trot,
and small as she was he was half a head shorter in
height. The most remarkable thing about Button-Bright was
that he was always quiet and composed, whatever happened,
and nothing was ever able to astonish him. Trot liked him
because he was not rude and never tried to plague her.
Cap'n Bill liked him because he had found the boy
cheerful and brave at all times, and willing to do
anything he was asked to do.

When they came to the house Trot sniffed the air and
asked "Don't I smell perfume?"

"I think you do," said the Bumpy Man. "You smell
violets, and that proves there is a breeze springing up
from the south. All our winds and breezes are perfumed
and for that reason we are glad to have them blow in our
direction. The south breeze always has a violet odor; the
north breeze has the fragrance of wild roses; the east
breeze is perfumed with lilies-of-the-valley and the west
wind with lilac blossoms. So we need no weathervane to
tell us which way the wind is blowing. We have only to
smell the perfume and it informs us at once."

Inside the house they found the Ork, and Button-Bright
regarded the strange, birdlike creature with curious
interest. After examining it closely for a time he asked:

"Which way does your tail whirl?"

"Either way," said the Ork.

Button-Bright put out his hand and tried to spin it.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed the Ork.

"Why not? " inquired the boy.

"Because it happens to be my tail, and I reserve the
right to whirl it myself," explained the Ork.

"Let's go out and fly somewhere," proposed Button-
Bright. "I want to see how the tail works."

"Not now," said the Ork. "I appreciate your interest in
me, which I fully deserve; but I only fly when I am going
somewhere, and if I got started I might not stop."

"That reminds me," remarked Cap'n Bill, "to ask you,
friend Ork, how we are going to get away from here?"

"Get away!" exclaimed the Bumpy Man. "Why don't you
stay here? You won't find any nicer place than Mo."

"Have you been anywhere else, sir?"

"No; I can't say that I have," admitted the Mountain
Ear.

"Then permit me to say you're no judge," declared Cap'n
Bill. "But you haven't answered my question, friend Ork.
How are we to get away from this mountain?"

The Ork reflected a while before he answered.

"I might carry one of you -- the boy or the girl --upon
my back," said he, "but three big people are more than I
can manage, although I have carried two of you for a
short distance. You ought not to have eaten those purple
berries so soon."

"P'r'aps we did make a mistake," Cap'n Bill
acknowledged.

"Or we might have brought some of those lavender
berries with us, instead of so many purple ones,"
suggested Trot regretfully.

Cap'n Bill made no reply to this statement, which
showed he did not fully agree with the little girl; but
he fell into deep thought, with wrinkled brows, and
finally he said:

"If those purple berries would make anything grow
bigger, whether it'd eaten the lavender ones or not,
I could find a way out of our troubles."

They did not understand this speech and looked at
the old sailor as if expecting him to explain what he
meant. But just then a chorus of shrill cries rose from
outside.

"Here! Let me go -- let me go!" the voices seemed to
say. "Why are we insulted in this way? Mountain Ear, come
and help us!"

Trot ran to the window and looked out.

"It's the birds you caught, Cap'n," she said. "I didn't
know they could talk."

"Oh, yes; all the birds in Mo are educated to talk,"
said the Bumpy Man. Then he looked at Cap'n Bill uneasily
and added: "Won't you let the poor things go?"

"I'll see," replied the sailor, and walked out to where
the birds were fluttering and complaining because the
strings would not allow them to fly away.

"Listen to me!" he cried, and at once they became
still. "We three people who are strangers in your land
want to go to some other country, and we want three of
you birds to carry us there. We know we are asking a
great favor, but it's the only way we can think of --
excep' walkin', an' I'm not much good at that because
I've a wooden leg. Besides, Trot an' Button-Bright are
too small to undertake a long and tiresome journey. Now,
tell me: Which three of you birds will consent to carry
us?"

The birds looked at one another as if greatly
astonished. Then one of them replied: "You must be crazy,
old man. Not one of us is big enough to fly with even the
smallest of your party."

"I'll fix the matter of size," promised Cap'n Bill. "If
three of you will agree to carry us, I'll make you big
an' strong enough to do it, so it won't worry you a bit."

The birds considered this gravely.  Living in a magic
country, they had no doubt but that the strange one-
legged man could do what he said. After a little, one of
them asked:

"If you make us big, would we stay big always?"

"I think so," replied Cap'n Bill.

They chattered a while among themselves and then the
bird that had first spoken said: "I'll go, for one."

"So will I," said another; and after a pause a third
said: "I'll go, too."

Perhaps more would have volunteered, for it seemed that
for some reason they all longed to be bigger than they
were; but three were enough for Cap'n Bill's purpose and
so he promptly released all the others, who immediately
flew away.

The three that remained were cousins, and all were of
the same brilliant plumage and in size about as large as
eagles. When Trot questioned them she found they were
quite young, having only abandoned their nests a few
weeks before. They were strong young birds, with clear,
brave eyes, and the little girl decided they were the
most beautiful of all the feathered creatures she had
ever seen.

Cap'n Bill now took from his pocket the wooden box with
the sliding cover and removed the three purple berries,
which were still in good condition.

"Eat these," he said, and gave one to each of the
birds. They obeyed, finding the fruit very pleasant to
taste. In a few seconds they began to grow in size and
grew so fast that Trot feared they would never stop. But
they finally did stop growing, and then they were much
larger than the Ork, and nearly the size of full-grown
ostriches.

Cap'n Bill was much pleased by this result.

"You can carry us now, all right," said he.

The birds strutted around with pride, highly pleased
with their immense size.

"I don't see, though," said Trot doubtfully, "how
we're going to ride on their backs without falling off."

"We're not going to ride on their backs," answered
Cap'n Bill. "I'm going to make swings for us to ride in."

He then asked the Bumpy Man for some rope, but the man
had no rope. He had, however, an old suit of gray clothes
which he gladly presented to Cap'n Bill, who cut the
cloth into strips and twisted it so that it was almost as
strong as rope. With this material he attached to each
bird a swing that dangled below its feet, and Button-
Bright made a trial flight in one of them to prove that
it was safe and comfortable. When all this had been
arranged one of the birds asked:

"Where do you wish us to take you?"

"Why, just follow the Ork," said Cap'n Bill. "He will
be our leader, and wherever the Ork flies you are to fly,
and wherever the Ork lands you are to land. Is that
satisfactory?"

The birds declared it was quite satisfactory, so Cap'n
Bill took counsel with the Ork.

"On our way here," said that peculiar creature, "I
noticed a broad, sandy desert at the left of me, on which
was no living thing."

"Then we'd better keep away from it," replied the
sailor.

"Not so," insisted the Ork. "I have found, on my
travels, that the most pleasant countries often lie in
the midst of deserts; so I think it would be wise for us
to fly over this desert and discover what lies beyond it.
For in the direction we came from lies the ocean, as we
well know, and beyond here is this strange Land of Mo,
which we do not care to explore. On one side, as we can
see from this mountain, is a broad expanse of plain, and
on the other the desert.  For my part, I vote for the
desert."

"What do you say, Trot?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"It's all the same to me," she replied.

No one thought of asking Button-Bright's opinion, so it
was decided to fly over the desert. They bade good-bye to
the Bumpy Man and thanked him for his kindness and
hospitality. Then they seated themselves in the swings --
one for each bird -- and told the Ork to start away and
they would follow.

The whirl of the Ork's tail astonished the birds at
first, but after he had gone a short distance they rose
in the air, carrying their passengers easily, and flew
with strong, regular strokes of their great wings in the
wake of their leader.




Chapter Nine

The Kingdom of Jinxland


Trot rode with more comfort than she had expected,
although the swing swayed so much that she had to hold on
tight with both hands. Cap'n Bill's bird followed the
Ork, and Trot came next, with Button-Bright trailing
behind her. It was quite an imposing procession, but
unfortunately there was no one to see it, for the Ork had
headed straight for the great sandy desert and in a few
minutes after starting they were flying high over the
broad waste, where no living thing could exist.

The little girl thought this would be a bad place for
the birds to lose strength, or for the cloth ropes to
give way; but although she could not help feeling a
trifle nervous and fidgety she had confidence in the huge
and brilliantly plumaged bird that bore her, as well as
in Cap'n Bill's knowledge of how to twist and fasten a
rope so it would hold.

That was a remarkably big desert. There was nothing to
relieve the monotony of view and every minute seemed an
hour and every hour a day. Disagreeable fumes and gases
rose from the sands, which would have been deadly to the
travelers had they not been so high in the air. As it
was, Trot was beginning to feel sick, when a breath of
fresher air filled her nostrils and on looking ahead she
saw a great cloud of pink-tinted mist. Even while she
wondered what it could be, the Ork plunged boldly into
the mist and the other birds followed. She could see
nothing for a time, nor could the bird which carried her
see where the Ork had gone, but it kept flying as
sturdily as ever and in a few moments the mist was passed
and the girl saw a most beautiful landscape spread out
below her, extending as far as her eye could reach.

She saw bits of forest, verdure clothed hills, fields
of waving grain, fountains, rivers and lakes; and
throughout the scene were scattered groups of pretty
houses and a few grand castles and palaces.

Over all this delightful landscape -- which from Trot's
high perch seemed like a magnificent painted picture --
was a rosy glow such as we sometimes see in the west at
sunset. In this case, however, it was not in the west
only, but everywhere.

No wonder the Ork paused to circle slowly over this
lovely country. The other birds followed his action, all
eyeing the place with equal delight. Then, as with one
accord, the four formed a group and slowly sailed
downward. This brought them to that part of the newly-
discovered land which bordered on the desert's edge; but
it was just as pretty here as anywhere, so the Ork and
the birds alighted and the three passengers at once got
out of their swings.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill, isn't this fine an' dandy?" exclaimed
Trot rapturously. "How lucky we were to discover this
beautiful country!"

"The country seems rather high class, I'll admit,
Trot," replied the old sailor-man, looking around him,
"but we don't know, as yet, what its people are like."

"No one could live in such a country without being
happy and good -- I'm sure of that," she said earnestly.
"Don't you think so, Button-Bright?"

"I'm not thinking, just now," answered the little boy.
"It tires me to think, and I never seem to gain anything
by it. When we see the people who live here we will know
what they are like, and no 'mount of thinking will make
them any different."

"That's true enough," said the Ork. "But now I want to
make a proposal. While you are getting acquainted with
this new country, which looks as if it contains
everything to make one happy, I would like to fly along -
- all by myself -- and see if I can find my home on the
other side of the great desert. If I do, I will stay
there, of course. But if I fail to find Orkland I will
return to you in a week, to see if I can do anything more
to assist you."

They were sorry to lose their queer companion, but
could offer no objection to the plan; so the Ork bade
them good-bye and rising swiftly in the air, he flew over
the country and was soon lost to view in the distance.

The three birds which had carried our friends now
begged permission to return by the way they had come, to
their own homes, saying they were anxious to show their
families how big they had become. So Cap'n Bill and Trot
and Button-Bright all thanked them gratefully for their
assistance and soon the birds began their long flight
toward the Land of Mo. Being now left to themselves in
this strange land, the three comrades selected a pretty
pathway and began walking along it. They believed this
path would lead them to a splendid castle which they
espied in the distance, the turrets of which towered far
above the tops of the trees which surrounded it. It did
not seem very far away, so they sauntered on slowly,
admiring the beautiful ferns and flowers that lined the
pathway and listening to the singing of the birds and the
soft chirping of the grasshoppers.

Presently the path wound over a little hill. In a
valley that lay beyond the hill was a tiny cottage
surrounded by flower beds and fruit trees. On the shady
porch of the cottage they saw, as they approached, a
pleasant faced woman sitting amidst a group of children,
to whom she was telling stories. The children quickly
discovered the strangers and ran toward them with
exclamations of astonishment, so that Trot and her
friends became the center of a curious group, all
chattering excitedly. Cap'n Bill's wooden leg seemed to
arouse the wonder of the children, as they could not
understand why he had not two meat legs. This attention
seemed to please the old sailor, who patted the heads of
the children kindly and then, raising his hat to the
woman, he inquired:

"Can you tell us, madam, just what country this is?"

She stared hard at all three of the strangers as she
replied briefly: "Jinxland."

"Oh!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, with a puzzled look. "And
where is Jinxland, please?"

"In the Quadling Country," said she.

"What!" cried Trot, in sudden excitement. "Do you mean
to say this is the Quadling Country of the Land of Oz?"

"To be sure I do," the woman answered. "Every bit of
land that is surrounded by the great desert is the Land
of Oz, as you ought to know as well as I do; but I'm
sorry to say that Jinxland is separated from the rest of
the Quadling Country by that row of high mountains you
see yonder, which have such steep sides that no one can
cross them. So we live here all by ourselves, and are
ruled by our own King, instead of by Ozma of Oz."

"I've been to the Land of Oz before," said Button-
Bright, "but I've never been here."

"Did you ever hear of Jinxland before?" asked Trot.

"No," said Button-Bright.

"It is on the Map of Oz, though," asserted the woman,
"and it's a fine country, I assure you. If only," she
added, and then paused to look around her with a
frightened expression. "If only --" here she stopped
again, as if not daring to go on with her speech.

"If only what, ma'am?" asked Cap'n Bill.

The woman sent the children into the house. Then she
came closer to the strangers and whispered: "If only we
had a different King, we would be very happy and
contented."

"What's the matter with your King?" asked Trot,
curiously. But the woman seemed frightened to have said
so much. She retreated to her porch, merely saying:

"The King punishes severely any treason on the part of
his subjects."

"What's treason?" asked Button-Bright.

"In this case," replied Cap'n Bill, "treason seems to
consist of knockin' the King; but I guess we know his
disposition now as well as if the lady had said more."

"I wonder," said Trot, going up to the woman, "if you
could spare us something to eat. We haven't had anything
but popcorn and lemonade for a long time."

"Bless your heart! Of course I can spare you some
food," the woman answered, and entering her cottage she
soon returned with a tray loaded with sandwiches, cakes
and cheese. One of the children drew a bucket of clear,
cold water from a spring and the three wanderers ate
heartily and enjoyed the good things immensely.

When Button-Bright could eat no more he filled the
pockets of his jacket with cakes and cheese, and not even
the children objected to this. Indeed they all seemed
pleased to see the strangers eat, so Cap'n Bill decided
that no matter what the King of Jinxland was like, the
people would prove friendly and hospitable.

"Whose castle is that, yonder, ma'am?" he asked, waving
his hand toward the towers that rose above the trees.

"It belongs to his Majesty, King Krewl." she said.

"Oh, indeed; and does he live there?"

"When he is not out hunting with his fierce courtiers
and war captains," she replied.

"Is he hunting now?" Trot inquired.

"I do not know, my dear. The less we know about the
King's actions the safer we are."

It was evident the woman did not like to talk about
King Krewl and so, having finished their meal, they said
good-bye and continued along the pathway.

"Don't you think we'd better keep away from that
King's castle, Cap'n?" asked Trot.

"Well," said he, "King Krewl would find out, sooner or
later, that we are in his country, so we may as well face
the music now. Perhaps he isn't quite so bad as that
woman thinks he is. Kings aren't always popular with
their people, you know, even if they do the best they
know how."

"Ozma is pop'lar," said Button-Bright.

"Ozma is diff'rent from any other Ruler, from all I've
heard," remarked Trot musingly, as she walked beside the
boy. "And, after all, we are really in the Land of Oz,
where Ozma rules ev'ry King and ev'rybody else. I never
heard of anybody getting hurt in her dominions, did you,
Button-Bright?"

"Not when she knows about it," he replied. "But those
birds landed us in just the wrong place, seems to me.
They might have carried us right on, over that row of
mountains, to the Em'rald City."

"True enough," said Cap'n Bill; "but they didn't, an'
so we must make the best of Jinxland. Let's try not to be
afraid."

"Oh, I'm not very scared," said Button-Bright, pausing
to look at a pink rabbit that popped its head out of a
hole in the field near by.

"Nor am I," added Trot. "Really, Cap'n, I'm so glad to
be anywhere at all in the wonderful fairyland of Oz that
I think I'm the luckiest girl in all the world. Dorothy
lives in the Em'rald City, you know, and so does the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and Tik-Tok and the Shaggy
Man -- and all the rest of 'em that we've heard so much
about -- not to mention Ozma, who must be the sweetest
and loveliest girl in all the world!"

"Take your time, Trot," advised Button-Bright. "You
don't have to say it all in one breath, you know. And you
haven't mentioned half of the curious people in the
Em'rald City."

"That 'ere Em'rald City," said Cap'n Bill impressively,
"happens to be on the other side o' those mountains, that
we're told no one is able to cross. I don't want to
discourage of you, Trot, but we're a'most as much
separated from your Ozma an' Dorothy as we were when we
lived in Californy."

There was so much truth in this statement that they all
walked on in silence for some time. Finally they reached
the grove of stately trees that bordered the grounds of
the King's castle. They had gone halfway through it when
the sound of sobbing, as of someone in bitter distress,
reached their ears and caused them to halt abruptly.




Chapter Ten

Pon, the Gardener's Boy


It was Button-Bright who first discovered, lying on his
face beneath a broad spreading tree near the pathway, a
young man whose body shook with the force of his sobs. He
was dressed in a long brown smock and had sandals on his
feet, betokening one in humble life. His head was bare
and showed a shock of brown, curly hair. Button-Bright
looked down on the young man and said:

"Who cares, anyhow?"

"I do!" cried the young man, interrupting his sobs to
roll over, face upward, that he might see who had spoken.
"I care, for my heart is broken!"

"Can't you get another one?" asked the little boy.

"I don't want another!" wailed the young man.

By this time Trot and Cap'n Bill arrived at the spot
and the girl leaned over and said in a sympathetic voice:

"Tell us your troubles and perhaps we may help you."

The youth sat up, then, and bowed politely. Afterward
he got upon his feet, but still kept wringing his hands
as he tried to choke down his sobs. Trot thought he was
very brave to control such awful agony so well.

"My name is Pon," he began. "I'm the gardener's boy."

"Then the gardener of the King is your father, I
suppose," said Trot.

"Not my father, but my master," was the reply

"I do the work and the gardener gives the orders. And
it was not my fault, in the least, that the Princess
Gloria fell in love with me."

"Did she, really?" asked the little girl.

"I don't see why," remarked Button-Bright, staring at
the youth.

"And who may the Princess Gloria be?" inquired Cap'n
Bill.

"She is the niece of King Krewl, who is her guardian.
The Princess lives in the castle and is the loveliest and
sweetest maiden in all Jinxland. She is fond of flowers
and used to walk in the gardens with her attendants. At
such times, if I was working at my tasks, I used to cast
down my eyes as Gloria passed me; but one day I glanced
up and found her gazing at me with a very tender look in
her eyes. The next day she dismissed her attendants and,
coming to my side, began to talk with me. She said I had
touched her heart as no other young man had ever done. I
kissed her hand. Just then the King came around a bend in
the walk. He struck me with his fist and kicked me with
his foot. Then he seized the arm of the Princess and
rudely dragged her into the castle."

"Wasn't he awful!" gasped Trot indignantly.

"He is a very abrupt King," said Pon, "so it was the
least I could expect. Up to that time I had not thought
of loving Princess Gloria, but realizing it would be
impolite not to return her love, I did so. We met at
evening, now and then, and she told me the King wanted
her to marry a rich courtier named Googly-Goo, who is old
enough to be Gloria's father. She has refused Googly-Goo
thirty-nine times, but he still persists and has brought
many rich presents to bribe the King. On that account
King Krewl has commanded his niece to marry the old man,
but the Princess has assured me, time and again, that she
will wed only me. This morning we happened to meet in the
grape arbor and as I was respectfully saluting the cheek
of the Princess, two of the King's guards seized me and
beat me terribly before the very eyes of Gloria, whom the
King himself held back so she could not interfere."

"Why, this King must be a monster!" cried Trot.

"He is far worse than that," said Pon, mournfully.

"But, see here," interrupted Cap'n Bill, who had
listened carefully to Pon. "This King may not be so much
to blame, after all. Kings are proud folks, because
they're so high an' mighty, an' it isn't reasonable for a
royal Princess to marry a common gardener's boy."

"It isn't right," declared Button-Bright. "A Princess
should marry a Prince."

"I'm not a common gardener's boy," protested Pon. "If I
had my rights I would be the King instead of Krewl. As it
is, I'm a Prince, and as royal as any man in Jinxland."

"How does that come?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"My father used to be the King and Krewl was his Prime
Minister. But one day while out hunting, King Phearse --
that was my father's name -- had a quarrel with Krewl and
tapped him gently on the nose with the knuckles of his
closed hand. This so provoked the wicked Krewl that he
tripped my father backward, so that he fell into a deep
pond. At once Krewl threw in a mass of heavy stones,
which so weighted down my poor father that his body could
not rise again to the surface. It is impossible to kill
anyone in this land, as perhaps you know, but when my
father was pressed down into the mud at the bottom of the
deep pool and the stones held him so he could never
escape, he was of no more use to himself or the world
than if he had died. Knowing this, Krewl proclaimed
himself King, taking possession of the royal castle and
driving all my father's people out. I was a small boy,
then, but when I grew up I became a gardener. I have
served King Krewl without his knowing that I am the son
of the same King Phearse whom he so cruelly made away
with."

"My, but that's a terr'bly exciting story!" said Trot,
drawing a long breath. "But tell us, Pon, who was
Gloria's father?"

"Oh, he was the King before my father," replied Pon.
"Father was Prime Minister for King Kynd, who was
Gloria's father. She was only a baby when King Kynd fell
into the Great Gulf that lies just this side of the
mountains -- the same mountains that separate Jinxland
from the rest of the Land of Oz. It is said the Great
Gulf has no bottom; but, however that may be, King Kynd
has never been seen again and my father became King in
his place."

"Seems to me," said Trot, "that if Gloria had her
rights she would be Queen of Jinxland."

"Well, her father was a King," admitted Pon, "and so
was my father; so we are of equal rank, although she's a
great lady and I'm a humble gardener's boy. I can't see
why we should not marry if we want to except that King
Krewl won't let us."

"It's a sort of mixed-up mess, taken altogether,"
remarked Cap'n Bill. "But we are on our way to visit King
Krewl, and if we get a chance, young man, we'll put in a
good word for you."

"Do, please!" begged Pon.

"Was it the flogging you got that broke your heart?"
inquired Button-Bright.

"Why, it helped to break it, of course," said Pon.

"I'd get it fixed up, if I were you," advised the boy,
tossing a pebble at a chipmunk in a tree. "You ought to
give Gloria just as good a heart as she gives you."

"That's common sense," agreed Cap'n Bill. So they left
the gardener's boy standing beside the path, and resumed
their journey toward the castle.




Chapter Eleven

The Wicked King and Googly-Goo


When our friends approached the great doorway of the
castle they found it guarded by several soldiers dressed
in splendid uniforms. They were armed with swords and
lances. Cap'n Bill walked straight up to them and asked:

"Does the King happen to be at home?"

"His Magnificent and Glorious Majesty, King Krewl, is
at present inhabiting his Royal Castle," was the stiff
reply.

"Then I guess we'll go in an' say how-d'ye-do,"
continued Cap'n Bill, attempting to enter the doorway.
But a soldier barred his way with a lance.

"Who are you, what are your names, and where
do you come from?" demanded the soldier.

"You wouldn't know if we told you," returned the
sailor, "seein' as we're strangers in a strange land."

"Oh, if you are strangers you will be permitted to
enter," said the soldier, lowering his lance. "His
Majesty is very fond of strangers."

"Do many strangers come here?" asked Trot.

"You are the first that ever came to our country," said
the man. "But his Majesty has often said that if
strangers ever arrived in Jinxland he would see that they
had a very exciting time."

Cap'n Bill scratched his chin thoughtfully. He wasn't
very favorably impressed by this last remark. But he
decided that as there was no way of escape from Jinxland
it would be wise to confront the King boldly and try to
win his favor. So they entered the castle, escorted by
one of the soldiers.

It was certainly a fine castle, with many large rooms,
all beautifully furnished. The passages were winding and
handsomely decorated, and after following several of
these the soldier led them into an open court that
occupied the very center of the huge building. It was
surrounded on every side by high turreted walls, and
contained beds of flowers, fountains and walks of many
colored marbles which were matched together in quaint
designs. In an open space near the middle of the court
they saw a group of courtiers and their ladies, who
surrounded a lean man who wore upon his head a jeweled
crown. His face was hard and sullen and through the slits
of his half-closed eyelids the eyes glowed like coals of
fire. He was dressed in brilliant satins and velvets and
was seated in a golden throne-chair.

This personage was King Krewl, and as soon as Cap'n
Bill saw him the old sailor knew at once that he was not
going to like the King of Jinxland.

"Hello! who's here?" said his Majesty, with a deep
scowl.

"Strangers, Sire," answered the soldier, bowing so low
that his forehead touched the marble tiles.

"Strangers, eh? Well, well; what an unexpected visit!
Advance, strangers, and give an account of yourselves."

The King's voice was as harsh as his features. Trot
shuddered a little but Cap'n Bill calmly replied:

"There ain't much for us to say, 'cept as we've arrived
to look over your country an' see how we like it. Judgin'
from the way you speak, you don't know who we are, or
you'd be jumpin' up to shake hands an' offer us seats.
Kings usually treat us pretty well, in the great big
Outside World where we come from, but in this little
kingdom -- which don't amount to much, anyhow -- folks
don't seem to 'a' got much culchure."

The King listened with amazement to this bold speech,
first with a frown and then gazing at the two children
and the old sailor with evident curiosity. The courtiers
were dumb with fear, for no one had ever dared speak in
such a manner to their self-willed, cruel King before.
His Majesty, however, was somewhat frightened, for cruel
people are always cowards, and he feared these mysterious
strangers might possess magic powers that would destroy
him unless he treated them well. So he commanded his
people to give the new arrivals seats, and they obeyed
with trembling haste.

After being seated, Cap'n Bill lighted his pipe and
began puffing smoke from it, a sight so strange to them
that it filled them all with wonder. Presently the King
asked:

"How did you penetrate to this hidden country? Did you
cross the desert or the mountains?"

"Desert," answered Cap'n Bill, as if the task were too
easy to be worth talking about.

"Indeed! No one has ever been able to do that before,"
said the King.

"Well, it's easy enough, if you know how," asserted
Cap'n Bill, so carelessly that it greatly impressed his
hearers. The King shifted in his throne uneasily. He was
more afraid of these strangers than before.

"Do you intend to stay long in Jinxland?" was his next
anxious question.

"Depends on how we like it," said Cap'n Bill. "Just now
I might suggest to your Majesty to order some rooms got
ready for us in your dinky little castle here. And a
royal banquet, with some fried onions an' pickled tripe,
would set easy on our stomicks an' make us a bit happier
than we are now."

"Your wishes shall be attended to," said King Krewl,
but his eyes flashed from between their slits in a wicked
way that made Trot hope the food wouldn't be poisoned. At
the King's command several of his attendants hastened
away to give the proper orders to the castle servants and
no sooner were they gone than a skinny old man entered
the courtyard and bowed before the King.

This disagreeable person was dressed in rich velvets,
with many furbelows and laces. He was covered with golden
chains, finely wrought rings and jeweled ornaments. He
walked with mincing steps and glared at all the courtiers
as if he considered himself far superior to any or all of
them.

"Well, well, your Majesty; what news -- what news?" he
demanded, in a shrill, cracked voice.

The King gave him a surly look.

"No news, Lord Googly-Goo, except that strangers have
arrived," he said.

Googly-Goo cast a contemptuous glance at Cap'n Bill and
a disdainful one at Trot and Button-Bright. Then he said:

"Strangers do not interest me, your Majesty. But the
Princess Gloria is very interesting -- very interesting,
indeed!  What does she say, Sire?  Will she marry me?"

"Ask her," retorted the King.

"I have, many times; and every time she has refused."

"Well?" said the King harshly.

"Well," said Googly-Goo in a jaunty tone, "a bird
that can sing, and won't sing, must be made to sing."

"Huh!" sneered the King. "That's easy, with a bird; but
a girl is harder to manage."

"Still," persisted Googly-Goo, "we must overcome
difficulties. The chief trouble is that Gloria fancies
she loves that miserable gardener's boy, Pon. Suppose we
throw Pon into the Great Gulf, your Majesty?"

"It would do you no good," returned the King. "She
would still love him."

"Too bad, too bad!" sighed Googly-Goo. "I have laid
aside more than a bushel of precious gems --each worth a
king's ransom -- to present to your Majesty on the day I
wed Gloria."

The King's eyes sparkled, for he loved wealth above
everything; but the next moment he frowned deeply again.

"It won't help us to kill Pon," he muttered. "What we
must do is kill Gloria's love for Pon."

"That is better, if you can find a way to do it,"
agreed Googly-Goo. "Everything would come right if you
could kill Gloria's love for that gardener's boy. Really,
Sire, now that I come to think of it, there must be fully
a bushel and a half of those jewels!"

Just then a messenger entered the court to say that the
banquet was prepared for the strangers. So Cap'n Bill,
Trot and Button-Bright entered the castle and were taken
to a room where a fine feast was spread upon the table.

"I don't like that Lord Googly-Goo," remarked Trot as
she was busily eating.

"Nor I," said Cap'n Bill. "But from the talk we heard I
guess the gardener's boy won't get the Princess."

"Perhaps not," returned the girl; "but I hope old
Googly doesn't get her, either."

"The King means to sell her for all those jewels,"
observed Button-Bright, his mouth half full of cake and
jam.

"Poor Princess!" sighed Trot. "I'm sorry for her,
although I've never seen her. But if she says no to
Googly-Goo, and means it, what can they do?"

"Don't let us worry about a strange Princess," advised
Cap'n Bill. "I've a notion we're not too safe, ourselves,
with this cruel King."

The two children felt the same way and all three were
rather solemn during the remainder of the meal.

When they had eaten, the servants escorted them to
their rooms. Cap'n Bill's room was way to one end of the
castle, very high up, and Trot's room was at the opposite
end, rather low down. As for Button-Bright, they placed
him in the middle, so that all were as far apart as they
could possibly be. They didn't like this arrangement very
well, but all the rooms were handsomely furnished and
being guests of the King they dared not complain.

After the strangers had left the courtyard the King and
Googly-Goo had a long talk together, and the King said:

"I cannot force Gloria to marry you just now, because
those strangers may interfere. I suspect that the wooden-
legged man possesses great magical powers, or he would
never have been able to carry himself and those children
across the deadly desert."

"I don't like him; he looks dangerous," answered
Googly-Goo. "But perhaps you are mistaken about his being
a wizard. Why don't you test his powers?"

"How?" asked the King.

"Send for the Wicked Witch. She will tell you in a
moment whether that wooden-legged person is a common man
or a magician."

"Ha! that's a good idea," cried the King. "Why didn't I
think of the Wicked Witch before? But the woman demands
rich rewards for her services."

"Never mind; I will pay her," promised the wealthy
Googly-Goo.

So a servant was dispatched to summon the Wicked Witch,
who lived but a few leagues from King Krewl's castle.
While they awaited her, the withered old courtier
proposed that they pay a visit to Princess Gloria and see
if she was not now in a more complaisant mood. So the two
started away together and searched the castle over
without finding Gloria.

At last Googly-Goo suggested she might be in the rear
garden, which was a large park filled with bushes and
trees and surrounded by a high wall. And what was their
anger, when they turned a corner of the path, to find in
a quiet nook the beautiful Princess, and kneeling before
her, Pon, the gardener's boy! With a roar of rage the
King dashed forward; but Pon had scaled the wall by means
of a ladder, which still stood in its place, and when he
saw the King coming he ran up the ladder and made good
his escape. But this left Gloria confronted by her angry
guardian, the King, and by old Googly-Goo, who was
trembling with a fury he could not express in words.

Seizing the Princess by her arm the King dragged her
back to the castle. Pushing her into a room on the lower
floor he locked the door upon the unhappy girl. And at
that moment the arrival of the Wicked Witch was
announced.

Hearing this, the King smiled, as a tiger smiles,
showing his teeth. And Googly-Goo smiled, as a serpent
smiles, for he had no teeth except a couple of fangs. And
having frightened each other with these smiles the two
dreadful men went away to the Royal Council Chamber to
meet the Wicked Witch.




Chapter Twelve

The Wooden-Legged Grass-Hopper


Now it so happened that Trot, from the window of her
room, had witnessed the meeting of the lovers in the
garden and had seen the King come and drag Gloria away.
The little girl's heart went out in sympathy for the poor
Princess, who seemed to her to be one of the sweetest and
loveliest young ladies she had ever seen, so she crept
along the passages and from a hidden niche saw Gloria
locked in her room.

The key was still in the lock, so when the King had
gone away, followed by Googly-Goo, Trot stole up to the
door, turned the key and entered. The Princess lay prone
upon a couch, sobbing bitterly. Trot went up to her and
smoothed her hair and tried to comfort her.

"Don't cry," she said. "I've unlocked the door, so you
can go away any time you want to."

"It isn't that," sobbed the Princess. "I am unhappy
because they will not let me love Pon, the gardener's
boy!"

"Well, never mind; Pon isn't any great shakes, anyhow,
seems to me," said Trot soothingly. "There are lots of
other people you can love."

Gloria rolled over on the couch and looked at the
little girl reproachfully.

"Pon has won my heart, and I can't help loving him,"
she explained. Then with sudden indignation she added:
"But I'll never love Googly-Goo -- never, as long as I
live!"

"I should say not!" replied Trot. "Pon may not be much
good, but old Googly is very, very bad. Hunt around, and
I'm sure you'll find someone worth your love. You're very
pretty, you know, and almost anyone ought to love you."

"You don't understand, my dear," said Gloria, as she
wiped the tears from her eyes with a dainty lace
handkerchief bordered with pearls. "When you are older
you will realize that a young lady cannot decide whom she
will love, or choose the most worthy. Her heart alone
decides for her, and whomsoever her heart selects, she
must love, whether he amounts to much or not."

Trot was a little puzzled by this speech, which seemed
to her unreasonable; but she made no reply and presently
Gloria's grief softened and she began to question the
little girl about herself and her adventures. Trot told
her how they had happened to come to Jinxland, and all
about Cap'n Bill and the Ork and Pessim and the Bumpy
Man.

While they were thus conversing together, getting more
and more friendly as they became better acquainted, in
the Council Chamber the King and Googly-Goo were talking
with the Wicked Witch.

This evil creature was old and ugly. She had lost one
eye and wore a black patch over it, so the people of
Jinxland had named her "Blinkie." Of course witches are
forbidden to exist in the Land of Oz, but Jinxland was so
far removed from the center of Ozma's dominions, and so
absolutely cut off from it by the steep mountains and the
bottomless gulf, that the laws of Oz were not obeyed very
well in that country. So there were several witches in
Jinxland who were the terror of the people, but King
Krewl favored them and permitted them to exercise their
evil sorcery.

Blinkie was the leader of all the other witches and
therefore the most hated and feared. The King used her
witchcraft at times to assist him in carrying out his
cruelties and revenge, but he was always obliged to pay
Blinkie large sums of money or heaps of precious jewels
before she would undertake an enchantment. This made him
hate the old woman almost as much as his subjects did,
but to-day Lord Googly-Goo had agreed to pay the witch's
price, so the King greeted her with gracious favor.

"Can you destroy the love of Princess Gloria for the
gardener's boy?" inquired his Majesty.

The Wicked Witch thought about it before she replied:

"That's a hard question to answer. I can do lots of
clever magic, but love is a stubborn thing to conquer.
When you think you've killed it, it's liable to bob up
again as strong as ever. I believe love and cats have
nine lives. In other words, killing love is a hard job,
even for a skillful witch, but I believe I can do
something that will answer your purpose just as well."

"What is that?" asked the King.

"I can freeze the girl's heart. I've got a special
incantation for that, and when Gloria's heart is
thoroughly frozen she can no longer love Pon."

"Just the thing!" exclaimed Googly-Goo, and the King
was likewise much pleased.

They bargained a long time as to the price, but finally
the old courtier agreed to pay the Wicked Witch's
demands. It was arranged that they should take Gloria to
Blinkie's house the next day, to have her heart frozen.

Then King Krewl mentioned to the old hag the strangers
who had that day arrived in Jinxland, and said to her:

"I think the two children -- the boy and the girl --
are unable to harm me, but I have a suspicion that the
wooden-legged man is a powerful wizard."

The witch's face wore a troubled look when she heard
this.

"If you are right," she said, "this wizard might spoil
my incantation and interfere with me in other ways. So it
will be best for me to meet this stranger at once and
match my magic against his, to decide which is the
stronger."

"All right," said the King. "Come with me and I will
lead you to the man's room."

Googly-Goo did not accompany them, as he was obliged to
go home to get the money and jewels he had promised to
pay old Blinkie, so the other two climbed several flights
of stairs and went through many passages until they came
to the room occupied by Cap'n Bill.

The sailor-man, finding his bed soft and inviting, and
being tired with the adventures he had experienced, had
decided to take a nap. When the Wicked Witch and the King
softly opened his door and entered, Cap'n Bill was
snoring with such vigor that he did not hear them at all.

Blinkie approached the bed and with her one eye
anxiously stared at the sleeping stranger.

"Ah," she said in a soft whisper, "I believe you are
right, King Krewl. The man looks to me like a very
powerful wizard. But by good luck I have caught him
asleep, so I shall transform him before he wakes up,
giving him such a form that he will be unable to oppose
me."

"Careful!" cautioned the King, also speaking low. "If
he discovers what you are doing he may destroy you, and
that would annoy me because I need you to attend to
Gloria."

But the Wicked Witch realized as well as he did that
she must be careful. She carried over her arm a black
bag, from which she now drew several packets carefully
wrapped in paper. Three of these she selected, replacing
the others in the bag. Two of the packets she mixed
together. and then she cautiously opened the third.

"Better stand back, your Majesty," she advised, "for if
this powder falls on you you might be transformed
yourself."

The King hastily retreated to the end of the room. As
Blinkie mixed the third powder with the others she waved
her hands over it, mumbled a few words, and then backed
away as quickly as she could.

Cap'n Bill was slumbering peacefully, all unconscious
of what was going on. Puff! A great cloud of smoke rolled
over the bed and completely hid him from view. When the
smoke rolled away, both Blinkie and the King saw that the
body of the stranger had quite disappeared, while in his
place, crouching in the middle of the bed, was a little
gray grasshopper.

One curious thing about this grasshopper was that the
last joint of its left leg was made of wood. Another
curious thing -- considering it was a grasshopper -- was
that it began talking, crying out in a tiny but sharp
voice:

"Here -- you people! What do you mean by treating me
so? Put me back where I belong, at once, or you'll be
sorry!"

The cruel King turned pale at hearing the grasshopper's
threats, but the Wicked Witch merely laughed in derision.
Then she raised her stick and aimed a vicious blow at the
grasshopper, but before the stick struck the bed the tiny
hopper made a marvelous jump -- marvelous, indeed, when
we consider that it had a wooden leg. It rose in the air
and sailed across the room and passed right through the
open window, where it disappeared from their view.

"Good!" shouted the King. "We are well rid of this
desperate wizard." And then they both laughed heartily at
the success of the incantation, and went away to complete
their horrid plans.

After Trot had visited a time with Princess Gloria, the
little girl went to Button-Bright's room but did not find
him there. Then she went to Cap'n Bill's room, but he was
not there because the witch and the King had been there
before her. So she made her way downstairs and questioned
the servants. They said they had seen the little boy go
out into the garden, some time ago, but the old man with
the wooden leg they had not seen at all.

Therefore Trot, not knowing what else to do, rambled
through the great gardens, seeking for Button-Bright or
Cap'n Bill and not finding either of them. This part of
the garden, which lay before the castle, was not walled
in, but extended to the roadway, and the paths were open
to the edge of the forest; so, after two hours of vain
search for her friends, the little girl returned to the
castle.

But at the doorway a soldier stopped her.

"I live here," said Trot, "so it's all right to let
me in. The King has given me a room."

"Well, he has taken it back again," was the soldier's
reply. "His Majesty's orders are to turn you away if you
attempt to enter. I am also ordered to forbid the boy,
your companion, to again enter the King's castle."

"How 'bout Cap'n Bill?" she inquired.

"Why, it seems he has mysteriously disappeared,"
replied the soldier, shaking his head ominously. "Where
he has gone to, I can't make out, but I can assure you he
is no longer in this castle. I'm sorry, little girl, to
disappoint you. Don't blame me; I must obey my master's
orders."

Now, all her life Trot had been accustomed to depend on
Cap'n Bill, so when this good friend was suddenly taken
from her she felt very miserable and forlorn indeed. She
was brave enough not to cry before the soldier, or even
to let him see her grief and anxiety, but after she was
turned away from the castle she sought a quiet bench in
the garden and for a time sobbed as if her heart would
break.

It was Button-Bright who found her, at last, just as
the sun had set and the shades of evening were falling.
He also had been turned away from the King's castle, when
he tried to enter it, and in the park he came across
Trot.

"Never mind," said the boy. "We can find a place to
sleep."

"I want Cap'n Bill," wailed the girl.

"Well, so do I," was the reply. "But we haven't got
him. Where do you s'pose he is, Trot?

"I don't s'pose anything. He's gone, an' that's all I
know 'bout it."

Button-Bright sat on the bench beside her and thrust
his hands in the pockets of his knickerbockers. Then he
reflected somewhat gravely for him.

"Cap'n Bill isn't around here," he said, letting his
eyes wander over the dim garden, "so we must go somewhere
else if we want to find him.  Besides, it's fast getting
dark, and if we want to find a place to sleep we must get
busy while we can see where to go."

He rose from the bench as he said this and Trot also
jumped up, drying her eyes on her apron. Then she walked
beside him out of the grounds of the King's castle. They
did not go by the main path, but passed through an
opening in a hedge and found themselves in a small but
well-worn roadway. Following this for some distance,
along a winding way, they came upon no house or building
that would afford them refuge for the night. It became so
dark that they could scarcely see their way, and finally
Trot stopped and suggested that they camp under a tree.

"All right," said Button-Bright, "I've often found that
leaves make a good warm blanket. But -- look there, Trot!
-- isn't that a light flashing over yonder?"

"It certainly is, Button-Bright. Let's go over and see
if it's a house. Whoever lives there couldn't treat us
worse than the King did."

To reach the light they had to leave the road, so they
stumbled over hillocks and brushwood, hand in hand,
keeping the tiny speck of light always in sight.

They were rather forlorn little waifs, outcasts in a
strange country and forsaken by their only friend and
guardian, Cap'n Bill. So they were very glad when finally
they reached a small cottage and, looking in through its
one window, saw Pon, the gardener's boy, sitting by a
fire of twigs.

As Trot opened the door and walked boldly in, Pon
sprang up to greet them. They told him of Cap'n Bill's
disappearance and how they had been turned out of the
King's castle. As they finished the story Pon shook his
head sadly.

"King Krewl is plotting mischief, I fear," said he,
"for to-day he sent for old Blinkie, the Wicked Witch,
and with my own eyes I saw her come from the castle and
hobble away toward her hut. She had been with the King
and Googly-Goo, and I was afraid they were going to work
some enchantment on Gloria so she would no longer love
me. But perhaps the witch was only called to the castle
to enchant your friend, Cap'n Bill."

"Could she do that?" asked Trot, horrified by the
suggestion.

"I suppose so, for old Blinkie can do a lot of wicked
magical things."

"What sort of an enchantment could she put on Cap'n
Bill?"

"I don't know. But he has disappeared, so I'm pretty
certain she has done something dreadful to him. But don't
worry. If it has happened, it can't be helped, and if it
hasn't happened we may be able to find him in the
morning."

With this Pon went to the cupboard and brought food for
them. Trot was far too worried to eat, but Button-Bright
made a good supper from the simple food and then lay down
before the fire and went to sleep. The little girl and
the gardener's boy, however, sat for a long time staring
into the fire, busy with their thoughts. But at last
Trot, too, became sleepy and Pon gently covered her with
the one blanket he possessed. Then he threw more wood on
the fire and laid himself down before it, next to Button-
Bright. Soon all three were fast asleep. They were in a
good deal of trouble; but they were young, and sleep was
good to them because for a time it made them forget.




Chapter Thirteen

Glinda the Good and the Scarecrow of Oz


That country south of the Emerald City, in the Land of
Oz, is known as the Quadling Country, and in the very
southernmost part of it stands a splendid palace in which
lives Glinda the Good.

Glinda is the Royal Sorceress of Oz. She has wonderful
magical powers and uses them only to benefit the subjects
of Ozma's kingdom. Even the famous Wizard of Oz pays
tribute to her, for Glinda taught him all the real magic
he knows, and she is his superior in all sorts of sorcery
Everyone loves Glinda, from the dainty and exquisite
Ruler, Ozma, down to the humblest inhabitant of Oz, for
she is always kindly and helpful and willing to listen to
their troubles, however busy she may be. No one knows her
age, but all can see how beautiful and stately she is.
Her hair is like red gold and finer than the finest
silken strands. Her eyes are blue as the sky and always
frank and smiling. Her cheeks are the envy of peach-blows
and her mouth is enticing as a rosebud. Glinda is tall
and wears splendid gowns that trail behind her as she
walks. She wears no jewels, for her beauty would shame
them.

For attendants Glinda has half a hundred of the
loveliest girls in Oz. They are gathered from all over
Oz, from among the Winkies, the Munchkins, the Gillikins
and the Quadlings, as well as from Ozma's magnificent
Emerald City, and it is considered a great favor to be
allowed to serve the Royal Sorceress.

Among the many wonderful things in Glinda's palace is
the Great Book of Records. In this book is inscribed
everything that takes place in all the world, just the
instant it happens; so that by referring to its pages
Glinda knows what is taking place far and near, in every
country that exists. In this way she learns when and
where she can help any in distress or danger, and
although her duties are confined to assisting those who
inhabit the Land of Oz, she is always interested in what
takes place in the unprotected outside world.

So it was that on a certain evening Glinda sat in her
library, surrounded by a bevy of her maids, who were
engaged in spinning, weaving and embroidery, when an
attendant announced the arrival at the palace of the
Scarecrow.

This personage was one of the most famous and popular
in all the Land of Oz. His body was merely a suit of
Munchkin clothes stuffed with straw, but his head was a
round sack filled with bran, with which the Wizard of Oz
had mixed some magic brains of a very superior sort. The
eyes, nose and mouth of the Scarecrow were painted upon
the front of the sack, as were his ears, and since this
quaint being had been endowed with life, the expression
of his face was very interesting, if somewhat comical.

The Scarecrow was good all through, even to his brains,
and while he was naturally awkward in his movements and
lacked the neat symmetry of other people, his disposition
was so kind and considerate and he was so obliging and
honest, that all who knew him loved him, and there were
few people in Oz who had not met our Scarecrow and made
his acquaintance. He lived part of the time in Ozma's
palace at the Emerald City, part of the time in his own
corncob castle in the Winkie Country, and part of the
time he traveled over all Oz, visiting with the people
and playing with the children, whom he dearly loved.

It was on one of his wandering journeys that the
Scarecrow had arrived at Glinda's palace, and the
Sorceress at once made him welcome. As he sat beside her,
talking of his adventures, he asked:

"What's new in the way of news?"

Glinda opened her Great Book of Records and read some
of the last pages.

"Here is an item quite curious and interesting," she
announced, an accent of surprise in her voice. "Three
people from the big Outside World have arrived in
Jinxland."

"Where is Jinxland?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Very near here, a little to the east of us," she said.
"In fact, Jinxland is a little slice taken off the
Quadling Country, but separated from it by a range of
high mountains, at the foot of which lies a wide, deep
gulf that is supposed to be impassable."

"Then Jinxland is really a part of the Land of Oz,"
said he.

"Yes," returned Glinda, "but Oz people know nothing of
it, except what is recorded here in my book."

"What does the Book say about it?" asked the Scarecrow.

"It is ruled by a wicked man called King Krewl,
although he has no right to the title. Most of the people
are good, but they are very timid and live in constant
fear of their fierce ruler. There are also several Wicked
Witches who keep the inhabitants of Jinxland in a state
of terror."

"Do those witches have any magical powers?" inquired
the Scarecrow.

"Yes, they seem to understand witchcraft in its most
evil form, for one of them has just transformed a
respectable and honest old sailor -- one of the strangers
who arrived there -- into a grasshopper. This same witch,
Blinkie by name, is also planning to freeze the heart of
a beautiful Jinxland girl named Princess Gloria."

"Why, that's a dreadful thing to do!" exclaimed the
Scarecrow.

Glinda's face was very grave. She read in her book how
Trot and Button-Bright were turned out of the King's
castle, and how they found refuge in the hut of Pon, the
gardener's boy

"I'm afraid those helpless earth people will endure
much suffering in Jinxland, even if the wicked King and
the witches permit them to live," said the good
Sorceress, thoughtfully. "I wish I might help them."

"Can I do anything?" asked the Scarecrow, anxiously.
"If so, tell me what to do, and I'll do it."

For a few moments Glinda did not reply, but sat musing
over the records. Then she said: "I am going to send you
to Jinxland, to protect Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n
Bill."

"All right," answered the Scarecrow in a cheerful
voice. "I know Button-Bright already, for he has been in
the Land of Oz before. You remember he went away from the
Land of Oz in one of our Wizard's big bubbles."

"Yes," said Glinda, "I remember that." Then she
carefully instructed the Scarecrow what to do and gave
him certain magical things which he placed in the pockets
of his ragged Munchkin coat.

"As you have no need to sleep," said she, "you may as
well start at once."

"The night is the same as day to me," he replied,
"except that I cannot see my way so well in the dark."

"I will furnish a light to guide you," promised the
Sorceress.

So the Scarecrow bade her good-bye and at once started
on his journey. By morning he had reached the mountains
that separated the Quadling Country from Jinxland. The
sides of these mountains were too steep to climb, but the
Scarecrow took a small rope from his pocket and tossed
one end upward, into the air. The rope unwound itself for
hundreds of feet, until it caught upon a peak of rock at
the very top of a mountain, for it was a magic rope
furnished him by Glinda. The Scarecrow climbed the rope
and, after pulling it up, let it down on the other side
of the mountain range. When he descended the rope on this
side he found himself in Jinxland, but at his feet yawned
the Great Gulf, which must be crossed before he could
proceed any farther.

The Scarecrow knelt down and examined the ground
carefully, and in a moment he discovered a fuzzy brown
spider that had rolled itself into a ball. So he took two
tiny pills from his pocket and laid them beside the
spider, which unrolled itself and quickly ate up the
pills. Then the Scarecrow said in a voice of command:

"Spin!" and the spider obeyed instantly.

In a few moments the little creature had spun two
slender but strong strands that reached way across the
gulf, one being five or six feet above the other. When
these were completed the Scarecrow started across the
tiny bridge, walking upon one strand as a person walks
upon a rope, and holding to the upper strand with his
hands to prevent him from losing his balance and toppling
over into the gulf. The tiny threads held him safely,
thanks to the strength given them by the magic pills.

Presently he was safe across and standing on the plains
of Jinxland. Far away he could see the towers of the
King's castle and toward this he at once began to walk.




Chapter Fourteen

The Frozen Heart


In the hut of Pon, the gardener's boy, Button-Bright
was the first to waken in the morning. Leaving his
companions still asleep, he went out into the fresh
morning air and saw some blackberries growing on bushes
in a field not far away. Going to the bushes he found the
berries ripe and sweet, so he began eating them. More
bushes were scattered over the fields, so the boy
wandered on, from bush to bush, without paying any heed
to where he was wandering. Then a butterfly fluttered by.
He gave chase to it and followed it a long way. When
finally he paused to look around him, Button-Bright could
see no sign of Pon's house, nor had he the slightest idea
in which direction it lay.

"Well, I'm lost again," he remarked to himself. "But
never mind; I've been lost lots of times. Someone is sure
to find me."

Trot was a little worried about Button-Bright when she
awoke and found him gone. Knowing how careless he was,
she believed that he had strayed away, but felt that he
would come back in time, because he had a habit of not
staying lost. Pon got the little girl some food for her
breakfast and then together they went out of the hut and
stood in the sunshine.

Pon's house was some distance off the road, but they
could see it from where they stood and both gave a start
of surprise when they discovered two soldiers walking
along the roadway and escorting Princess Gloria between
them. The poor girl had her hands bound together, to
prevent her from struggling, and the soldiers rudely
dragged her forward when her steps seemed to lag.

Behind this group came King Krewl, wearing his jeweled
crown and swinging in his hand a slender golden staff
with a ball of clustered gems at one end.

"Where are they going?" asked Trot. "To the house of
the Wicked Witch, I fear," Pon replied. "Come, let us
follow them, for I am sure they intend to harm my dear
Gloria."

"Won't they see us?" she asked timidly.

"We won't let them. I know a short cut through the
trees to Blinkie's house," said he.

So they hurried away through the trees and reached the
house of the witch ahead of the King and his soldiers.
Hiding themselves in the shrubbery, they watched the
approach of poor Gloria and her escort, all of whom
passed so near to them that Pon could have put out a hand
and touched his sweetheart, had he dared to.

Blinkie's house had eight sides, with a door and a
window in each side. Smoke was coming out of the chimney
and as the guards brought Gloria to one of the doors it
was opened by the old witch in person. She chuckled with
evil glee and rubbed her skinny hands together to show
the delight with which she greeted her victim, for
Blinkie was pleased to be able to perform her wicked
rites on one so fair and sweet as the Princess.

Gloria struggled to resist when they bade her enter the
house, so the soldiers forced her through the doorway and
even the King gave her a shove as he followed close
behind. Pon was so incensed at the cruelty shown Gloria
that he forgot all caution and rushed forward to enter
the house also; but one of the soldiers prevented him,
pushing the gardener's boy away with violence and
slamming the door in his face.

"Never mind," said Trot soothingly, as Pon rose from
where he had fallen. "You couldn't do much to help the
poor Princess if you were inside. How unfortunate it is
that you are in love with her!"

"True," he answered sadly, "it is indeed my misfortune.
If I did not love her, it would be none of my business
what the King did to his niece Gloria; but the unlucky
circumstance of my loving her makes it my duty to defend
her."

"I don't see how you can, duty or no duty," observed
Trot.

"No; I am powerless, for they are stronger than I. But
we might peek in through the window and see what they are
doing."

Trot was somewhat curious, too, so they crept up to one
of the windows and looked in, and it so happened that
those inside the witch's house were so busy they did not
notice that Pon and Trot were watching them.

Gloria had been tied to a stout post in the center of
the room and the King was giving the Wicked Witch a
quantity of money and jewels, which Googly-Goo had
provided in payment. When this had been done the King
said to her:

"Are you perfectly sure you can freeze this maiden's
heart, so that she will no longer love that low
gardener's boy?"

"Sure as witchcraft, your Majesty," the creature
replied.

"Then get to work," said the King. "There may be some
unpleasant features about the ceremony that would annoy
me, so I'll bid you good day and leave you to carry out
your contract. One word, however: If you fail, I shall
burn you at the stake!" Then he beckoned to his soldiers
to follow him, and throwing wide the door of the house
walked out.

This action was so sudden that King Krewl almost caught
Trot and Pon eavesdropping, but they managed to run
around the house before he saw them. Away he marched, up
the road, followed by his men, heartlessly leaving Gloria
to the mercies of old Blinkie.

When they again crept up to the window, Trot and Pon
saw Blinkie gloating over her victim. Although nearly
fainting from fear, the proud Princess gazed with haughty
defiance into the face of the wicked creature; but she
was bound so tightly to the post that she could do no
more to express her loathing.

Pretty soon Blinkie went to a kettle that was swinging
by a chain over the fire and tossed into it several
magical compounds. The kettle gave three flashes, and at
every flash another witch appeared in the room.

These hags were very ugly but when one-eyed Blinkie
whispered her orders to them they grinned with joy as
they began dancing around Gloria. First one and then
another cast something into the kettle, when to the
astonishment of the watchers at the window all three of
the old women were instantly transformed into maidens of
exquisite beauty, dressed in the daintiest costumes
imaginable. Only their eyes could not be disguised, and
an evil glare still shone in their depths. But if the
eyes were cast down or hidden, one could not help but
admire these beautiful creatures, even with the knowledge
that they were mere illusions of witchcraft.

Trot certainly admired them, for she had never seen
anything so dainty and bewitching, but her attention was
quickly drawn to their deeds instead of their persons,
and then horror replaced admiration. Into the kettle old
Blinkie poured another mess from a big brass bottle she
took from a chest, and this made the kettle begin to
bubble and smoke violently. One by one the beautiful
witches approached to stir the contents of the kettle and
to mutter a magic charm. Their movements were graceful
and rhythmic and the Wicked Witch who had called them to
her aid watched them with an evil grin upon her wrinkled
face.

Finally the incantation was complete. The kettle ceased
bubbling and together the witches lifted it from the
fire. Then Blinkie brought a wooden ladle and filled it
from the contents of the kettle. Going with the spoon to
Princess Gloria she cried:

"Love no more! Magic art
Now will freeze your mortal heart!"

With this she dashed the contents of the ladle full
upon Gloria's breast.

Trot saw the body of the Princess become transparent,
so that her beating heart showed plainly. But now the
heart turned from a vivid red to gray, and then to white.
A layer of frost formed about it and tiny icicles clung
to its surface. Then slowly the body of the girl became
visible again and the heart was hidden from view. Gloria
seemed to have fainted, but now she recovered and,
opening her beautiful eyes, stared coldly and without
emotion at the group of witches confronting her.

Blinkie and the others knew by that one cold look that
their charm had been successful. They burst into a chorus
of wild laughter and the three beautiful ones began
dancing again, while Blinkie unbound the Princess and set
her free.

Trot rubbed her eyes to prove that she was wide awake
and seeing clearly, for her astonishment was great when
the three lovely maidens turned into ugly, crooked hags
again, leaning on broomsticks and canes. They jeered at
Gloria, but the Princess regarded them with cold disdain.
Being now free, she walked to a door, opened it and
passed out. And the witches let her go.

Trot and Pon had been so intent upon this scene that in
their eagerness they had pressed quite hard against the
window. Just as Gloria went out of the house the window-
sash broke loose from its fastenings and fell with a
crash into the room. The witches uttered a chorus of
screams and then, seeing that their magical incantation
had been observed, they rushed for the open window with
uplifted broomsticks and canes. But Pon was off like the
wind, and Trot followed at his heels. Fear lent them
strength to run, to leap across ditches, to speed up the
hills and to vault the low fences as a deer would.

The band of witches had dashed through the window in
pursuit; but Blinkie was so old, and the others so
crooked and awkward, that they soon realized they would
be unable to overtake the fugitives. So the three who had
been summoned by the Wicked Witch put their canes or
broomsticks between their legs and flew away through the
air, quickly disappearing against the blue sky. Blinkie,
however, was so enraged at Pon and Trot that she hobbled
on in the direction they had taken, fully determined to
catch them, in time, and to punish them terribly for
spying upon her witchcraft.

When Pon and Trot had run so far that they were
confident they had made good their escape, they sat down
near the edge of a forest to get their breath again, for
both were panting hard from their exertions. Trot was the
first to recover speech, and she said to her companion:

"My! wasn't it terr'ble?"

"The most terrible thing I ever saw," Pon agreed.

"And they froze Gloria's heart; so now she can't love
you any more."

"Well, they froze her heart, to be sure," admitted Pon,
"but I'm in hopes I can melt it with my love."

Where do you s'pose Gloria is?" asked the girl, after a
pause.

"She left the witch's house just before we did. Perhaps
she has gone back to the King's castle," he said.

"I'm pretty sure she started off in a diff'rent
direction," declared Trot. "I looked over my shoulder, as
I ran, to see how close the witches were, and I'm sure I
saw Gloria walking slowly away toward the north."

"Then let us circle around that way," proposed Pon,
"and perhaps we shall meet her."

Trot agreed to this and they left the grove and began
to circle around toward the north, thus drawing nearer
and nearer to old Blinkie's house again. The Wicked Witch
did not suspect this change of direction, so when she
came to the grove she passed through it and continued on.

Pon and Trot had reached a place less than half a mile
from the witch's house when they saw Gloria walking
toward them. The Princess moved with great dignity and
with no show of haste whatever, holding her head high and
looking neither to right nor left.

Pon rushed forward, holding out his arms as if to
embrace her and calling her sweet names. But Gloria gazed
upon him coldly and repelled him with a haughty gesture.
At this the poor gardener's boy sank upon his knees and
hid his face in his arms, weeping bitter tears; but the
Princess was not at all moved by his distress. Passing
him by, she drew her skirts aside, as if unwilling they
should touch him, and then she walked up the path a way
and hesitated, as if uncertain where to go next.

Trot was grieved by Pon's sobs and indignant because
Gloria treated him so badly. But she remembered why.

"I guess your heart is frozen, all right," she said to
the Princess. Gloria nodded gravely, in reply, and then
turned her back upon the little girl. "Can't you like
even me?" asked Trot, half pleadingly.

"No," said Gloria.

"Your voice sounds like a refrig'rator," sighed the
little girl. "I'm awful sorry for you, 'cause you were
sweet an' nice to me before this happened. You can't help
it, of course; but it's a dreadful thing, jus' the same."

"My heart is frozen to all mortal loves," announced
Gloria, calmly. "I do not love even myself."

"That's too bad," said Trot, "for, if you can't love
anybody, you can't expect anybody to love you."

"I do!" cried Pon. "I shall always love her."

"Well, you're just a gardener's boy," replied Trot,
"and I didn't think you 'mounted to much, from the first.
I can love the old Princess Gloria, with a warm heart an'
nice manners, but this one gives me the shivers."

"It's her icy heart, that's all," said Pon.

"That's enough," insisted Trot. "Seeing her heart isn't
big enough to skate on, I can't see that she's of any use
to anyone. For my part, I'm goin' to try to find Button-
Bright an' Cap'n Bill."

"I will go with you," decided Pon. "It is evident that
Gloria no longer loves me and that her heart is frozen
too stiff for me to melt it with my own love; therefore I
may as well help you to find your friends."

As Trot started off, Pon cast one more imploring look
at the Princess, who returned it with a chilly stare. So
he followed after the little girl.

As for the Princess, she hesitated a moment and then
turned in the same direction the others had taken, but
going far more slowly. Soon she heard footsteps pattering
behind her, and up came Googly-Goo. a little out of
breath with running.

"Stop, Gloria!" he cried. "I have come to take you back
to my mansion, where we are to be married."

She looked at him wonderingly a moment, then tossed her
head disdainfully and walked on. But Googly-Goo kept
beside her.

"What does this mean?" he demanded. "Haven't you
discovered that you no longer love that gardener's boy,
who stood in my way?"

"Yes; I have discovered it," she replied. "My heart is
frozen to all mortal loves. I cannot love you, or Pon, or
the cruel King my uncle, or even myself. Go your way,
Googly-Goo, for I will wed no one at all."

He stopped in dismay when he heard this, but in another
minute he exclaimed angrily:

"You must wed me, Princess Gloria, whether you want to
or not! I paid to have your heart frozen; I also paid the
King to permit our marriage. If you now refuse me it will
mean that I have been robbed -- robbed -- robbed of my
precious money and jewels!"

He almost wept with despair, but she laughed a cold,
bitter laugh and passed on. Googly-Goo caught at her arm,
as if to restrain her, but she whirled and dealt him a
blow that sent him reeling into a ditch beside the path.
Here he lay for a long time, half covered by muddy water,
dazed with surprise.

Finally the old courtier arose, dripping, and climbed
from the ditch. The Princess had gone; so, muttering
threats of vengeance upon her, upon the King and upon
Blinkie, old Googly-Goo hobbled back to his mansion to
have the mud removed from his costly velvet clothes.




Chapter Fifteen

Trot Meets the Scarecrow


Trot and Pon covered many leagues of ground, searching
through forests, in fields and in many of the little
villages of Jinxland, but could find no trace of either
Cap'n Bill or Button-Bright. Finally they paused beside a
cornfield and sat upon a stile to rest. Pon took some
apples from his pocket and gave one to Trot. Then he
began eating another himself, for this was their time for
luncheon. When his apple was finished Pon tossed the core
into the field.

"Tchuk-tchuk!" said a strange voice. "what do you mean
by hitting me in the eye with an apple-core?"

Then rose up the form of the Scarecrow, who had hidden
himself in the cornfield while he examined Pon and Trot
and decided whether they were worthy to be helped.

"Excuse me," said Pon. "I didn't know you were there."

"How did you happen to be there, anyhow?" asked Trot.

The Scarecrow came forward with awkward steps and stood
beside them.

"Ah, you are the gardener's boy," he said to Pon. Then
he turned to Trot. "And you are the little girl who came
to Jinxland riding on a big bird, and who has had the
misfortune to lose her friend, Cap'n Bill, and her chum,
Button-Bright."

"Why, how did you know all that?" she inquired.

"I know a lot of things," replied the Scarecrow,
winking at her comically. "My brains are the Carefully-
Assorted, Double-Distilled, High-Efficiency sort that the
Wizard of Oz makes. He admits, himself, that my brains
are the best he ever manufactured."

"I think I've heard of you," said Trot slowly, as she
looked the Scarecrow over with much interest; "but you
used to live in the Land of Oz."

"Oh, I do now," he replied cheerfully. "I've just come
over the mountains from the Quadling Country to see if I
can be of any help to you."

"Who, me?" asked Pon.

"No, the strangers from the big world. It seems they
need looking after."

"I'm doing that myself," said Pon, a little
ungraciously. "If you will pardon me for saying so, I
don't see how a Scarecrow with painted eyes can look
after anyone."

"If you don't see that, you are more blind than the
Scarecrow," asserted Trot. "He's a fairy man, Pon, and
comes from the fairyland of Oz, so he can do 'most
anything. I hope," she added, turning to the Scarecrow,
"you can find Cap'n Bill for me."

"I will try, anyhow," he promised. "But who is that old
woman who is running toward us and shaking her stick at
us?"

Trot and Pon turned around and both uttered an
exclamation of fear. The next instant they took to their
heels and ran fast up the path. For it was old Blinkie,
the Wicked Witch, who had at last traced them to this
place. Her anger was so great that she was determined not
to abandon the chase of Pon and Trot until she had caught
and punished them. The Scarecrow understood at once that
the old woman meant harm to his new friends, so as she
drew near he stepped before her. His appearance was so
sudden and unexpected that Blinkie ran into him and
toppled him over, but she tripped on his straw body and
went rolling in the path beside him.

The Scarecrow sat up and said: "I beg your pardon!" but
she whacked him with her stick and knocked him flat
again. Then, furious with rage, the old witch sprang upon
her victim and began pulling the straw out of his body.
The poor Scarecrow was helpless to resist and in a few
moments all that was left of him was an empty suit of
clothes and a heap of straw beside it. Fortunately,
Blinkie did not harm his head, for it rolled into a
little hollow and escaped her notice. Fearing that Pon
and Trot would escape her, she quickly resumed the chase
and disappeared over the brow of a hill, following the
direction in which she had seen them go.

Only a short time elapsed before a gray grasshopper
with a wooden leg came hopping along and lit directly on
the upturned face of the Scarecrow's head.

"Pardon me, but you are resting yourself upon my nose,"
remarked the Scarecrow

"Oh! are you alive?" asked the grasshopper.

"That is a question I have never been able to decide,"
said the Scarecrow's head. "When my body is properly
stuffed I have animation and can move around as well as
any live person. The brains in the head you are now
occupying as a throne, are of very superior quality and
do a lot of very clever thinking. But whether that is
being alive, or not, I cannot prove to you; for one who
lives is liable to death, while I am only liable to
destruction."

"Seems to me," said the grasshopper, rubbing his nose
with his front legs, "that in your case it doesn't matter
-- unless you're destroyed already."

"I am not; all I need is re-stuffing," declared the
Scarecrow; "and if Pon and Trot escape the witch, and
come back here, I am sure they will do me that favor."

"Tell me! Are Trot and Pon around here?" inquired the
grasshopper, its small voice trembling with excitement.

The Scarecrow did not answer at once, for both his eyes
were staring straight upward at a beautiful face that was
slightly bent over his head. It was, indeed, Princess
Gloria, who had wandered to this spot, very much
surprised when she heard the Scarecrow's head talk and
the tiny gray grasshopper answer it.

"This," said the Scarecrow, still staring at her, "must
be the Princess who loves Pon, the gardener's boy."

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed the grasshopper -- who of
course was Cap'n Bill -- as he examined the young lady
curiously.

"No," said Gloria frigidly, "I do not love Pon, or
anyone else, for the Wicked Witch has frozen my heart."

"What a shame!" cried the Scarecrow. "One so lovely
should be able to love. But would you mind, my dear,
stuffing that straw into my body again?"

The dainty Princess glanced at the straw and at the
well-worn blue Munchkin clothes and shrank back in
disdain. But she was spared from refusing the Scarecrow's
request by the appearance of Trot and Pon, who had hidden
in some bushes just over the brow of the hill and waited
until old Blinkie had passed them by. Their hiding place
was on the same side as the witch's blind eye, and she
rushed on in the chase of the girl and the youth without
being aware that they had tricked her.

Trot was shocked at the Scarecrow's sad condition and
at once began putting the straw back into his body. Pon,
at sight of Gloria, again appealed to her to take pity on
him, but the frozen-hearted Princess turned coldly away
and with a sigh the gardener's boy began to assist Trot.

Neither of them at first noticed the small grasshopper,
which at their appearance had skipped off the Scarecrow's
nose and was now clinging to a wisp of grass beside the
path, where he was not likely to be stepped upon. Not
until the Scarecrow had been neatly restuffed and set
upon his feet again -- when he bowed to his restorers and
expressed his thanks -- did the grasshopper move from his
perch. Then he leaped lightly into the path and called
out:

"Trot -- Trot! Look at me. I'm Cap'n Bill! See what the
Wicked Witch has done to me."

The voice was small, to be sure, but it reached Trot's
ears and startled her greatly. She looked intently at the
grasshopper, her eyes wide with fear at first; then she
knelt down and, noticing the wooden leg, she began to
weep sorrowfully.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill -- dear Cap'n Bill! What a cruel thing
to do!" she sobbed.

"Don't cry, Trot," begged the grasshopper. "It didn't
hurt any, and it doesn't hurt now. But it's mighty
inconvenient an' humiliatin', to say the least."

"I wish," said the girl indignantly, while trying hard
to restrain her tears, "that I was big 'nough an' strong
'nough to give that horrid witch a good beating. She
ought to be turned into a toad for doing this to you,
Cap'n Bill!"

"Never mind," urged the Scarecrow, in a comforting
voice, "such a transformation doesn't last always, and as
a general thing there's some way to break the
enchantment. I'm sure Glinda could do it, in a jiffy."

"Who is Glinda?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

Then the Scarecrow told them all about Glinda, not
forgetting to mention her beauty and goodness and her
wonderful powers of magic. He also explained how the
Royal Sorceress had sent him to Jinxland especially to
help the strangers, whom she knew to be in danger because
of the wiles of the cruel King and the Wicked Witch.




Chapter Sixteen

Pon Summons the King to Surrender


Gloria had drawn near to the group to listen to their
talk, and it seemed to interest her in spite of her
frigid manner. They knew, of course, that the poor
Princess could not help being cold and reserved, so they
tried not to blame her.

"I ought to have come here a little sooner," said the
Scarecrow, regretfully; "but Glinda sent me as soon as
she discovered you were here and were likely to get into
trouble. And now that we are all together -- except
Button-Bright, over whom it is useless to worry -- I
propose we hold a council of war, to decide what is best
to be done."

That seemed a wise thing to do, so they all sat down
upon the grass, including Gloria, and the grasshopper
perched upon Trot's shoulder and allowed her to stroke
him gently with her hand.

"In the first place," began the Scarecrow, "this King
Krewl is a usurper and has no right to rule this Kingdom
of Jinxland."

"That is true," said Pon, eagerly. "My father was King
before him, and I --"

"You are a gardener's boy," interrupted the Scarecrow.
"Your father had no right to rule, either, for the
rightful King of this land was the father of Princess
Gloria, and only she is entitled to sit upon the throne
of Jinxland."

"Good!" exclaimed Trot. "But what'll we do with King
Krewl? I s'pose he won't give up the throne unless he has
to."

"No, of course not," said the Scarecrow. "Therefore it
will be our duty to make him give up the throne."

"How?" asked Trot.

"Give me time to think," was the reply. "That's what my
brains are for. I don't know whether you people ever
think, or not, but my brains are the best that the Wizard
of Oz ever turned out, and if I give them plenty of time
to work, the result usually surprises me."

"Take your time, then," suggested Trot. "There's no
hurry."

"Thank you," said the straw man, and sat perfectly
still for half an hour. During this interval the
grasshopper whispered in Trot's ear, to which he was very
close, and Trot whispered back to the grasshopper sitting
upon her shoulder. Pon cast loving glances at Gloria, who
paid not the slightest heed to them.

Finally the Scarecrow laughed aloud.

"Brains working?" inquired Trot.

"Yes. They seem in fine order to-day. We will conquer
King Krewl and put Gloria upon his throne as Queen of
Jinxland."

"Fine!" cried the little girl, clapping her hands
together gleefully. "But how?"

"Leave the how to me," said the Scarecrow proudly.

As a conqueror I'm a wonder. We will, first of all,
write a message to send to King Krewl, asking him to
surrender. If he refuses, then we will make him
surrender."

"Why ask him. when we know he'll refuse?" inquired Pon.

"Why, we must be polite, whatever we do," explained the
Scarecrow. "It would be very rude to conquer a King
without proper notice."

They found it difficult to write a message without
paper, pen and ink, none of which was at hand; so it was
decided to send Pon as a messenger, with instructions to
ask the King, politely but firmly, to surrender.

Pon was not anxious to be the messenger. Indeed, he
hinted that it might prove a dangerous mission. But the
Scarecrow was now the acknowledged head of the Army of
Conquest, and he would listen to no refusal. So off Pon
started for the King's castle, and the others accompanied
him as far as his hut, where they had decided to await
the gardener's boy's return.

I think it was because Pon had known the Scarecrow such
a short time that he lacked confidence in the straw man's
wisdom. It was easy to say: "We will conquer King Krewl,"
but when Pon drew near to the great castle he began to
doubt the ability of a straw-stuffed man, a girl, a
grasshopper and a frozen-hearted Princess to do it. As
for himself, he had never thought of defying the King
before.

That was why the gardener's boy was not very bold when
he entered the castle and passed through to the enclosed
court where the King was just then seated, with his
favorite courtiers around him. None prevented Pon's
entrance, because he was known to be the gardener's boy,
but when the King saw him he began to frown fiercely. He
considered Pon to be to blame for all his trouble with
Princess Gloria, who since her heart had been frozen had
escaped to some unknown place, instead of returning to
the castle to wed Goqgly-Goo, as she had been expected to
do. So the King bared his teeth angrily as he demanded:

"What have you done with Princess Gloria?"

"Nothing, your Majesty! I have done nothing at all,"
answered Pon in a faltering voice. "She does not love me
any more and even refuses to speak to me."

"Then why are you here, you rascal?" roared the King.

Pon looked first one way and then another, but saw no
means of escape; so he plucked up courage.

"I am here to summon your Majesty to surrender."

"What!" shouted the King. "Surrender?  Surrender to
whom?"

Pon's heart sank to his boots.

"To the Scarecrow," he replied.

Some of the courtiers began to titter, but King Krewl
was greatly annoyed. He sprang up and began to beat poor
Pon with the golden staff he carried. Pon howled lustily
and would have run away had not two of the soldiers held
him until his Majesty was exhausted with punishing the
boy. Then they let him go and he left the castle and
returned along the road, sobbing at every step because
his body was so sore and aching.

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "did the King surrender?"

"No; but he gave me a good drubbing!" sobbed poor Pon.

Trot was very sorry for Pon, but Gloria did not seem
affected in any way by her lover's anguish. The
grasshopper leaped to the Scarecrow's shoulder and asked
him what he was going to do next.

"Conquer," was the reply. "But I will go alone, this
time, for beatings cannot hurt me at all; nor can lance
thrusts -- or sword cuts -- or arrow pricks."

"Why is that?" inquired Trot.

"Because I have no nerves, such as you meat people
possess. Even grasshoppers have nerves, but straw
doesn't; so whatever they do -- except just one thing --
they cannot injure me. Therefore I expect to conquer King
Krewl with ease."

"What is that one thing you excepted?" asked Trot.

"They will never think of it, so never mind. And now,
if you will kindly excuse me for a time, I'll go over to
the castle and do my conquering."

"You have no weapons," Pon reminded him.

"True," said the Scarecrow. "But if I carried weapons I
might injure someone -- perhaps seriously -- and that
would make me unhappy. I will just borrow that riding-
whip, which I see in the corner of your hut, if you don't
mind. It isn't exactly proper to walk with a riding-whip,
but I trust you will excuse the inconsistency."

Pon handed him the whip and the Scarecrow bowed to all
the party and left the hut, proceeding leisurely along
the way to the King's castle.




Chapter Seventeen

The Ork Rescues Button-Bright


I must now tell you what had become of Button-Bright
since he wandered away in the morning and got lost. This
small boy, as perhaps you have discovered, was almost as
destitute of nerves as the Scarecrow. Nothing ever
astonished him much; nothing ever worried him or made him
unhappy. Good fortune or bad fortune he accepted with a
quiet smile, never complaining, whatever happened. This
was one reason why Button-Bright was a favorite with all
who knew him -- and perhaps it was the reason why he so
often got into difficulties, or found himself lost.

To-day, as he wandered here and there, over hill and
down dale, he missed Trot and Cap'n Bill, of whom he was
fond, but nevertheless he was not unhappy. The birds sang
merrily and the wildflowers were beautiful and the breeze
had a fragrance of new-mown hay

"The only bad thing about this country is its King," he
reflected; "but the country isn't to blame for that."

A prairie-dog stuck its round head out of a mound of
earth and looked at the boy with bright eyes.

"Walk around my house, please," it said, "and then you
won't harm it or disturb the babies."

"All right," answered Button-Bright, and took care not
to step on the mound. He went on, whistling merrily,
until a petulant voice cried:

"Oh, stop it! Please stop that noise. It gets on my
nerves."

Button-Bright saw an old gray owl sitting in the crotch
of a tree, and he replied with a laugh: "All right, old
Fussy," and stopped whistling until he had passed out of
the owl's hearing. At noon he came to a farmhouse where
an aged couple lived. They gave him a good dinner and
treated him kindly, but the man was deaf and the woman
was dumb, so they could answer no questions to guide him
on the way to Pon's house. When he left them he was just
as much lost as he had been before.

Every grove of trees he saw from a distance he visited,
for he remembered that the King's castle was near a grove
of trees and Pon's hut was near the King's castle; but
always he met with disappointment. Finally, passing
through one of these groves, he came out into the open
and found himself face to face with the Ork.

"Hello!" said Button-Bright. "Where did you come from?"

"From Orkland," was the reply. "I've found my own
country, at last, and it is not far from here, either. I
would have come back to you sooner, to see how you are
getting along, had not my family and friends welcomed my
return so royally that a great celebration was held in my
honor. So I couldn't very well leave Orkland again until
the excitement was over."

"Can you find your way back home again?" asked the boy.

"Yes, easily; for now I know exactly where it is. But
where are Trot and Cap'n Bill?"

Button-Bright related to the Ork their adventures since
it had left them in Jinxland, telling of Trot's fear that
the King had done something wicked to Cap'n Bill, and of
Pon's love for Gloria, and how Trot and Button-Bright had
been turned out of the King's castle. That was all the
news that the boy had, but it made the Ork anxious for
the safety of his friends.

"We must go to them at once, for they may need us," he
said.

"I don't know where to go," confessed Button-Bright.
"I'm lost."

"Well, I can take you back to the hut of the gardener's
boy," promised the Ork, "for when I fly high in the air I
can look down and easily spy the King's castle. That was
how I happened to spy you, just entering the grove; so I
flew down and waited until you came out."

"How can you carry me?" asked the boy.

"You'll have to sit straddle my shoulders and put your
arms around my neck. Do you think you can keep from
falling off?"

"I'll try," said Button-Bright. So the Ork squatted
down and the boy took his seat and held on tight. Then
the skinny creature's tail began whirling and up they
went, far above all the tree-tops.

After the Ork had circled around once or twice, its
sharp eyes located the towers of the castle and away it
flew, straight toward the place. As it hovered in the
air, near by the castle, Button-Bright pointed out Pon's
hut, so they landed just before it and Trot came running
out to greet them.

Gloria was introduced to the Ork, who was surprised
to find Cap'n Bill transformed into a grasshopper.

"How do you like it?" asked the creature.

"Why, it worries me good deal," answered Cap'n Bill,
perched upon Trot's shoulder. "I'm always afraid o' bein'
stepped on, and I don't like the flavor of grass an'
can't seem to get used to it. It's my nature to eat
grass, you know, but I begin to suspect it's an acquired
taste."

"Can you give molasses?" asked the Ork.

"I guess I'm not that kind of a grasshopper," replied
Cap'n Bill. "But I can't say what I might do if I was
squeezed -- which I hope I won't be."

"Well," said the Ork, "it's a great pity, and I'd like
to meet that cruel King and his Wicked Witch and punish
them both severely. You're awfully small, Cap'n Bill, but
I think I would recognize you anywhere by your wooden
leg."

Then the Ork and Button-Bright were told all about
Gloria's frozen heart and how the Scarecrow had come from
the Land of Oz to help them. The Ork seemed rather
disturbed when it learned that the Scarecrow had gone
alone to conquer King Krewl.

"I'm afraid he'll make a fizzle of it," said the skinny
creature, "and there's no telling what that terrible King
might do to the poor Scarecrow, who seems like a very
interesting person. So I believe I'll take a hand in this
conquest myself."

"How?" asked Trot.

"Wait and see," was the reply. "But, first of all, I
must fly home again -- back to my own country -- so if
you'll forgive my leaving you so soon, I'll be off at
once. Stand away from my tail, please, so that the wind
from it, when it revolves, won't knock you over."

They gave the creature plenty of room and away it went
like a flash and soon disappeared in the sky.

"I wonder," said Button-Bright, looking solemnly after
the Ork, "whether he'll ever come back again."

"Of course he will!" returned Trot. "The Ork's a pretty
good fellow, and we can depend on him. An' mark my words,
Button-Bright, whenever our Ork does come back, there's
one cruel King in Jinxland that'll wish he hadn't."




Chapter Eighteen

The Scarecrow Meets an Enemy


The Scarecrow was not a bit afraid of King Krewl.
Indeed, he rather enjoyed the prospect of conquering the
evil King and putting Gloria on the throne of Jinxland in
his place. So he advanced boldly to the royal castle and
demanded admittance.

Seeing that he was a stranger, the soldiers allowed him
to enter. He made his way straight to the throne room,
where at that time his Majesty was settling the disputes
among his subjects.

"Who are you?" demanded the King.

"I'm the Scarecrow of Oz, and I command you to
surrender yourself my prisoner."

"Why should I do that? " inquired the King, much
astonished at the straw man's audacity.

"Because I've decided you are too cruel a King to rule
so beautiful a country. You must remember that Jinxland
is a part of Oz, and therefore you owe allegiance to Ozma
of Oz, whose friend and servant I am."

Now, when he heard this, King Krewl was much disturbed
in mind, for he knew the Scarecrow spoke the truth. But
no one had ever before come to Jinxland from the Land of
Oz and the King did not intend to be put out of his
throne if he could help it. Therefore he gave a harsh,
wicked laugh of derision and said:

"I'm busy, now. Stand out of my way, Scarecrow, and
I'll talk with you by and by."

But the Scarecrow turned to the assembled courtiers and
people and called in a loud voice:

"I hereby declare, in the name of Ozma of Oz, that this
man is no longer ruler of Jinxland. From this moment
Princess Gloria is your rightful Queen, and I ask all of
you to be loyal to her and to obey her commands."

The people looked fearfully at the King, whom they all
hated in their hearts, but likewise feared. Krewl was now
in a terrible rage and he raised his golden sceptre and
struck the Scarecrow so heavy a blow that he fell to the
floor.

But he was up again, in an instant, and with Pon's
riding-whip he switched the King so hard that the wicked
monarch roared with pain as much as with rage, calling on
his soldiers to capture the Scarecrow.

They tried to do that, and thrust their lances and
swords into the straw body, but without doing any damage
except to make holes in the Scarecrow's clothes. However,
they were many against one and finally old Googly-Goo
brought a rope which he wound around the Scarecrow,
binding his legs together and his arms to his sides, and
after that the fight was over.

The King stormed and danced around in a dreadful fury,
for he had never been so switched since he was a boy --
and perhaps not then. He ordered the Scarecrow thrust
into the castle prison, which was no task at all because
one man could carry him easily, bound. as he was.

Even after the prisoner was removed the King could not
control his anger. He tried to figure out some way to be
revenged upon the straw man, but could think of nothing
that could hurt him. At last, when the terrified people
and the frightened courtiers had all slunk away, old
Googly-Goo approached the king with a malicious grin upon
his face.

"I'll tell you what to do," said he. "Build a big
bonfire and burn the Scarecrow up, and that will be the
end of him."

The King was so delighted with this suggestion that he
hugged old Googly-Goo in his joy

"Of course!" he cried. "The very thing. Why did I not
think of it myself?"

So he summoned his soldiers and retainers and bade them
prepare a great bonfire in an open space in the castle
park. Also he sent word to all his people to assemble and
witness the destruction of the Scarecrow who had dared to
defy his power. Before long a vast throng gathered in the
park and the servants had heaped up enough fuel to make a
fire that might be seen for miles away -- even in the
daytime.

When all was prepared, the King had his throne brought
out for him to sit upon and enjoy the spectacle, and then
he sent his soldiers to fetch the Scarecrow.

Now the one thing in all the world that the straw man
really feared was fire. He knew he would burn very easily
and that his ashes wouldn't amount to much afterward. It
wouldn't hurt him to be destroyed in such a manner, but
he realized that many people in the Land of Oz, and
especially Dorothy and the Royal Ozma, would feel sad if
they learned that their old friend the Scarecrow was no
longer in existence.

In spite of this, the straw man was brave and faced his
fiery fate like a hero. When they marched him out before
the concourse of people he turned to the King with great
calmness and said:

"This wicked deed will cost you your throne, as well as
much suffering, for my friends will avenge my
destruction."

"Your friends are not here, nor will they know what I
have done to you, when you are gone and can-not tell
them," answered the King in a scornful voice.

Then he ordered the Scarecrow bound to a stout stake
that he had had driven into the ground, and the materials
for the fire were heaped all around him. When this had
been done, the King's brass band struck up a lively tune
and old Googly-Goo came forward with a lighted match and
set fire to the pile.

At once the flames shot up and crept closer and closer
toward the Scarecrow. The King and all his people were so
intent upon this terrible spectacle that none of them
noticed how the sky grew suddenly dark. Perhaps they
thought that the loud buzzing sound -- like the noise of
a dozen moving railway trains -- came from the blazing
fagots; that the rush of wind was merely a breeze. But
suddenly down swept a flock of Orks, half a hundred of
them at the least, and the powerful currents of air
caused by their revolving tails sent the bonfire
scattering in every direction, so that not one burning
brand ever touched the Scarecrow.

But that was not the only effect of this sudden
tornado. King Krewl was blown out of his throne and went
tumbling heels over head until he landed with a bump
against the stone wall of his own castle, and before he
could rise a big Ork sat upon him and held him pressed
flat to the ground. Old Googly-Goo shot up into the air
like a rocket and landed on a tree, where he hung by the
middle on a high limb, kicking the air with his feet and
clawing the air with his hands, and howling for mercy
like the coward he was.

The people pressed back until they were jammed close
together, while all the soldiers were knocked over and
sent sprawling to the earth. The excitement was great for
a few minutes, and every frightened inhabitant of
Jinxland looked with awe and amazement at the great Orks
whose descent had served to rescue the Scarecrow and
conquer King Krewl at one and the same time.

The Ork, who was the leader of the band, soon had the
Scarecrow free of his bonds. Then he said: "Well, we were
just in time to save you, which is better than being a
minute too late. You are now the master here, and we are
determined to see your orders obeyed."

With this the Ork picked up Krewl's golden crown, which
had fallen off his head, and placed it upon the head of
the Scarecrow, who in his awkward way then shuffled over
to the throne and sat down in it.

Seeing this, a rousing cheer broke from the crowd of
people, who tossed their hats and waved their
handkerchiefs and hailed the Scarecrow as their King. The
soldiers joined the people in the cheering, for now they
fully realized that their hated master was conquered and
it would be wise to show their good will to the
conqueror. Some of them bound Krewl with ropes and
dragged him forward, dumping his body on the ground
before the Scarecrow's throne. Googly-Goo struggled until
he finally slid off the limb of the tree and came
tumbling to the ground. He then tried to sneak away and
escape, but the soldiers seized and bound him beside
Krewl.

"The tables are turned," said the Scarecrow, swelling
out his chest until the straw within it crackled
pleasantly, for he was highly pleased; "but it was you
and your people who did it, friend Ork, and from this
time you may count me your humble servant."




Chapter Nineteen

The Conquest of the Witch

Now as soon as the conquest of King Krewl had taken
place, one of the Orks had been dispatched to Pon's house
with the joyful news. At once Gloria and Pon and Trot and
Button-Bright hastened toward the castle. They were
somewhat surprised by the sight that met their eyes, for
there was the Scarecrow, crowned King, and all the people
kneeling humbly before him. So they likewise bowed low to
the new ruler and then stood beside the throne. Cap'n
Bill, as the gray grasshopper, was still perched upon
Trot's shoulder, but now he hopped to the shoulder of the
Scarecrow and whispered into the painted ear:

"I thought Gloria was to be Queen of Jinxland."

The Scarecrow shook his head.

"Not yet," he answered. "No Queen with a frozen heart
is fit to rule any country." Then he turned to his new
friend, the Ork, who was strutting about, very proud of
what he had done, and said: "Do you suppose you, or your
followers, could find old Blinkie the Witch?"

"Where is she?" asked the Ork.

"Somewhere in Jinxland, I'm sure."

"Then," said the Ork, "we shall certainly be able to
find her."

"It will give me great pleasure," declared the
Scarecrow. "When you have found her, bring her here to
me. and I will then decide what to do with her."

The Ork called his followers together and spoke a few
words to them in a low tone. A moment after they rose
into the air -- so suddenly that the Scarecrow, who was
very light in weight, was blown quite out of his throne
and into the arms of Pon, who replaced him carefully upon
his seat. There was an eddy of dust and ashes, too, and
the grasshopper only saved himself from being whirled
into the crowd of people by jumping into a tree, from
where a series of hops soon brought him back to Trot's
shoulder again. The Orks were quite out of sight by this
time, so the Scarecrow made a speech to the people and
presented Gloria to them, whom they knew well already
and were fond of. But not all of them knew of her frozen
heart, and when the Scarecrow related the story of the
Wicked Witch's misdeeds, which had been encouraged and
paid for by Krewl and Googly-Goo, the people were very
indignant.

Meantime the fifty Orks had scattered all over Jinx
land, which is not a very big country, and their sharp
eyes were peering into every valley and grove and gully.
Finally one of them spied a pair of heels sticking out
from underneath some bushes, and with a shrill whistle to
warn his comrades that the witch was found the Ork flew
down and dragged old Blinkie from her hiding-place. Then
two or three of the Orks seized the clothing of the
wicked woman in their strong claws and, lifting her high
in the air, where she struggled and screamed to no avail,
they flew with her straight to the royal castle and set
her down before the throne of the Scarecrow.

"Good!" exclaimed the straw man, nodding his stuffed
head with satisfaction. "Now we can proceed to business.
Mistress Witch, I am obliged to request, gently but
firmly, that you undo all the wrongs you have done by
means of your witchcraft."

"Pah!" cried old Blinkie in a scornful voice. "I defy
you all! By my magic powers I can turn you all into pigs,
rooting in the mud, and I'll do it if you are not
careful."

"I think you are mistaken about that," said the
Scarecrow, and rising from his throne he walked with
wobbling steps to the side of the Wicked Witch. "Before I
left the Land of Oz, Glinda the Royal Sorceress gave me a
box, which I was not to open except in an emergency. But
I feel pretty sure that this occasion is an emergency;
don't you, Trot?" he asked, turning toward the little
girl.

"Why, we've got to do something," replied Trot
seriously. "Things seem in an awful muddle here, jus'
now, and they'll be worse if we don't stop this witch
from doing more harm to people."

"That is my idea, exactly," said the Scarecrow, and
taking a small box from his pocket he opened the cover
and tossed the contents toward Blinkie.

The old woman shrank back, pale and trembling, as a
fine white dust settled all about her. Under its
influence she seemed to the eyes of all observers to
shrivel and grow smaller.

"Oh, dear - oh, dear!" she wailed, wringing her hands
in fear. "Haven't you the antidote, Scarecrow? Didn't the
great Sorceress give you another box?"

"She did," answered the Scarecrow.

"Then give it me -- quick!" pleaded the witch. "Give it
me -- and I'll do anything you ask me to!"

"You will do what I ask first," declared the Scarecrow,
firmly.

The witch was shriveling and growing smaller every
moment.

"Be quick, then!" she cried. "Tell me what I must do
and let me do it, or it will be too late."

"You made Trot's friend, Cap'n Bill, a grasshopper. I
command you to give him back his proper form again," said
the Scarecrow.

"Where is he? Where's the grasshopper? Quick -- quick!"
she screamed.

Cap'n Bill, who had been deeply interested in this
conversation, gave a great leap from Trot's shoulder and
landed on that of the Scarecrow. Blinkie saw him alight
and at once began to make magic passes and to mumble
magic incantations. She was in a desperate hurry, knowing
that she had no time to waste, and the grasshopper was so
suddenly transformed into the old sailor-man, Cap'n Bill,
that he had no opportunity to jump off the Scarecrow's
shoulder; so his great weight bore the stuffed Scarecrow
to the ground. No harm was done, however, and the straw
man got up and brushed the dust from his clothes while
Trot delightedly embraced Cap'n Bill.

"The other box! Quick! Give me the other box," begged
Blinkie, who had now shrunk to half her former size.

"Not yet," said the Scarecrow. "You must first melt
Princess Gloria's frozen heart."

"I can't; it's an awful job to do that! I can't,"
asserted the witch, in an agony of fear -- for still she
was growing smaller.

"You must!" declared the Scarecrow, firmly.

The witch cast a shrewd look at him and saw that he
meant it; so she began dancing around Gloria in a frantic
manner. The Princess looked coldly on, as if not at all
interested in the proceedings, while Blinkie tore a
handful of hair from her own head and ripped a strip of
cloth from the bottom of her gown. Then the witch sank
upon her knees, took a purple powder from her black bag
and sprinkled it over the hair and cloth.

"I hate to do it -- I  hate to do it!" she wailed, "for
there is no more of this magic compound in all the world.
But I must sacrifice it to save my own life. A match!
Give me a match, quick!" and panting from lack of breath
she gazed imploringly from one to another.

Cap'n Bill was the only one who had a match, but he
lost no time in handing it to Blinkie, who quickly set
fire to the hair and the cloth and the purple powder. At
once a purple cloud enveloped Gloria, and this gradually
turned to a rosy pink color --brilliant and quite
transparent. Through the rosy cloud they could all see
the beautiful Princess, standing proud and erect. Then
her heart became visible, at first frosted with ice but
slowly growing brighter and warmer until all the frost
had disappeared and it was beating as softly and
regularly as any other heart. And now the cloud dispersed
and disclosed Gloria, her face suffused with joy, smiling
tenderly upon the friends who were grouped about her.

Poor Pon stepped forward -- timidly, fearing a repulse,
but with pleading eyes and arms fondly outstretched
toward his former sweetheart -- and the Princess saw him
and her sweet face lighted with a radiant smile. Without
an instant's hesitation she threw herself into Pon's arms
and this reunion of two loving hearts was so affecting
that the people turned away and lowered their eyes so as
not to mar the sacred joy of the faithful lovers.

But Blinkie's small voice was shouting to the Scarecrow
for help.

"The antidote!" she screamed. "Give me the other box --
quick!"

The Scarecrow looked at the witch with his quaint,
painted eyes and saw that she was now no taller than his
knee. So he took from his pocket the second box and
scattered its contents on Blinkie. She ceased to grow any
smaller, but she could never regain her former size, and
this the wicked old woman well knew.

She did not know, however, that the second powder had
destroyed all her power to work magic, and seeking to be
revenged upon the Scarecrow and his friends she at once
began to mumble a charm so terrible in its effect that it
would have destroyed half the population of Jinxland --
had it worked. But it did not work at all, to the
amazement of old Blinkie. And by this time the Scarecrow
noticed what the little witch was trying to do, and said
to her:

"Go home, Blinkie, and behave yourself. You are no
longer a witch, but an ordinary old woman, and since you
are powerless to do more evil I advise you to try to do
some good in the world. Believe me, it is more fun to
accomplish a good act than an evil one, as you will
discover when once you have tried it."

But Blinkie was at that moment filled with grief and
chagrin at losing her magic powers. She started away
toward her home, sobbing and bewailing her fate, and not
one who saw her go was at all sorry for her.




Chapter Twenty

Queen Gloria


Next morning the Scarecrow called upon all the
courtiers and the people to assemble in the throne room
of the castle, where there was room enough for all that
were able to attend. They found the straw man seated upon
the velvet cushions of the throne, with the King's
glittering crown still upon his stuffed head. On one side
of the throne, in a lower chair, sat Gloria, looking
radiantly beautiful and fresh as a new-blown rose. On the
other side sat Pon, the gardener's boy, still dressed in
his old smock frock and looking sad and solemn; for Pon
could not make himself believe that so splendid a
Princess would condescend to love him when she had come
to her own and was seated upon a throne. Trot and Cap'n
Bill sat at the feet of the Scarecrow and were much
interested in the proceedings. Button-Bright had lost
himself before breakfast, but came into the throne room
before the ceremonies were over. Back of the throne stood
a row of the great Orks, with their leader in the center,
and the entrance to the palace was guarded by more Orks,
who were regarded with wonder and awe.

When all were assembled, the Scarecrow stood up and
made a speech. He told how Gloria's father, the good King
Kynd, who had once ruled them and been loved by everyone,
had been destroyed by King Phearce, the father of Pon,
and how King Phearce had been destroyed by King Krewl.
This last King had been a bad ruler, as they knew very
well, and the Scarecrow declared that the only one in all
Jinxland who had the right to sit upon the throne was
Princess Gloria, the daughter of King Kynd.

"But," he added, "it is not for me, a stranger, to say
who shall rule you. You must decide for yourselves, or
you will not be content. So choose now who shall be your
future ruler."

And they all shouted:  "The Scarecrow!  The Scarecrow
shall rule us!"

Which proved that the stuffed man had made himself very
popular by his conquest of King Krewl, and the people
thought they would like him for their King. But the
Scarecrow shook his head so vigorously that it became
loose, and Trot had to pin it firmly to his body again.

"No," said he, "I belong in the Land of Oz, where I am
the humble servant of the lovely girl who rules us all --
the royal Ozma. You must choose one of your own
inhabitants to rule over Jinxland. Who shall it be?"

They hesitated for a moment, and some few cried: "Pon!"
but many more shouted: "Gloria!"

So the Scarecrow took Gloria's hand and led her to the
throne, where he first seated her and then took the
glittering crown off his own head and placed it upon that
of the young lady, where it nestled prettily amongst her
soft curls. The people cheered and shouted then, kneeling
before their new Queen; but Gloria leaned down and took
Pon's hand in both her own and raised him to the seat
beside her.

"You shall have both a King and a Queen to care for you
and to protect you, my dear subjects," she said in a
sweet voice, while her face glowed with happiness; "for
Pon was a King's son before he became a gardener's boy,
and because I love him he is to be my Royal Consort."

That pleased them all, especially Pon, who realized
that this was the most important moment of his life. Trot
and Button-Bright and Cap'n Will all congratulated him on
winning the beautiful Gloria; but the Ork sneezed twice
and said that in his opinion the young lady might have
done better.

Then the Scarecrow ordered the guards to bring in the
wicked Krewl, King no longer, and when he appeared,
loaded with chains and dressed in fustian, the people
hissed him and drew back as he passed so their garments
would not touch him.

Krewl was not haughty or overbearing any more; on the
contrary he seemed very meek and in great fear of the
fate his conquerors had in store for him. But Gloria and
Pon were too happy to be revengeful and so they offered
to appoint Krewl to the position of gardener's boy at the
castle, Pon having resigned to become King. But they said
he must promise to reform his wicked ways and to do his
duty faithfully, and he must change his name from Krewl
to Grewl. All this the man eagerly promised to do, and so
when Pon retired to a room in the castle to put on
princely raiment, the old brown smock he had formerly
worn was given to Grewl, who then went out into the
garden to water the roses.

The remainder of that famous day, which was long
remembered in Jinxland, was given over to feasting and
merrymaking. In the evening there was a grand dance in
the courtyard, where the brass band played a new piece of
music called the "Ork Trot" which was dedicated to "Our
Glorious Gloria, the Queen."

While the Queen and Pon were leading this dance, and
all the Jinxland people were having a good time, the
strangers were gathered in a group in the park outside
the castle. Cap'n Bill, Trot, Button-Bright and the
Scarecrow were there, and so was their old friend the
Ork; but of all the great flock of Orks which had
assisted in the conquest but three remained in Jinxland,
besides their leader, the others having returned to their
own country as soon as Gloria was crowned Queen. To the
young Ork who had accompanied them in their adventures
Cap'n Bill said:

"You've surely been a friend in need, and we're mighty
grateful to you for helping us. I might have been a
grasshopper yet if it hadn't been for you, an' I might
remark that bein' a grasshopper isn't much fun."

"If it hadn't been for you, friend Ork," said the
Scarecrow, "I fear I could not have conquered King
Krewl."

"No," agreed Trot, "you'd have been just a heap of
ashes by this time."

And I might have been lost yet," added Button-Bright.
"Much obliged, Mr. Ork."

"Oh, that's all right," replied the Ork. "Friends must
stand together, you know, or they wouldn't be friends.
But now I must leave you and be off to my own country,
where there's going to be a surprise party on my uncle,
and I've promised to attend it."

"Dear me," said the Scarecrow, regretfully. "That is
very unfortunate."

"Why so?" asked the Ork.

"I hoped you would consent to carry us over those
mountains, into the Land of Oz. My mission here is now
finished and I want to get back to the Emerald City."

"How did you cross the mountains before?" inquired the
Ork.

"I scaled the cliffs by means of a rope, and crossed
the Great Gulf on a strand of spider web. Of course I can
return in the same manner, but it would be a hard journey
-- and perhaps an impossible one -- for Trot and Button-
Bright and Cap'n Bill. So I thought that if you had the
time you and your people would carry us over the
mountains and land us all safely on the other side, in
the Land of Oz."

The Ork thoughtfully considered the matter for a while.
Then he said:

"I mustn't break my promise to be present at the
surprise party; but, tell me, could you go to Oz to-
night?"

"What, now?" exclaimed Trot.

"It is a fine moonlight night," said the Ork, "and I've
found in my experience that there's no time so good as
right away. The fact is," he explained, "it's a long
journey to Orkland and I and my cousins here are all
rather tired by our day's work. But if you will start
now, and be content to allow us to carry you over the
mountains and dump you on the other side, just say the
word and -- off we go!"

Cap'n Bill and Trot looked at one another
questioningly. The little girl was eager to visit the
famous fairyland of Oz and the old sailor had endured
such hardships in Jinxland that he would be glad to be
out of it.

"It's rather impolite of us not to say good-bye to the
new King and Queen," remarked the Scarecrow, "but I'm
sure they're too happy to miss us, and I assure you it
will be much easier to fly on the backs of the Orks over
those steep mountains than to climb them as I did."

"All right; let's go!" Trot decided. "But where's
Button-Bright?"

Just at this important moment Button-Bright was lost
again, and they all scattered in search of him. He had
been standing beside them just a few minutes before, but
his friends had an exciting hunt for him before they
finally discovered the boy seated among the members of
the band, beating the end of the bass drum with the bone
of a turkey-leg that he had taken from the table in the
banquet room.

"Hello, Trot," he said, looking up at the little girl
when she found him. "This is the first chance I ever had
to pound a drum with a reg'lar drum stick. And I ate all
the meat off the bone myself."

"Come quick. We're going to the Land of Oz."

"Oh, what's the hurry?" said Button-Bright; but she
seized his arm and dragged him away to the park, where
the others were waiting.

Trot climbed upon the back of her old friend, the Ork
leader, and the others took their seats on the backs of
his three cousins. As soon as all were placed and
clinging to the skinny necks of the creatures, the
revolving tails began to whirl and up rose the four
monster Orks and sailed away toward the mountains. They
were so high in the air that when they passed the crest
of the highest peak it seemed far below them. No sooner
were they well across the barrier than the Orks swooped
downward and landed their passengers upon the ground.

"Here we are, safe in the Land of Oz!" cried the
Scarecrow joyfully.

"Oh, are we?" asked Trot, looking around her curiously.

She could see the shadows of stately trees and the
outlines of rolling hills; beneath her feet was soft
turf, but otherwise the subdued light of the moon
disclosed nothing clearly.

"Seems jus' like any other country," was Cap'n Bill's
comment.

"But it isn't," the Scarecrow assured him. "You are now
within the borders of the most glorious fairyland in all
the world. This part of it is just a corner of the
Quadling Country, and the least interesting portion of
it. It's not very thickly settled, around here, I'll
admit, but --"

He was interrupted by a sudden whir and a rush of air
as the four Orks mounted into the sky.

"Good night!" called the shrill voices of the strange
creatures, and although Trot shouted "Good night!" as
loudly as she could, the little girl was almost ready to
cry because the Orks had not waited to be properly
thanked for all their kindness to her and to Cap'n Bill.

But the Orks were gone, and thanks for good deeds do
not amount to much except to prove one's politeness.

"Well, friends," said the Scarecrow, "we mustn't stay
here in the meadows all night, so let us find a pleasant
place to sleep. Not that it matters to me, in the least,
for I never sleep; but I know that meat people like to
shut their eyes and lie still during the dark hours."

"I'm pretty tired," admitted Trot, yawning as she
followed the straw man along a tiny path, "so, if you
don't find a house handy, Cap'n Bill and I will sleep
under the trees, or even on this soft grass."

But a house was not very far off, although when the
Scarecrow stumbled upon it there was no light in it
whatever. Cap'n Bill knocked on the door several times,
and there being no response the Scarecrow boldly lifted
the latch and walked in, followed by the others. And no
sooner had they entered than a soft light filled the
room. Trot couldn't tell where it came from, for no lamp
of any sort was visible, but she did not waste much time
on this problem, because directly in the center of the
room stood a table set for three, with lots of good food
on it and several of the dishes smoking hot.

The little girl and Button-Bright both uttered
exclamations of pleasure, but they looked in vain for any
cook stove or fireplace, or for any person who might have
prepared for them this delicious feast.

"It's fairyland," muttered the boy, tossing his cap in
a corner and seating himself at the table. "This supper
smells 'most as good as that turkey-leg I had in
Jinxland. Please pass the muffins, Cap'n Bill."

Trot thought it was strange that no people but
themselves were in the house, but on the wall opposite
the door was a gold frame bearing in big letters the
word:

"WELCOME."

So she had no further hesitation in eating of the food
so mysteriously prepared for them.

"But there are only places for three!" she exclaimed.

"Three are quite enough," said the Scarecrow. "I never
eat, because I am stuffed full already, and I like my
nice clean straw better than I do food."

Trot and the sailor-man were hungry and made a hearty
meal, for not since they had left home had they tasted
such good food. It was surprising that Button-Bright
could eat so soon after his feast in Jinxland, but the
boy always ate whenever there was an opportunity. "If I
don't eat now," he said, "the next time I'm hungry I'll
wish I had."

"Really, Cap'n," remarked Trot, when she found a dish
of ice-cream appear beside her plate, "I b'lieve this is
fairyland, sure enough."

"There's no doubt of it, Trot," he answered gravely

"I've been here before," said Button-Bright, "so I
know."

After supper they discovered three tiny bedrooms
adjoining the big living room of the house, and in each
room was a comfortable white bed with downy pillows. You
may be sure that the tired mortals were not long in
bidding the Scarecrow good night and creeping into their
beds, where they slept soundly until morning.

For the first time since they set eyes on the terrible
whirlpool, Trot and Cap'n Bill were free from anxiety and
care. Button-Bright never worried about anything. The
Scarecrow, not being able to sleep, looked out of the
window and tried to count the stars.




Chapter Twenty-One

Dorothy, Betsy and Ozma


I suppose many of my readers have read descriptions of
the beautiful and magnificent Emerald City of Oz, so I
need not describe it here, except to state that never has
any city in any fairyland ever equalled this one in
stately splendor. It lies almost exactly in the center
of the Land of Oz, and in the center of the Emerald City
rises the wall of glistening emeralds that surrounds the
palace of Ozma. The palace is almost a city in itself
and is inhabited by many of the Ruler's especial friends
and those who have won her confidence and favor. As for
Ozma herself, there are no words in any dictionary I can
find that are fitted to describe this young girl's beauty
of mind and person. Merely to see her is to love her for
her charming face and manners; to know her is to love
her for her tender sympathy, her generous nature, her
truth and honor. Born of a long line of Fairy Queens,
Ozma is as nearly perfect as any fairy may be, and she is
noted for her wisdom as well as for her other qualities.
Her happy subjects adore their girl Ruler and each one
considers her a comrade and protector.

At the time of which I write, Ozma's best friend and
most constant companion was a little Kansas girl named
Dorothy, a mortal who had come to the Land of Oz in a
very curious manner and had been offered a home in Ozma's
palace. Furthermore, Dorothy had been made a Princess of
Oz, and was as much at home in the royal palace as was
the gentle Ruler. She knew almost every part of the great
country and almost all of its numerous inhabitants. Next
to Ozma she was loved better than anyone in all Oz, for
Dorothy was simple and sweet, seldom became angry and had
such a friendly, chummy way that she made friends
where-ever she wandered. It was she who first brought the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion to
the Emerald City. Dorothy had also introduced to Ozma
the Shaggy Man and the Hungry Tiger, as well as Billina
the Yellow Hen, Eureka the Pink Kitten, and many other
delightful characters and creatures. Coming as she did
from our world, Dorothy was much like many other girls we
know; so there were times when she was not so wise as she
might have been, and other times when she was obstinate
and got herself into trouble. But life in a fairy-land
had taught the little girl to accept all sorts of
surprising things as matters-of-course, for while Dorothy
was no fairy -- but just as mortal as we are -- she had
seen more wonders than most mortals ever do.

Another little girl from our outside world also lived
in Ozma's palace. This was Betsy Bobbin, whose strange
adventures had brought her to the Emerald City, where
Ozma had cordially welcomed her. Betsy was a shy little
thing and could never get used to the marvels that
surrounded her, but she and Dorothy were firm friends and
thought themselves very fortunate in being together in
this delightful country.

One day Dorothy and Betsy were visiting Ozma in the
girl Ruler's private apartment, and among the things that
especially interested them was Ozma's Magic Picture, set
in a handsome frame and hung upon the wall of the room.
This picture was a magic one because it constantly
changed its scenes and showed events and adventures
happening in all parts of the world. Thus it was really a
"moving picture" of life, and if the one who stood before
it wished to know what any absent person was doing, the
picture instantly showed that person, with his or her
surroundings.

The two girls were not wishing to see anyone in
particular, on this occasion, but merely enjoyed watching
the shifting scenes, some of which were exceedingly
curious and remarkable. Suddenly Dorothy exclaimed: "Why,
there's Button-Bright!" and this drew Ozma also to look
at the picture, for she and Dorothy knew the boy well.

"Who is Button-Bright?" asked Betsy, who had never met
him.

"Why, he's the little boy who is just getting off the
back of that strange flying creature," exclaimed Dorothy.
Then she turned to Ozma and asked: "What is that thing,
Ozma? A bird? I've never seen anything like it before."

"It is an Ork," answered Ozma, for they were watching
the scene where the Ork and the three big birds were
first landing their passengers in Jinxland after the long
flight across the desert. "I wonder," added the girl
Ruler, musingly, "why those strangers dare venture into
that unfortunate country, which is ruled by a wicked
King."

"That girl, and the one-legged man, seem to be mortals
from the outside world," said Dorothy

"The man isn't one-legged," corrected Betsy; "he has
one wooden leg."

"It's almost as bad," declared Dorothy, watching Cap'n
Bill stump around.

"They are three mortal adventurers," said Ozma, "and
they seem worthy and honest. But I fear they will be
treated badly in Jinxland, and if they meet with any
misfortune there it will reflect upon me, for Jinxland is
a part of my dominions."

"Can't we help them in any way?" inquired Dorothy.
"That seems like a nice little girl. I'd be sorry if
anything happened to her."

"Let us watch the picture for awhile," suggested Ozma,
and so they all drew chairs before the Magic Picture and
followed the adventures of Trot and Cap'n Bill and
Button-Bright. Presently the scene shifted and showed
their friend the Scarecrow crossing the mountains into
Jinxland, and that somewhat relieved Ozma's anxiety, for
she knew at once that Glinda the Good had sent the
Scarecrow to protect the strangers.

The adventures in Jinxland proved very interesting to
the three girls in Ozma's palace, who during the
succeeding days spent much of their time in watching the
picture. It was like a story to them.

"That girl's a reg'lar trump!" exclaimed Dorothy,
referring to Trot, and Ozma answered:

"She's a dear little thing, and I'm sure nothing very
bad will happen to her. The old sailor is a fine
character, too, for he has never once grumbled over being
a grasshopper, as so many would have done."

When the Scarecrow was so nearly burned up the girls
all shivered a little, and they clapped their hands in
joy when the flock of Orks came and saved him.

So it was that when all the exciting adventures in
Jinxland were over and the four Orks had begun their
flight across the mountains to carry the mortals into the
Land of Oz, Ozma called the Wizard to her and asked him
to prepare a place for the strangers to sleep.

The famous Wizard of Oz was a quaint little man who
inhabited the royal palace and attended to all the
magical things that Ozma wanted done. He was not as
powerful as Glinda, to be sure, but he could do a great
many wonderful things. He proved this by placing a house
in the uninhabited part of the Quadling Country where the
Orks landed Cap'n Bill and Trot and Button-Bright, and
fitting it with all the comforts I have described in the
last chapter.

Next morning Dorothy said to Ozma:

"Oughtn't we to go meet the strangers, so we can show
them the way to the Emerald City? I'm sure that little
girl will feel shy in this beautiful land, and I know if
'twas me I'd like somebody to give me a welcome."

Ozma smiled at her little friend and answered:

"You and Betsy may go to meet them, if you wish, but I
can not leave my palace just now, as I am to have a
conference with Jack Pumpkinhead and Professor Wogglebug
on important matters. You may take the Sawhorse and the
Red Wagon, and if you start soon you will be able to meet
the Scarecrow and the strangers at Glinda's palace."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Dorothy, and went away to tell
Betsy and to make preparations for the journey.




Chapter Twenty-Two

The Waterfall


Glinda's castle was a long way from the mountains, but
the Scarecrow began the journey cheerfully, since time
was of no great importance in the Land of Oz and he had
recently made the trip and knew the way. It never
mattered much to Button-Bright where he was or what he
was doing; the boy was content in being alive and having
good companions to share his wanderings. As for Trot and
Cap'n Bill, they now found themselves so comfortable and
free from danger, in this fine fairyland, and they were
so awed and amazed by the adventures they were
encountering, that the journey to Glinda's castle was
more like a pleasure trip than a hardship, so many
wonderful things were there to see.

Button-Bright had been in Oz before, but never in this
part of it, so the Scarecrow was the only one who knew
the paths and could lead them. They had eaten a hearty
breakfast, which they found already prepared for them and
awaiting them on the table when they arose from their
refreshing sleep, so they left the magic house in a
contented mood and with hearts lighter and more happy
than they had known for many a day. As they marched
along through the fields, the sun shone brightly and the
breeze was laden with delicious fragrance, for it carried
with it the breath of millions of wildflowers.

At noon, when they stopped to rest by the bank of a
pretty river, Trot said with a long-drawn breath that was
much like a sigh:

"I wish we'd brought with us some of the food that was
left from our breakfast, for I'm getting hungry again."

Scarcely had she spoken when a table rose up before
them, as if from the ground itself, and it was loaded
with fruits and nuts and cakes and many other good things
to eat. The little girl's eyes opened wide at this
display of magic, and Cap'n Bill was not sure that the
things were actually there and fit to eat until he had
taken them in his hand and tasted them. But the Scarecrow
said with a laugh:

"Someone is looking after your welfare, that is
certain, and from the looks of this table I suspect my
friend the Wizard has taken us in his charge. I've known
him to do things like this before, and if we are in the
Wizard's care you need not worry about your future."

"Who's worrying?" inquired Button-Bright, already at
the table and busily eating.

The Scarecrow looked around the place while the others
were feasting, and finding many things unfamiliar to him
he shook his head and remarked:

"I must have taken the wrong path, back in that last
valley, for on my way to Jinxland I remember that I
passed around the foot of this river, where there was a
great waterfall."

"Did the river make a bend, after the waterfall?" asked
Cap'n Bill.

"No, the river disappeared. Only a pool of whirling
water showed what had become of the river; but I suppose
it is under ground, somewhere, and will come to the
surface again in another part of the country."

"Well," suggested Trot, as she finished her luncheon,
"as there is no way to cross this river, I s'pose we'll
have to find that waterfall, and go around it."

"Exactly," replied the Scarecrow; so they soon renewed
their journey, following the river for a long time until
the roar of the waterfall sounded in their ears. By and
by they came to the waterfall itself, a sheet of silver
dropping far, far down into a tiny lake which seemed to
have no outlet. From the top of the fall, where they
stood, the banks gradually sloped away, so that the
descent by land was quite easy, while the river could do
nothing but glide over an edge of rock and tumble
straight down to the depths below.

"You see," said the Scarecrow, leaning over the brink,
"this is called by our Oz people the Great Waterfall,
because it is certainly the highest one in all the land;
but I think -- Help!"

He had lost his balance and pitched headforemost into
the river. They saw a flash of straw and blue clothes,
and the painted face looking upward in surprise. The
next moment the Scarecrow was swept over the waterfall
and plunged into the basin below.

The accident had happened so suddenly that for a moment
they were all too horrified to speak or move.

"Quick! We must go to help him or he will be drowned,"
Trot exclaimed.

Even while speaking she began to descend the bank to
the pool below, and Cap'n Bill followed as swiftly as his
wooden leg would let him. Button-Bright came more slowly,
calling to the girl:

"He can't drown, Trot; he's a Scarecrow."

But she wasn't sure a Scarecrow couldn't drown and
never relaxed her speed until she stood on the edge of
the pool, with the spray dashing in her face. Cap'n Bill,
puffing and panting, had just voice enough to ask, as he
reached her side:

"See him, Trot?"

"Not a speck of him.  Oh, Cap'n, what do you s'pose has
become of him?"

"I s'pose," replied the sailor, "that he's in that
water, more or less far down, and I'm 'fraid it'll make
his straw pretty soggy. But as fer his bein' drowned, I
agree with Button-Bright that it can't be done."

There was small comfort in this assurance and Trot
stood for some time searching with her eyes the bubbling
water, in the hope that the Scarecrow would finally come
to the surface. Presently she heard Button-Bright
calling: "Come here, Trot!" and looking around she saw
that the boy had crept over the wet rocks to the edge of
the waterfall and seemed to be peering behind it. Making
her way toward him, she asked:

"What do you see?"

"A cave," he answered. "Let's go in. P'r'aps we'll find
the Scarecrow there."

She was a little doubtful of that, but the cave
interested her, and so did it Cap'n Bill. There was just
space enough at the edge of the sheet of water for them
to crowd in behind it, but after that dangerous entrance
they found room enough to walk upright and after a time
they came to an opening in the wall of rock. Approaching
this opening, they gazed within it and found a series of
steps, cut so that they might easily descend into the
cavern.

Trot turned to look inquiringly at her companions. The
falling water made such din and roaring that her voice
could not be heard. Cap'n Bill nodded his head, but
before he could enter the cave, Button-Bright was before
him, clambering down the steps without a particle of
fear. So the others followed the boy.

The first steps were wet with spray, and slippery, but
the remainder were quite dry. A rosy light seemed to come
from the interior of the cave, and this lighted their
way. After the steps there was a short tunnel, high
enough for them to walk erect in. and then they reached
the cave itself and paused in wonder and admiration.

They stood on the edge of a vast cavern, the walls
and domed roof of which were lined with countless
rubies, exquisitely cut and flashing sparkling rays
from one to another. This caused a radiant light that
permitted the entire cavern to be distinctly seen, and
the effect was so marvelous that Trot drew in her
breath with a sort of a gasp, and stood quite still in
wonder.

But the walls and roof of the cavern were merely a
setting for a more wonderful scene. In the center was a
bubbling caldron of water, for here the river rose again,
splashing and dashing till its spray rose high in the
air, where it took the ruby color of the jewels and
seemed like a seething mass of flame. And while they
gazed into the tumbling, tossing water, the body of the
Scarecrow suddenly rose in the center, struggling and
kicking, and the next instant wholly disappeared from
view.

"My, but he's wet!" exclaimed Button-Bright; but none
of the others heard him.

Trot and Cap'n Bill discovered that a broad ledge --
covered, like the walls, with glittering rubies -- ran
all around the cavern; so they followed this gorgeous
path to the rear and found where the water made its final
dive underground, before it disappeared entirely. Where
it plunged into this dim abyss the river was black and
dreary looking, and they stood gazing in awe until just
beside them the body of the Scarecrow again popped up
from the water.




Chapter Twenty Three

The Land of Oz


The straw man's appearance on the water was so sudden
that it startled Trot, but Cap'n Bill had the presence of
mind to stick his wooden leg out over the water and the
Scarecrow made a desperate clutch and grabbed the leg
with both hands. He managed to hold on until Trot and
Button-Bright knelt down and seized his clothing, but the
children would have been powerless to drag the soaked
Scarecrow ashore had not Cap'n Bill now assisted them.
When they laid him on the ledge of rubies he was the most
useless looking Scarecrow you can imagine -- his straw
sodden and dripping with water, his clothing wet and
crumpled, while even the sack upon which his face was
painted had become so wrinkled that the old jolly
expression of their stuffed friend's features was
entirely gone. But he could still speak, and when Trot
bent down her ear she heard him say:

"Get me out of here as soon as you can."

That seemed a wise thing to do, so Cap'n Bill lifted
his head and shoulders, and Trot and Button-Bright each
took a leg; among them they partly carried and partly
dragged the damp Scarecrow out of the Ruby Cavern, along
the tunnel, and up the flight of rock steps. It was
somewhat difficult to get him past the edge of the
waterfall, but they succeeded, after much effort, and a
few minutes later laid their poor comrade on a grassy
bank where the sun shone upon him freely and he was
beyond the reach of the spray.

Cap'n Bill now knelt down and examined the straw that
the Scarecrow was stuffed with.

"I don't believe it'll be of much use to him, any
more," said he, "for it's full of polliwogs an' fish
eggs, an' the water has took all the crinkle out o' the
straw an ruined it. I guess, Trot, that the best thing
for us to do is to empty out all his body an' carry his
head an' clothes along the road till we come to a field
or a house where we can get some fresh straw."

"Yes, Cap'n," she agreed, "there's nothing else to be
done. But how shall we ever find the road to Glinda's
palace, without the Scarecrow to guide us?"

"That's easy," said the Scarecrow, speaking in a rather
feeble but distinct voice. "If Cap'n Bill will carry my
head on his shoulders, eyes front, I can tell him which
way to go."

So they followed that plan and emptied all the old, wet
straw out of the Scarecrow's body. Then the sailor-man
wrung out the clothes and laid them in the sun till they
were quite dry. Trot took charge of the head and pressed
the wrinkles out of the face as it dried, so that after a
while the Scarecrow's expression became natural again,
and as jolly as before.

This work consumed some time, but when it was completed
they again started upon their journey, Button-Bright
carrying the boots and hat, Trot the bundle of clothes,
and Cap'n Bill the head. The Scarecrow, having regained
his composure and being now in a good humor, despite his
recent mishaps, beguiled their way with stories of the
Land of Oz.

It was not until the next morning, however, that they
found straw with which to restuff the Scarecrow. That
evening they came to the same little house they had slept
in before, only now it was magically transferred to a new
place. The same bountiful supper as before was found
smoking hot upon the table and the same cosy beds were
ready for them to sleep in.

They rose early and after breakfast went out of doors,
and there, lying just beside the house, was a heap of
clean, crisp straw. Ozma had noticed the Scarecrow's
accident in her Magic Picture and had notified the Wizard
to provide the straw, for she knew the adventurers were
not likely to find straw in the country through which
they were now traveling.

They lost no time in stuffing the Scarecrow anew, and
he was greatly delighted at being able to walk around
again and to assume the leadership of the little party.

"Really," said Trot, "I think you're better than you
were before, for you are fresh and sweet all through and
rustle beautifully when you move."

"Thank you, my dear," he replied gratefully. "I always
feel like a new man when I'm freshly stuffed. No one
likes to get musty, you know, and even good straw may be
spoiled by age."

"It was water that spoiled you, the last time,"
remarked Button-Bright, "which proves that too much
bathing is as bad as too little. But, after all,
Scarecrow, water is not as dangerous for you as fire."

"All things are good in moderation," declared the
Scarecrow. "But now, let us hurry on, or we shall not
reach Glinda's palace by nightfall."




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Royal Reception


At about four o'clock of that same day the Red Wagon
drew up at the entrance to Glinda's palace and Dorothy
and Betsy jumped out. Ozma's Red Wagon was almost a
chariot, being inlaid with rubies and pearls, and it was
drawn by Ozma's favorite steed, the wooden Sawhorse.

"Shall I unharness you," asked Dorothy, "so you can
come in and visit?"

"No," replied the Sawhorse. "I'll just stand here and
think. Take your time. Thinking doesn't seem to bore me
at all."

"What will you think of?" inquired Betsy.

"Of the acorn that grew the tree from which I was
made."

So they left the wooden animal and went in to see
Glinda, who welcomed the little girls in her most cordial
manner.

"I knew you were on your way," said the good Sorceress
when they were seated in her library, "for I learned from
my Record Book that you intended to meet Trot and Button-
Bright on their arrival here."

"Is the strange little girl named Trot?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes; and her companion, the old sailor, is named Cap'n
Bill. I think we shall like them very much, for they are
just the kind of people to enjoy and appreciate our
fairyland and I do not see any way, at present, for them
to return again to the outside world."

"Well, there's room enough here for them, I'm sure,"
said Dorothy. "Betsy and I are already eager to welcome
Trot. It will keep us busy for a year, at least, showing
her all the wonderful things in Oz."

Glinda smiled.

"I have lived here many years," said she, "and I have
not seen all the wonders of Oz yet."

Meantime the travelers were drawing near to the palace,
and when they first caught sight of its towers Trot
realized that it was far more grand and imposing than was
the King's castle in Jinxland. The nearer they came, the
more beautiful the palace appeared, and when finally the
Scarecrow led them up the great marble steps, even
Button-Bright was filled with awe.

"I don't see any soldiers to guard the place," said the
little girl.

"There is no need to guard Glinda's palace," replied
the Scarecrow. "We have no wicked people in Oz, that we
know of, and even if there were any, Glinda's magic would
be powerful enough to protect her."

Button-Bright was now standing on the top steps of the
entrance, and he suddenly exclaimed:

"Why, there's the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon! Hip,
hooray!" and next moment he was rushing down to throw his
arms around the neck of the wooden horse, which good-
naturedly permitted this familiarity when it recognized
in the boy an old friend.

Button-Bright's shout had been heard inside the palace,
so now Dorothy and Betsy came running out to embrace
their beloved friend, the Scarecrow, and to welcome Trot
and Cap'n Bill to the Land of Oz.

"We've been watching you for a long time, in Ozma's
Magic Picture," said Dorothy, "and Ozma has sent us to
invite you to her own palace in the Em'rald City. I don't
know if you realize how lucky you are to get that
invitation, but you'll understand it better after you've
seen the royal palace and the Em'rald City."

Glinda now appeared in person to lead all the party
into her Azure Reception Room. Trot was a little afraid
of the stately Sorceress, but gained courage by holding
fast to the hands of Betsy and Dorothy. Cap'n Bill had no
one to help him feel at ease, so the old sailor sat
stiffly on the edge of his chair and said:

"Yes, ma'am," or "No, ma'am," when he was spoken to,
and was greatly embarrassed by so much splendor.

The Scarecrow had lived so much in palaces that he felt
quite at home, and he chatted to Glinda and the Oz girls
in a merry, light-hearted way. He told all about his
adventures in Jinxland, and at the Great Waterfall, and
on the journey hither -- most of which his hearers knew
already -- and then he asked Dorothy and Betsy what had
happened in the Emerald City since he had left there.

They all passed the evening and the night at Glinda's
palace, and the Sorceress was so gracious to Cap'n Bill
that the old man by degrees regained his self-possession
and began to enjoy himself. Trot had already come to the
conclusion that in Dorothy and Betsy she had found two
delightful comrades, and Button-Bright was just as much
at home here as he had been in the fields of Jinxland or
when he was buried in the popcorn snow of the Land of Mo.

The next morning they arose bright and early and after
breakfast bade good-bye to the kind Sorceress, whom Trot
and Cap'n Bill thanked earnestly for sending the
Scarecrow to Jinxland to rescue them. Then they all
climbed into the Red Wagon.

There was room for all on the broad seats, and when all
had taken their places -- Dorothy, Trot and Betsy on the
rear seat and Cap'n Bill, Button-Bright and the Scarecrow
in front -- they called "Gid-dap!" to the Sawhorse and
the wooden steed moved briskly away, pulling the Red
Wagon with ease.

It was now that the strangers began to perceive the
real beauties of the Land of Oz, for they were passing
through a more thickly settled part of the country and
the population grew more dense as they drew nearer to the
Emerald City. Everyone they met had a cheery word or a
smile for the Scarecrow, Dorothy and Betsy Bobbin, and
some of them remembered Button-Bright and welcomed him
back to their country.

It was a happy party, indeed, that journeyed in the Red
Wagon to the Emerald City, and Trot already began to hope
that Ozma would permit her and Cap'n Bill to live always
in the Land of Oz.

When they reached the great city they were more amazed
than ever, both by the concourse of people in their
quaint and picturesque costumes, and by the splendor of
the city itself. But the magnificence of the Royal Palace
quite took their breath away, until Ozma received them in
her own pretty apartment and by her charming manners and
assuring smiles made them feel they were no longer
strangers.

Trot was given a lovely little room next to that of
Dorothy, while Cap'n Bill had the cosiest sort of a room
next to Trot's and overlooking the gardens. And that
evening Ozma gave a grand banquet and reception in honor
of the new arrivals. While Trot had read of many of the
people she then met, Cap'n Bill was less familiar with
them and many of the unusual characters introduced to him
that evening caused the old sailor to open his eyes wide
in astonishment.

He had thought the live Scarecrow about as curious as
anyone could be, but now he met the Tin Woodman, who was
all made of tin, even to his heart, and carried a
gleaming axe over his shoulder wherever he went. Then
there was Jack Pumpkinhead, whose head was a real pumpkin
with the face carved upon it; and Professor Wogglebug,
who had the shape of an enormous bug but was dressed in
neat fitting garments. The Professor was an interesting
talker and had very polite manners, but his face was so
comical that it made Cap'n Bill smile to look at it. A
great friend of Dorothy and Ozma seemed to be a machine
man called Tik-Tok, who ran down several times during the
evening and had to be wound up again by someone before he
could move or speak.

At the reception appeared the Shaggy Man and his
brother, both very popular in Oz, as well as Dorothy's
Uncle Henry and Aunt Em, two happy old people who lived
in a pretty cottage near the palace.

But what perhaps seemed most surprising to both Trot
and Cap'n Bill was the number of peculiar animals
admitted into Ozma's parlors, where they not only
conducted themselves quite properly but were able to talk
as well as anyone.

There was the Cowardly Lion, an immense beast with a
beautiful mane; and the Hungry Tiger, who smiled
continually; and Eureka the Pink Kitten, who lay curled
upon a cushion and had rather supercilious manners; and
the wooden Sawhorse; and nine tiny piglets that belonged
to the Wizard; and a mule named Hank, who belonged to
Betsy Bobbin. A fuzzy little terrier dog, named Toto, lay
at Dorothy's feet but seldom took part in the
conversation, although he listened to every word that was
said. But the most wonderful of all to Trot was a square
beast with a winning smile, that squatted in a corner of
the room and wagged his square head at everyone in quite
a jolly way. Betsy told Trot that this unique beast was
called the Woozy, and there was no other like him in all
the world.

Cap'n Bill and Trot had both looked around expectantly
for the Wizard of Oz, but the evening was far advanced
before the famous little man entered the room. But he
went up to the strangers at once and said:

"I know you, but you don't know me; so let's get
acquainted."

And they did get acquainted, in a very short time, and
before the evening was over Trot felt that she knew every
person and animal present at the reception, and that they
were all her good friends.

Suddenly they looked around for Button-Bright, but he
was nowhere to be found.

"Dear me!" cried Trot. "He's lost again."

"Never mind, my dear," said Ozma, with her charming
smile, "no one can go far astray in the Land of Oz, and
if Button-Bright isn't lost occasionally, he isn't
happy."





The Wonderful Oz Books by L. Frank Baum

THE WIZARD OF OZ
THE LAND OF OZ
OZMA OF OZ
DOROTHY AND THE WIZARD IN OZ
THE ROAD TO OZ
THE EMERALD CITY OF OZ
THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ
TIK-TOK OF OZ
THE SCARECROW OF OZ
RINKITINK IN OZ
THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ
THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ
THE MAGIC OF OZ
GLINDA OF OZ





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Scarecrow of Oz by Baum

