*Project Gutenberg's Etext of Rinkitink In Oz by L. Frank Baum*

#10 in the L. Frank Baum's Wonderful World Of Oz Series
We are now naming the files as they are numbered in the books--
i.e. This is #10 in the series so the file name is 10wozxxx.xxx
where the x's are place holders for editon # and file type such
as 10woz10.txt and 10woz10.zip, when we do a .htm, 10woz10h.htm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Rinkitink In Oz

by L. Frank Baum

June, 1997  [Etext #958]

*Project Gutenberg's Etext of Rinkitink In Oz by L. Frank Baum*
*****This file should be named 10woz10.txt or 10woz10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 10woz11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 10woz10a.txt.


This Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Anthony Matonac.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*




          RINKITINK IN OZ

Wherein is recorded the Perilous Quest of
   Prince Inga of Pingaree and King
       Rinkitink in the Magical
        Isles that lie beyond
            the Borderland
                 of Oz

           By L. Frank Baum
       "Royal Historian of Oz"


Introducing this Story


Here is a story with a boy hero, and a boy of whom
you have never before heard. There are girls in the
story, too, including our old friend Dorothy, and some
of the characters wander a good way from the Land of Oz
before they all assemble in the Emerald City to take
part in Ozma's banquet. Indeed, I think you will find
this story  quite different from the other histories
of Oz, but I hope you will not like it the less on that
account.

If I am permitted to write another Oz book it will
tell of some thrilling adventures encountered by
Dorothy, Betsy Bobbin, Trot and the Patchwork Girl
right in the Land of Oz, and how they discovered some
amazing creatures that never could have existed outside
a fairy-land. I have an idea that about the time you
are reading this story of Rinkitink I shall be writing
that story of Adventures in Oz.

Don't fail to write me often and give me your advice
and suggestions, which I always appreciate. I get a
good many letters from my readers, but every one is a
joy to me and I answer them as soon as I can find time
to do so.

"OZCOT"
at HOLLYWOOD
in CALIFORNIA, 1916.

L. FRANK BAUM
Royal Historian of Oz




LIST OF CHAPTERS
 1  The Prince of Pingaree
 2  The Coming of King Rinkitink
 3  The Warriors from the North
 4  The Deserted Island
 5  The Three Pearls
 6  The Magic Boat
 7  The Twin Islands
 8  Rinkitink Makes a Great Mistake
 9  A Present for Zella
10  The Cunning of Queen Cor
11  Zella Goes to Coregos
12  The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat
13  Zella Saves the Prince
14  The Escape
15  The Flight of the Rulers
16  Nikobob Refuses a Crown
17  The Nome King
18  Inga Parts With His Pink Pearl
19  Rinkitink Chuckles
20  Dorothy to the Rescue
21  The Wizard Finds an Enchantment
22  Ozma's Banquet
23  The Pearl Kingdom
24  The Captive King





Chapter One

The Prince of Pingaree


If you have a map of the Land of Oz handy, you will
find that the great Nonestic Ocean washes the shores of
the Kingdom of Rinkitink, between which and the Land of
Oz lies a strip of the country of the Nome King and a
Sandy Desert. The Kingdom of Rinkitink isn't very big
and lies close to the ocean, all the houses and the
King's palace being built near the shore. The people
live much upon the water, boating and fishing, and the
wealth of Rinkitink is gained from trading along the
coast and with the islands nearest it.

Four days' journey by boat to the north of Rinkitink
is the Island of Pingaree, and as our story begins here
I must tell you something about this island. At the
north end of Pingaree, where it is widest, the land is
a mile from shore to shore, but at the south end it is
scarcely half a mile broad; thus, although Pingaree is
four miles long, from north to south, it cannot be
called a very big island. It is exceedingly pretty,
however, and to the gulls who approach it from the sea
it must resemble a huge green wedge lying upon the
waters, for its grass and trees give it the color of
an emerald.

The grass came to the edge of the sloping shores; the
beautiful trees occupied all the central portion of
Pingaree, forming a continuous grove where the branches
met high overhead and there was just space beneath
them for the cosy houses of the inhabitants. These
houses were scattered everywhere throughout the
island, so that there was no town or city, unless the
whole island might be called a city. The canopy of
leaves, high overhead, formed a shelter from sun and
rain, and the dwellers in the grove could all look past
the straight tree-trunks and across the grassy slopes
to the purple waters of the Nonestic Ocean.

At the big end of the island, at the north, stood the
royal palace of King Kitticut, the lord and ruler of
Pingaree. It was a beautiful palace, built entirely of
snow-white marble and capped by domes of burnished
gold, for the King was exceedingly wealthy. All along
the coast of Pingaree were found the largest and finest
pearls in the whole world.

These pearls grew within the shells of big oysters,
and the people raked the oysters from their watery
beds, sought out the milky pearls and carried them
dutifully to their King. Therefore, once every year His
Majesty was able to send six of his boats, with sixty
rowers and many sacks of the valuable pearls, to the
Kingdom of Rinkitink, where there was a city called
Gilgad, in which King Rinkitink's palace stood on a
rocky headland and served, with its high towers, as a
lighthouse to guide sailors to the harbor. In Gilgad
the pearls from Pingaree were purchased by the King's
treasurer, and the boats went back to the island laden
with stores of rich merchandise and such supplies of
food as the people and the royal family of Pingaree
needed.

The Pingaree people never visited any other land but
that of Rinkitink, and so there were few other lands
that knew there was such an island. To the southwest
was an island called the Isle of Phreex, where the
inhabitants had no use for pearls. And far north of
Pingaree -- six days' journey by boat, it was said --
were twin islands named Regos and Coregos, inhabited by
a fierce and warlike people.

Many years before this story really begins, ten big
boatloads of those fierce warriors of Regos and Coregos
visited Pingaree, landing suddenly upon the north end
of the island. There they began to plunder and conquer,
as was their custom, but the people of Pingaree,
although neither so big nor so strong as their foes,
were able to defeat them and drive them all back to the
sea, where a great storm overtook the raiders from
Regos and Coregos and destroyed them and their boats,
not a single warrior returning to his own country.

This defeat of the enemy seemed the more wonderful
because the pearl-fishers of Pingaree were mild and
peaceful in disposition and seldom quarreled even among
themselves. Their only weapons were their oyster rakes;
yet the fact remains that they drove their fierce
enemies from Regos and Coregos from their shores.

King Kitticut was only a boy when this remarkable
battle was fought, and now his hair was gray; but he
remembered the day well and, during the years that
followed, his one constant fear was of another invasion
of his enemies. He feared they might send a more
numerous army to his island, both for conquest and
revenge, in which case there could be little hope of
successfully opposing them.

This anxiety on the part of King Kitticut led him to
keep a sharp lookout for strange boats, one of his men
patrolling the beach constantly, but he was too wise to
allow any fear to make him or his subjects unhappy. He
was a good King and lived very contentedly in his fine
palace, with his fair Queen Garee and their one child,
Prince Inga.

The wealth of Pingaree increased year by year; and
the happiness of the people increased, too. Perhaps
there was no place, outside the Land of Oz, where
contentment and peace were more manifest than on this
pretty island, hidden in the besom of the Nonestic
Ocean. Had these conditions remained undisturbed, there
would have been no need to speak of Pingaree in this
story.

Prince Inga, the heir to all the riches and the
kingship of Pingaree, grew up surrounded by every
luxury; but he was a manly little fellow, although
somewhat too grave and thoughtful, and he could never
bear to be idle a single minute. He knew where the
finest oysters lay hidden along the coast and was as
successful in finding pearls as any of the men of the
island, although he was so slight and small. He had a
little boat of his own and a rake for dragging up the
oysters and he was very proud indeed when he could
carry a big white pearl to his father.

There was no school upon the island, as the people of
Pingaree were far removed from the state of
civilization that gives our modern children such
advantages as schools and learned professors, but the
King owned several manuscript books, the pages being
made of sheepskin. Being a man of intelligence, he was
able to teach his son something of reading, writing and
arithmetic.

When studying his lessons Prince Inga used to go into
the grove near his father's palace and climb into the
branches of a tall tree, where he had built a platform
with a comfortable seat to rest upon, all hidden by the
canopy of leaves. There, with no one to disturb him, he
would pore over the sheepskin on which were written the
queer characters of the Pingarese language.

King Kitticut was very proud of his little son, as
well he might be, and he soon felt a high respect for
Inga's judgment and thought that he was worthy to be
taken into the confidence of his father in many matters
of state. He taught the boy the needs of the people and
how to rule them justly, for some day he knew that Inga
would be King in his place. One day he called his son
to his side and said to him:

"Our island now seems peaceful enough, Inga, and we
are happy and prosperous, but I cannot forget those
terrible people of Regos and Coregos. My constant fear
is that they will send a fleet of boats to search for
those of their race whom we defeated many years ago,
and whom the sea afterwards destroyed. If the warriors
come in great numbers we may be unable to oppose them,
for my people are little trained to fighting at best;
they surely would cause us much injury and suffering."

"Are we, then, less powerful than in my grandfather's
day?" asked Prince Inga.

The King shook his head thoughtfully.

"It is not that," said he. "That you may fully
understand that marvelous battle, I must confide to,
you a great secret. I have in my possession three Magic
Talismans, which I have ever guarded with utmost care,
keeping the knowledge of their existence from anyone
else. But, lest I should die, and the secret be lost, I
have decided to tell you what these talismans are and
where they are hidden. Come with me, my son.

He led the way through the rooms of the palace until
they came to the great banquet hall. There, stopping in
the center of the room, he stooped down and touched a
hidden spring in the tiled floor. At once one of the
tiles sank downward and the King reached within the
cavity and drew out a silken bag.

This bag he proceeded to open, showing Inga that it
contained three great pearls, each one as big around as
a marble. One had a blue tint and one was of a delicate
rose color, but the third was pure white.

"These three pearls," said the King, speaking in a
solemn, impressive voice, "are the most wonderful the
world has ever known. They were gifts to one of my
ancestors from the Mermaid Queen, a powerful fairy whom
he once had the good fortune to rescue from her
enemies. In gratitude for this favor she presented him
with these pearls. Each of the three possesses an
astonishing power, and whoever is their owner may count
himself a fortunate man. This one having the blue tint
will give to the person who carries it a strength so
great that no power can resist him. The one with the
pink glow will protect its owner from all dangers that
may threaten him, no matter from what source they may
come. The third pearl -- this one of pure white -- can
speak, and its words are always wise and helpful."

"What is this, my father!" exclaimed the Prince,
amazed; "do you tell me that a pearl can speak? It
sounds impossible."

"Your doubt is due to your ignorance of fairy
powers," returned the King, gravely. "Listen, my son,
and you will know that I speak the truth."

He held the white pearl to Inga's ear and the Prince
heard a small voice say distinctly: "Your father is
right. Never question the truth of what you fail to
understand, for the world is filled with wonders."

"I crave your pardon, dear father," said the Prince,
"for clearly I heard the pearl speak, and its words
were full of wisdom."

"The powers of the other pearls are even greater,"
resumed the King. "Were I poor in all else, these gems
would make me richer than any other monarch the world
holds."

"I believe that," replied Inga, looking at the
beautiful pearls with much awe. "But tell me, my
father, why do you fear the warriors of Regos and
Coregos when these marvelous powers are yours?"

"The powers are mine only while I have the pearls
upon my person," answered King Kitticut, "and I dare
not carry them constantly for fear they might be lost.
Therefore, I keep them safely hidden in this recess. My
only danger lies in the chance that my watchmen might
fail to discover the approach of our enemies and allow
the warrior invaders to seize me before I could secure
the pearls. I should, in that case, be quite powerless
to resist. My father owned the magic pearls at the time
of the Great Fight, of which you have so often heard,
and the pink pearl protected him from harm, while the
blue pearl enabled him and his people to drive away the
enemy. Often have I suspected that the destroying storm
was caused by the fairy mermaids, but that is a matter
of which I have no proof."

"I have often wondered how we managed to win that
battle," remarked Inga thoughtfully. "But the pearls
will assist us in case the warriors come again, will
they not?"

"They are as powerful as ever," declared the King.
"Really, my son, I have little to fear from any foe.
But lest I die and the secret be lost to the next King,
I have now given it into your keeping. Remember that
these pearls are the rightful heritage of all Kings of
Pingaree. If at any time I should be taken from you,
Inga, guard this treasure well and do not forget where
it is hidden."

"I shall not forget," said Inga.

Then the King returned the pearls to their hiding
place and the boy went to his own room to ponder upon
the wonderful secret his father had that day confided
to his care.





Chapter Two

The Coming of King Rinkitink


A few days after this, on a bright and sunny morning
when the breeze blew soft and sweet from the ocean and
the trees waved their leaf-laden branches, the Royal
Watchman, whose duty it was to patrol the shore, came
running to the King with news that a strange boat was
approaching the island.

At first the King was sore afraid and made a step
toward the hidden pearls, but the next moment he
reflected that one boat, even if filled with enemies,
would be powerless to injure him, so he curbed his fear
and went down to the beach to discover who the
strangers might be. Many of the men of Pingaree
assembled there also, and Prince Inga followed his
father. Arriving at the water's edge, they all stood
gazing eagerly at the oncoming boat.

It was quite a big boat, they observed, and covered
with a canopy of purple silk, embroidered with gold. It
was rowed by twenty men, ten on each side. As it came
nearer, Inga could see that in the stern, seated upon a
high, cushioned chair of state, was a little man who
was so very fat that he was nearly as broad as he was
high This man was dressed in a loose silken robe of
purple that fell in folds to his feet, while upon his
head was a cap of white velvet curiously worked with
golden threads and having a circle of diamonds sewn
around the band. At the opposite end of the boat stood
an oddly shaped cage, and several large boxes of
sandalwood were piled near the center of the craft.

As the boat approached the shore the fat little man
got upon his feet and bowed several times in the
direction of those who had assembled to greet him, and
as he bowed he flourished his white cap in an energetic
manner. His face was round as an apple and nearly as
rosy. When he stopped bowing he smiled in such a sweet
and happy way that Inga thought he must be a very jolly
fellow.

The prow of the boat grounded on the beach, stopping
its speed so suddenly that the little man was caught
unawares and nearly toppled headlong into the sea. But
he managed to catch hold of the chair with one hand and
the hair of one of his rowers with the other, and so
steadied himself. Then, again waving his jeweled cap
around his head, he cried in a merry voice:

"Well, here I am at last!"

"So I perceive," responded King Kitticut, bowing with
much dignity.

The fat man glanced at all the sober faces before him
and burst into a rollicking laugh. Perhaps I should say
it was half laughter and half a chuckle of merriment,
for the sounds he emitted were quaint and droll and
tempted every hearer to laugh with him.

"Heh, heh -- ho, ho, ho!" he roared. "Didn't expect
me, I see. Keek-eek-eek-eek! This is funny -- it's
really funny. Didn't know I was coming, did you? Hoo,
hoo, hoo, hoo! This is certainly amusing. But I'm here,
just the same."

"Hush up!" said a deep, growling voice. "You're
making yourself ridiculous."

Everyone looked to see where this voice came from;
but none could guess who had uttered the words of
rebuke. The rowers of the boat were all solemn and
silent and certainly no one on the shore had spoken.
But the little man did not seem astonished in the
least, or even annoyed.

King Kitticut now addressed the stranger, saying
courteously:

"You are welcome to the Kingdom of Pingaree. Perhaps
you will deign to come ashore and at your convenience
inform us whom we have the honor of receiving as a
guest."

"Thanks; I will," returned the little fat man,
waddling from his place in the boat and stepping, with
some difficulty, upon the sandy beach. "I am King
Rinkitink, of the City of Gilgad in the Kingdom of
Rinkitink, and I have come to Pingaree to see for
myself the monarch who sends to my city so many
beautiful pearls. I have long wished to visit this
island; and so, as I said before, here I am!"

"I am pleased to welcome you," said King Kitticut.
"But why has Your Majesty so few attendants? Is it not
dangerous for the King of a great country to make
distant journeys in one frail boat, and with but twenty
men?"

"Oh, I suppose so," answered King Rinkitink, with a
laugh. "But what else could I do? My subjects would not
allow me to go anywhere at all, if they knew it. So I
just ran away."

"Ran away!" exclaimed King Kitticut in surprise.

"Funny, isn't it? Heh, heh, heh -- woo, hoo!" laughed
Rinkitink, and this is as near as I can spell with
letters the jolly sounds of his laughter. "Fancy a King
running away from his own ple -- hoo, hoo -- keek, eek,
eek, eek! But I had to, don't you see!"

"Why?" asked the other King.

"They're afraid I'll get into mischief. They don't
trust me. Keek-eek-eek -- Oh, dear me! Don't trust
their own King. Funny, isn't it?"

"No harm can come to you on this island," said
Kitticut, pretending not to notice the odd ways of his
guest. "And, whenever it pleases you to return to your
own country, I will send with you a fitting escort of
my own people. In the meantime, pray accompany me to my
palace, where everything shall be done to make you
comfortable and happy."

"Much obliged," answered Rinkitink, tipping his white
cap over his left ear and heartily shaking the hand of
his brother monarch. "I'm sure you can make me
comfortable if you've plenty to eat. And as for being
happy -- ha, ha, ha, ha! -- why, that's my trouble. I'm
too happy. But stop! I've brought you some presents in
those boxes. Please order your men to carry them up to
the palace."

"Certainly," answered King Kitticut, well pleased,
and at once he gave his men the proper orders.

"And, by the way," continued the fat little King,
"let them also take my goat from his cage."

"A goat!" exclaimed the King of Pingaree.

"Exactly; my goat Bilbil. I always ride him wherever
I go, for I'm not at all fond of walking, being a
trifle stout -- eh, Kitticut? -- a trifle stout! Hoo,
hoo, hoo-keek, eek!"

The Pingaree people started to lift the big cage out
of the boat, but just then a gruff voice cried: "Be
careful, you villains!" and as the words seemed to come
from the goat's mouth the men were so astonished that
they dropped the cage upon the sand with a sudden jar.

"There! I told you so!" cried the voice angrily.
"You've rubbed the skin off my left knee. Why on earth
didn't you handle me gently?"

"There, there, Bilbil," said King Rinkitink
soothingly; "don't scold, my boy. Remember that these
are strangers, and we their guests." Then he turned to
Kitticut and remarked: "You have no talking goats on
your island, I suppose."

"We have no goats at all," replied the King; "nor
have we any animals, of any sort, who are able to
talk."

"I wish my animal couldn't talk, either," said
Rinkitink, winking comically at Inga and then looking
toward the cage. "He is very cross at times, and
indulges in language that is not respectful. I thought,
at first, it would be fine to have a talking goat, with
whom I could converse as I rode about my city on his
back; but -- keek-eek-eek-eek! -- the rascal treats me
as if I were a chimney sweep instead of a King. Heh,
heh, heh, keek, eek! A chimney sweep-hoo, hoo, hoo! --
and me a King! Funny, isn't it?" This last was
addressed to Prince Inga, whom he chucked familiarly
under the chin, to the boy's great embarrassment.

"Why do you not ride a horse?" asked King Kitticut.

"I can't climb upon his back, being rather stout;
that's why. Kee, kee, keek, eek! -- rather stout --
hoo, hoo, hoo!" He paused to wipe the tears of
merriment from his eyes and then added: "But I can get
on and off Bilbil's back with ease."

He now opened the cage and the goat deliberately
walked out and looked about him in a sulky manner. One
of the rowers brought from the boat a saddle made of
red velvet and beautifully embroidered with silver
thistles, which he fastened upon the goat's back. The
fat King put his leg over the saddle and seated himself
comfortably, saying:

"Lead on, my noble host, and we will follow."

"What! Up that steep hill?" cried the goat. "Get off
my back at once, Rinkitink, or I won't budge a step.

"But-consider, Bilbil," remonstrated the King. "How
am I to get up that hill unless I ride?"

"Walk!" growled Bilbil.

"But I'm too fat. Really, Bilbil, I'm surprised at
you. Haven't I brought you all this distance so you may
see something of the world and enjoy life? And now you
are so ungrateful as to refuse to carry me! Turn about
is fair play, my boy. The boat carried you to this
shore, because you can't swim, and now you must carry
me up the hill, because I can't climb. Eh, Bilbil,
isn't that reasonable?"

"Well, well, well," said the goat, surlily, "keep
quiet and I'll carry you. But you make me very tired,
Rinkitink, with your ceaseless chatter."

After making this protest Bilbil began walking
up the hill, carrying the fat King upon his back
with no difficulty whatever.

Prince Inga and his father and all the men of
Pingaree were much astonished to overhear this dispute
between King Rinkitink and his goat; but they were too
polite to make critical remarks in the presence of
their guests. King Kitticut walked beside the goat and
the Prince followed after, the men coming last with the
boxes of sandalwood.

When they neared the palace, the Queen and her
maidens came out to meet them and the royal guest was
escorted in state to the splendid throne room of the
palace. Here the boxes were opened and King Rinkitink
displayed all the beautiful silks and laces and jewelry
with which they were filled. Every one of the courtiers
and ladies received a handsome present, and the King
and Queen had many rich gifts and Inga not a few. Thus
the time passed pleasantly until the Chamberlain
announced that dinner was served.

Bilbil the goat declared that he preferred eating of
the sweet, rich grass that grew abundantly in the
palace grounds, and Rinkitink said that the beast could
never bear being shut up in a stable; so they removed
the saddle from his back and allowed him to wander
wherever he pleased.

During the dinner Inga divided his attention between
admiring the pretty gifts he had received and listening
to the jolly sayings of the fat King, who laughed when
he was not eating and ate when he was not laughing and
seemed to enjoy himself immensely.

"For four days I have lived in that narrow boat,"
said he, "with no other amusement than to watch the
rowers and quarrel with Bilbil; so I am very glad to be
on land again with such friendly and agreeable people."

"You do us great honor," said King Kitticut, with a
polite bow.

"Not at all -- not at all, my brother. This Pingaree
must be a wonderful island, for its pearls are the
admiration of all the world; nor will I deny the fact
that my kingdom would be a poor one without the riches
and glory it derives from the trade in your pearls. So
I have wished for many years to come here to see you,
but my people said: 'No! Stay at home and behave
yourself, or we'll know the reason why.'"

"Will they not miss Your Majesty from your
palace at Gilgad?" inquired Kitticut.

"I think not," answered Rinkitink. "You see, one of
my clever subjects has written a parchment entitled
'How to be Good,' and I believed it would benefit me to
study it, as I consider the accomplishment of being
good one of the fine arts. I had just scolded severely
my Lord High Chancellor for coming to breakfast without
combing his eyebrows, and was so sad and regretful at
having hurt the poor man's feelings that I decided to
shut myself up in my own room and study the scroll
until I knew how to be good -- hee, heek, keek, eek,
eek! --to be good! Clever idea, that, wasn't it? Mighty
clever! And I issued a decree that no one should enter
my room, under pain of my royal displeasure, until I
was ready to come out. They're awfully afraid of my
royal displeasure, although not a bit afraid of me.
Then I put the parchment in my pocket and escaped
through the back door to my boat -- and here I am. Oo,
hoo-hoo, keek-eek! Imagine the fuss there would be in
Gilgad if my subjects knew where I am this very
minute!"

"I would like to see that parchment," said the
solemn-eyed Prince Inga, "for if it indeed teaches one
to be good it must be worth its weight in pearls."

"Oh, it's a fine essay," said Rinkitink, "and
beautifully written with a goosequill. Listen to this:
You'll enjoy it -- tee, hee, hee! -- enjoy it."

He took from his pocket a scroll of parchment tied
with a black ribbon, and having carefully unrolled it,
he proceeded to read as follows:

"'A Good Man is One who is Never Bad.' How's that,
eh? Fine thought, what? 'Therefore, in order to be
Good, you must avoid those Things which are Evil.' Oh,
hoo-hoo-hoo! -- how clever! When I get back I shall
make the man who wrote that a royal hippolorum, for,
beyond question, he is the wisest man in my kingdom -as
he has often told me himself." With this, Rinkitink lay
back in his chair and chuckled his queer chuckle until
he coughed, and coughed until he choked and choked
until he sneezed. And he wrinkled his face in such a
jolly, droll way that few could keep from laughing with
him, and even the good Queen was forced to titter
behind her fan.

When Rinkitink had recovered from his fit of laughter
and had wiped his eyes upon a fine lace handkerchief,
Prince Inga said to him:

"The parchment speaks truly."

"Yes, it is true beyond doubt," answered Rinkitink,
"and if I could persuade Bilbil to read it he would be
a much better goat than he is now. Here is another
selection: 'To avoid saying Unpleasant Things, always
Speak Agreeably.' That would hit Bilbil, to a dot. And
here is one that applies to you, my Prince: 'Good
Children are seldom punished, for the reason that they
deserve no punishment.' Now, I think that is neatly
put, and shows the author to be a deep thinker. But the
advice that has impressed me the most is in the
following paragraph: 'You may not find it as Pleasant
to be Good as it is to be Bad, but Other People will
find it more Pleasant.' Haw-hoo-ho! keek-eek! 'Other
people will find it more pleasant!' -- hee, hee, heek,
keek! -- 'more pleasant.' Dear me -- dear me! Therein
lies a noble incentive to be good, and whenever I get
time I'm surely going to try it."

Then he wiped his eyes again with the lace
handkerchief and, suddenly remembering his dinner,
seized his knife and fork and began eating.





Chapter Three

The Warriors from the North


King Rinkitink was so much pleased with the Island of
Pingaree that he continued his stay day after day and
week after week, eating good dinners, talking with King
Kitticut and sleeping. Once in a while he would read
from his scroll. "For," said he, "whenever I return
home, my subjects will be anxious to know if I have
learned 'How to be Good,' and I must not disappoint
them."

The twenty rowers lived on the small end of the
island, with the pearl fishers, and seemed not to care
whether they ever returned to the Kingdom of Rinkitink
or not. Bilbil the goat wandered over the grassy
slopes, or among the trees, and passed his days exactly
as he pleased. His master seldom cared to ride him.
Bilbil was a rare curiosity to the islanders, but since
there was little pleasure in talking with the goat they
kept away from him. This pleased the creature, who
seemed well satisfied to be left to his own devices.

Once Prince Inga, wishing to be courteous, walked up
to the goat and said: "Good morning, Bilbil."

"It isn't a good morning," answered Bilbil grumpily.
"It is cloudy and damp, and looks like rain."

"I hope you are contented in our kingdom," continued
the boy, politely ignoring the other's harsh words.

"I'm not," said Bilbil. "I'm never contented; so it
doesn't matter to me whether I'm in your kingdom or in
some other kingdom. Go away -- will you?"

"Certainly," answered the Prince, and after this
rebuff he did not again try to make friends with
Bilbil.

Now that the King, his father, was so much occupied
with his royal guest, Inga was often left to amuse
himself, for a boy could not be allowed to take part in
the conversation of two great monarchs. He devoted
himself to his studies, therefore, and day after day he
climbed into the branches of his favorite tree and sat
for hours in his "tree-top rest," reading his father's
precious manuscripts and thinking upon what he read.

You must not think that Inga was a molly-coddle or a
prig, because he was so solemn and studious. Being a
King's son and heir to a throne, he could not play with
the other boys of Pingaree, and he lived so much in the
society of the King and Queen, and was so surrounded by
the pomp and dignity of a court, that he missed all the
jolly times that boys usually have. I have no doubt
that had he been able to live as other boys do, he
would have been much like other boys; as it was, he was
subdued by his surroundings, and more grave and
thoughtful than one of his years should be.

Inga was in his tree one morning when, without
warning, a great fog enveloped the Island of Pingaree.
The boy could scarcely see the tree next to that in
which he sat, but the leaves above him prevented the
dampness from wetting him, so he curled himself up in
his seat and fell fast asleep.

All that forenoon the fog continued. King Kitticut,
who sat in his palace talking with his merry visitor,
ordered the candles lighted, that they might be able to
see one another. The good Queen, Inga's mother, found
it was too dark to work at her embroidery, so she
called her maidens together and told them wonderful
stories of bygone days, in order to pass away the
dreary hours.

But soon after noon the weather changed. The dense
fog rolled away like a heavy cloud and suddenly the sun
shot his bright rays over the island.

"Very good!" exclaimed King Kitticut. "We shall have
a pleasant afternoon, I am sure," and he blew out the
candles.

Then he stood a moment motionless, as if turned to
stone, for a terrible cry from without the palace
reached his ears -- a cry so full of fear and horror
that the King's heart almost stopped beating.
Immediately there was a scurrying of feet as every one
in the palace, filled with dismay, rushed outside to
see what had happened. even fat little Rinkitink sprang
from his chair and followed his host and the others
through the arched vestibule.

After many years the worst fears of King Kitticut
were realized.

Landing upon the beach, which was but a few steps
from the palace itself, were hundreds of boats, every
one filled with a throng of fierce warriors. They
sprang upon the land with wild shouts of defiance and
rushed to the King's palace, waving aloft their swords
and spears and battleaxes.

King Kitticut, so completely surprised that he was
bewildered, gazed at the approaching host with terror
and grief.

"They are the men of Regos and Coregos!" he groaned.
"We are, indeed, lost!"

Then he bethought himself, for the first time, of his
wonderful pearls. Turning quickly, he ran back into the
palace and hastened to the hall where the treasures
were hidden. But the leader of the warriors had seen
the King enter the palace and bounded after him,
thinking he meant to escape. Just as the King had
stooped to press the secret spring in the tiles, the
warrior seized him from the rear and threw him backward
upon the floor, at the same time shouting to his men to
fetch ropes and bind the prisoner. This they did very
quickly and King Kitticut soon found himself helplessly
bound and in the power of his enemies. In this sad
condition he was lifted by the warriors and carried
outside, when the good King looked upon a sorry sight.

The Queen and her maidens, the officers and servants
of the royal household and all who had inhabited this
end of the Island of Pingaree had been seized by the
invaders and bound with ropes. At once they began
carrying their victims to the boats, tossing them in as
unceremoniously as if they had been bales of
merchandise.

The King looked around for his son Inga, but failed
to find the boy among the prisoners. Nor was the fat
King, Rinkitink, to be seen anywhere about.

The warriors were swarming over the palace like bees
in a hive, seeking anyone who might be in hiding, and
after the search had been prolonged for some time the
leader asked impatiently: "Do you find anyone else?"

"No," his men told him. "We have captured them all."

"Then," commanded the leader, "remove everything of
value from the palace and tear down its walls and
towers, so that not one stone remains upon another!"

While the warriors were busy with this task we will
return to the boy Prince, who, when the fog lifted and
the sun came out, wakened from his sleep and began to
climb down from his perch in the tree. But the
terrifying cries of the people, mingled with the shouts
of the rude warriors, caused him to pause and listen
eagerly.

Then he climbed rapidly up the tree, far above his
platform, to the topmost swaying branches. This tree,
which Inga called his own, was somewhat taller than the
other trees that surrounded it, and when he had reached
the top he pressed aside the leaves and saw a great
fleet of boats upon the shore -- strange boats, with
banners that he had never seen before. Turning to look
upon his father's palace, he found it surrounded by a
horde of enemies. Then Inga knew the truth: that tile
island had been invaded by the barbaric warriors from
the north. He grew so faint from the terror of it all
that he might have fallen had he not wound his arms
around a limb and clung fast until the dizzy feeling
passed away. Then with his sash he bound himself to the
limb and again ventured to look out through the leaves.

The warriors were now engaged in carrying King
Kitticut and Queen Garee and all their other captives
down to the boats, where they were thrown in and
chained one to another. It was a dreadful sight for the
Prince to witness, but he sat very still, concealed
from the sight of anyone below by the bower of leafy
branches around him. Inga knew very well that he could
do nothing to help his beloved parents, and that if he
came down he would only be forced to share their cruel
fate.

Now a procession of the Northmen passed between the
boats and the palace, bearing the rich furniture,
splendid draperies and rare ornaments of which the
royal palace had been robbed, together with such food
and other plunder as they could lay their hands upon.
After this, the men of Regos and Coregos threw ropes
around the marble domes and towers and hundreds of
warriors tugged at these ropes until the domes and
towers toppled and fell in ruins upon the ground. Then
the walls themselves were torn down, till little
remained of the beautiful palace but a vast heap of
white marble blocks tumbled and scattered upon the
ground.

Prince Inga wept bitter tears of grief as he watched
the ruin of his home; yet he was powerless to avert the
destruction. When the palace had been demolished, some
of the warriors entered their boats and rowed along the
coast of the island, while the others marched in a
great body down the length of the island itself. They
were so numerous that they formed a line stretching
from shore to shore and they destroyed every house they
came to and took every inhabitant prisoner.

The pearl fishers who lived at the lower end of the
island tried to escape in their boats, but they were
soon overtaken and made prisoners, like the others. Nor
was there any attempt to resist the foe, for the sharp
spears and pikes and swords of the invaders terrified
the hearts of the defenseless people of Pingaree, whose
sole weapons were their oyster rakes.

When night fell the whole of the Island of Pingaree
had been conquered by the men of the North, and all its
people were slaves of the conquerors. Next morning the
men of Regos and Coregos, being capable of no further
mischief, departed from the scene of their triumph,
carrying their prisoners with them and taking also
every boat to be found upon the island. Many of the
boats they had filled with rich plunder, with pearls
and silks and velvets, with silver and gold ornaments
and all the treasure that had made Pingaree famed as
one of the richest kingdoms in the world. And the
hundreds of slaves they had captured would be set to
work in the mines of Regos and the grain fields of
Coregos.

So complete was the victory of the Northmen that it
is no wonder the warriors sang songs of triumph as they
hastened back to their homes. Great rewards were
awaiting them when they showed the haughty King of
Regos and the terrible Queen of Coregos the results of
their ocean raid and conquest.




Chapter Four

The Deserted Island


All through that terrible night Prince Inga remained
hidden in his tree. In the morning he watched the great
fleet of boats depart for their own country, carrying
his parents and his countrymen with them, as well as
everything of value the Island of Pingaree had
contained.

Sad, indeed, were the boy's thoughts when the last of
the boats had become a mere speck in the distance, but
Inga did not dare leave his perch of safety until all
of the craft of the invaders had disappeared beyond the
horizon. Then he came down, very slowly and carefully,
for he was weak from hunger and the long and weary
watch, as he had been in the tree for twenty-four hours
without food.

The sun shone upon the beautiful green isle as
brilliantly as if no ruthless invader had passed and
laid it in ruins. The birds still chirped among the
trees and the butterflies darted from flower to flower
as happily as when the land was filled with a
prosperous and contented people.

Inga feared that only he was left of all his nation.
Perhaps he might be obliged to pass his life there
alone. He would not starve, for the sea would give him
oysters and fish, and the trees fruit; yet the life
that confronted him was far from enticing.

The boy's first act was to walk over to where the
palace had stood and search the ruins until he found
some scraps of food that had been overlooked by the
enemy. He sat upon a block of marble and ate of this,
and tears filled his eyes as he gazed upon the
desolation around him. But Inga tried to bear up
bravely, and having satisfied his hunger he walked over
to the well, intending to draw a bucket of drinking
water.

Fortunately, this well had been overlooked by the
invaders and the bucket was still fastened to the chain
that wound around a stout wooden windlass. Inga took
hold of the crank and began letting the bucket down
into the well, when suddenly he was startled by a
muffled voice crying out:

"Be careful, up there!"

The sound and the words seemed to indicate that the
voice came from the bottom of the well, so Inga looked
down. Nothing could be seen, on account of the
darkness.

"Who are you?" he shouted.

"It's I -- Rinkitink," came the answer, and the
depths of the well echoed: "Tink-i-tink-i-tink!" in a
ghostly manner.

"Are you in the well?" asked the boy, greatly
surprised.

"Yes, and nearly drowned. I fell in while running
from those terrible warriors, and I've been standing in
this damp hole ever since, with my head just above the
water. It's lucky the well was no deeper, for had my
head been under water, instead of above it -- hoo, hoo,
hoo, keek, eek! -- under instead of over, you know --
why, then I wouldn't be talking to you now! Ha, hoo,
hee!" And the well dismally echoed: "Ha, hoo, hee!"
which you must imagine was a laugh half merry and half
sad.

"I'm awfully sorry," cried the boy, in answer. "I
wonder you have the heart to laugh at all. But how am I
to get you out?"

"I've been considering that all night," said
Rinkitink, "and I believe the best plan will be for you
to let down the bucket to me, and I'll hold fast to it
while you wind up the chain and so draw me to the top."

"I will try to do that," replied Inga, and he let the
bucket down very carefully until he heard the King call
out:

"I've got it! Now pull me up -- slowly, my boy,
slowly -- so I won't rub against the rough sides."

Inga began winding up the chain, but King Rinkitink
was so fat that he was very heavy and by the time the
boy had managed to pull him halfway up the well his
strength was gone. He clung to the crank as long as
possible, but suddenly it slipped from his grasp and
the next minute he heard Rinkitink fall "plump!" into
the water again.

"That's too bad!" called Inga, in real distress; "but
you were so heavy I couldn't help it."

"Dear me!" gasped the King, from the darkness below,
as he spluttered and coughed to get the water out of
his mouth. "Why didn't you tell me you were going to
let go?"

"I hadn't time," said Inga, sorrowfully.

"Well, I'm not suffering from thirst," declared the
King, "for there's enough water inside me to float all
the boats of Regos and Coregos or at least it feels
that way. But never mind! So long as I'm not actually
drowned, what does it matter?"

"What shall we do next?" asked the boy anxiously.

"Call someone to help you," was the reply.

"There is no one on the island but myself," said the
boy; "-- excepting you," he added, as an afterthought.

"I'm not on it -- more's the pity! -- but in it,"
responded Rinkitink. "Are the warriors all gone?"

"Yes," said Inga, "and they have taken my father and
mother, and all our people, to be their slaves," he
added, trying in vain to repress a sob.

"So -- so!" said Rinkitink softly; and then he paused
a moment, as if in thought. Finally he said: "There are
worse things than slavery, but I never imagined a well
could be one of them. Tell me, Inga, could you let down
some food to me? I'm nearly starved, and if you could
manage to send me down some food I'd be well fed --
hoo, hoo, heek, keek, eek! -- well fed. Do you see the
joke, Inga?"

"Do not ask me to enjoy a joke just now, Your
Majesty," begged Inga in a sad voice; "but if you will
be patient I will try to find something for you to
eat."

He ran back to the ruins of the palace and began
searching for bits of food with which to satisfy the
hunger of the King, when to his surprise he observed
the goat, Bilbil, wandering among the marble blocks.

"What!" cried Inga. "Didn't the warriors get you,
either?"

"If they had," calmly replied Bilbil, "I shouldn't be
here."

"But how did you escape?" asked the boy.

"Easily enough. I kept my mouth shut and stayed away
from the rascals," said the goat. "I knew that the
soldiers would not care for a skinny old beast like me,
for to the eye of a stranger I seem good for nothing.
Had they known I could talk, and that my head contained
more wisdom than a hundred of their own noddles, I
might not have escaped so easily."

"Perhaps you are right," said the boy.

"I suppose they got the old man?" carelessly remarked
Bilbil.

"What old man?"

"Rinkitink."

"Oh, no! His Majesty is at the bottom of the well,"
said Inga, "and I don't know how to get him out again."

"Then let him stay there," suggested the goat.

"That would be cruel. I am sure, Bilbil, that you are
fond of the good King, your master, and do not mean
what you say. Together, let us find some way to save
poor King Rinkitink. He is a very jolly companion, and
has a heart exceedingly kind and gentle."

"Oh, well; the old boy isn't so bad, taken
altogether," admitted Bilbil, speaking in a more
friendly tone. "But his bad jokes and fat laughter tire
me dreadfully, at times."

Prince Inga now ran back to the well, the goat
following more leisurely.

"Here's Bilbil!" shouted the boy to the King. "The
enemy didn't get him, it seems."

"That's lucky for the enemy," said Rinkitink. "But
it's lucky for me, too, for perhaps the beast can
assist me out of this hole. If you can let a rope down
the well, I am sure that you and Bilbil, pulling
together, will be able to drag me to the earth's
surface."

"Be patient and we will make the attempt," replied
Inga encouragingly, and he ran to search. the ruins for
a rope. Presently he found one that had been used by
the warriors in toppling over the towers, which in
their haste they had neglected to remove, and with some
difficulty he untied the knots and carried the rope to
the mouth of the well.

Bilbil had lain down to sleep and the refrain of a
merry song came in muffled tones from the well, proving
that Rinkitink was making a patient endeavor to amuse
himself.

"I've found a rope!" Inga called down to him; and
then the boy proceeded to make a loop in one end of the
rope, for the King to put his arms through, and the
other end he placed over the drum of the windlass. He
now aroused Bilbil and fastened the rope firmly around
the goat's shoulders.

"Are you ready?" asked the boy, leaning over the
well.

"I am," replied the King.

"And I am not," growled the goat, "for I have not yet
had my nap out. Old Rinki will be safe enough in the
well until I've slept an hour or two longer."

"But it is damp in the well," protested the boy, "and
King Rinkitink may catch the rheumatism, so that he
will have to ride upon your back wherever he goes."

Hearing this, Bilbil jumped up at once.

"Let's get him out," he said earnestly.

"Hold fast!" shouted Inga to the King. Then he seized
the rope and helped Bilbil to pull. They soon found the
task more difficult than they had supposed. Once or
twice the King's weight threatened to drag both the boy
and the goat into the well, to keep Rinkitink company.
But they pulled sturdily, being aware of this danger,
and at last the King popped out of the hole and fell
sprawling full length upon the ground.

For a time he lay panting and breathing hard to get
his breath back, while Inga and Bilbil were likewise
worn out from their long strain at the rope; so the
three rested quietly upon the grass and looked at one
another in silence.

Finally Bilbil said to the King: "I'm surprised at
you. Why were you so foolish as to fall down that well?
Don't you know it's a dangerous thing to do? You might
have broken your neck in the fall, or been drowned in
the water."

"Bilbil," replied the King solemnly, "you're a goat.
Do you imagine I fell down the well on purpose?"

"I imagine nothing," retorted Bilbil. "I only know
you were there."

"There? Heh-heh-heek-keek-eek! To be sure I was
there," laughed Rinkitink. "There in a dark hole, where
there was no light; there in a watery well, where the
wetness soaked me through and through -- keek-eek-eek-
eek! -- through and through!"

"How did it happen?" inquired Inga.

"I was running away from the enemy," explained the
King, "and I was carelessly looking over my shoulder at
the same time, to see if they were chasing me. So I did
not see the well, but stepped into it and found myself
tumbling down to the bottom. I struck the water very
neatly and began struggling to keep myself from
drowning, but presently I found that when I stood upon
my feet on the bottom of the well, that my chin was
just above the water. So I stood still and yelled for
help; but no one heard me."

"If the warriors had heard you," said Bilbil, "they
would have pulled you out and carried you away to be a
slave. Then you would have been obliged to work for a
living, and that would be a new experience."

"Work!" exclaimed Rinkitink. "Me work? Hoo, hoo,
heek-keek-eek! How absurd! I'm so stout -- not to say
chubby -- not to say fat -- that I can hardly walk, and
I couldn't earn my salt at hard work. So I'm glad the
enemy did not find me, Bilbil. How many others
escaped?"

"That I do not know," replied the boy, "for I
have not yet had time to visit the other parts of
the island. When you have rested and satisfied
your royal hunger, it might be well for us to
look around and see what the thieving warriors
of Regos and Coregos have left us."

"An excellent idea," declared Rinkitink. "I am
somewhat feeble from my long confinement in the well,
but I can ride upon Bilbil's back and we may as well
start at once."

Hearing this, Bilbil cast a surly glance at his
master but said nothing, since it was really the goat's
business to carry King Rinkitink wherever he desired to
go.

They first searched the ruins of the palace, and
where the kitchen had once been they found a small
quantity of food that had been half hidden by a block
of marble. This they carefully placed in a sack to
preserve it for future use, the little fat King having
first eaten as much as he cared for. This consumed some
time, for Rinkitink had been exceedingly hungry and
liked to eat in a leisurely manner. When he had
finished the meal he straddled Bilbil's back and set
out to explore the island, Prince Inga walking by his
side.

They found on every hand ruin and desolation. The
houses of the people had been pilfered of all valuables
and then torn down or burned. Not a boat had been left
upon the shore, nor was there a single person, man or
woman or child, remaining upon the island, save
themselves. The only inhabitants of Pingaree now
consisted of a fat little King, a boy and a goat.

Even Rinkitink, merry hearted as he was, found it
hard to laugh in the face of this mighty disaster. Even
the goat, contrary to its usual habit, refrained from
saying anything disagreeable. As for the poor boy whose
home was now a wilderness, the tears came often to his
eyes as he marked the ruin of his dearly loved island.

When, at nightfall, they reached the lower end of
Pingaree and found it swept as bare as the rest, Inga's
grief was almost more than he could bear. Everything
had been swept from him -- parents, home and country --
in so brief a time that his bewilderment was equal to
his sorrow.

Since no house remained standing, in which they might
sleep, the three wanderers crept beneath the
overhanging branches of a cassa tree and curled
themselves up as comfortably as possible. So tired and
exhausted were they by the day's anxieties and griefs
that their troubles soon faded into the mists of
dreamland. Beast and King and boy slumbered peacefully
together until wakened by the singing of the birds
which greeted the dawn of a new day.




Chapter Five

The Three Pearls


When King Rinkitink and Prince Inga had bathed
themselves in the sea and eaten a simple breakfast,
they began wondering what they could do to improve
their condition.

"The poor people of Gilgad," said Rinkitink
cheerfully, "are little likely ever again to behold
their King in the flesh, for my boat and my rowers are
gone with everything else. Let us face the fact that we
are imprisoned for life upon this island, and that our
lives will be short unless we can secure more to eat
than is in this small sack."

"I'll not starve, for I can eat grass," remarked the
goat in a pleasant tone -- or a tone as pleasant as
Bilbil could assume.

"True, quite true," said the King. Then he seemed
thoughtful for a moment and turning to Inga he asked:
"Do you think, Prince, that if the worst comes, we
could eat Bilbil?"

The goat gave a groan and cast a reproachful look at
his master as he said:

"Monster! Would you, indeed, eat your old friend and
servant?"

"Not if I can help it, Bilbil," answered the King
pleasantly. "You would make a remarkably tough morsel,
and my teeth are not as good as they once were.

While this talk was in progress Inga suddenly
remembered the three pearls which his father had hidden
under the tiled floor of the banquet hall. Without
doubt King Kitticut had been so suddenly surprised by
the invaders that he had found no opportunity to get
the pearls, for otherwise the fierce warriors would
have been defeated and driven out of Pingaree. So they
must still be in their hiding place, and Inga believed
they would prove of great assistance to him and his
comrades in this hour of need. But the palace was a
mass of ruins; perhaps he would be unable now to find
the place where the pearls were hidden.

He said nothing of this to Rinkitink, remembering
that his father had charged him to preserve the secret
of the pearls and of their magic powers. Nevertheless,
the thought of securing the wonderful treasures of his
ancestors gave the boy new hope.

He stood up and said to the King:

"Let us return to the other end of Pingaree. It is
more pleasant than here in spite of the desolation of
my father's palace. And there, if anywhere, we shall
discover a way out of our difficulties."

This suggestion met with Rinkitink's approval and the
little party at once started upon the return journey.
As there was no occasion to delay upon the way, they
reached the big end of the island about the middle of
the day and at once began searching the ruins of the
palace.

They found, to their satisfaction, that one room at
the bottom of a tower was still habitable, although the
roof was broken in and the place was somewhat littered
with stones. The King was, as he said, too fat to do
any hard work, so he sat down on a block of marble and
watched Inga clear the room of its rubbish. This done,
the boy hunted through the ruins until he discovered a
stool and an armchair that had not been broken beyond
use. Some bedding and a mattress were also found, so
that by nightfall the little room had been made quite
comfortable

The following morning, while Rinkitink was still
sound asleep and Bilbil was busily cropping the dewy
grass that edged the shore, Prince Inga began to search
the tumbled heaps of marble for the place where the
royal banquet hall had been. After climbing over the
ruins for a time he reached a flat place which he
recognized, by means of the tiled flooring and the
broken furniture scattered about, to be the great hall
he was seeking. But in the center of the floor,
directly over the spot where the pearls were hidden,
lay several large and heavy blocks of marble, which had
been torn from the dismantled walls.

This unfortunate discovery for a time discouraged the
boy, who realized how helpless he was to remove such
vast obstacles; but it was so important to secure the
pearls that he dared not give way to despair until
every human effort had been made, so he sat him down to
think over the matter with great care.

Meantime Rinkitink had risen from his bed and walked
out upon the lawn, where he found Bilbil reclining at
ease upon the greensward.

"Where is Inga?" asked Rinkitink, rubbing his eyes
with his knuckles because their vision was blurred with
too much sleep.

"Don't ask me," said the goat, chewing with much
satisfaction a cud of sweet grasses.

"Bilbil," said the King, squatting down beside the
goat and resting his fat chin upon his hands and his
elbows on his knees, "allow me to confide to you the
fact that I am bored, and need amusement. My good
friend Kitticut has been kidnapped by the barbarians
and taken from me, so there is no one to converse with
me intelligently. I am the King and you are the goat.
Suppose you tell me a story.

"Suppose I don't," said Bilbil, with a scowl, for a
goat's face is very expressive.

"If you refuse, I shall be more unhappy than ever,
and I know your disposition is too sweet to permit
that. Tell me a story, Bilbil."

The goat looked at him with an expression of scorn.
Said he:

"One would think you are but four years old,
Rinkitink! But there -- I will do as you command.
Listen carefully, and the story may do you some good --
although I doubt if you understand the moral."

"I am sure the story will do me good," declared the
King, whose eyes were twinkling.

"Once on a time," began the goat.

"When was that, Bilbil?" asked the King gently.

"Don't interrupt; it is impolite. Once on a time
there was a King with a hollow inside his head, where
most people have their brains, and --"

"Is this a true story, Bilbil?"

"And the King with a hollow head could chatter words,
which had no sense, and laugh in a brainless manner at
senseless things. That part of the story is true
enough, Rinkitink."

"Then proceed with the tale, sweet Bilbil. Yet it is
hard to believe that any King could be brainless --
unless, indeed, he proved it by owning a talking goat."

Bilbil glared at him a full minute in silence.
Then he resumed his story:

"This empty-headed man was a King by accident, having
been born to that high station. Also the King was
empty-headed by the same chance, being born without
brains."

"Poor fellow!" quoth the King. "Did he own a talking
goat?"

"He did," answered Bilbil.

"Then he was wrong to have been born at all. Cheek-
eek-eek-eek, oo, hoo!" chuckled Rinkitink, his fat body
shaking with merriment. "But it's hard to prevent
oneself from being born; there's no chance for protest,
eh, Bilbil?"

"Who is telling this story, I'd like to know,"
demanded the goat, with anger.

"Ask someone with brains, my boy; I'm sure I can't
tell," replied the King, bursting into one of his merry
fits of laughter.

Bilbil rose to his hoofs and walked away in a
dignified manner, leaving Rinkitink chuckling anew at
the sour expression of the animal's face.

"Oh, Bilbil, you'll be the death of me, some day --
I'm sure you will!" gasped the King, taking out his
lace handkerchief to wipe his eyes; for, as he often
did, he had laughed till the tears came.

Bilbil was deeply vexed and would not even turn his
head to look at his master. To escape from Rinkitink he
wandered among the ruins of the palace, where he came
upon Prince Inga.

"Good morning, Bilbil," said the boy. "I was just
going to find you, that I might consult you upon an
important matter. If you will kindly turn back with me
I am sure your good judgment will be of great
assistance."

The angry goat was quite mollified by the respectful
tone in which he was addressed, but he immediately
asked:

"Are you also going to consult that empty-headed King
over yonder?"

"I am sorry to hear you speak of your kind master in
such a way," said the boy gravely. "All men are
deserving of respect, being the highest of living
creatures, and Kings deserve respect more than others,
for they are set to rule over many people."

"Nevertheless," said Bilbil with conviction,
"Rinkitink's head is certainly empty of brains."

"That I am unwilling to believe," insisted Inga. "But
anyway his heart is kind and gentle and that is better
than being wise. He is merry in spite of misfortunes
that would cause others to weep and he never speaks
harsh words that wound the feelings of his friends."

"Still," growled Bilbil, "he is --"

"Let us forget everything but his good nature, which
puts new heart into us when we are sad," advised the
boy."

"But he is --"

"Come with me, please," interrupted Inga, "for the
matter of which I wish to speak is very important."

Bilbil followed him, although the boy still heard the
goat muttering that the King had no brains. Rinkitink,
seeing them turn into the ruins, also followed, and
upon joining them asked for his breakfast.

Inga opened the sack of food and while he and the
King ate of it the boy said:

"If I could find a way to remove some of the blocks
of marble which have fallen in the banquet hall, I
think I could find means for us to escape from this
barren island."

"Then," mumbled Rinkitink, with his mouth full, "let
us move the blocks of marble."

"But how?" inquired Prince Inga. "They are very
heavy."

"Ah, how, indeed?" returned the  King, smacking his
lips contentedly. "That is a serious question. But -- I
have it! Let us see what my famous parchment says about
it." He wiped his fingers upon a napkin and then,
taking the scroll from a pocket inside his embroidered
blouse, he unrolled it and read the following words:
'Never step on another man's toes.'

The goat gave a snort of contempt; Inga was silent;
the King looked from one to the other inquiringly.

"That's the idea, exactly!" declared Rinkitink.

"To be sure," said Bilbil scornfully, "it tells us
exactly how to move the blocks of marble."

"Oh, does it?" responded the King, and then for a
moment he rubbed the top of his bald head in a
perplexed manner. The next moment he burst into a peal
of joyous laughter. The goat looked at Inga and sighed.

"What did I tell you?" asked the creature. "Was I
right, or was I wrong?"

"This scroll," said Rinkitink, "is indeed a
masterpiece. Its advice is of tremendous value. 'Never
step on another man's toes.' Let us think this over.
The inference is that we should step upon our own toes,
which were given us for that purpose. Therefore, if I
stepped upon another man's toes, I would be the other
man. Hoo, hoo, hoo! -- the other man -- hee, hee, heek-
keek-eek! Funny, isn't it?"

"Didn't I say --" began Bilbil.

"No matter what you said, my boy," roared the King.
"No fool could have figured that out as nicely as I
did."

"We have still to decide how to remove the blocks of
marble," suggested Inga anxiously.

 "Fasten a rope to them, and pull," said Bilbil.
"Don't pay any more attention to Rinkitink, for he is
no wiser than the man who wrote that brainless scroll.
Just get the rope, and we'll fasten Rinkitink to one
end of it for a weight and I'll help you pull."

"Thank you, Bilbil," replied the boy. "I'll get the
rope at once.

Bilbil found it difficult to climb over the ruins to
the floor of the banquet hall, but there are few places
a goat cannot get to when it makes the attempt, so
Bilbil succeeded at last, and even fat little Rinkitink
finally joined them, though much out of breath.

Inga fastened one end of the rope around a block of
marble and then made a loop at the other end to go over
Bilbil's head. When all was ready the boy seized the
rope and helped the goat to pull; yet, strain as they
might, the huge block would not stir from its place.
Seeing this, King Rinkitink came forward and lent his
assistance, the weight of his body forcing the heavy
marble to slide several feet from where it had lain.

But it was hard work and all were obliged to take a
long rest before undertaking the removal of the next
block.

"Admit, Bilbil," said the King, "that I am of some
use in the world."

"Your weight was of considerable help," acknowledged
the goat, "but if your head were as well filled as
your stomach the task would be still easier."

When Inga went to fasten the rope a second time he
was rejoiced to discover that by moving one more block
of marble he could uncover the tile with the secret
spring. So the three pulled with renewed energy and to
their joy the block moved and rolled upon its side,
leaving Inga free to remove the treasure when he
pleased.

But the boy had no intention of allowing Bilbil and
the King to share the secret of the royal treasures of
Pingaree; so, although both the goat and its master
demanded to know why the marble blocks had been moved,
and how it would benefit them, Inga begged them to wait
until the next morning, when he hoped to be able to
satisfy them that their hard work had not been in vain.

Having little confidence in this promise of a mere
boy, the goat grumbled and the King laughed; but Inga
paid no heed to their ridicule and set himself to work
rigging up a fishing rod, with line and hook. During
the afternoon he waded out to some rocks near the shore
and fished patiently until he had captured enough
yellow perch for their supper and breakfast.

"Ah," said Rinkitink, looking at the fine catch when
Inga returned to the shore; "these will taste delicious
when they are cooked; but do you know how to cook
them?"

"No," was the reply. I have often caught fish, but
never cooked them. Perhaps Your Majesty understands
cooking."

"Cooking and majesty are two different things,"
laughed the little King. "I could not cook a fish to
save me from starvation."

"For my part," said Bilbil, "I never eat fish, but I
can tell you how to cook them, for I have often watched
the palace cooks at their work." And so, with the
goat's assistance, the boy and the King managed to
prepare the fish and cook them, after which they were
eaten with good appetite.

That night, after Rinkitink and Bilbil were both fast
asleep, Inga stole quietly through the moonlight to the
desolate banquet hall. There, kneeling down, he touched
the secret spring as his father had instructed him to
do and to his joy the tile sank downward and disclosed
the opening. You may imagine how the boy's heart
throbbed with excitement as he slowly thrust his hand
into the cavity and felt around to see if the precious
pearls were still there. In a moment his fingers
touched the silken bag and, without pausing to close
the recess, he pressed the treasure against his breast
and ran out into the moonlight to examine it. When he
reached a bright place he started to open the bag, but
he observed Bilbil lying asleep upon the grass near by.
So, trembling with the fear of discovery, he ran to
another place, and when he paused he heard Rinkitink
snoring lustily. Again he fled and made his way to the
seashore, where he squatted under a bank and began to
untie the cords that fastened the mouth of the bag. But
now another fear assailed him.

"If the pearls should slip from my hand," he thought,
"and roll into the water, they might be lost to me
forever. I must find some safer place."

Here and there he wandered, still clasping the silken
bag in both hands, and finally he went to the grove and
climbed into the tall tree where he had made his
platform and seat. But here it was pitch dark, so he
found he must wait patiently until morning before he
dared touch the pearls. During those hours of waiting
he had time for reflection and reproached himself for
being so frightened by the possession of his father's
treasures.

"These pearls have belonged to our family for
generations," he mused, "yet no one has ever lost them.
If I use ordinary care I am sure I need have no fears
for their safety."

When the dawn came and he could see plainly, Inga
opened the bag and took out the Blue Pearl. There was
no possibility of his being observed by others, so he
took time to examine it wonderingly, saying to himself:
"This will give me strength."

Taking off his right shoe he placed the Blue Pearl
within it, far up in the pointed toe. Then he tore a
piece from his handkerchief and stuffed it into the
shoe to hold the pearl in place. Inga's shoes were long
and pointed, as were all the shoes worn in Pingaree,
and the points curled upward, so that there was quite a
vacant space beyond the place where the boy's toes
reached when the shoe was upon his foot.

After he had put on the Shoe and laced it up he
opened the bag and took out the Pink Pearl. "This will
protect me from danger," said Inga, and removing the
shoe from his left foot he carefully placed the pearl
in the hollow toe. This, also, he secured in place by
means of a strip torn from his handkerchief.

Having put on the second shoe and laced it up, the
boy drew from the silken bag the third pearl -- that
which was pure white -- and holding it to his ear he
asked.

"Will you advise me what to do, in this my hour of
misfortune?"

Clearly the small voice of the pearl made answer:

"I advise you to go to the Islands of Regos and
Coregos, where you may liberate your parents from
slavery."

"How could I do that?" exclaimed Prince Inga, amazed
at receiving such advice.

"To-night," spoke the voice of the pearl, "there will
be a storm, and in the morning a boat will strand upon
the shore. Take this boat and row to Regos and
Coregos."

"How can I, a weak boy, pull the boat so far?" he
inquired, doubting the possibility.

"The Blue Pearl will give you strength," was the
reply.

"But I may be shipwrecked and drowned, before ever I
reach Regos and Coregos," protested the boy.

"The Pink Pearl will protect you from harm," murmured
the voice, soft and low but very distinct.

"Then I shall act as you advise me," declared Inga,
speaking firmly because this promise gave him courage,
and as he removed the pearl from his ear it whispered:

"The wise and fearless are sure to win success."

Restoring the White Pearl to the depths of the silken
bag, Inga fastened it securely around his neck and
buttoned his waist above it to hide the treasure from
all prying eyes. Then he slowly climbed down from the
tree and returned to the room where King Rinkitink
still slept.

The goat was browsing upon the grass but looked cross
and surly. When the boy said good morning as he passed,
Bilbil made no response whatever. As Inga entered the
room the King awoke and asked:

"What is that mysterious secret of yours? I've been
dreaming about it, and I haven't got my breath yet from
tugging at those heavy blocks. Tell me the secret."

"A secret told is no longer a secret," replied Inga,
with a laugh. "Besides, this is a family secret, which
it is proper I should keep to myself. But I may tell
you one thing, at least: We are going to leave this
island to-morrow morning."

The King seemed puzzled' by this statement.

"I'm not much of a swimmer," said he, "and, though
I'm fat enough to float upon the surface of the water,
I'd only bob around and get nowhere at all."

"We shall not swim, but ride comfortably in a boat,"
promised Inga.

"There isn't a boat on this island!" declared
Rinkitink, looking upon the boy with wonder.

"True," said Inga. "But one will come to us in the
morning." He spoke positively, for he had perfect faith
in the promise of the White Pearl; but Rinkitink,
knowing nothing of the three marvelous jewels, began to
fear that the little Prince had lost his mind through
grief and misfortune.

For this reason the King did not question the boy
further but tried to cheer him by telling him witty
stories. He laughed at all the stories himself, in his
merry, rollicking way, and Inga joined freely in the
laughter because his heart had been lightened by the
prospect of rescuing his dear parents. Not since the
fierce warriors had descended upon Pingaree had the boy
been so hopeful and happy.

With Rinkitink riding upon Bilbil's back, the three
made a tour of the island and found in the central part
some bushes and trees bearing ripe fruit. They gathered
this freely, for -- aside from the fish which Inga
caught -- it was the only food they now had, and the
less they had, the bigger Rinkitink's appetite seemed
to grow.

"I am never more happy," said he with a sigh, "than
when I am eating."

Toward evening the sky became overcast and soon a
great storm began to rage. Prince Inga and King
Rinkitink took refuge within the shelter of the room
they had fitted up and there Bilbil joined them. The
goat and the King were somewhat disturbed by the
violence of the storm, but Inga did not mind it, being
pleased at this evidence that the White Pearl might be
relied upon.

All night the wind shrieked around the island;
thunder rolled, lightning flashed and rain came down in
torrents. But with morning the storm abated and when
the sun arose no sign of the tempest remained save a
few fallen trees.




Chapter Six

The Magic Boat


Prince Inga was up with the sun and, accompanied by
Bilbil, began walking along the shore in search of the
boat which the White Pearl had promised him. Never for
an instant did he doubt that he would find it and
before he had walked any great distance a dark object
at the water's edge caught his eye.

"It is the boat, Bilbil!" he cried joyfully, and
running down to it he found it was, indeed, a large and
roomy boat. Although stranded upon the beach, it was in
perfect order and had suffered in no way from the
storm.

Inga stood for some moments gazing upon the handsome
craft and wondering where it could have come from.
Certainly it was unlike any boat he had ever seen. On
the outside it was painted a lustrous black, without
any other color to relieve it; but all the inside of
the boat was lined with pure silver, polished so highly
that the surface resembled a mirror and glinted
brilliantly in the rays of the sun. The seats had white
velvet cushions upon them and the cushions were
splendidly embroidered with threads of gold. At one
end, beneath the broad seat, was a small barrel with
silver hoops, which the boy found was filled with
fresh, sweet water. A great chest of sandalwood, bound
and ornamented with silver, stood in the other end of
the boat. Inga raised the lid and discovered the chest
filled with sea-biscuits, cakes, tinned meats and ripe,
juicy melons; enough good and wholesome food to last
the party a long time.

Lying upon the bottom of the boat were two shining
oars, and overhead, but rolled back now, was a canopy
of silver cloth to ward off the heat of the sun.

It is no wonder the boy was delighted with the
appearance of this beautiful boat; but on reflection he
feared it was too large for him to row any great
distance. Unless, indeed, the Blue Pearl gave him
unusual strength.

While he was considering this matter, King Rinkitink
came waddling up to him and said:

"Well, well, well, my Prince, your words have come
true! Here is the boat, for a certainty, yet how it
came here -- and how you knew it would come to us --
are puzzles that mystify me. I do not question our good
fortune, however, and my heart is bubbling with joy,
for in this boat I will return at once to my City of
Gilgad, from which I have remained absent altogether
too long a time."

"I do not wish to go to Gilgad," said Inga.

"That is too bad, my friend, for you would be very
welcome. But you may remain upon this island, if you
wish," continued Rinkitink, "and when I get home I will
send some of my people to rescue you."

"It is my boat, Your Majesty," said Inga quietly.

"May be, may be," was the careless answer, "but I am
King of a great country, while you are a boy Prince
without any kingdom to speak of. Therefore, being of
greater importance than you, it is just and right that
I take, your boat and return to my own country in it."

"I am sorry to differ from Your Majesty's views,"
said Inga, "but instead of going to Gilgad I consider
it of greater importance that we go to the islands of
Regos and Coregos."

"Hey? What!" cried the astounded King. "To Regos and
Coregos! To become slaves of the barbarians, like the
King, your father? No, no, my boy! Your Uncle Rinki may
have an empty noddle, as Bilbil claims, but he is far
too wise to put his head in the lion's mouth. It's no
fun to be a slave."

"The people of Regos and Coregos will not enslave
us," declared Inga. "On the contrary, it is my
intention to set free my dear parents, as well as all
my people, and to bring them back again to Pingaree."

"Cheek-eek-eek-eek-eek! How funny!" chuckled
Rinkitink, winking at the goat, which scowled in
return. "Your audacity takes my breath away, Inga, but
the adventure has its charm, I must, confess. Were I
not so fat, I'd agree to your plan at once, and could
probably conquer that horde of fierce warriors without
any assistance at all -- any at all -- eh, Bilbil? But
I grieve to say that I am fat, and not in good fighting
trim. As for your determination to do what I admit I
can't do, Inga, I fear you forget that you are only a
boy, and rather small at that."

"No, I do not forget that," was Inga's reply.

"Then please consider that you and I and Bilbil are
not strong enough, as an army, to conquer a powerful
nation of skilled warriors. We could attempt it, of
course, but you are too young to die, while I am too
old. Come with me to my City of Gilgad, where you will
be greatly honored. I'll have my professors teach you
how to be good. Eh? What do you say?"

Inga was a little embarrassed how to reply to these
arguments, which he knew King Rinkitink considered were
wise; so, after a period of thought, he said:

"I will make a bargain with Your Majesty, for I do
not wish to fail in respect to so worthy a man and so
great a King as yourself. This boat is mine, as I have
said, and in my father's absence you have become my
guest; therefore I claim that I am entitled to some
consideration, as well as you."

"No doubt of it," agreed Rinkitink. "What is the
bargain you propose, Inga?"

"Let us both get into the boat, and you shall first
try to row us to Gilgad. If you succeed, I will
accompany you right willingly; but should you fail, I
will then row the boat to Regos, and you must come with
me without further protest."

"A fair and just bargain!" cried the King, highly
pleased. "Yet, although I am a man of mighty deeds, I
do not relish the prospect of rowing so big a boat all
the way to Gilgad. But I will do my best and abide by
the result."

The matter being thus peaceably settled, they
prepared to embark. A further supply of fruits was
placed in the boat and Inga also raked up a quantity of
the delicious oysters that abounded on the coast of
Pingaree but which he had before been unable to reach
for lack of a boat. This was done at the suggestion of
the ever-hungry Rinkitink, and when the oysters had
been stowed in their shells behind the water barrel and
a plentiful supply of grass brought aboard for Bilbil,
they decided they were ready to start on their voyage.

It proved no easy task to get Bilbil into the boat,
for he was a remarkably clumsy goat and once, when
Rinkitink gave him a push, he tumbled into the water
and nearly drowned before they could get him out again.
But there was no thought of leaving the quaint animal
behind. His power of speech made him seem almost human
in the eyes of the boy, and the fat King was so
accustomed to his surly companion that nothing could
have induced him to part with him. Finally Bilbil fell
sprawling into the bottom of the boat, and Inga helped
him to get to the front end, where there was enough
space for him to lie down.

Rinkitink now took his seat in the silver-lined craft
and the boy came last, pushing off the boat as he
sprang aboard, so that it floated freely upon the
water.

"Well, here we go for Gilgad!" exclaimed the King,
picking up the oars and placing them in the row-locks.
Then he began to row as hard as he could, singing at
the same time an odd sort of a song that ran like this

"The way to Gilgad isn't bad
For a stout old King and a brave young lad,
For a cross old goat with a dripping coat,
And a silver boat in which to float.
So our hearts are merry, light and glad
As we speed away to fair Gilgad!"

"Don't, Rinkitink; please don't! It makes me
seasick," growled Bilbil.

Rinkitink stopped rowing, for by this time he was all
out of breath and his round face was covered with big
drops of perspiration. And when he looked over his
shoulder he found to his dismay that the boat had
scarcely moved a foot from its former position.

Inga said nothing and appeared not to notice the
King's failure. So now Rinkitink, with a serious look
on his fat, red face, took off his purple robe and
rolled up the sleeves of his tunic and tried again.

However, he succeeded no better than before and when
he heard Bilbil give a gruff laugh and saw a smile upon
the boy Prince's face, Rinkitink suddenly dropped the
oars and began shouting with laughter at his own
defeat. As he wiped his brow with a yellow silk
handkerchief he sang in a merry voice:

"A sailor bold am I, I hold,
But boldness will not row a boat.
So I confess I'm in distress
And just as useless as the goat."


"Please leave me out of your verses," said Bilbil
with a snort of anger.

"When I make a fool of myself, Bilbil, I'm a goat,"
replied Rinkitink.

"Not so," insisted Bilbil. "Nothing could make you a
member of my superior race."

"Superior? Why, Bilbil, a goat is but a beast, while
I am a King!"

"I claim that superiority lies in intelligence," said
the goat.

Rinkitink paid no attention to this remark, but
turning to Inga he said:

"We may as well get back to the shore, for the boat
is too heavy to row to Gilgad or anywhere else. Indeed,
it will be hard for us to reach land again."

"Let me take the oars," suggested Inga. "You must not
forget our bargain."

"No, indeed," answered Rinkitink. "If you can row us
to Regos, or to any other place, I will go with you
without protest."

So the King took Inga's place at the stern of the
boat and the boy grasped the oars and commenced to row.
And now, to the great wonder of Rinkitink -- and even
to Inga's surprise -- the oars became light as feathers
as soon as the Prince took hold of them. In an instant
the boat began to glide rapidly through the water and,
seeing this, the boy turned its prow toward the north.
He did not know exactly where Regos and Coregos were
located, but he did know that the islands lay to the
north of Pingaree, so he decided to trust to luck and
the guidance of the pearls to carry him to them.

Gradually the Island of Pingaree became smaller to
their view as the boat sped onward, until at the end of
an hour they had lost sight of it altogether and were
wholly surrounded by the purple waters of the Nonestic
Ocean.

Prince Inga did not tire from the labor of rowing;
indeed, it seemed to him no labor at all. Once he
stopped long enough to place the poles of the canopy in
the holes that had been made for them, in the edges of
the boat, and to spread the canopy of silver over the
poles, for Rinkitink had complained of the sun's heat.
But the canopy shut out the hot rays and rendered the
interior of the boat cool and pleasant.

"This is a glorious ride!" cried Rinkitink, as he lay
back in the shade. "I find it a decided relief to be
away from that dismal island of Pingaree.

"It may be a relief for a short time," said Bilbil,
"but you are going to the land of your enemies, who
will probably stick your fat body full of spears and
arrows."

"Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed Inga, distressed at the
thought.

"Never mind," said the King calmly, "a man can die
but once, you know, and when the enemy kills me I shall
beg him to kill Bilbil, also, that we may remain
together in death as in life."

"They may be cannibals, in which case they will roast
and eat us," suggested Bilbil, who wished to terrify
his master.

"Who knows?" answered Rinkitink, with a shudder. "But
cheer up, Bilbil; they may not kill us after all, or
even capture us; so let us not borrow trouble. Do not
look so cross, my sprightly quadruped, and I will sing
to amuse you."

"Your song would make me more cross than ever,"
grumbled the goat.

"Quite impossible, dear Bilbil. You couldn't be more
surly if you tried. So here is a famous song for you."

While the boy rowed steadily on and the boat rushed
fast over the water, the jolly King, who never could be
sad or serious for many minutes at a time, lay back on
his embroidered cushions and sang as follows:

"A merry maiden went to sea --

Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
She sat upon the Captain's knee
And looked around the sea to see
What she could see, but she couldn't see me --

Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!


"How do you like that, Bilbil?"

"I don't like it," complained the goat. "It reminds
me of the alligator that tried to whistle."

"Did he succeed, Bilbil?" asked the King.

"He whistled as well as you sing."

"Ha, ha, ha, ha, heek, keek, eek!" chuckled the King.
"He must have whistled most exquisitely, eh, my
friend?"

"I am not your friend," returned the goat, wagging
his ears in a surly manner.

"I am yours, however," was the King's cheery reply;
"and to prove it I'll sing you another verse."

"Don't, I beg of you!"

But the King sang as follows:


"The wind blew off the maiden's shoe --
  Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
And the shoe flew high to the sky so blue
And the maiden knew 'twas a new shoe, too;
But she couldn't pursue the shoe, 'tis true-
  Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!


"Isn't that sweet, my pretty goat?"

"Sweet, do you ask?" retorted Bilbil. "I consider it
as sweet as candy made from mustard and vinegar."

"But not as sweet as your disposition, I admit. Ah,
Bilbil, your temper would put honey itself to shame."

"Do not quarrel, I beg of you," pleaded Inga. "Are we
not sad enough already?"

"But this is a jolly quarrel," said the King, "and it
is the way Bilbil and I often amuse ourselves. Listen,
now, to the last verse of all:

"The maid who shied her shoe now cried --

Sing too-ral-oo-ral-i-do!
Her tears were fried for the Captain's bride
Who ate with pride her sobs, beside,
And gently sighed 'I'm satisfied' --

Sing to-ral-oo-ral-i-do!"


"Worse and worse!" grumbled Bilbil, with much scorn.
"I am glad that is the last verse, for another of the
same kind might cause me to faint."

"I fear you have no ear for music," said the King.

"I have heard no music, as yet," declared the goat.
"You must have a strong imagination, King Rinkitink, if
you consider your songs music. Do you remember the
story of the bear that hired out for a nursemaid?"

"I do not recall it just now," said Rinkitink, with a
wink at Inga.

"Well, the bear tried to sing a lullaby to put the
baby to sleep."

"And then?" said the King.

"The bear was highly pleased with its own voice, but
the baby was nearly frightened to death."

"Heh, heb, heh, heh, whoo, hoo, hoo! You are a merry
rogue, Bilbil," laughed the King; "a merry rogue in
spite of your gloomy features. However, if I have not
amused you, I have at least pleased myself, for I am
exceedingly fond of a good song. So let us say no more
about it."

All this time the boy Prince was rowing. the boat. He
was not in the least tired, for the oars he held seemed
to move of their own accord. He paid little heed to the
conversation of Rinkitink and the goat, but busied his
thoughts with plans of what he should do when he
reached the islands of Regos and Coregos and confronted
his enemies. When the others finally became silent,
Inga inquired.

"Can you fight, King Rinkitink?"

"I have never tried," was the answer. "In time of
danger I have found it much easier to run away than to
face the foe."

"But could you fight?" asked the boy.

"I might try, if there was no chance to escape by
running. Have you a proper weapon for me to fight
with?"

"I have no weapon at all," confessed Inga.

"Then let us use argument and persuasion instead of
fighting. For instance, if we could persuade the
warriors of Regos to lie down, and let me step on them,
they would be crushed with ease.

Prince Inga had expected little support from the
King, so he was not discouraged by this answer. After
all, he reflected, a conquest by battle would be out of
the question, yet the White Pearl would not have
advised him to go to Regos and Coregos had the mission
been a hopeless one. It seemed to him, on further
reflection, that he must rely upon circumstances to
determine his actions when he reached the islands of
the barbarians.

By this time Inga felt perfect confidence in the
Magic Pearls. It was the White Pearl that had given him
the boat, and the Blue Pearl that had given him
strength to row it. He believed that the Pink Pearl
would protect him from any danger that might arise; so
his anxiety was not for himself, but for his
companions. King Rinkitink and the goat had no magic to
protect them, so Inga resolved to do all in his power
to keep them from harm.

For three days and three nights the boat with the
silver lining sped swiftly over the ocean. On the
morning of the fourth day, so quickly had they
traveled, Inga saw before him the shores of the two
great islands of Regos and Coregos.

"The pearls have guided me aright!" he whispered to
himself. "Now, if I am wise, and cautious, and brave, I
believe I shall be able to rescue my father and mother
and my people."




Chapter Seven

The Twin Islands


The Island of Regos was ten miles wide and forty miles
long and it was ruled by a big and powerful King named
Gos. Near to the shores were green and fertile fields,
but farther back from the sea were rugged hills and
mountains, so rocky that nothing would grow there. But
in these mountains were mines of gold and silver, which
the slaves of the King were forced to work, being
confined in dark underground passages for that purpose.
In the course of time huge caverns had been hollowed
out by the slaves, in which they lived and slept, never
seeing the light of day. Cruel overseers with whips
stood over these poor people, who had been captured in
many countries by the raiding parties of King Cos, and
the overseers were quite willing to lash the slaves
with their whips if they faltered a moment in their
work.

Between the green shores and the mountains were
forests of thick, tangled trees, between which narrow
paths had been cut to lead up to the caves of the
mines. It was on the level green meadows, not far from
the ocean, that the great City of Regos had been built,
wherein was located the palace of the King. This city
was inhabited by thousands of the fierce warriors of
Gos, who frequently took to their boats and spread over
the sea to the neighboring islands to conquer and
pillage, as they had done at Pingaree. When they were
not absent on one of these expeditions, the City of
Regos swarmed with them and so became a dangerous place
for any peaceful person to live in, for the warriors
were as lawless as their King.

The Island of Coregos lay close beside the Island of
Regos; so close, indeed, that one might have thrown a
stone from one shore to another. But Coregos was only
half the size of Regos and instead of being mountainous
it was a rich and pleasant country, covered with fields
of grain. The fields of Coregos furnished food for the
warriors and citizens of both countries, while the
mines of Regos made them all rich.

Coregos was ruled by Queen Cor, who was wedded to
King Gos; but so stern and cruel was the nature of this
Queen that the people could not decide which of their
sovereigns they dreaded most.

Queen Cor lived in her own City of Coregos, which lay
on that side of her island facing Regos, and her
slaves, who were mostly women, were made to plow the
land and to plant and harvest the grain.

From Regos to Coregos stretched a bridge of boats,
set close together, with planks laid across their edges
for people to walk upon. In this way it was easy to
pass from one island to the other and in times of
danger the bridge could be quickly removed.

The native inhabitants of Regos and Coregos consisted
of the warriors, who did nothing but fight and ravage,
and the trembling servants who waited on them. King Gos
and Queen Cor were at war with all the rest of the
world. Other islanders hated and feared them, for their
slaves were badly treated and absolutely no mercy was
shown to the weak or ill.

When the boats that had gone to Pingaree returned
loaded with rich plunder and a host of captives, there
was much rejoicing in Regos and Coregos and the King
and Queen gave a fine feast to the warriors who had
accomplished so great a conquest. This feast was set
for the warriors in the grounds of King Gos's palace,
while with them in the great throne room all the
captains and leaders of the fighting men were assembled
with King Gos and Queen Cor, who had come from her
island to attend the ceremony. Then all the goods that
had been stolen from the King of Pingaree were divided
according to rank, the King and Queen taking half, the
captains a quarter, and the rest being divided amongst
the warriors.

The day following the feast King Gos sent King
Kitticut and all the men of Pingaree to work in his
mines under the mountains, having first chained them
together so they could not escape. The gentle Queen of
Pingaree and all her women, together with the captured
children, were given to Queen Cor, who set them to work
in her grain fields.

Then the rulers and warriors of these dreadful
islands thought they had done forever with Pingaree.
Despoiled of all its wealth, its houses torn down, its
boats captured and all its people enslaved, what
likelihood was there that they might ever again hear of
the desolated island? So the people of Regos and
Coregos were surprised and puzzled when one morning
they observed approaching their shores from the
direction of the south a black boat containing a boy, a
fat man and a goat. The warriors asked one another who
these could be, and where they had come from? No one
ever came to those islands of their own accord, that
was certain.

Prince Inga guided his boat to the south end of the
Island of Regos, which was the landing place nearest to
the city, and when the warriors saw this action they
went down to the shore to meet him, being led by a big
captain named Buzzub.

"Those people surely mean us no good," said Rinkitink
uneasily to the boy. "Without doubt they intend to
capture us and make us their slaves."

"Do not fear, sir," answered Inga, in a calm voice.
"Stay quietly in the boat with Bilbil until I have
spoken with these men."

He stopped the boat a dozen feet from the shore, and
standing up in his place made a grave bow to the
multitude confronting him. Said the big Captain Buzzub
in a gruff voice:

"Well, little one, who may you be? And how dare you
come, uninvited and all alone, to the Island of Regos?"

"I am Inga, Prince of Pingaree," returned the boy,
"and I have come here to free my parents and my people,
whom you have wrongfully enslaved."

When they heard this bold speech a mighty laugh arose
from the band of warriors, and when it had subsided the
captain said:

"You love to jest, my baby Prince, and the joke is
fairly good. But why did you willingly thrust your head
into the lion's mouth? When you were free, why did you
not stay free? We did not know we had left a single
person in Pingaree! But since you managed to escape us
then, it is really kind of you to come here of your own
free will, to be our slave. Who is the funny fat person
with you?"

"It is His Majesty, King Rinkitink, of the great City
of Gilgad. He has accompanied me to see that you render
full restitution for all you have stolen from
Pingaree."

"Better yet!" laughed Buzzub. "He will make a fine
slave for Queen Cor, who loves to tickle fat men, and
see them jump."

King Rinkitink was filled with horror when he heard
this, but the Prince answered as boldly as before,
saying:

"We are not to be frightened by bluster, believe me;
nor are we so weak as you imagine. We have magic powers
so great and terrible that no host of warriors can
possibly withstand us, and therefore I call upon you to
surrender your city and your island to us, before we
crush you with our mighty powers."

The boy spoke very gravely and earnestly, but his
words only aroused another shout of laughter. So while
the men of Regos were laughing Inga drove the boat
we'll up onto the sandy beach and leaped out. He also
helped Rinkitink out, and when the goat had unaided
sprung to the sands, the King got upon Bilbil's back,
trembling a little internally, but striving to look as
brave as possible.

There was a bunch of coarse hair between the goat's
ears, and this Inga clutched firmly in his left hand.
The boy knew the Pink Pearl would protect not only
himself, but all whom he touched, from any harm, and as
Rinkitink was astride the goat and Inga had his hand
upon the animal, the three could not be injured by
anything the warriors could do. But Captain Buzzub did
not know this, and the little group of three seemed so
weak and ridiculous that he believed their capture
would be easy. So he turned to his men and with a wave
of his hand said:

"Seize the intruders!"

Instantly two or three of the warriors stepped
forward to obey, but to their amazement they could not
reach any of the three; their hands were arrested as if
by an invisible wall of iron. Without paying any
attention to these attempts at capture, Inga advanced
slowly and the goat kept pace with him. And when
Rinkitink saw that he was safe from harm he gave one of
his big, merry laughs, and it startled the warriors and
made them nervous. Captain Buzzub's eyes grew big with
surprise as the three steadily advanced and forced his
men backward; nor was he free from terror himself at
the magic that protected these strange visitors. As for
the warriors, they presently became terror-stricken and
fled in a panic up the slope toward the city, and
Buzzub was obliged to chase after them and shout
threats of punishment before he could halt them and
form them into a line of battle.

All the men of Regos bore spears and bows-and-arrows,
and some of the officers had swords and battle-axes; so
Buzzub ordered them to stand their ground and shoot and
slay the strangers as they approached. This they tried
to do. Inga being in advance, the warriors sent a
flight of sharp arrows straight at the boy's breast,
while others cast their long spears at him.

It seemed to Rinkitink that the little Prince must
surely perish as he stood facing this hail of murderous
missiles; but the power of the Pink Pearl did not
desert him, and when the arrows and spears had reached
to within an inch of his body they bounded back again
and fell harmlessly at his feet. Nor were Rinkitink or
Bilbil injured in the least, although they stood close
beside Inga.

Buzzub stood for a moment looking upon the boy in
silent wonder. Then, recovering himself, he shouted in
a loud voice:

"Once again! All together, my men. No one shall ever
defy our might and live!"

Again a flight of arrows and spears sped toward the
three, and since many more of the warriors of Regos had
by this time joined their fellows, the air was for a
moment darkened by the deadly shafts. But again all
fell harmless before the power of the Pink Pearl, and
Bilbil, who had been growing very angry at the attempts
to injure him and his party, suddenly made a bolt
forward, casting off Inga's hold, and butted into the
line of warriors, who were standing amazed at their
failure to conquer.

Taken by surprise at the goat's attack, a dozen big
warriors tumbled in a heap, yelling with fear, and
their comrades, not knowing what had happened but
imagining that their foes were attacking them, turned
about and ran to the city as hard as they could go.
Bilbil, still angry, had just time to catch the big
captain as he turned to follow his men, and Buzzub
first sprawled headlong upon the ground, then rolled
over two or three times, and finally jumped up and ran
yelling after his defeated warriors. This butting on
the part of the goat was very hard upon King Rinkitink,
who nearly fell off Bilbil's back at the shock of
encounter; but the little fat King wound his arms
around the goat's neck and shut his eyes and clung on
with all his might. It was not until he heard Inga say
triumphantly, "We have won the fight without striking a
blow!" that Rinkitink dared open his eyes again. Then
he saw the warriors rushing into the City of Regos and
barring the heavy gates, and he was very much relieved
at the sight.

"Without striking a blow!" said Bilbil indignantly.
"That is not quite true, Prince Inga. You did not
fight, I admit, but I struck a couple of times to good
purpose, and I claim to have conquered the cowardly
warriors unaided."

"You and I together, Bilbil," said Rinkitink mildly.
"But the next time you make a charge, please warn me in
time, so that I may dismount and give you all the
credit for the attack."

There being no one now to oppose their advance, the
three walked to the gates of the city, which had been
closed against them. The gates were of iron and heavily
barred, and upon the top of the high walls of the city
a host of the warriors now appeared armed with arrows
and spears and other weapons. For Buzzub had gone
straight to the palace of King Cos and reported his
defeat, relating the powerful magic of the boy, the fat
King and the goat, and had asked what to do next.

The big captain still trembled with fear, but King
Gos did not helieve in magic, and called Buzzub a
coward and a weakling. At once the King took command of
his men personally, and he ordered the walls manned
with warriors and instructed them to shoot to kill if
any of the three strangers approached the gates.

Of course, neither Rinkitink nor Bilbil knew how they
had been protected from harm and so at first they were
inclined to resent the boy's command that the three
must always keep together and touch one another at all
times. But when Inga explained that his magic would not
otherwise save them from injury, they agreed to obey,
for they had now seen enough to convince them that the
Prince was really protected by some invisible power.

As they came before the gates another shower of
arrows and spears descended upon them, and as before
not a single missile touched their bodies. King Gos,
who was upon the wall, was greatly amazed and somewhat
worried, but he depended upon the strength of his gates
and commanded his men to continue shooting until all
their weapons were gone.

Inga let them shoot as much as they wished, while he
stood before the great gates and examined them
carefully.

"Perhaps Bilbil can batter down the gates, suggested
Rinkitink.

"No," replied the goat; "my head is hard, but not
harder than iron."

"Then," returned the King, "let us stay outside;
especially as we can't get in."

But Inga was not at all sure they could not get in.
The gates opened inward, and three heavy bars were held
in place by means of stout staples riveted to the
sheets of steel. The boy had been told that the power
of the Blue Pearl would enable him to accomplish any
feat of strength, and he believed that this was true.

The warriors, under the direction of King Gos,
continued to hurl arrows and darts and spears and axes
and huge stones upon the invaders, all without avail.
The ground below was thickly covered with weapons, yet
not one of the three before the gates had been injured
in the slightest manner. When everything had been cast
that was available and not a single weapon of any sort
remained at hand, the amazed warriors saw the boy put
his shoulder against the gates and burst asunder the
huge staples that held the bars in place. A thousand of
their men could not have accomplished this feat, yet
the small, slight boy did it with seeming ease. The
gates burst open, and Inga advanced into the city
street and called upon King Gos to surrender.

But Gos was now as badly frightened as were his
warriors. He and his men were accustomed to war and
pillage and they had carried terror into many
countries, but here was a small boy, a fat man and a
goat who could not be injured by all his skill in
warfare, his numerous army and thousands of death-
dealing weapons. Moreover, they not only defied King
Gos's entire army but they had broken in the huge gates
of the city -- as easily as if they had been made of
paper -- and such an exhibition of enormous strength
made the wicked King fear for his life. Like all
bullies and marauders, Gos was a coward at heart, and
now a panic seized him and he turned and fled before
the calm advance of Prince Inga of Pingaree. The
warriors were like their master, and having thrown all
their weapons over the wall and being helpless to
oppose the strangers, they all swarmed after Gos, who
abandoned his city and crossed the bridge of boats to
the Island of Coregos. There was a desperate struggle
among these cowardly warriors to get over the bridge,
and many were pushed into the water and obliged to
swim; but finally every fighting man of Regos had
gained the shore of Coregos and then they tore away the
bridge of boats and drew them up on their own side,
hoping the stretch of open water would prevent the
magic invaders from following them.

The humble citizens and serving people of Regos, who
had been terrified and abused by the rough warriors all
their lives, were not only greatly astonished by this
sudden conquest of their masters but greatly delighted.
As the King and his army fled to Coregos, the people
embraced one another and danced for very joy, and then
they turned to see what the conquerors of Regos were
like.




Chapter Eight

Rinkitink Makes a Great Mistake


The fat King rode his goat through the streets of the
conquered city and the boy Prince walked proudly beside
him, while all the people bent their heads humbly to
their new masters, whom they were prepared to serve in
the same manner they had King Gos.

Not a warrior remained in all Regos to oppose the
triumphant three; the bridge of boats had been
destroyed; Inga and his companions were free from
danger -- for a time, at least.

The jolly little King appreciated this fact and
rejoiced that he had escaped all injury during the
battle. How it had all happened he could not tell, nor
even guess, but he was content in being safe and free
to take possession of the enemy's city. So, as they
passed through the lines of respectful civilians on
their way to the palace, the King tipped his crown back
on his bald head and folded his arms and sang in his
best voice the following lines:

"Oh, here comes the army of King Rinkitink!
It isn't a big one, perhaps you may think,
But it scattered the warriors quicker than wink --

Rink-i-tink, tink-i-tink, tink!
Our Bilbil's a hero and so is his King;
Our foemen have vanished like birds on the wing;
I guess that as fighters we're quite the real thing --

Rink-i-tink, tink-i-tink, tink!"


"Why don't you give a little credit to Inga?"
inquired the goat. "If I remember aright, he did a
little of the conquering himself."

"So he did," responded the King, "and that's the
reason I'm sounding our own praise, Bilbil. Those who
do the least, often shout the loudest and so get the
most glory. Inga did so much that there is danger of
his becoming more important than we are, and so we'd
best say nothing about him."

When they reached the palace, which was an immense
building, furnished throughout in regal splendor, Inga
took formal possession and ordered the majordomo to
show them the finest rooms the building contained.
There were many pleasant apartments, but Rinkitink
proposed to Inga that they share one of the largest
bedrooms together.

"For," said he, "we are not sure that old Gos will
not return and try to recapture his city, and you must
remember that I have no magic to protect me. In any
danger, were I alone, I might be easily killed or
captured, while if you are by my side you can save me
from injury."

The boy realized the wisdom of this plan, and
selected a fine big bedroom on the second floor of the
palace, in which he ordered two golden beds placed and
prepared for King Rinkitink and himself. Bilbil was
given a suite of rooms on the other side of the palace,
where servants brought the goat fresh-cut grass to eat
and made him a soft bed to lie upon.

That evening the boy Prince and the fat King dined in
great state in the lofty-domed dining hall of the
palace, where forty servants waited upon them. The
royal chef, anxious to win the favor of the conquerors
of Regos, prepared his finest and most savory dishes
for them, which Rinkitink ate with much appetite and
found so delicious that he ordered the royal chef
brought into the banquet hall and presented him with a
gilt button which the King cut from his own jacket.

"You are welcome to it," said he to the chef,
"because I have eaten so much that I cannot use that
lower button at all."

Rinkitink was mightily pleased to live in a
comfortable palace again and to dine at a well spread
table. His joy grew every moment, so that he came in
time to be as merry and cheery as before Pingaree was
despoiled. And, although he had been much frightened
during Inga's defiance of the army of King Gos, he now
began to turn the matter into a joke.

"Why, my boy," said he, "you whipped the big black-
bearded King exactly as if he were a schoolboy, even
though you used no warlike weapon at all upon him. He
was cowed through fear of your magic, and that reminds
me to demand from you an explanation. How did you do
it, Inga? And where did the wonderful magic come from?"

Perhaps it would have been wise for the Prince to
have explained about the magic pearls, but at that
moment he was not inclined to do so. Instead, he
replied:

"Be patient, Your Majesty. The secret is not my own,
so please do not ask me to divulge it. Is it not
enough, for the present, that the magic saved you from
death to-day?"

"Do not think me ungrateful," answered the King
earnestly. "A million spears fell on me from the wall,
and several stones as big as mountains, yet none of
them hurt me!"

"The stones were not as big as mountains, sire," said
the Prince with a smile. "They were, indeed, no larger
than your head."

"Are you sure about that?" asked Rinkitink.

"Quite sure, Your Majesty."

"How deceptive those things are!" sighed the King.
"This argument reminds me of the story of Tom Tick,
which my father used to tell."

"I have never heard that story," Inga answered.

"Well, as he told it, it ran like this:


"When Tom walked out, the sky to spy,
A naughty gnat flew in his eye;
But Tom knew not it was a gnat --
He thought, at first, it was a cat.

"And then, it felt so very big,
He thought it surely was a pig
Till, standing still to hear it grunt,
He cried: 'Why, it's an elephunt!'

"But -- when the gnat flew out again
And Tom was free from all his pain,
He said: 'There flew into my eye
A leetle, teenty-tiny fly.'"


"Indeed," said Inga, laughing, "the gnat was much
like your stones that seemed as big as mountains."

After their dinner they inspected the palace, which
was filled with valuable goods stolen by King Gos from
many nations. But the day's events had tired them and
they retired early to their big sleeping apartment.

"In the morning," said the boy to Rinkitink, as he
was undressing for bed, "I shall begin the search for
my father and mother and the people of Pingaree. And,
when they are found and rescued, we will all go home
again, and be as happy as we were before."

They carefully bolted the door of their room, that no
one might enter, and then got into their beds, where
Rinkitink fell asleep in an instant. The boy lay awake
for a while thinking over the day's adventures, but
presently he fell sound asleep also, and so weary was
he that nothing disturbed his slumber until he awakened
next morning with a ray of sunshine in his eyes, which
had crept into the room through the open window by King
Rinkitink's bed.

Resolving to begin the search for his parents without
any unnecessary delay, Inga at once got out of bed and
began to dress himself, while Rinkitink, in the other
bed, was still sleeping peacefully. But when the boy
had put on both his stockings and began looking for his
shoes, he could find but one of them. The left shoe,
that containing the Pink Pearl, was missing.

Filled with anxiety at this discovery, Inga searched
through the entire room, looking underneath the beds
and divans and chairs and behind the draperies and in
the corners and every other possible place a shoe might
be. He tried the door, and found it still bolted; so,
with growing uneasiness, the boy was forced to admit
that the precious shoe was not in the room.

With a throbbing heart he aroused his companion.

"King Rinkitink," said he, "do you know what has
become of my left shoe?"

"Your shoe!" exclaimed the King, giving a wide yawn
and rubbing his eyes to get the sleep out of them.
"Have you lost a shoe?"

"Yes," said Inga. "I have searched everywhere in the
room, and cannot find it."

"But why bother me about such a small thing?"
inquired Rinkitink. "A shoe is only a shoe, and you can
easily get another one. But, stay! Perhaps it was your
shoe which I threw at the cat last night."

"The cat!" cried Inga. "What do you mean?"

"Why, in the night," explained Rinkitink, sitting up
and beginning to dress himself, "I was wakened by the
mewing of a cat that sat upon a wall of the palace,
just outside my window. As the noise disturbed me, I
reached out in the dark and caught up something and
threw it at the cat, to frighten the creature away. I
did not know what it was that I threw, and I was too
sleepy to care; but probably it was your shoe, since it
is now missing."

"Then," said the boy, in a despairing tone of voice,
"your carelessness has ruined me, as well as yourself,
King Rinkitink, for in that shoe was concealed the
magic power which protected us from danger."

The King's face became very serious when he heard
this and he uttered a low whistle of surprise and
regret.

"Why on earth did you not warn me of this?" he
demanded. "And why did you keep such a precious power
in an old shoe? And why didn't you put the shoe under a
pillow? You were very wrong, my lad, in not confiding
to me, your faithful friend, the secret, for in that
case the shoe would not now be lost."

To all this Inga had no answer. He sat on the side of
his bed, with hanging head, utterly disconsolate, and
seeing this, Rinkitink had pity for his sorrow.

"Come!" cried the King; "let us go out at once and
look for the shoe which I threw at the cat. It must
even now be lying in the yard of the palace."

This suggestion roused the boy to action. He at once
threw open the door and in his stocking feet rushed
down the staircase, closely followed by Rinkitink. But
although they looked on both sides of the palace wall
and in every possible crack and corner where a shoe
might lodge, they failed to find it.

After a half hour's careful search the boy said
sorrowfully:

"Someone must have passed by, as we slept, and taken
the precious shoe, not knowing its value. To us, King
Rinkitink, this will be a dreadful misfortune, for we
are surrounded by dangers from which we have now no
protection. Luckily I have the other shoe left, within
which is the magic power that gives me strength; so all
is not lost."

Then he told Rinkitink, in a few words, the secret of
the wonderful pearls, and how he had recovered them
from the ruins and hidden them in his shoes, and how
they had enabled him to drive King Gos and his men from
Regos and to capture the city. The King was much
astonished, and when the story was concluded he said to
Inga:

"What did you do with the other shoe?"

"Why, I left it in our bedroom," replied the boy.

"Then I advise you to get it at once," continued
Rinkitink, "for we can ill afford to lose the second
shoe, as well as the one I threw at the cat."

"You are right!" cried Inga, and they hastened back
to their bedchamber.

On entering the room they found an old woman sweeping
and raising a great deal of dust.

"Where is my shoe?" asked the Prince, anxiously.

The old woman stopped sweeping and looked at him in a
stupid way, for she was not very intelligent.

"Do you mean the one odd shoe that was lying on the
floor when I came in?" she finally asked.

"Yes -- yes!" answered the boy. "Where is it? Tell me
where it is!"

"Why, I threw it on the dust-heap, outside the back
gate," said she, "for, it being but a single shoe, with
no mate, it can be of no use to anyone."

"Show us the way to the dust-heap -- at once!"
commanded the boy, sternly, for he was greatly
frightened by this new misfortune which threatened him.

The old woman hobbled away and they followed her,
constantly urging her to hasten; but when they reached
the dust-heap no shoe was to be seen.

"This is terrible!" wailed the young Prince, ready to
weep at his loss. "We are now absolutely ruined, and at
the mercy of our enemies. Nor shall I be able to
liberate my dear father and mother."

"Well," replied Rinkitink, leaning against an old
barrel and looking quite solemn, "the thing is
certainly unlucky, any way we look at it. I suppose
someone has passed along here and, seeing the shoe upon
the dust-heap, has carried it away. But no one could
know the magic power the shoe contains and so will not
use it against us. I believe, Inga, we must now depend
upon our wits to get us out of the scrape we are in.

With saddened hearts they returned to the palace, and
entering a small room where no one could observe them
or overhear them, the boy took the White Pearl from its
silken bag and held it to his ear, asking:

"What shall I do now?"

"Tell no one of your loss," answered the Voice of the
Pearl. "If your enemies do not know that you are
powerless, they will fear you as much as ever. Keep
your secret, be patient, and fear not!"

Inga heeded this advice and also warned Rinkitink to
say nothing to anyone of the loss of the shoes and the
powers they contained. He sent for the shoemaker of
King Gos, who soon brought him a new pair of red
leather shoes that fitted him quite well. When these
had been put upon his feet, the Prince, accompanied by
the King, started to walk through the city.

Wherever they went the people bowed low to the
conqueror, although a few, remembering Inga's terrible
strength, ran away in fear and trembling. They had been
used to severe masters and did not yet know how they
would be treated by King Gos's successor. There being
no occasion for the boy to exercise the powers he had
displayed the previous day, his present helplessness
was not suspected by any of the citizens of Regos, who
still considered him a wonderful magician.

Inga did not dare to fight his way to the mines, at
present, nor could he try to conquer the Island of
Coregos, where his mother was enslaved; so he set about
the regulation of the City of Regos, and having
established himself with great state in the royal
palace he began to govern the people by kindness,
having consideration for the most humble.

The King of Regos and his followers sent spies across
to the island they had abandoned in their flight, and
these spies returned with the news that the terrible
boy conqueror was still occupying the city. Therefore
none of them ventured to go back to Regos but continued
to live upon the neighboring island of Coregos, where
they passed the days in fear and trembling and sought
to plot and plan ways how they might overcome the
Prince of Pingaree and the fat King of Gilgad.




Chapter Nine

A Present for Zella


Now it so happened that on the morning of that same day
when the Prince of Pingaree suffered the loss of his
priceless shoes, there chanced to pass along the road
that wound beside the royal palace a poor charcoal-
burner named Nikobob, who was about to return to his
home in the forest.

Nikobob carried an ax and a bundle of torches over
his shoulder and he walked with his eyes to the ground,
being deep in thought as to the strange manner in which
the powerful King Gos and his city had been conquered
by a boy Prince who had come from Pingaree.

Suddenly the charcoal-burner espied a shoe lying upon
the ground, just beyond the high wall of the palace and
directly in his path. He picked it up and, seeing it
was a pretty shoe, although much too small for his own
foot, he put it in his pocket.

Soon after, on turning a corner of the wall, Nikobob
came to a dust-heap where, lying amidst a mass of
rubbish, was another shoe -- the mate to the one he had
before found. This also he placed in his pocket, saying
to himself:

"I have now a fine pair of shoes for my daughter
Zella, who will be much pleased to find I have brought
her a present from the city."

And while the charcoal-burner turned into the forest
and trudged along the path toward his home, Inga and
Rinkitink were still searching for the missing shoes.
Of course, they could not know that Nikobob had found
them, nor did the honest man think he had taken
anything more than a pair of cast-off shoes which
nobody wanted.

Nikobob had several miles to travel through the
forest before he could reach the little log cabin where
his wife, as well as his little daughter Zella, awaited
his return, but he was used to long walks and tramped
along the path whistling cheerfully to beguile the
time.

Few people, as I said before, ever passed through the
dark and tangled forests of Regos, except to go to the
mines in the mountain beyond, for many dangerous
creatures lurked in the wild jungles, and King Gos
never knew, when he sent a messenger to the mines,
whether he would reach there safely or not.

The charcoal-burner, however, knew the wild forest
well, and especially this part of it lying between the
city and his home. It was the favorite haunt of the
ferocious beast Choggenmugger, dreaded by every dweller
in the Island of Regos. Choggenmugger was so old that
everyone thought it must have been there since the
world was made, and each year of its life the huge
scales that covered its body grew thicker and harder
and its jaws grew wider and its teeth grew sharper and
its appetite grew more keen than ever.

In former ages there had been many dragons in Regos,
but Choggenmugger was so fond of dragons that he had
eaten all of them long ago. There had also been great
serpents and crocodiles in the forest marshes, but all
had gone to feed the hunger of Choggenmugger. The
people of Regos knew well there was no use opposing the
Great Beast, so when one unfortunately met with it he
gave himself up for lost.

All this Nikobob knew well, but fortune had always
favored him in his journey through the forest, and
although he had at times met many savage beasts and
fought them with his sharp ax, he had never to this day
encountered the terrible Choggenmugger. Indeed, he was
not thinking of the Great Beast at all as he walked
along, but suddenly he heard a crashing of broken trees
and felt a trembling of the earth and saw the immense
jaws of Choggenmugger opening before him. Then Nikobob
gave himself up for lost and his heart almost ceased to
beat.

He believed there was no way of escape. No one ever
dared oppose Choggenmugger. But Nikobob hated to die
without showing the monster, in some way, that he was
eaten only under protest. So he raised his ax and
brought it down upon the red, protruding tongue of the
monster -- and cut it clean off!

For a moment the charcoal-burner scarcely believed
what his eyes saw, for he knew nothing of the pearls he
carried in his pocket or the magic power they lent his
arm. His success, however, encouraged him to strike
again, and this time the huge scaly jaw of
Choggenmugger was severed in twain and the beast howled
in terrified rage.

Nikobob took off his coat, to give himself more
freedom of action, and then he earnestly renewed the
attack. But now the ax seemed blunted by the hard
scales and made no impression upon them whatever. The
creature advanced with glaring, wicked eyes, and
Nikobob seized his coat under his arm and turned to
flee.

That was foolish, for Choggenmugger could run like
the wind. In a moment it overtook the charcoal-burner
and snapped its four rows of sharp teeth together. But
they did not touch Nikobob, because he still held the
coat in his grasp, close to his body, and in the coat
pocket were Inga's shoes, and in the points of the
shoes were the magic pearls. Finding himself uninjured,
Nikobob put on his coat, again seized his ax, and in a
short time had chopped Choggenmugger into many small
pieces -- a task that proved not only easy but very
agreeable.

"I must be the strongest man in all the world!"
thought the charcoal-burner, as he proudly resumed his
way, "for Choggenmugger has been the terror of Regos
since the world began, and I alone have been able to
destroy the beast. Yet it is singular' that never
before did I discover how powerful a man I am."

He met no further adventure and at midday reached a
little clearing in the forest where stood his humble
cabin.

"Great news! I have great news for you," he shouted,
as his wife and little daughter came to greet him.
"King Gos has been conquered by a boy Prince from the
far island of Pingaree, and I have this day -- unaided
-- destroyed Choggenmugger by the might of my strong
arm.

This was, indeed, great news. They brought Nikobob
into the house and set him in an easy chair and made
him tell everything he knew about the Prince of
Pingaree and the fat King of Gilgad, as well as the
details of his wonderful fight with mighty
Choggenmugger.

"And now, my daughter," said the charcoalburner, when
all his news had been related for at least the third
time, "here is a pretty present I have brought you
from the city."

With this he drew the shoes from the pocket of his
coat and handed them to Zella, who gave him a dozen
kisses in payment and was much pleased with her gift.
The little girl had never worn shoes before, for her
parents were too poor to buy her such luxuries, so now
the possession of these, which were not much worn,
filled the child's heart with joy. She admired the red
leather and the graceful curl of the pointed toes. When
she tried them on her feet, they fitted as well as if
made for her.

All the afternoon, as she helped her mother with the
housework, Zella thought of her pretty shoes. They
seemed more important to her than the coming to Regos
of the conquering Prince of Pingaree, or even the death
of Choggenmugger.

When Zella and her mother were not working in the
cabin, cooking or sewing, they often searched the
neighboring forest for honey which the wild bees
cleverly hid in hollow trees. The day after Nikobob's
return, as they were starting out after honey, Zella
decided to put on her new shoes, as they would keep the
twigs that covered the ground from hurting her feet.
She was used to the twigs, of course, but what is the
use of having nice, comfortable shoes, if you do not
wear them?

So she danced along, very happily, followed by her
mother, and presently they came to a tree in which was
a deep hollow. Zella thrust her hand and arm into the
space and found that the tree was full of honey, so she
began to dig it out with a wooden paddle. Her mother,
who held the pail, suddenly cried in warning:

"Look out, Zella; the bees are coming!" and then the
good woman ran fast toward the house to escape.

Zella, however, had no more than time to turn her
head when a thick swarm of bees surrounded her, angry
because they had caught her stealing their honey and
intent on stinging the girl as a punishment. She knew
her danger and expected to be badly injured by the
multitude of stinging bees, but to her surprise the
little creatures were unable to fly close enough to her
to stick their dart-like stingers into her flesh. They
swarmed about her in a dark cloud, and their angry
buzzing was terrible to hear, yet the little girl
remained unharmed.

When she realized this, Zella was no longer afraid
but continued to ladle out the honey until she had
secured all that was in the tree. Then she returned to
the cabin, where her mother was weeping and bemoaning
the fate of her darling child, and the good woman was
greatly astonished to find Zella had escaped injury.

Again they went to the woods to search for honey, and
although the mother always ran away whenever the bees
came near them, Zella paid no attention to the
creatures but kept at her work, so that before supper
time came the pails were again filled to overflowing
with delicious honey.

"With such good fortune as we have had this day,"
said her mother, "we shall soon gather enough honey for
you to carry to Queen Cor." For it seems the wicked
Queen was very fond of honey and it had been Zella's
custom to go, once every year, to the City of Coregos,
to carry the Queen a supply of sweet honey for her
table. Usually she had but one pail.

"But now," said Zella, "I shall be able to carry two
pailsful to the Queen, who will, I am sure, give me a
good price for it."

"True," answered her mother, "and, as the boy Prince
may take it into his head to conquer Coregos, as well
as Regos, I think it best for you to start on your
journey to Queen Cor tomorrow morning. Do you not agree
with me, Nikobob?" she added, turning to her husband,
the charcoal-burner, who was eating his supper.

"I agree with you," he replied. "If Zella must go to
the City of Coregos, she may as well start to-morrow
morning."




Chapter Ten

The Cunning of Queen Cor


You may be sure the Queen of Coregos was not well
pleased to have King Gos and all his warriors living in
her city after they had fled from their own. They were
savage natured and quarrelsome men at all times, and
their tempers had not improved since their conquest by
the Prince of Pingaree. Moreover, they were eating up
Queen Cor's provisions and crowding the houses of her
own people, who grumbled and complained until their
Queen was heartily tired.

"Shame on you!" she said to her husband, King Gos,
"to be driven out of your city by a boy, a roly-poly
King and a billy goat! Why do you not go back and fight
them?"

"No human can fight against the powers of magic,"
returned the King in a surly voice. "That boy is either
a fairy or under the protection of fairies. We escaped
with our lives only because we were quick to run away;
but, should we return to Regos, the same terrible power
that burst open the city gates would crush us all to
atoms."

"Bah! you are a coward," cried the Queen, tauntingly.

"I am not a coward," said the big King. "I have
killed in battle scores of my enemies; by the might of
my sword and my good right arm I have conquered many
nations; all my life people have feared me. But no one
would dare face the tremendous power of the Prince of
Pingaree, boy though he is. It would not be courage, it
would be folly, to attempt it."

"Then meet his power with cunning," suggested the
Queen. "Take my advice, and steal over to Regos at
night, when it is dark, and capture or destroy the boy
while he sleeps."

"No weapon can touch his body," was the answer. "He
bears a charmed life and cannot be injured."

"Does the fat King possess magic powers, or the
goat?" inquired Cor.

"I think not," said Gos. "We could not injure them,
indeed, any more than we could the boy, but they did
not seem to have any unusual strength, although the
goat's head is harder than a battering-ram."

"Well," mused the Queen, "there is surely some way to
conquer that slight boy. If you are afraid to undertake
the job, I shall go myself. By some stratagem I shall
manage to make him my prisoner. He will not dare to
defy a Queen, and no magic can stand against a woman's
cunning."

"Go ahead, if you like," replied the King, with an
evil grin, "and if you are hung up by the thumbs or
cast into a dungeon, it will serve you right for
thinking you can succeed where a skilled warrior dares
not make the attempt."

"I'm not afraid," answered the Queen. "It is only
soldiers and bullies who are cowards."

In spite of this assertion, Queen Cor was not so
brave as she was cunning. For several days she thought
over this plan and that, and tried to decide which was
most likely to succeed. She had never seen the boy
Prince but had heard so many tales of him from the
defeated warriors, and especially from Captain Buzzub,
that she had learned to respect his power.

Spurred on by the knowledge that she would never get
rid of her unwelcome guests until Prince Inga was
overcome and Regos regained for King Gos, the Queen of
Coregos finally decided to trust to luck and her native
wit to defeat a simple-minded boy, however powerful he
might be. Inga could not suspect what she was going to
do, because she did not know herself. She intended to
act boldly and trust to chance to win.

It is evident that had the cunning Queen known that
Inga had lost all his magic, she would not have devoted
so much time to the simple matter of capturing him, but
like all others she was impressed by the marvelous
exhibition of power he had shown in capturing Regos,
and had no reason to believe the boy was less powerful
now.

One morning Queen Cor boldly entered a boat, and,
taking four men with her as an escort and bodyguard,
was rowed across the narrow channel to Regos. Prince
Inga was sitting in the palace playing checkers with
King Rinkitink when a servant came to him, saying that
Queen Cor had arrived and desired an audience with him.

With many misgivings lest the wicked Queen discover
that he had now lost his magic powers, the boy ordered
her to be admitted, and she soon entered the room and
bowed low before him, in mock respect.

Cor was a big woman, almost as tall as King Gos. She
had flashing black eyes and the dark complexion you see
on gypsies. Her temper, when irritated, was something
dreadful, and her face wore an evil expression which
she tried to cover by smiling sweetly -- often when she
meant the most mischief.

"I have come," said she in a low voice, "to render
homage to the noble Prince of Pingaree. I am told that
Your Highness is the strongest person in the world, and
invincible in battle, and therefore I wish you to
become my friend, rather than my enemy."

Now Inga did not know how to reply to this speech. He
disliked the appearance of the woman and was afraid of
her and he was unused to deception and did not know how
to mask his real feelings. So he took time to think
over his answer, which he finally made in these words:

"I have no quarrel with Your Majesty, and my only
reason for coming here is to liberate my father and
mother, and my people, whom you and your husband have
made your slaves, and to recover the goods King Gos has
plundered from the Island of Pingaree. This I hope soon
to accomplish, and if you really wish to be my friend,
you can assist me greatly."

While he was speaking Queen Cor had been studying the
boy's face stealthily, from the corners of her eyes,
and she said to herself: "He is so small and innocent
that I believe I can capture him alone, and with ease.
He does not seem very terrible and I suspect that King
Gos and his warriors were frightened at nothing."

Then, aloud, she said to Inga:

"I wish to invite you, mighty Prince, and your
friend, the great King of Gilgad, to visit my poor
palace at Coregos, where all my people shall do you
honor. Will you come?"

"At present," replied Inga, uneasily, "I must refuse
your kind invitation."

"There will be feasting, and dancing girls, and games
and fireworks," said the Queen, speaking as if eager to
entice him and at each word coming a step nearer to
where he stood.

"I could not enjoy them while my poor parents are
slaves," said the boy, sadly.

"Are you sure of that?" asked Queen Cor, and by that
time she was close beside Inga. Suddenly she leaned
forward and threw both of her long arms around Inga's
body, holding him in a grasp that was like a vise.

Now Rinkitink sprang forward to rescue his friend,
but Cor kicked out viciously with her foot and struck
the King squarely on his stomach -- a very tender place
to be kicked, especially if one is fat. Then, still
hugging Inga tightly, the Queen called aloud:

"I've got him! Bring in the ropes."

Instantly the four men she had brought with her
sprang into the room and bound the boy hand and foot.
Next they seized Rinkitink, who was still rubbing his
stomach, and bound him likewise.

With a laugh of wicked triumph, Queen Cor now led her
captives down to the boat and returned with them to
Coregos.

Great was the astonishment of King Gos and his
warriors when they saw that the mighty Prince of
Pingaree, who had put them all to flight, had been
captured by a woman. Cowards as they were, they now
crowded around the boy and jeered at him, and some of
them would have struck him had not the Queen cried out:

"Hands off! He is my prisoner, remember not yours."

"Well, Cor, what are you going to do with him?"
inquired King Gos.

"I shall make him my slave, that he may amuse my idle
hours. For he is a pretty boy, and gentle, although he
did frighten all of you big warriors so terribly."

The King scowled at this speech, not liking to be
ridiculed, but he said nothing more. He and his men
returned that same day to Regos, after restoring the
bridge of boats. And they held a wild carnival of
rejoicing, both in the King's palace and in the city,
although the poor people of Regos who were not warriors
were all sorry that the kind young Prince had been
captured by his enemies and could rule them no longer.

When her unwelcome guests had all gone back to Regos
and the Queen was alone in her palace, she ordered Inga
and Rinkitink brought before her and their bonds
removed. They came sadly enough, knowing they were in
serious straits and at the mercy of a cruel mistress.
Inga had taken counsel of the White Pearl, which had
advised him to bear up bravely under his misfortune,
promising a change for the better very soon. With this
promise to comfort him, Inga faced the Queen with a
dignified bearing that indicated both pride and
courage.

"Well, youngster," said she, in a cheerful tone
because she was pleased with her success, "you played a
clever trick on my poor husband and frightened him
badly, but for that prank I am inclined to forgive you.
Hereafter I intend you to be my page, which means that
you must fetch and carry for me at my will. And let me
advise you to obey my every whim without question or
delay, for when I am angry I become ugly, and when I am
ugly someone is sure to feel the lash. Do you
understand me?"

Inga bowed, but made no answer. Then she turned to
Rinkitink and said:

"As for you, I cannot decide how to make you useful
to me, as you are altogether too fat and awkward to
work in the fields. It may be, however, that I can use
you as a pincushion.

"What!" cried Rinkitink in horror, "would you stick
pins into the King of Gilgad?"

"Why not?" returned Queen Cor. "You are as fat as a
pincushion, as you must yourself admit, and whenever I
needed a pin I could call you to me." Then she laughed
at his frightened look and asked: "By the way, are you
ticklish?"

This was the question Rinkitink had been dreading. He
gave a moan of despair and shook his head.

"I should love to tickle the bottom of your feet with
a feather," continued the cruel woman. "Please take off
your shoes."

"Oh, your Majesty!" pleaded poor Rinkitink, "I beg
you to allow me to amuse you in some other way. I can
dance, or I can sing you a song."

"Well," she answered, shaking with laughter, "you may
sing a song -- if it be a merry one. But you do not
seem in a merry mood."

"I feel merry -- indeed, Your Majesty, I do!"
protested Rinkitink, anxious to escape the tickling.
But even as he professed to "feel merry" his round, red
face wore an expression of horror and anxiety that was
realty comical.

"Sing, then!" commanded Queen Cor, who was greatly
amused.

Rinkitink gave a sigh of relief and after clearing
his throat and trying to repress his sobs he began to
sing this song-gently, at first, but finally roaring it
out at the top of his voice:

"Oh!
There was a Baby Tiger lived in a men-ag-er-ie --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy -- they wouldn't set him free;
And ev'rybody thought that he was gentle as could be --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy -- Ba-by Ti-ger!

"Oh!
They patted him upon his head and shook him by the paw --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy -- he had a bone to gnaw;
But soon he grew the biggest Tiger that you ever saw --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy -- what a Ti-ger!

"Oh!
One day they came to pet the brute and he began to fight --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy-how he did scratch and bite!
He broke the cage and in a rage he darted out of sight --

Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy was a Ti-ger!"

"And is there a moral to the song?" asked Queen Cor,
when King Rinkitink had finished his song with great
spirit.

"If there is," replied Rinkitink, "it is a warning
not to fool with tigers."

The little Prince could not help smiling at this
shrewd answer, but Queen Cor frowned and gave the King
a sharp look.

"Oh," said she; "I think I know the difference
between a tiger and a lapdog. But I'll bear the warning
in mind, just the same."

For, after all her success in capturing them, she was
a little afraid of these people who had once displayed
such extraordinary powers.




Chapter Eleven

Zella Goes to Coregos


The forest in which Nikobob lived with his wife and
daughter stood between the mountains and the City of
Regos, and a well-beaten path wound among the trees,
leading from the city to the mines. This path was used
by the King's messengers, and captured prisoners were
also sent by this way from Regos to work in the
underground caverns.

Nikobob had built his cabin more than a mile away
from this path, that he might not be molested by the
wild and lawless soldiers of King Gos, but the family
of the charcoal-burner was surrounded by many creatures
scarcely less dangerous to encounter, and often in the
night they could hear savage animals growling and
prowling about the cabin. Because Nikobob minded his
own business and never hunted the wild creatures to
injure them, the beasts had come to regard him as one
of the natural dwellers in the forest and did not
molest him or his family. Still Zella and her mother
seldom wandered far from home, except on such errands
as carrying honey to Coregos, and at these times
Nikobob cautioned them to be very careful.

So when Zella set out on her journey to Queen Cor,
with the two pails of honey in her hands, she was
undertaking a dangerous adventure and there was no
certainty that she would return safely to her loving
parents. But they were poor, and Queen Cor's money,
which they expected to receive for the honey, would
enable them to purchase many things that were needed;
so it was deemed best that Zella should go. She was a
brave little girl and poor people are often obliged to
take chances that rich ones are spared.

A passing woodchopper had brought news to Nikobob's
cabin that Queen Cor had made a prisoner of the
conquering Prince of Pingaree and that Gos and his
warriors were again back in their city of Regos; but
these struggles and conquests were matters which,
however interesting, did not concern the poor charcoal-
burner or his family. They were more anxious over the
report that the warriors had become more reckless than
ever before, and delighted in annoying all the common
people; so Zella was told to keep away from the beaten
path as much as possible, that she might not encounter
any of the King's soldiers.

"When it is necessary to choose between the warriors
and the wild beasts," said Nikobob, "the beasts will be
found the more merciful."

The little girl had put on her best attire for the
journey and her mother threw a blue silk shawl over her
head and shoulders. Upon her feet were the pretty red
shoes her father had brought her from Regos. Thus
prepared, she kissed her parents good-bye and started
out with a light heart, carrying the pails of honey in
either hand.

It was necessary for Zella to cross the path
that led from the mines to the city, but once on
the other side she was not likely to meet with
anyone, for she had resolved to cut through the
forest and so reach the bridge of boats without
entering the City of Regos, where she might be
interrupted. For an hour or two she found the
walking easy enough, but then the forest, which
in this part was unknown to her, became badly
tangled. The trees were thicker and creeping
vines intertwined between them. She had to
turn this way and that to get through at all, and
finally she came to a place where a network of
vines and branches effectually barred her farther
progress.

Zella was dismayed, at first, when she encountered
this obstacle, but setting down her pails she made an
endeavor to push the branches aside. At her touch they
parted as if by magic, breaking asunder like dried
twigs, and she found she could pass freely. At another
place a great log had fallen across her way, but the
little girl lifted it easily and cast it aside,
although six ordinary men could scarcely have moved it.

The child was somewhat worried at this evidence of a
strength she had heretofore been ignorant that she
possessed. In order to satisfy herself that it was no
delusion, she tested her new-found power in many ways,
finding that nothing was too big nor too heavy for her
to lift. And, naturally enough, the girl gained courage
from these experiments and became confident that she
could protect herself in any emergency. When,
presently, a wild boar ran toward her, grunting
horribly and threatening her with its great tusks, she
did not climb a tree to escape, as she had always done
before on meeting such creatures, but stood still and
faced the boar. When it had come quite close and Zella
saw that it could not injure her -- a fact that
astonished both the beast and the girl -- she suddenly
reached down and seizing it by one ear threw the great
beast far off amongst the trees, where it fell headlong
to the earth, grunting louder than ever with surprise
and fear.

The girl laughed merrily at this incident and,
picking up her pails, resumed her journey through the
forest. It is not recorded whether the wild boar told
his adventure to the other beasts or they had happened
to witness his defeat, but certain it is that Zella was
not again molested. A brown bear watched her pass
without making any movement in her direction and a
great puma -- a beast much dreaded by all men -- crept
out of her path as she approached, and disappeared
among the trees.

Thus everything favored the girl's journey and she
made such good speed that by noon she emerged from the
forest's edge and found she was quite near to the
bridge of boats that led to Coregos. This she crossed
safely and without meeting any of the rude warriors she
so greatly feared, and five minutes later the daughter
of the charcoal-burner was seeking admittance at the
back door of Queen Cor's palace.




Chapter Twelve

The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat


Our story must now return to one of our characters
whom  we have been forced to neglect. The temper of
Bilbil the goat was not sweet under any circumstances,
and whenever he had a grievance he was inclined to be
quite grumpy. So, when his master settled down in the
palace of King Gos for a quiet life with the boy
Prince, and passed his time in playing checkers and
eating and otherwise enjoying himself, he had no use
whatever for Bilbil, and shut the goat in an upstairs
room to prevent his wandering through the city and
quarreling with the citizens. But this Bilbil did not
like at all. He became very cross and disagreeable at
being left alone and he did not speak nicely to the
servants who came to bring him food; therefore those
people decided not to wait upon him any more, resenting
his conversation and not liking to be scolded by a
lean, scraggly goat, even though it belonged to a
conqueror. The servants kept away from the room and
Bilbil grew more hungry and more angry every hour. He
tried to eat the rugs and ornaments, but found them not
at all nourishing. There was no grass to be had unless
he escaped from the palace.

When Queen Cor came to capture Inga and Rinkitink,
both the prisoners were so filled with despair at their
own misfortune that they gave no thought whatever to
the goat, who was left in his room. Nor did Bilbil know
anything of the changed fortunes of his comrades until
he heard shouts and boisterous laughter in the
courtyard below. Looking out of a window, with the
intention of rebuking those who dared thus to disturb
him, Bilbil saw the courtyard quite filled with
warriors and knew from this that the palace had in some
way again fallen into the hands of the enemy.

Now, although Bilbil was often exceedingly
disagreeable to King Rinkitink, as well as to the
Prince, and sometimes used harsh words in addressing
them, he was intelligent enough to know them to be his
friends, and to know that King Gos and his people were
his foes. In sudden anger, provoked by the sight of the
warriors and the knowledge that he was in the power of
the dangerous men of Regos, Bilbil butted his head
against the door of his room and burst it open. Then he
ran to the head of the staircase and saw King Gos
coming up the stairs followed by a long line of his
chief captains and warriors.

The goat lowered his head, trembling with rage and
excitement, and just as the King reached the top stair
the animal dashed forward and butted His Majesty so
fiercely that the big and powerful King, who did not
expect an attack, doubled up and tumbled backward. His
great weight knocked over the man just behind him and
he in turn struck the next warrior and upset him, so
that in an instant the whole line of Bilbil's foes was
tumbling heels over head to the bottom of the stairs,
where they piled up in a heap, struggling and shouting
and in the mixup hitting one another with their fists,
until every man of them was bruised and sore.

Finally King Gos scrambled out of the heap and rushed
up the stairs again, very angry indeed. Bilbil was
ready for him and a second time butted the King down
the stairs; but now the goat also lost his balance and
followed the King, landing full upon the confused heap
of soldiers. Then he kicked out so viciously with his
heels that he soon freed himself and dashed out of the
doorway of the palace.

"Stop him!" cried King Gos, running after.

But the goat was now so wild and excited that it was
not safe for anyone to stand in his way. None of the
men were armed and when one or two tried to head off
the goat, Bilbil sent them sprawling upon the ground.
Most of the warriors, however, were wise enough not to
attempt to interfere with his flight.

Coursing down the street, Bilbil found himself
approaching the bridge of boats and without pausing to
think where it might lead him he crossed over and
proceeded on his way. A few moments later a great stone
building blocked his path. It was the palace of Queen
Cor, and seeing the gates of the courtyard standing
wide open, Bilbil rushed through them without
slackening his speed.




Chapter Thirteen

Zella Saves the Prince


The wicked Queen of Coregos was in a very bad humor
this morning, for one of her slave drivers had come
from the fields to say that a number of slaves had
rebelled and would not work.

"Bring them here to me!" she cried savagely. "A good
whipping may make them change their minds."

So the slave driver went to fetch the rebellious ones
and Queen Cor sat down to eat her breakfast, an ugly
look on her face.

Prince Inga had been ordered to stand behind his new
mistress with a big fan of peacock's feathers, but he
was so unused to such service that he awkwardly brushed
her ear with the fan. At once she flew into a terrible
rage and slapped the Prince twice with her hand-blows
that tingled, too, for her hand was big and hard and
she was not inclined to be gentle. Inga took the blows
without shrinking or uttering a cry, although they
stung his pride far more than his body. But King
Rinkitink, who was acting as the queen's butler and had
just brought in her coffee, was so startled at seeing
the young Prince punished that he tipped over the urn
and the hot coffee streamed across the lap of the
Queen's best morning gown.

Cor sprang from her seat with a scream of anger and
poor Rinkitink would doubtless have been given a
terrible beating had not the slave driver returned at
this moment and attracted the woman's attention. The
overseer had brought with him all of the women slaves
from Pingaree, who had been loaded down with chains and
were so weak and ill they could scarcely walk, much
less work in the fields.

Prince Inga's eyes were dimmed with sorrowful tears
when he discovered how his poor people had been abused,
but his own plight was so helpless that he was unable
to aid them. Fortunately the boy's mother, Queen Garee,
was not among these slaves, for Queen Cor had placed
her in the royal dairy to make butter.

"Why do you refuse to work?" demanded Cor in a harsh
voice, as the slaves from Pingaree stood before her,
trembling and with downcast eyes.

"Because we lack strength to perform the tasks your
overseers demand," answered one of the women.

"Then you shall be whipped until your strength
returns!" exclaimed the Queen, and turning to Inga, she
commanded: "Get me the whip with the seven lashes."

As the boy left the room, wondering how he might
manage to save the unhappy women from their undeserved
punishment, he met a girl entering by the back way, who
asked:

"Can you tell me where to find Her Majesty, Queen
Cor?"

"She is in the chamber with the red dome, where green
dragons are painted upon the walls," replied Inga; "but
she is in an angry and ungracious mood to-day. Why do
you wish to see her?"

"I have honey to sell," answered the girl, who was
Zella, just come from the forest. "The Queen is very
fond of my honey."

"You may go to her, if you so desire," said the boy,
"but take care not to anger the cruel Queen, or she may
do you a mischief."

"Why should she harm me, who brings her the honey she
so dearly loves?" inquired the child innocently. "But I
thank you for your warning; and I will try not to anger
the Queen."

As Zella started to go, Inga's eyes suddenly fell
upon her shoes and instantly he recognized them as his
own. For only in Pingaree were shoes shaped in this
manner: high at the heel and pointed at the toes.

"Stop!" he cried in an excited voice, and the girl
obeyed, wonderingly. "Tell me," he continued, more
gently, "where did you get those shoes?"

"My father brought them to me from Regos," she
answered.

"From Regos!"

"Yes. Are they not pretty?" asked Zella, looking down
at her feet to admire them. "One of them my father
found by the palace wall, and the other on an ash-heap.
So he brought them to me and they fit me perfectly."

By this time Inga was trembling with eager joy, which
of course the girl could not understand.

"What is your name, little maid?" he asked.

"I am called Zella, and my father is Nikobob, the
charcoal-burner."

"Zella is a pretty name. I am Inga, Prince of
Pingaree," said he, "and the shoes you are now wearing,
Zella, belong to me. They were not cast away, as your
father supposed, but were lost. Will you let me have
them again?"

Zella's eyes filled with tears.

"Must I give up my pretty shoes, then?" she asked.
"They are the only ones I have ever owned."

Inga was sorry for the poor child, but he knew how
important it was that he regain possession of the Magic
Pearls. So he said, pleadingly:

"Please let me have them, Zella. See! I will exchange
for them the shoes I now have on, which are newer and
prettier than the others."

The girl hesitated. She wanted to please the boy
Prince, yet she hated to exchange the shoes which her
father had brought her as a present.

"If you will give me the shoes," continued the boy,
anxiously, "I will promise to make you and your father
and mother rich and prosperous. Indeed, I will promise
to grant any favors you may ask of me," and he sat down
upon the floor and drew off the shoes he was wearing
and held them toward the girl.

"I'll see if they will fit me," said Zella, taking
off her left shoe -- the one that contained the Pink
Pearl -- and beginning to put on one of Inga's.

Just then Queen Cor, angry at being made to
wait for her whip with the seven lashes, rushed
into the room to find Inga. Seeing the boy sitting
upon the floor beside Zella, the woman sprang
toward him to beat him with her clenched fists;
but Inga had now slipped on the shoe and the
Queen's blows could not reach his body.

Then Cor espied the whip lying beside Inga and
snatching it up she tried to lash him with it -- all to
no avail.

While Zella sat horrified by this scene, the Prince,
who realized he had no time to waste, reached out and
pulled the right shoe from the girl's foot, quickly
placing it upon his own. Then he stood up and, facing
the furious but astonished Queen, said to her in a
quiet voice:

"Madam, please give me that whip."

"I won't!" answered Cor. "I'm going to lash those
Pingaree women with it."

The boy seized hold of the whip and with irresistible
strength drew it from the Queen's hand. But she drew
from her bosom a sharp dagger and with the swiftness of
lightning aimed a blow at Inga's heart. He merely stood
still and smiled, for the blade rebounded and fell
clattering to the floor.

Then, at last, Queen Cor understood the magic power
that had terrified her husband but which she had
ridiculed in her ignorance, not believing in it. She
did not know that Inga's power had been lost, and found
again, but she realized the boy was no common foe and
that unless she could still manage to outwit him her
reign in the Island of Coregos was ended. To gain time,
she went back to the red-domed chamber and seated
herself in her throne, before which were grouped the
weeping slaves from Pingaree.

Inga had taken Zella's hand and assisted her to put
on the shoes he had given her in exchange for his own.
She found them quite comfortable and did not know she
had lost anything by the transfer.

"Come with me," then said the boy Prince, and led her
into the presence of Queen Cor, who was giving
Rinkitink a scolding. To the overseer Inga said.

"Give me the keys which unlock these chains, that I
may set these poor women at liberty."

"Don't you do it!" screamed Queen Cor.

"If you interfere, madam," said the boy, "I will put
you into a dungeon."

By this Rinkitink knew that Inga had recovered his
Magic Pearls and the little fat King was so overjoyed
that he danced and capered all around the room. But the
Queen was alarmed at the threat and the slave driver,
fearing the conqueror of Regos, tremblingly gave up the
keys.

Inga quickly removed all the shackles from the women
of his country and comforted them, telling them they
should work no more but would soon be restored to their
homes in Pingaree. Then he commanded the slave driver
to go and get all the children who had been made
slaves, and to bring them to their mothers. The man
obeyed and left at once to perform his errand, while
Queen Cor, growing more and more uneasy, suddenly
sprang from her throne and before Inga could stop her
had rushed through the room and out into the courtyard
of the palace, meaning to make her escape. Rinkitink
followed her, running as fast as he could go.

It was at this moment that Bilbil, in his mad dash
from Regos, turned in at the gates of the courtyard,
and as he was coming one way and Queen Cor was going
the other they bumped into each other with great force.
The woman sailed through the air, over Bilbil's head,
and landed on the ground outside the gates, where her
crown rolled into a ditch and she picked herself up,
half dazed, and continued her flight. Bilbil was also
somewhat dazed by the unexpected encounter, but he
continued his rush rather blindly and so struck poor
Rinkitink, who was chasing after Queen Cor. They rolled
over one another a few times and then Rinkitink sat up
and Bilbil sat up and they looked at each other in
amazement.

"Bilbil," said the King, "I'm astonished at you!"

"Your Majesty," said Bilbil, "I expected kinder
treatment at your hands."

"You interrupted me," said Rinkitink.

"There was plenty of room without your taking my
path," declared the goat.

And then Inga came running out and said. "Where is
the Queen?"

"Gone," replied Rinkitink, "but she cannot go far, as
this is an island. However, I have found Bilbil, and
our party is again reunited. You have recovered your
magic powers, and again we are masters of the
situation. So let us be thankful."

Saying this, the good little King got upon his feet
and limped back into the throne room to help comfort
the women.

Presently the children of Pingaree, who had been
gathered together by the overseer, were brought in and
restored to their mothers, and there was great
rejoicing among them, you may be sure.

"But where is Queen Garee, my dear mother?"
questioned Inga; but the women did not know and it was
some time before the overseer remembered that one of
the slaves from Pingaree had been placed in the royal
dairy. Perhaps this was the woman the boy was seeking.

Inga at once commanded him to lead the way to the
butter house, but when they arrived there Queen Garee
was nowhere in the place, although the boy found a silk
scarf which he recognized as one that his mother used
to wear. Then they began a search throughout the island
of Coregos, but could not find Inga's mother anywhere.

When they returned to the palace of Queen Cor,
Rinkitink discovered that the bridge of boats had again
been removed, separating them from Regos, and from this
they suspected that Queen Cor had fled to her husband's
island and had taken Queen Garee with her. Inga was
much perplexed what to do and returned with his friends
to the palace to talk the matter over.

Zella was now crying because she had not sold her
honey and was unable to return to her parents on the
island of Regos, but the boy prince comforted her and
promised she should be protected until she could be
restored to her home. Rinkitink found Queen Cor's
purse, which she had had no time to take with her, and
gave Zella several gold pieces for the honey. Then Inga
ordered the palace servants to prepare a feast for all
the women and children of Pingaree and to prepare for
them beds in the great palace, which was large enough
to accommodate them all.

Then the boy and the goat and Rinkitink and Zella
went into a private room to consider what should be
done next.




Chapter Fourteen

The Escape


"Our fault," said Rinkitink, "is that we conquer only
one of these twin islands at a time. When  we
conquered Regos, our foes all came to Coregos, and now
that we have conquered Coregos, the Queen has fled to
Regos. And each time they removed the bridge of boats,
so that we could not follow them."

"What has become of our own boat, in which we came
from Pingaree?" asked Bilbil.

"We left it on the shore of Regos," replied the
Prince, "but I wonder if we could not get it again."

"Why don't you ask the White Pearl?" suggested
Rinkitink.

"That is a good idea," returned the boy, and at once
he drew the White Pearl from its silken bag and held it
to his ear. Then he asked: "How may I regain our boat?"

The Voice of the Pearl replied: "Go to the south end
of the Island of Coregos, and clap your hands three
times and the boat will come to you.

"Very good!" cried Inga, and then he turned to his
companions and said: "We shall be able to get our boat
whenever we please; but what then shall we do?"

"Take me home in it!" pleaded Zella.

"Come with me to my City of Gilgad," said the King,
"where you will be very welcome to remain forever."

"No," answered Inga, "I must rescue my father and
mother, as well as my people. Already I have the women
and children of Pingaree, but the men are with my
father in the mines of Regos, and my dear mother has
been taken away by Queen Cor. Not until all are rescued
will I consent to leave these islands."

"Quite right!" exclaimed Bilbil.

"On second thought," said Rinkitink, "I agree with
you. If you are careful to sleep in your shoes, and
never take them off again, I believe you will be able
to perform the task you have undertaken."

They counseled together for a long time as to their
mode of action and it was finally considered best to
make the attempt to liberate King Kitticut first of
all, and with him the men from Pingaree. This would
give them an army to assist them and afterward they
could march to Regos and compel Queen Cor to give up
the Queen of Pingaree. Zella told them that they could
go in their boat along the shore of Regos to a point
opposite the mines, thus avoiding any conflict with the
warriors of King Gos.

This being considered the best course to pursue, they
resolved to start on the following morning, as night
was even now approaching. The servants being all busy
in caring for the women and children, Zella undertook
to get a dinner for Inga and Rinkitink and herself and
soon prepared a fine meal in the palace kitchen, for
she was a good little cook and had often helped her
mother. The dinner was served in a small room
overlooking the gardens and Rinkitink thought the best
part of it was the sweet honey, which he spread upon
the biscuits that Zella had made. As for Bilbil, he
wandered through the palace grounds and found some
grass that made him a good dinner.

During the evening Inga talked with the women and
cheered them, promising soon to reunite them with their
husbands who were working in the mines and to send them
back to their own island of Pingaree.

Next morning the boy rose bright and early and found
that Zella had already prepared a nice breakfast. And
after the meal they went to the most southern point of
the island, which was not very far away, Rinkitink
riding upon Bilbil's back and Inga and Zella following
behind them, hand in hand.

When they reached the water's edge the boy advanced
and clapped his hands together three times, as the
White Pearl had told him to do. And in a few moments
they saw in the distance the black boat with the silver
lining, coming swiftly toward them from the sea.
Presently it grounded on the beach and they all got
into it.

Zella was delighted with the boat, which was the most
beautiful she had ever seen, and the marvel of its
coming to them through the water without anyone to row
it, made her a little afraid of the fairy craft. But
Inga picked up the oars and began to row and at once
the boat shot swiftly in the direction of Regos. They
rounded the point of that island where the city was
built and noticed that the shore was lined with
warriors who had discovered their boat but seemed
undecided whether to pursue it or not. This was
probably because they had received no commands what to
do, or perhaps they had learned to fear the magic
powers of these adventurers from Pingaree and were
unwilling to attack them unless their King ordered them
to.

The coast on the western side of the Island of Regos
was very uneven and Zella, who knew fairly well the
location of the mines from the inland forest path, was
puzzled to decide which mountain they now viewed from
the sea was the one where the entrance to the
underground caverns was located. First she thought it
was this peak, and then she guessed it was that; so
considerable time was lost through her uncertainty.

They finally decided to land and explore the country,
to see where they were, so Inga ran the boat into a
little rocky cove where they all disembarked. For an
hour they searched for the path without finding any
trace of it and now Zella believed they had gone too
far to the north and must return to another mountain
that was nearer to the city.

Once again they entered the boat and followed the
winding coast south until they thought they had reached
the right place. By this time, however, it was growing
dark, for the entire day had been spent in the search
for the entrance to the mines, and Zella warned them
that it would be safer to spend the night in the boat
than on the land, where wild beasts were sure to
disturb them. None of them realized at this time how
fatal this day of search had been to their plans and
perhaps if Inga had realized what was going on he would
have landed and fought all the wild beasts in the
forest rather than quietly remain in the boat until
morning.

However, knowing nothing of the cunning plans of
Queen Cor and King Gos, they anchored their boat in a
little bay and cheerfully ate their dinner, finding
plenty of food and drink in the boat's lockers. In the
evening the stars came out in the sky and tipped the
waves around their boat with silver. All around them
was delightfully still save for the occasional snarl of
a beast on the neighboring shore.

They talked together quietly of their adventures and
their future plans and Zella told them her simple
history and how hard her poor father was obliged to
work, burning charcoal to sell for enough money to
support his wife and child. Nikobob might be the
humblest man in all Regos, but Zella declared he was a
good man, and honest, and it was not his fault that his
country was ruled by so wicked a King.

Then Rinkitink, to amuse them, offered to sing a
song, and although Bilbil protested in his gruff way,
claiming that his master's voice was cracked and
disagreeable, the little King was encouraged by the
others to sing his song, which he did.

"A red-headed man named Ned was dead;

Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
In battle he had lost his head;

Sing fiddle-cum-faddl-cum-fi-do!
'Alas, poor Ned,' to him I said,
'How did you lose your head so red?'

Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

"Said Ned: 'I for my country bled,'

Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
'Instead of dying safe in bed',

Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
'If I had only fled, instead,
I then had been a head ahead.'

Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

"I said to Ned --"


"Do stop, Your Majesty!" pleaded Bilbil. "You're
making my head ache."

"But the song isn't finished," replied Rinkitink,
"and as for your head aching, think of poor Ned, who
hadn't any head at all!"

"I can think of nothing but your dismal singing,"
retorted Bilbil. "Why didn't you choose a cheerful
subject, instead of telling how a man who was dead lost
his red head? Really, Rinkitink, I'm surprised at you.

"I know a splendid song about a live man, said the
King.

"Then don't sing it," begged Bilbil.

Zella was both astonished and grieved by the
disrespectful words of the goat, for she had quite
enjoyed Rinkitink's singing and had been taught a
proper respect for Kings and those high in authority.
But as it was now getting late they decided to go to
sleep, that they might rise early the following
morning, so they all reclined upon the bottom of the
big boat and covered themselves with blankets which
they found stored underneath the seats for just such
occasions. They were not long in falling asleep and did
not waken until daybreak.

After a hurried breakfast, for Inga was eager to
liberate his father, the boy rowed the boat ashore and
they all landed and began searching for the path. Zella
found it within the next half hour and declared they
must be very close to the entrance to the mines; so
they followed the path toward the north, Inga going
first, and then Zella following him, while Rinkitink
brought up the rear riding upon Bilbil's back.

Before long they saw a great wall of rock towering
before them, in which was a low arched entrance, and on
either side of this entrance stood a guard, armed with
a sword and a spear. The guards of the mines were not
so fierce as the warriors of King Gos, their duty being
to make the slaves work at their tasks and guard them
from escaping; but they were as cruel as their cruel
master wished them to be, and as cowardly as they were
cruel.

Inga walked up to the two men at the entrance and
said:

"Does this opening lead to the mines of King Gos?"

"It does," replied one of the guards, "but no one is
allowed to pass out who once goes in."

"Nevertheless," said the boy, we intend to go in and
we shall come out whenever it pleases us to do so. I am
the Prince of Pingaree, and I have come to liberate my
people, whom King Gos has enslaved."

Now when the two guards heard this speech they looked
at one another and laughed, and one of them said: "The
King was right, for he said the boy was likely to come
here and that he would try to set his people free. Also
the King commanded that we must keep the little Prince
in the mines, and set him to work, together with his
companions."

"Then let us obey the King," replied the other man.

Inga was surprised at hearing this, and asked:

"When did King Gos give you this order?"

"His Majesty was here in person last night," replied
the man, "and went away again but an hour ago. He
suspected you were coming here and told us to capture
you if we could."

This report made the boy very anxious, not for
himself but for his father, for he feared the King was
up to some mischief. So he hastened to enter the mines
and the guards did nothing to oppose him or his
companions, their orders being to allow him to go in
but not to come out.

The little group of adventurers passed through a long
rocky corridor and reached a low, wide cavern where
they found a dozen guards and a hundred slaves, the
latter being hard at work with picks and shovels
digging for gold, while the guards stood over them with
long whips.

Inga found many of the men from Pingaree among these
slaves, but King Kitticut was not in this cavern; so
they passed through it and entered another corridor
that led to a second cavern. Here also hundreds of men
were working, but the boy did not find his father
amongst them, and so went on to a third cavern.

The corridors all slanted downward, so that the
farther they went the lower into the earth they
descended, and now they found the air hot and close and
difficult to breathe. Flaming torches were stuck into
the walls to give light to the workers, and these added
to the oppressive heat.

The third and lowest cavern was the last in the
mines, and here were many scores of slaves and many
guards to keep them at work. So far, none of the guards
had paid any attention to Inga's party, but allowed
them to proceed as they would, and while the slaves
cast curious glances at the boy and girl and man and
goat, they dared say nothing. But now the boy walked up
to some of the men of Pingaree and asked news of his
father, telling them not to fear the guards as he would
protect them from the whips.

Then he Teamed that King Kitticut had indeed been
working in this very cavern until the evening before,
when King Gos had come and taken him away -- still
loaded with chains.

"Seems to me," said King Rinkitink, when he heard
this report, "that Gos has carried your father away to
Regos, to prevent us from rescuing him. He may hide
poor Kitticut in a dungeon, where we cannot find him."

"Perhaps you are right," answered the boy, "but I am
determined to find him, wherever he may be."

Inga spoke firmly and with courage, but he was
greatly disappointed to find that King Gos had been
before him at the mines and had taken his father away.
However, he tried not to feel disheartened, believing
he would succeed in the end, in spite of all
opposition. Turning to the guards, he said:

"Remove the chains from these slaves and set them
free."

The guards laughed at this order, and one of them
brought forward a handful of chains, saying: "His
Majesty has commanded us to make you, also, a slave,
for you are never to leave these caverns again."

Then he attempted to place the chains on Inga, but
the boy indignantly seized them and broke them apart as
easily as if they had been cotton cords. When a dozen
or more of the guards made a dash to capture him, the
Prince swung the end of the chain like a whip and drove
them into a corner, where they cowered and begged for
mercy.

Stories of the marvelous strength of the boy Prince
had already spread to the mines of Regos, and although
King Gos had told them that Inga had been deprived of
all his magic power, the guards now saw this was not
true, so they deemed it wise not to attempt to oppose
him.

The chains of the slaves had all been riveted fast to
their ankles and wrists, but Inga broke the bonds of
steel with his hands and set the poor men free -- not
only those from Pingaree but all who had been captured
in the many wars and raids of King Gos. They were very
grateful, as you may suppose, and agreed to support
Prince Inga in whatever action he commanded.

He led them to the middle cavern, where all the
guards and overseers fled in terror at his approach,
and soon he had broken apart the chains of the slaves
who had been working in that part of the mines. Then
they approached the first cavern and liberated all
there.

The slaves had been treated so cruelly by the
servants of King Gos that they were eager to pursue and
slay them, in revenge; but Inga held them back and
formed them into companies, each company having its own
leader. Then he called the leaders together and
instructed them to march in good order along the path
to the City of Regos, where he would meet them and
tell them what to do next.

They readily agreed to obey him, and, arming
themselves with iron bars and pick-axes which they
brought from the mines, the slaves began their march to
the city.

Zella at first wished to be left behind, that she
might make her way to her home, but neither Rinkitink
nor Inga thought it was safe for her to wander alone
through the forest, so they induced her to return with
them to the city.

The boy beached his boat this time at the same place
as when he first landed at Regos, and while many of the
warriors stood on the shore and before the walls of the
city, not one of them attempted to interfere with the
boy in any way. Indeed, they seemed uneasy and anxious,
and when Inga met Captain Buzzub the boy asked if
anything had happened in his absence.

"A great deal has happened," replied Buzzub. "Our
King and Queen have run away and left us, and we don't
know what to do."

"Run away!" exclaimed Inga. "Where did they go to?"

"Who knows?" said the man, shaking his head
despondently. "They departed together a few hours ago,
in a boat with forty rowers, and they took with them
the King and Queen of Pingaree!"




Chapter Fifteen

The Flight of the Rulers


Now it seems that when Queen Cor fled from her island
to Regos, she had wit enough, although greatly frightened,
to make a stop at the royal dairy, which was near
to the bridge, and to drag poor Queen Garee from the
butter-house and across to Regos with her. The warriors
of King Gos had never before seen the terrible Queen
Cor frightened, and therefore when she came running
across the bridge of boats, dragging the Queen of
Pingaree after her by one arm, the woman's great fright
had the effect of terrifying the waiting warriors.

"Quick!" cried Cor. "Destroy the bridge, or we are
lost."

While the men were tearing away the bridge of boats
the Queen ran up to the palace of Gos, where she met
her husband.

"That boy is a wizard!" she gasped. "There is no
standing against him."

"Oh, have you discovered his magic at last?" replied
Gos, laughing in her face. "Who, now, is the coward?"

"Don't laugh!" cried Queen Cor. "It is no laughing
matter. Both our islands are as good as conquered, this
very minute. What shall we do, Gos?"

"Come in," he said, growing serious, "and let us talk
it over."

So they went into a room of the palace and talked
long and earnestly.

"The boy intends to liberate his father and mother,
and all the people of Pingaree, and to take them back
to their island," said Cor. "He may also destroy our
palaces and make us his slaves. I can see but one way,
Gos, to prevent him from doing all this, and whatever
else he pleases to do."

"What way is that?" asked King Gos.

"We must take the boy's parents away from here as
quickly as possible. I have with me the Queen of
Pingaree, and you can run up to the mines and get the
King. Then we will carry them away in a boat and hide
them where the boy cannot find them, with all his
magic. We will use the King and Queen of Pingaree as
hostages, and send word to the boy wizard that if he
does not go away from our islands and allow us to rule
them undisturbed, in our own way, we will put his
father and mother to death. Also we will say that as
long as we are let alone his parents will be safe,
although still safely hidden. I believe, Gos, that in
this way we can compel Prince Ingato obey us, for he
seems very fond of his parents."

"It isn't a bad idea," said Gos, reflectively; "but
where can we hide the King and Queen, so that the boy
cannot find them?"

"In the country of the Nome King, on the mainland
away at the south," she replied. "The nomes are our
friends, and they possess magic powers that will enable
them to protect the prisoners from discovery. If we can
manage to get the King and Queen of Pingaree to the
Nome Kingdom before the boy knows what we are doing, I
am sure our plot will succeed."

Gos gave the plan considerable thought in the next
five minutes, and the more he thought about it the more
clever and reasonable it seemed. So he agreed to do as
Queen Cor suggested and at once hurried away to the
mines, where he arrived before Prince Inga did. The
next morning he carried King Kitticut back to Regos.

While Gos was gone, Queen Cor busied herself in
preparing a large and swift boat for the journey. She
placed in it several bags of gold and jewels with which
to bribe the nomes, and selected forty of the strongest
oarsmen in Regos to row the boat. The instant King Gos
returned with his royal prisoner all was ready for
departure. They quickly entered the boat with their two
important captives and without a word of explanation to
any of their people they commanded the oarsmen to
start, and were soon out of sight upon the broad
expanse of the Nonestic Ocean.

Inga arrived at the city some hours later and was
much distressed when he learned that his father and
mother had been spirited away from the islands.

"I shall follow them, of course," said the boy to
Rinkitink, "and if I cannot overtake them on the ocean
I will search the world over until I find them. But
before I leave here I must arrange to send our people
back to Pingaree."




Chapter Sixteen

Nikobob Refuses a Crown


Almost the first persons that Zella saw when she landed
from the silver-lined boat at Regos were her father and
mother. Nikobob and his wife had been greatly worried
when their little daughter failed to return from
Coregos, so they had set out to discover what had
become of her. When they reached the City of Regos,
that very morning, they were astonished to hear news of
all the strange events that had taken place; still,
they found comfort when told that Zella had been seen
in the boat of Prince Inga, which had gone to the
north. Then, while they wondered what this could mean,
the silver-lined boat appeared again, with their
daughter in it, and they ran down to the shore to give
her a welcome and many joyful kisses.

Inga invited the good people to the palace of King
Gos, where he conferred with them, as well as with
Rinkitink and Bilbil.

"Now that the King and Queen of Regos and Coregos
have run away," he said, "there is no one to rule these
islands. So it is my duty to appoint a new ruler, and
as Nikobob, Zella's father, is an honest and worthy
man, I shall make him the King of the Twin Islands."

"Me?" cried Nikobob, astounded by this speech. "I beg
Your Highness, on my bended knees, not to do so cruel a
thing as to make me King!"

"Why not?" inquired Rinkitink. "I'm a King, and I
know how it feels. I assure you, good Nikobob, that I
quite enjoy my high rank, although a jeweled crown is
rather heavy to wear in hot weather."

"With you, noble sir, it is different," said Nikobob,
"for you are far from your kingdom and its trials and
worries and may do as you please. But to remain in
Regos, as King over these fierce and unruly warriors,
would be to live in constant anxiety and peril, and the
chances are that they would murder me within a month.
As I have done no harm to anyone and have tried to be a
good and upright man, I do not think that I should be
condemned to such a dreadful fate."

"Very well," replied Inga, "we will say no more about
your being King. I merely wanted to make you rich and
prosperous, as I had promised Zella."

"Please forget that promise," pleaded the charcoal-
burner, earnestly; "I have been safe from molestation
for many years, because I was poor and possessed
nothing that anyone else could envy. But if you make me
rich and prosperous I shall at once become the prey of
thieves and marauders and probably will lose my life in
the attempt to protect my fortune."

Inga looked at the man in surprise.

"What, then, can I do to please you?" he inquired.

"Nothing more than to allow me to go home to my poor
cabin," said Nikobob.

"Perhaps," remarked King Rinkitink, "the charcoal-
burner has more wisdom concealed in that hard head of
his than we gave him credit for. But let us use that
wisdom, for the present, to counsel us what to do in
this emergency."

"What you call my wisdom," said Nikobob, "is merely
common sense. I have noticed that some men become rich,
and are scorned by some and robbed by others. Other men
become famous, and are mocked at and derided by their
fellows. But the poor and humble man who lives
unnoticed and unknown escapes all these troubles and is
the only one who can appreciate the joy of living."

"If I had a hand, instead of a cloven hoof, I'd like
to shake hands with you, Nikobob," said Bilbil the
goat. "But the poor man must not have a cruel master,
or he is undone."

During the council they found, indeed, that the
advice of the charcoal-burner was both shrewd and
sensible, and they profited much by his words.

Inga gave Captain Buzzub the command of the warriors
and made him promise to keep his men quiet and orderly
-- if he could. Then the boy allowed all of King Gos's
former slaves, except those who came from Pingaree, to
choose what boats they required and to stock them with
provisions and row away to their own countries. When
these had departed, with grateful thanks and many
blessings showered upon the boy Prince who had set them
free, Inga made preparations to send his own people
home, where they were told to rebuild their houses and
then erect a new royal palace. They were then to await
patiently the coming of King Kitticut or Prince Inga.

"My greatest worry," said the boy to his friends, "is
to know whom to appoint to take charge of this work of
restoring Pingaree to its former condition. My men are
all pearl fishers, and although willing and honest,
have no talent for directing others how to work."

While the preparations for departure were being made,
Nikobob offered to direct the men of Pingaree, and did
so in a very capable manner. As the island had been
despoiled of all its valuable furniture and draperies
and rich cloths and paintings and statuary and the
like, as well as gold and silver and ornaments, Inga
thought it no more than just that they be replaced by
the spoilers. So he directed his people to search
through the storehouses of King Gos and to regain all
their goods and chattels that could be found. Also he
instructed them to take as much else as they required
to make their new homes comfortable, so that many boats
were loaded full of goods that would enable the people
to restore Pingaree to its former state of comfort.

For his father's new palace the boy plundered the
palaces of both Queen Cor and King Gos, sending enough
wares away with his people to make King Kitticut's new
residence as handsomely fitted and furnished as had
been the one which the ruthless invaders from Regos had
destroyed.

It was a great fleet of boats that set out one
bright, sunny morning on the voyage to Pingaree,
carrying all the men, women and children and all the
goods for refitting their homes. As he saw the fleet
depart, Prince Inga felt that he had already
successfully accomplished a part of his mission, but he
vowed he would never return to Pingaree in person until
he could take his father and mother there with him;
unless, indeed, King Gos wickedly destroyed his beloved
parents, in which case Inga would become the King of
Pingaree and it would be his duty to go to his people
and rule over them.

It was while the last of the boats were preparing to
sail for Pingaree that Nikobob, who had been of great
service in getting them ready, came to Inga in a
thoughtful mood and said:

"Your Highness, my wife and my daughter Zella have
been urging me to leave Regos and settle down in your
island, in a new home. From what your people have told
me, Pingaree is a better place to live than Regos, and
there are no cruel warriors or savage beasts there to
keep one in constant fear for the safety of those he
loves. Therefore, I have come to ask to go with my
family in one of the boats."

Inga was much pleased with this proposal and not only
granted Nikobob permission to go to Pingaree to live,
but instructed him to take with him sufficient goods to
furnish his new home in a comfortable manner. In
addition to this, he appointed Nikobob general manager
of the buildings and of the pearl fisheries, until his
father or he himself arrived, and the people approved
this order because they liked Nikobob and knew him to
be just and honest.

Soon as the last boat of the great flotilla had
disappeared from the view of those left at Regos, Inga
and Rinkitink prepared to leave the island themselves.
The boy was anxious to overtake the boat of King Gos,
if possible, and Rinkitink had no desire to remain in
Regos.

Buzzub and the warriors stood silently on the shore
and watched the black boat with its silver lining
depart, and I am sure they were as glad to be rid of
their unwelcome visitors as Inga and Rinkitink and
Bilbil were to leave.

The boy asked the White Pearl what direction the boat
of King Gos had taken and then he followed after it,
rowing hard and steadily for eight days without
becoming at all weary. But, although the black boat
moved very swiftly, it failed to overtake the barge
which was rowed by Queen Cor's forty picked oarsmen.




Chapter Seventeen

The Nome King


The Kingdom of the Nomes does not border on the
Nonestic Ocean, from which it is separated by the
Kingdom of Rinkitink and the Country of the Wheelers,
which is a part of the Land of Ev. Rinkitink's country
is separated from the country of the Nomes by a row of
high and steep mountains, from which it extends to the
sea. The Country of the Wheelers is a sandy waste that
is open on one side to the Nonestic Ocean and on the
other side has no barrier to separate it from the Nome
Country, therefore it was on the coast of the Wheelers
that King Cos landed -- in a spot quite deserted by any
of the curious inhabitants of that country.

The Nome Country is very large in extent, and is only
separated from the Land of Oz, on its eastern borders,
by a Deadly Desert that can not be crossed by mortals,
unless they are aided by the fairies or by magic.

The nomes are a numerous and mischievous people,
living in underground caverns of wide extent, connected
one with another by arches and passages. The word
"nome" means "one who knows," and these people are so
called because they know where all the gold and silver
and precious stones are hidden in the earth -- a
knowledge that no other living creatures share with
them. The nomes are busy people, constantly digging up
gold in one place and taking it to another place, where
they secretly bury it, and perhaps this is the reason
they alone know where to find it. The nomes were ruled,
at the time of which I write, by a King named Kaliko.

King Gos had expected to be pursued by Inga in his
magic boat, so he made all the haste possible, urging
his forty rowers to their best efforts night and day.
To his joy he was not overtaken but landed on the sandy
beach of the Wheelers on the morning of the eighth day.

The forty rowers were left with the boat, while Queen
Cor and King Cos, with their royal prisoners, who were
still chained, began the journey to the Nome King.

It was not long before they passed the sands and
reached the rocky country belonging to the nomes, but
they were still a long way from the entrance to the
underground caverns in which lived the Nome King. There
was a dim path, winding between stones and boulders,
over which the walking was quite difficult, especially
as the path led up hills that were small mountains, and
then down steep and abrupt slopes where any misstep
might mean a broken leg. Therefore it was the second
day of their journey before they climbed halfway up a
rugged mountain and found themselves at the entrance of
the Nome King's caverns.

On their arrival, the entrance seemed free and
unguarded, but Gos and Cor had been there before, and
they were too wise to attempt to enter without
announcing themselves, for the passage to the caves was
full of traps and pitfalls. So King Gos stood still and
shouted, and in an instant they were surrounded by a
group of crooked nomes, who seemed to have sprung from
the ground.

One of these had very long ears and was called The
Long-Eared Hearer. He said: "I heard you coming early
this morning."

Another had eyes that looked in different directions
at the same time and were curiously bright and
penetrating. He could look over a hill or around a
corner and was called The Lookout. Said he: "I saw you
coming yesterday."

"Then," said King Gos, "perhaps King Kaliko is
expecting us."

"It is true," replied another nome, who wore a gold
collar around his neck and carried a bunch of golden
keys. "The mighty Nome King expects you, and bids you
follow me to his presence."

With this he led the way into the caverns and Gos and
Cor followed, dragging their weary prisoners with them,
for poor King Kitticut and his gentle Queen had been
obliged to carry, all through the tedious journey, the
bags of gold and jewels which were to bribe the Nome
King to accept them as slaves.

Through several long passages the guide led them and
at last they entered a small cavern which was
beautifully decorated and set with rare jewels that
flashed from every part of the wall, floor and ceiling.
This was a waiting-room for visitors, and there their
guide left them while he went to inform King Kaliko of
their arrival.

Before long they were ushered into a great domed
chamber, cut from the solid rock and so magnificent
that all of them -- the King and Queen of Pingaree and
the King and Queen of Regos and Coregos -- drew long
breaths of astonishment and opened their eyes as wide
as they could.

In an ivory throne sat a little round man who had a
pointed beard and hair that rose to a tall curl on top
of his head. He was dressed in silken robes, richly
embroidered, which had large buttons of cut rubies. On
his head was a diamond crown and in his hand he held a
golden sceptre with a big jeweled ball at one end of
it. This was Kaliko, the King and ruler of all the
nomes. He nodded pleasantly enough to his visitors and
said in a cheery voice:

"Well, Your Majesties, what can I do for you?"

"It is my desire," answered King Gos, respectfully,
"to place in your care two prisoners, whom you now see
before you. They must be carefully guarded, to prevent
them from escaping, for they have the cunning of foxes
and are not to be trusted. In return for the favor I am
asking you to grant, I have brought Your Majesty
valuable presents of gold and precious gems.

He then commanded Kitticut and Garee to lay before
the Nome King the bags of gold and jewels, and they
obeyed, being helpless.

"Very good," said King Kaliko, nodding approval, for
like all the nomes he loved treasures of gold and
jewels. "But who are the prisoners you have brought
here, and why do you place them in my charge instead of
guarding them, yourself? They seem gentle enough, I'm
sure."

"The prisoners," returned King Gos, "are the King and
Queen of Pingaree, a small island north of here. They
are very evil people and came to our islands of Regos
and Coregos to conquer them and slay our poor people.
Also they intended to plunder us of all our riches, but
by good fortune we were able to defeat and capture
them. However, they have a son who is a terrible wizard
and who by magic art is trying to find this awful King
and Queen of Pingaree, and to set them free, that they
may continue their wicked deeds. Therefore, as we have
no magic to defend ourselves with, we have brought the
prisoners to you for safe keeping."

"Your Majesty," spoke up King Kitticut, addressing
the Nome King with great indignation, "do not believe
this tale, I implore you. It is all a lie!"

"I know it," said Kaliko. "I consider it a clever
lie, though, because it is woven without a thread of
truth. However, that is none of my business. The fact
remains that my good friend King Gos wishes to put you
in my underground caverns, so that you will be unable
to escape. And why should I not please him in this
little matter? Gos is a mighty King and a great
warrior, while your island of Pingaree is desolated and
your people scattered. In my heart, King Kitticut, I
sympathize with you, but as a matter of business policy
we powerful Kings must stand together and trample the
weaker ones under our feet."

King Kitticut was surprised to find the King of the
nomes so candid and so well informed, and he tried to
argue that he and his gentle wife did not deserve their
cruel fate and that it would be wiser for Kaliko to
side with them than with the evil King of Regos. But
Kaliko only shook his head and smiled, saying:

"The fact that you are a prisoner, my poor Kitticut,
is evidence that you are weaker than King Cos, and I
prefer to deal with the strong. By the way," he added,
turning to the King of Regos, "have these prisoners any
connection with the Land of Oz?"

"Why do you ask?" said Gos.

"Because I dare not offend the Oz people," was the
reply. "I am very powerful, as you know, but Ozma of Oz
is far more powerful than I; therefore, if this King
and Queen of Pingaree happened to be under Ozma's
protection, I would have nothing to do with them."

"I assure Your Majesty that the prisoners have
nothing to do with the Oz people," Gos hastened to say.
And Kitticut, being questioned, admitted that this was
true.

"But how about that wizard you mentioned?" asked the
Nome King.

"Oh, he is merely a boy; but he is very ferocious and
obstinate and he is assisted by a little fat sorcerer
called Rinkitink and a talking goat."

"Oho! A talking goat, do you say? That certainly
sounds like magic; and it also sounds like the Land of
Oz, where all the animals talk," said Kaliko, with a
doubtful expression.

But King Gos assured him the talking goat had never
been to Oz.

"As for Rinkitink, whom you call a sorcerer,"
continued the Nome King, "he is a neighbor of mine, you
must know, but as we are cut off from each other by
high mountains beneath which a powerful river runs, I
have never yet met King Rinkitink. But I have heard of
him, and from all reports he is a jolly rogue, and
perfectly harmless. However, in spite of your false
statements and misrepresentations, I will earn the
treasure you have brought me, by keeping your prisoners
safe in my caverns.

"Make them work," advised Queen Cor. "They are rather
delicate, and to make them work will make them suffer
delightfully."

"I'll do as I please about that," said the Nome King
sternly. "Be content that I agree to keep them safe."

The bargain being thus made and concluded, Kaliko
first examined the gold and jewels and then sent it
away to his royal storehouse, which was well filled
with like treasure. Next the captives were sent away in
charge of the nome with the golden collar and keys,
whose name was Klik, and he escorted them to a small
cavern and gave them a good supper.

"I shall lock your door," said Klik, "so there is no
need of your wearing those heavy chains any longer." He
therefore removed the chains and left King Kitticut and
his Queen alone. This was the first time since the
Northmen had carried them away from Pingaree that the
good King and Queen had been alone together and free of
all bonds, and as they embraced lovingly and mingled
their tears over their sad fate they were also grateful
that they had passed from the control of the heartless
King Gos into the more considerate care of King Kaliko.
They were still captives but they believed they would
be happier in the underground caverns of the nomes than
in Regos and Coregos.

Meantime, in the King's royal cavern a great feast
had been spread. King Gos and Queen Cor, having
triumphed in their plot, were so well pleased that they
held high revelry with the jolly Nome King until a late
hour that night. And the next morning, having cautioned
Kaliko not to release the prisoners under any
consideration without their orders, the King and Queen
of Regos and Coregos left the caverns of the nomes to
return to the shore of the ocean where they had left
their boat.




Chapter Eighteen

Inga Parts with his Pink Pearl


The White Pearl guided Inga truly in his pursuit of the
boat of King Gos, but the boy had been so delayed in
sending his people home to Pingaree that it was a full
day after Gos and Cor landed on the shore of the
Wheeler Country that Inga's boat arrived at the same
place.

There he found the forty rowers guarding the barge of
Queen Cor, and although they would not or could not
tell the boy where the King and Queen had taken his
father and mother, the White Pearl advised him to
follow the path to the country and the caverns of the
nomes.

Rinkitink didn't like to undertake the rocky and
mountainous journey, even with Bilbil to carry him, but
he would not desert Inga, even though his own kingdom
lay just beyond a range of mountains which could be
seen towering southwest of them. So the King bravely
mounted the goat, who always grumbled but always obeyed
his master, and the three set off at once for the
caverns of the nomes.

They traveled just as slowly as Queen Cor and King
Gos had done, so when they were about halfway they
discovered the King and Queen coming back to their
boat. The fact that Gos and Cor were now alone proved
that they had left Inga's father and mother behind
them; so, at the suggestion of Rinkitink, the three hid
behind a high rock until the King of Regos and the
Queen of Coregos, who had not observed them, had passed
them by. Then they continued their journey, glad that
they had not again been forced to fight or quarrel with
their wicked enemies.

"We might have asked them, however, what they had
done with your poor parents," said Rinkitink.

"Never mind," answered Inga. "I am sure the White
Pearl will guide us aright."

For a time they proceeded in silence and then
Rinkitink began to chuckle with laughter in the
pleasant way he was wont to do before his misfortunes
came upon him.

"What amuses Your Majesty?" inquired the boy.

"The thought of how surprised my dear subjects would
be if they realized how near to them I am, and yet how
far away. I have always wanted to visit the Nome
Country, which is full of mystery and magic and all
sorts of adventures, but my devoted subjects forbade me
to think of such a thing, fearing I would get hurt or
enchanted."

"Are you afraid, now that you are here?" asked Inga.

"A little, but not much, for they say the new Nome
King is not as wicked as the old King used to be.
Still, we are undertaking a dangerous journey and I
think you ought to protect me by lending me one of your
pearls."

Inga thought this over and it seemed a reasonable
request.

"Which pearl would you like to have?" asked the boy.

"Well, let us see," returned Rinkitink; "you may need
strength to liberate your captive parents, so you must
keep the Blue Pearl. And you will need the advice of
the White Pearl, so you had best keep that also. But in
case we should be separated I would have nothing to
protect me from harm, so you ought to lend me the Pink
Pearl."

"Very well," agreed Inga, and sitting down upon a
rock he removed his right shoe and after withdrawing
the cloth from the pointed toe took out the Pink Pearl
-- the one which protected from any harm the person who
carried it.

"Where can you put it, to keep it safely?" he asked.

"In my vest pocket," replied the King. "The pocket
has a flap to it and I can pin it down in such a way
that the pearl cannot get out and become lost. As for
robbery, no one with evil intent can touch my person
while I have the pearl."

So Inga gave Rinkitink the Pink Pearl and the little
King placed it in the pocket of his red-and-green
brocaded velvet vest, pinning the flap of the pocket
down tightly.

They now resumed their journey and finally reached
the entrance to the Nome King's caverns. Placing the
White Pearl to his ear, Inga asked: "What shall I do
now?" and the Voice of the Pearl replied: "Clap your
hands together four times and call aloud the word
'Klik.' Then allow yourselves to be conducted to the
Nome King, who is now holding your father and mother
captive."

Inga followed these instructions and when Klik
appeared in answer to his summons the boy requested an
audience of the Nome King. So Klik led them into the
presence of King Kaliko, who was suffering from a
severe headache, due to his revelry the night before,
and therefore was unusually cross and grumpy.

"I know what you've come for," said he, before Inga
could speak. "You want to get the captives from Regos
away from me; but you can't do it, so you'd best go away
again."

"The captives are my father and mother, and I intend
to liberate them," said the boy firmly.

The King stared hard at Inga, wondering at his
audacity. Then he turned to look at King Rinkitink and
said:

"I suppose you are the King of Gilgad, which is in
the Kingdom of Rinkitink."

"You've guessed it the first time," replied
Rinkitink.

"How round and fat you are!" exclaimed Kaliko.

"I was just thinking how fat and round you are," said
Rinkitink. "Really, King Kaliko, we ought to be
friends, we're so much alike in everything but
disposition and intelligence."

Then he began to chuckle, while Kaliko stared hard at
him, not knowing whether to accept his speech as a
compliment or not. And now the nome's eyes wandered to
Bilbil, and he asked:

"Is that your talking goat?"

Bilbil met the Nome King's glowering look with a gaze
equally surly and defiant, while Rinkitink answered:
"It is, Your Majesty."

"Can he really talk?" asked Kaliko, curiously.

"He can. But the best thing he does is to scold. Talk
to His Majesty, Bilbil."

But Bilbil remained silent and would not speak.

"Do you always ride upon his back?" continued Kaliko,
questioning Rinkitink.

"Yes," was the answer, "because it is difficult for a
fat man to walk far, as perhaps you know from
experience.

"That is true," said Kaliko. "Get off the goat's back
and let me ride him a while, to see how I like it.
Perhaps I'll take him away from you, to ride through my
caverns."

Rinkitink chuckled softly as he heard this, but at
once got off Bilbil's back and let Kaliko get on. The
Nome King was a little awkward, but when he was firmly
astride the saddle he called in a loud voice: "Giddap!"

When Bilbil paid no attention to the command and
refused to stir, Kaliko kicked his heels viciously
against the goat's body, and then Bilbil made a sudden
start. He ran swiftly across the great cavern, until he
had almost reached the opposite wall, when he stopped
so abruptly that King Kaliko sailed over his head and
bumped against the jeweled wall. He bumped so hard that
the points of his crown were all mashed out of shape
and his head was driven far into the diamond-studded
band of the crown, so that it covered one eye and a
part of his nose. Perhaps this saved Kaliko's head from
being cracked against the rock wall, but it was hard on
the crown.

Bilbil was highly pleased at the success of his feat
and Rinkitink laughed merrily at the Nome King's
comical appearance; but Kaliko was muttering and
growling as he picked himself up and struggled to pull
the battered crown from his head, and it was evident
that he was not in the least amused. Indeed, Inga could
see that the King was very angry, and the boy knew that
the incident was likely to turn Kaliko against the
entire party.

The Nome King sent Klik for another crown and ordered
his workmen to repair the one that was damaged. While
he waited for the new crown he sat regarding his
visitors with a scowling face, and this made Inga more
uneasy than ever. Finally, when the new crown was
placed upon his head, King Kaliko said: "Follow me,
strangers!" and led the way to a small door at one end
of the cavern.

Inga and Rinkitink followed him through the doorway
and found themselves standing on a balcony that
overlooked an enormous domed cave -- so extensive that
it seemed miles to the other side of it. All around
this circular cave, which was brilliantly lighted from
an unknown source, were arches connected with other
caverns.

Kaliko took a gold whistle from his pocket and blew a
shrill note that echoed through every part of the cave.
Instantly nomes began to pour in through the side
arches in great numbers, until the immense space was
packed with them as far as the eye could reach. All
were armed with glittering weapons of polished silver
and gold, and Inga was amazed that any King could
command so great an army.

They began marching and countermarching in very
orderly array until another blast of the gold whistle
sent them scurrying away as quickly as they had
appeared. And as soon as the great cave was again empty
Kaliko returned with his visitors to his own royal
chamber, where he once more seated himself upon his
ivory throne.

"I have shown you," said he to Inga, "a part of my
bodyguard. The royal armies, of which this is only a
part, are as numerous as the sands of the ocean, and
live in many thousands of my underground caverns. You
have come here thinking to force me to give up the
captives of King Gos and Queen Cor, and I wanted to
convince you that my power is too mighty for anyone to
oppose. I am told that you are a wizard, and depend
upon magic to aid you; but you must know that the nomes
are not mortals, and understand magic pretty well
themselves, so if we are obliged to fight magic with
magic the chances are that we are a hundred times more
powerful than you can be. Think this over carefully, my
boy, and try to realize that you are in my power. I do
not believe you can force me to liberate King Kitticut
and Queen Garee, and I know that you cannot coax me to
do so, for I have given my promise to King Gos.
Therefore, as I do not wish to hurt you, I ask you to
go away peaceably and let me alone."

"Forgive me if I do not agree with you, King Kaliko,"
answered the boy. "However difficult and dangerous my
task may be, I cannot leave your dominions until every
effort to release my parents has failed and left me
completely discouraged."

"Very well," said the King, evidently displeased. "I
have warned you, and now if evil overtakes you it is
your own fault. I've a headache to-day, so I cannot
entertain you properly, according to your rank; but
Klik will attend you to my guest chambers and to-morrow
I will talk with you again."

This seemed a fair and courteous way to treat one's
declared enemies, so they politely expressed the wish
that Kaliko's headache would be better, and followed
their guide, Klik, down a well-lighted passage and
through several archways until they finally reached
three nicely furnished bedchambers which were cut from
solid gray rock and well lighted and aired by some
mysterious method known to the nomes.

The first of these rooms was given King Rinkitink,
the second was Inga's and the third was assigned to
Bilbil the goat. There was a swinging rock door
between the third and second rooms and another between
the second and first, which also had a door that opened
upon the passage. Rinkitink's room was the largest, so
it was here that an excellent dinner was spread by some
of the nome servants, who, in spite of their crooked
shapes, proved to be well trained and competent.

"You are not prisoners, you know," said Klik; neither
are you welcome guests, having declared your purpose to
oppose our mighty King and all his hosts. But we bear
you no ill will, and you are to be well fed and cared
for as long as you remain in our caverns. Eat hearty,
sleep tight, and pleasant dreams to you."

Saying this, he left them alone and at once Rinkitink
and Inga began to counsel together as to the best means
to liberate King Kitticut and Queen Garee. The White
Pearl's advice was rather unsatisfactory to the boy,
just now, for all that the Voice said in answer to his
questions was: "Be patient, brave and determined."

Rinkitink suggested that they try to discover in what
part of the series of underground caverns Inga's
parents had been confined, as that knowledge was
necessary before they could take any action; so
together they started out, leaving Bilbil asleep in his
room, and made their way unopposed through many
corridors and caverns. In some places were great
furnaces, where gold dust was being melted into bricks.
In other rooms workmen were fashioning the gold into
various articles and ornaments. In one cavern immense
wheels revolved which polished precious gems, and they
found many caverns used as storerooms, where treasure
of every sort was piled high. Also they came to the
barracks of the army and the great kitchens.

There were nomes everywhere -- countless thousands of
them -- but none paid the slightest heed to the
visitors from the earth's surface. Yet, although Inga
and Rinkitink walked until they were weary, they were
unable to locate the place where the boy's father and
mother had been confined, and when they tried to return
to their own rooms they found that they had hopelessly
lost themselves amid the labyrinth of passages.
However, Klik presently came to them, laughing at their
discomfiture, and led them back to their bedchambers.

Before they went to sleep they carefully barred the
door from Rinkitink's room to the corridor, but the
doors that connected the three rooms one with another
were left wide open.

In the night Inga was awakened by a soft grating
sound that filled him with anxiety because he could not
account for it. It was dark in his room, the light
having disappeared as soon as he got into bed, but he
managed to feel his way to the door that led to
Rinkitink's room and found it tightly closed and
immovable. Then he made his way to the opposite door,
leading to Bilbil's room, to discover that also had
been closed and fastened.

The boy had a curious sensation that all of his room
-- the walls, floor and ceiling -- was slowly whirling
as if on a pivot, and it was such an uncomfortable
feeling that he got into bed again, not knowing what
else to do. And as the grating noise had ceased and the
room now seemed stationary, he soon fell asleep again.

When the boy wakened, after many hours, he found the
room again light. So he dressed himself and discovered
that a small table, containing a breakfast that was
smoking hot, had suddenly appeared in the center of
his room. He tried the two doors, but finding that he
could not open them he ate some breakfast, thoughtfully
wondering who had locked him in and why he had been
made a prisoner. Then he again went to the door which
he thought led to Rinkitink's chamber and to his
surprise the latch lifted easily and the door swung
open.

Before him was a rude corridor hewn in the rock and
dimly lighted. It did not look inviting, so Inga closed
the door, puzzled to know what had become of
Rinkitink's room and the King, and went to the opposite
door. Opening this, he found a solid wall of rock
confronting him, which effectually prevented his escape
in that direction.

The boy now realized that King Kaliko had tricked
him, and while professing to receive him as a guest had
plotted to separate him from his comrades. One way had
been left, however, by which he might escape and he
decided to see where it led to.

So, going to the first door, he opened it and
ventured slowly into the dimly lighted corridor. When
he had advanced a few steps he heard the door of his
room slam shut behind him. He ran back at once, but the
door of rock fitted so closely into the wall that he
found it impossible to open it again. That did not
matter so much, however, for the room was a prison and
the only way of escape seemed ahead of him.

Along the corridor he crept until, turning a
corner, he found himself in a large domed cavern that
was empty and deserted. Here also was a dim light that
permitted him to see another corridor at the opposite
side; so he crossed the rocky floor of the cavern and
entered a second corridor. This one twisted and turned
in every direction but was not very long, so soon the
boy reached a second cavern, not so large as the first.
This he found vacant also, but it had another corridor
leading out of it, so Inga entered that. It was
straight and short and beyond was a third cavern, which
differed little from the others except that it had a
strong iron grating at one side of it.

All three of these caverns had been roughly hewn from
the rock and it seemed they had never been put to use,
as had all the other caverns of the nomes he had
visited. Standing in the third cavern, Inga saw what he
thought was still another corridor at its farther side,
so he walked toward it. This opening was dark, and that
fact, and the solemn silence all around him, made him
hesitate for a while to enter it. Upon reflection,
however, he realized that unless he explored the place
to the very end he could not hope to escape from it, so
he boldly entered the dark corridor and felt his way
cautiously as he moved forward.

Scarcely had he taken two paces when a crash
resounded back of him and a heavy sheet of steel closed
the opening into the cavern from which he had just
come. He paused a moment, but it still seemed best to
proceed, and as Inga advanced in the dark, holding his
hands outstretched before him to feel his way,
handcuffs fell upon his wrists and locked themselves
with a sharp click, and an instant later he found he
was chained to a stout iron post set firmly in the rock
floor.

The chains were long enough to permit him to move a
yard or so in any direction and by feeling the walls he
found he was in a small circular room that had no
outlet except the passage by which he had entered, and
that was now closed by the door of steel. This was the
end of the series of caverns and corridors.

It was now that the horror of his situation occurred
to the boy with full force. But he resolved not to
submit to his fate without a struggle, and realizing
that he possessed the Blue Pearl, which gave him
marvelous strength, he quickly broke the chains and set
himself free of the handcuffs. Next he twisted the
steel door from its hinges, and creeping along the
short passage, found himself in the third cave.

But now the dim light, which had before guided him,
had vanished; yet on peering into the gloom of the cave
he saw what appeared to be two round disks of flame,
which cast a subdued glow over the floor and walls. By
this dull glow he made out the form of an enormous man,
seated in the center of the cave, and he saw that the
iron grating had been removed, permitting the man to
enter.

The giant was unclothed and its limbs were thickly
covered with coarse red hair. The round disks of flame
were its two eyes and when it opened its mouth to yawn
Inga saw that its jaws were wide enough to crush a
dozen men between the great rows of teeth.

Presently the giant looked up and perceived the boy
crouching at the other side of the cavern, so he called
out in a hoarse, rude voice:

"Come hither, my pretty one. We will wrestle
together, you and I, and if you succeed in throwing me
I will let you pass through my cave."

The boy made no reply to the challenge. He realized
he was in dire peril and regretted that he had lent the
Pink Pearl to King Rinkitink. But it was now too late
for vain regrets, although he feared that even his
great strength would avail him little against this
hairy monster. For his arms were not long enough to
span a fourth of the giant's huge body, while the
monster's powerful limbs would be likely to crush out
Inga's life before he could gain the mastery.

Therefore the Prince resolved to employ other means
to combat this foe, who had doubtless been placed there
to bar his return. Retreating through the passage he
reached the room where he had been chained and wrenched
the iron post from its socket. It was a foot thick and
four feet long, and being of solid iron was so heavy
that three ordinary men would have found it hard to
lift.

Returning to the cavern, the boy swung the great bar
above his head and dashed it with mighty force full at
the giant. The end of the bar struck the monster upon
its forehead, and with a single groan it fell full
length upon the floor and lay still.

When the giant fell, the glow from its eyes faded
away, and all was dark. Cautiously, for Inga was not
sure the giant was dead, the boy felt his way toward
the opening that led to the middle cavern. The entrance
was narrow and the darkness was intense, but, feeling
braver now, the boy stepped boldly forward. Instantly
the floor began to sink beneath him and in great alarm
he turned and made a leap that enabled him to grasp the
rocky sides of the wall and regain a footing in the
passage through which he had just come.

Scarcely had he obtained this place of refuge when a
mighty crash resounded throughout the cavern and the
sound of a rushing torrent came from far below. Inga
felt in his pocket and found several matches, one of
which he lighted and held before him. While it
flickered he saw that the entire floor of the cavern
had fallen away, and knew that had he not instantly
regained his footing in the passage he would have
plunged into the abyss that lay beneath him.

By the light of another match he saw the opening at
the other side of the cave and the thought came to him
that possibly he might leap across the gulf. Of course,
this could never be accomplished without the marvelous
strength lent him by the Blue Pearl, but Inga had the
feeling that one powerful spring might carry him over
the chasm into safety. He could not stay where he was,
that was certain, so he resolved to make the attempt.

He took a long run through the first cave and the
short corridor; then, exerting all his strength, he
launched himself over the black gulf of the second
cave. Swiftly he flew and, although his heart stood
still with fear, only a few seconds elapsed before his
feet touched the ledge of the opposite passageway and
he knew he had safely accomplished the wonderful feat.

Only pausing to draw one long breath of relief, Inga
quickly traversed the crooked corridor that led to the
last cavern of the three. But when he came in sight of
it he paused abruptly, his eyes nearly blinded by a
glare of strong light which burst upon them. Covering
his face with his hands, Inga retreated behind a
projecting corner of rock and by gradually getting his
eyes used to the light he was finally able to gaze
without blinking upon the strange glare that had so
quickly changed the condition of the cavern. When he
had passed through this vault it had been entirely
empty. Now the flat floor of rock was covered
everywhere with a bed of glowing coals, which shot up
little tongues of red and white flames. Indeed, the
entire cave was one monster furnace and the heat that
came from it was fearful.

Inga's heart sank within him as he realized the
terrible obstacle placed by the cunning Nome King
between him and the safety of the other caverns. There
was no turning back, for it would be impossible for him
again to leap over the gulf of the second cave, the
corridor at this side being so crooked that he could
get no run before he jumped. Neither could he leap over
the glowing coals of the cavern that faced him, for it
was much larger than the middle cavern. In this dilemma
he feared his great strength would avail him nothing
and he bitterly reproached himself for parting with the
Pink Pearl, which would have preserved him from injury.

However, it was not in the nature of Prince Inga to
despair for long, his past adventures having taught him
confidence and courage, sharpened his wits and given
him the genius of invention. He sat down and thought
earnestly on the means of escape from his danger and at
last a clever idea came to his mind. This is the way to
get ideas: never to let adverse circumstances
discourage you, but to believe there is a way out of
every difficulty, which may be found by earnest
thought.

There were many points and projections of rock in the
walls of the crooked corridor in which Inga stood and
some of these rocks had become cracked and loosened,
although still clinging to their places. The boy picked
out one large piece, and, exerting all his strength,
tore it away from the wall. He then carried it to the
cavern and tossed it upon the burning coals, about ten
feet away from the end of the passage. Then he returned
for another fragment of rock, and wrenching it free
from its place, he threw it ten feet beyond the first
one, toward the opposite side of the cave. The boy
continued this work until he had made a series of
stepping-stones reaching straight across the cavern to
the dark passageway beyond, which he hoped would lead
him back to safety if not to liberty.

When his work had been completed, Inga did not long
hesitate to take advantage of his stepping-stones, for
he knew his best chance of escape lay in his crossing
the bed of coals before the rocks became so heated that
they would burn his feet. So he leaped to the first
rock and from there began jumping from one to the other
in quick succession. A withering wave of heat at once
enveloped him, and for a time he feared he would
suffocate before he could cross the cavern; but he held
his breath, to keep the hot air from his lungs, and
maintained his leaps with desperate resolve.

Then, before he realized it, his feet were pressing
the cooler rocks of the passage beyond and he rolled
helpless upon the floor, gasping for breath. His skin
was so red that it resembled the shell of a boiled
lobster, but his swift motion had prevented his being
burned, and his shoes had thick soles, which saved his
feet.

After resting a few minutes, the boy felt strong
enough to go on. He went to the end of the passage and
found that the rock door by which he had left his room
was still closed, so he returned to about the middle of
the corridor and was thinking what he should do next,
when suddenly the solid rock before him began to move
and an opening appeared through which shone a brilliant
light. Shielding his eyes, which were somewhat dazzled,
Inga sprang through the opening and found himself in
one of the Nome King's inhabited caverns, where before
him stood King Kaliko, with a broad grin upon his
features, and Klik, the King's chamberlain, who looked
surprised, and King Rinkitink seated astride Bilbil the
goat, both of whom seemed pleased that Inga had
rejoined them.




Chapter Nineteen

Rinkitink Chuckles


We will now relate what happened to Rinkitink and
Bilbil that morning, while Inga was undergoing his
trying experience in escaping the fearful dangers of
the three caverns.

The King of Gilgad wakened to find the door of Inga's
room fast shut and locked, but he had no trouble in
opening his own door into the corridor, for it seems
that the boy's room, which was the middle one, whirled
around on a pivot, while the adjoining rooms occupied
by Bilbil and Rinkitink remained stationary. The little
King also found a breakfast magically served in his
room, and while he was eating it, Klik came to him and
stated that His Majesty, King Kaliko, desired his
presence in the royal cavern.

So Rinkitink, having first made sure that the Pink
Pearl was still in his vest pocket, willingly followed
Klik, who ran on some distance ahead. But no sooner had
Rinkitink set foot in the passage than a great rock,
weighing at least a ton, became dislodged and dropped
from the roof directly over his head. Of course, it
could not harm him, protected as he was by the Pink
Pearl, and it bounded aside and crashed upon the floor,
where it was shattered by its own weight.

"How careless!" exclaimed the little King, and
waddled after Klik, who seemed amazed at his escape.

Presently another rock above Rinkitink plunged
downward, and then another, but none touched his body.
Klik seemed much perplexed at these continued escapes
and certainly Kaliko was surprised when Rinkitink, safe
and sound, entered the royal cavern.

"Good morning," said the King of Gilgad. "Your rocks
are getting loose, Kaliko, and you'd better have them
glued in place before they hurt someone." Then he began
to chuckle: "Hoo, hoo, hoo-hee, hee-heek, keek, eek!"
and Kaliko sat and frowned because he realized that the
little fat King was poking fun at him.

"I asked Your Majesty to come here," said the Nome
King, "to show you a curious skein of golden thread
which my workmen have made. If it pleases you, I will
make you a present of it."

With this he held out a small skein of glittering
gold twine, which was really pretty and curious.
Rinkitink took it in his hand and at once the golden
thread began to unwind -- so swiftly that the eye could
not follow its motion. And, as it unwound, it coiled
itself around Rinkitink's body, at the same time
weaving itself into a net, until it had enveloped the
little King from head to foot and placed him in a
prison of gold.

"Aha!" cried Kaliko; "this magic worked all right, it
seems.

"Oh, did it?" replied Rinkitink, and stepping forward
he walked right through the golden net, which fell to
the floor in a tangled mass

Kaliko rubbed his chin thoughtfully and stared hard
at Rinkitink.

"I understand a good bit of magic," said ,he, "but
Your Majesty has a sort of magic that greatly puzzles
me, because it is unlike anything of the sort that I
ever met with before."

"Now, see here, Kaliko," said Rinkitink; "if you are
trying to harm me or my companions, give it up, for you
will never succeed. We're harm-proof, so to speak, and
you are merely wasting your time trying to injure us.

"You may be right, and I hope I am not so impolite as
to argue with a guest," returned the Nome King. "But
you will pardon me if I am not yet satisfied that you
are stronger than my famous magic. However, I beg you
to believe that I bear you no ill will, King Rinkitink;
but it is my duty to destroy you, if possible, because
you and that insignificant boy Prince have openly
threatened to take away my captives and have positively
refused to go back to the earth's surface and let me
alone. I'm very tender-hearted, as a matter of fact,
and I like you immensely, and would enjoy having you as
a friend, but --" Here he pressed a button on the arm
of his throne chair and the section of the floor where
Rinkitink stood suddenly opened and disclosed a black
pit beneath, which was a part of 'the terrible
Bottomless Gulf.

But Rinkitink did not fall into the pit; his body
remained suspended in the air until he put out his foot
and stepped to the solid floor, when the opening
suddenly closed again.

"I appreciate Your Majesty's friendship," remarked
Rinkitink, as calmly as if nothing had happened, "but I
am getting tired with standing. Will you kindly send
for my goat, Bilbil, that I may sit upon his back to
rest?"

"Indeed I will!" promised Kaliko. "I have not yet
completed my test of your magic, and as I owe that goat
a slight grudge for bumping my head and smashing my
second-best crown, I will be glad to discover if the
beast can also escape my delightful little sorceries."

So Klik was sent to fetch Bilbil and presently
returned with the goat, which was very cross this
morning because it had not slept well in the
underground caverns.

Rinkitink lost no time in getting upon the red velvet
saddle which the goat constantly wore, for he feared
the Nome King would try to destroy Bilbil and knew that
as long as his body touched that of the goat the Pink
Pearl would protect them both; whereas, if Bilbil stood
alone, there was no magic to save him.

Bilbil glared wickedly at King Kaliko, who moved
uneasily in his ivory throne. Then the Nome King
whispered a moment in the ear of Klik, who nodded and
left the room.

"Please make yourselves at home here for a few
minutes, while I attend to an errand," said the Nome
King, getting up from the throne. "I shall return
pretty soon, when I hope to find you pieceful -- ha,
ha, ha! -- that's a joke you can't appreciate now but
will later. Be pieceful -- that's the idea. Ho, ho, ho!
How funny." Then he waddled from the cavern, closing
the door behind him.

"Well, why didn't you laugh when Kaliko laughed?"
demanded the goat, when they were left alone in the
cavern.

"Because he means mischief of some sort," replied
Rinkitink, "and we'll laugh after the danger is over,
Bilbil. There's an old adage that says: 'He laughs best
who laughs last,' and the only way to laugh last is to
give the other fellow a chance. Where did that knife
come from, I wonder."

For a long, sharp knife suddenly appeared in the air
near them, twisting and turning from side to side and
darting here and there in a dangerous manner, without
any support whatever. Then another knife became visible
-- and another and another -- until all the space in
the royal cavern seemed filled with them. Their sharp
points and edges darted toward Rinkitink and Bilbil
perpetually and nothing could have saved them from
being cut to pieces except the protecting power of the
Pink Pearl. As it was, not a knife touched them and
even Bilbil gave a gruff laugh at the failure of
Kaliko's clever magic.

The goat wandered here and there in the cavern,
carrying Rinkitink upon his back, and neither of them
paid the slightest heed to the knives, although the
glitter of the hundreds of polished blades was rather
trying. to their eyes. Perhaps for ten minutes the
knives darted about them in bewildering fury; then they
disappeared as suddenly as they had appeared.

Kaliko cautiously stuck his head through the doorway
and found the goat chewing the embroidery of his royal
cloak, which he had left lying over the throne, while
Rinkitink was reading his manuscript on "How to be
Good" and chuckling over its advice. The Nome King
seemed greatly disappointed as he came in and resumed
his seat on the throne. Said Rinkitink with a chuckle:

"We've really had a peaceful time, Kaliko, although
not the pieceful time you expected. Forgive me if I
indulge in a laugh -- hoo, hoo, hoo-hee, heek-keek-eek!
And now, tell me; aren't you getting tired of trying to
injure us?"

"Eh -- heh," said the Nome King. "I see now that your
magic can protect you from all my arts. But is the boy
Inga as, well protected as Your Majesty and the goat?'

"Why do you ask?" inquired Rinkitink, uneasy at the
question because he remembered he had not seen the
little Prince of Pingaree that morning.

"Because," said Kaliko, "the boy has been undergoing
trials far greater and more dangerous than any you have
encountered, and it has been hundreds of years since
anyone has been able to escape alive from the perils of
my Three Trick Caverns."

King Rinkitink was much alarmed at hearing this, for
although he knew that Inga possessed the Blue Pearl,
that would only give to him marvelous strength, and
perhaps strength alone would not enable him to escape
from danger. But he would not let Kaliko see the fear
he felt for Inga's safety, so he said in a careless
way:

"You're a mighty poor magician, Kaliko, and I'll give
you my crown if Inga hasn't escaped any danger you have
threatened him with."

"Your whole crown is not worth one of the valuable
diamonds in my crown," answered the Nome King, "but
I'll take it. Let us go at once, therefore, and see
what has become of the boy Prince, for if he is not
destroyed by this time I will admit he cannot be
injured by any of the magic arts which I have at my
command."

He left the room, accompanied by Klik, who had now
rejoined his master, and by Rinkitink riding upon
Bilbil. After traversing several of the huge caverns
they entered one that was somewhat more bright and
cheerful than the others, where the Nome King paused
before a wall of rock. Then Klik pressed a secret
spring and a section of the wall opened and disclosed
the corridor where Prince Inga stood facing them.

"Tarts and tadpoles!" cried Kaliko in surprise. "The
boy is still alive!"




Chapter Twenty

Dorothy to the Rescue


One day when Princess Dorothy of Oz was visiting Glinda
the Good, who is Ozma's Royal Sorceress, she was
looking through Glinda's Great Book of Records --
wherein is inscribed all important events that happen
in every part of the world -- when she came upon the
record of the destruction of Pingaree, the capture of
King Kitticut and Queen Garee and all their people, and
the curious escape of Inga, the boy Prince, and of King
Rinkitink and the talking goat. Turning over some of
the following pages, Dorothy read how Inga had found
the Magic Pearls and was rowing the silver-lined boat
to Regos to try to rescue his parents.

The little girl was much interested to know how well
Inga succeeded, but she returned to the palace of Ozma
at the Emerald City of Oz the next day and other events
made her forget the boy Prince of Pingaree for a time.
However, she was one day idly looking at Ozma's Magic
Picture, which shows any scene you may wish to see,
when the girl thought of Inga and commanded the Magic
Picture to show what the boy was doing at that moment.

It was the time when Inga and Rinkitink had followed
the King of Regos and Queen of Coregos to the Nome
King's country and she saw them hiding behind the rock
as Cor and Gos passed them by after having placed the
King and Queen of Pingaree in the keeping of the Nome
King. From that time Dorothy followed, by means of the
Magic Picture, the adventures of Inga and his friend in
the Nome King's caverns, and the danger and
helplessness of the poor boy aroused the little girl's
pity and indignation.

So she went to Ozma and told the lovely girl Ruler of
Oz all about Inga and Rinkitink.

"I think Kaliko is treating them dreadfully mean,"
declared Dorothy, "and I wish you'd let me go to the
Nome Country and help them out of their troubles."

"Go, my dear, if you wish to," replied Ozma, "but I
think it would be best for you to take the Wizard with
you."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of the nomes," said Dorothy, "but
I'll be glad to take the Wizard, for company. And may
we use your Magic Carpet, Ozma?"

"Of course. Put the Magic Carpet in the Red Wagon and
have the Sawhorse take you and the Wizard to the edge
of the desert. While you are gone, Dorothy, I'll watch
you in the Magic Picture, and if any danger threatens
you I'll see you are not harmed."

Dorothy thanked the Ruler of Oz and kissed her good-
bye, for she was determined to start at once. She found
the Wizard of Oz, who was planting shoetrees in the
garden, and when she told him Inga's story he willingly
agreed to accompany the little girl to the Nome King's
caverns. They had both been there before and had
conquered the nomes with ease, so they were not at all
afraid.

The Wizard, who was a cheery little man with a bald
head and a winning smile, harnessed the Wooden Sawhorse
to the Red Wagon and loaded on Ozma's Magic Carpet.
Then he and Dorothy climbed to the seat and the
Sawhorse started off and carried them swiftly through
the beautiful Land of Oz to the edge of the Deadly
Desert that separated their fairyland from the Nome
Country.

Even Dorothy and the clever Wizard would not have
dared to cross this desert without the aid of the Magic
Carpet, for it would have quickly destroyed them; but
when the roll of carpet had been placed upon the edge
of the sands, leaving just enough lying flat for them
to stand upon, the carpet straightway began to unroll
before them and as they walked on it continued to
unroll, until they had safely passed over the stretch
of Deadly Desert and were on the border of the Nome
King's dominions.

This journey had been accomplished in a few minutes,
although such a distance would have required several
days travel had they not been walking on the Magic
Carpet. On arriving they at once walked toward the
entrance to the caverns of the nomes.

The Wizard carried a little black bag containing his
tools of wizardry, while Dorothy carried over her arm a
covered basket in which she had placed a dozen eggs,
with which to conquer the nomes if she had any trouble
with them.

Eggs may seem to you to be a queer weapon with which
to fight, but the little girl well knew their value.
The nomes are immortal; that is, they do not perish, as
mortals do, unless they happen to come in contact with
an egg. If an egg touches them -- either the outer
shell or the inside of the egg -- the nomes lose their
charm of perpetual life and thereafter are liable to
die through accident or old age, just as all humans
are.

For this reason the sight of an egg fills a nome with
terror and he will do anything to prevent an egg from
touching him, even for an instant. So, when Dorothy
took her basket of eggs with her, she knew that she was
more powerfully armed than if she had a regiment of
soldiers at her back.




Chapter Twenty-One

The Wizard Finds an Enchantment


After Kaliko had failed in his attempts to destroy his
guests, as has been related, the Nome King did nothing
more to injure them but treated them in a friendly
manner. He refused, however, to permit Inga to see or
to speak with his father and mother, or even to know in
what part of the underground caverns they were
confined.

"You are able to protect your lives and persons, I
freely admit," said Kaliko; "but I firmly believe you
have no power, either of magic or otherwise, to take
from me the captives I have agreed to keep for King
Gos."

Inga would not agree to this. He determined not to
leave the caverns until he had liberated his father and
mother, although he did not then know how that could be
accomplished. As for Rinkitink, the jolly King was well
fed and had a good bed to sleep upon, so he was not
worrying about anything and seemed in no hurry to go
away.

Kaliko and Rinkitink were engaged in pitching a game
with solid gold quoits, on the floor of the royal
chamber, and Inga and Bilbil were watching them, when
Klik came running in, his hair standing on end with
excitement, and cried out that the Wizard of Oz and
Dorothy were approaching.

Kaliko turned pale on hearing this unwelcome news
and, abandoning his game, went to sit in his ivory
throne and try to think what had brought these fearful
visitors to his domain.

"Who is Dorothy?" asked Inga.

"She is a little girl who once lived in Kansas,"
replied Klik, with a shudder, "but she now lives in
Ozma's palace at the Emerald City and is a Princess of
Oz -- which means that she is a terrible foe to deal
with."

"Doesn't she like the nomes?" inquired the boy.

"It isn't that," said King Kaliko, with a groan, "but
she insists on the nomes being goody-goody, which is
contrary to their natures. Dorothy gets angry if I do
the least thing that is wicked, and tries to make me
stop it, and that naturally makes me downhearted. I
can't imagine why she has come here just now, for I've
been behaving very well lately. As for that Wizard of
Oz, he's chock-full of magic that I can't overcome, for
he learned it from Glinda, who is the most powerful
sorceress in the world. Woe is me! Why didn't Dorothy
and the Wizard stay in Oz, where they belong?"

Inga and Rinkitink listened to this with much joy,
for at once the idea came to them both to plead with
Dorothy to help them. Even Bilbil pricked up his ears
when he heard the Wizard of Oz mentioned, and the goat
seemed much less surly, and more thoughtful than usual.

A few minutes later a nome came to say that Dorothy
and the Wizard had arrived and demanded admittance, so
Klik was sent to usher them into the royal presence of
the Nome King.

As soon as she came in the little girl ran up to the
boy Prince and seized both his hands.

"Oh, Inga!" she exclaimed, "I'm so glad to find you
alive and well."

Inga was astonished at so warm a greeting. Making a
low bow he said:

"I don't think we have met before, Princess."

"No, indeed," replied Dorothy, "but I know all about
you and I've come to help you and King Rinkitink out of
your troubles." Then she turned to the Nome King and
continued: "You ought to be ashamed of yourself, King
Kaliko, to treat an honest Prince and an honest King so
badly."

"I haven't done anything to them," whined Kaliko,
trembling as her eyes flashed upon him.

"No; but you tried to, an' that's just as bad, if not
worse," said Dorothy, who was very indignant. "And now
I want you to send for the King and Queen of Pingaree
and have them brought here immejitly!"

"I won't," said Kaliko.

"Yes, you will!" cried Dorothy, stamping her foot at
him. "I won't have those poor people made unhappy any
longer, or separated from their little boy. Why, it's
dreadful, Kaliko, an' I'm su'prised at you. You must be
more wicked than I thought you were."

"I can't do it, Dorothy," said the Nome King, almost
weeping with despair. "I promised King Gos I'd keep
them captives. You wouldn't ask me to break my promise,
would you?"

"King Gos was a robber and an outlaw," she said, "and
p'r'aps you don't know that a storm at sea wrecked his
boat, while he was going back to Regos, and that he and
Queen Cor were both drowned."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Kaliko. "Is that so?"

"I saw it in Glinda's Record Book," said Dorothy. "So
now you trot out the King and Queen of Pingaree as
quick as you can."

"No," persisted the contrary Nome King, shaking his
head. "I won't do it. Ask me anything else and I'll try
to please you, but I can't allow these friendly enemies
to triumph over me.

"In that case," said Dorothy, beginning to remove the
cover from her basket, "I'll show you some eggs."

"Eggs!" screamed the Nome King in horror. "Have you
eggs in that basket?"

"A dozen of 'em," replied Dorothy.

"Then keep them there -- I beg -- I implore you! --
and I'll do anything you say," pleaded Kaliko, his
teeth chattering so that he could hardly speak.

"Send for the King and Queen of Pingaree," said
Dorothy.

"Go, Klik," commanded the Nome King, and Klik ran
away in great haste, for he was almost as much
frightened as his master.

It was an affecting scene when the unfortunate King
and Queen of Pingaree entered the chamber and with sobs
and tears of joy embraced their brave and adventurous
son. All the others stood silent until greetings and
kisses had been exchanged and Inga had told his parents
in a few words of his vain struggles to rescue them and
how Princess Dorothy had finally come to his
assistance.

Then King Kitticut shook the hands of his friend King
Rinkitink and thanked him for so loyally supporting his
son Inga, and Queen Garee kissed little Dorothy's
forehead and blessed her for restoring her husband and
herself to freedom.

The Wizard had been standing near Bilbil the goat and
now he was surprised to hear the animal say:

"Joyful reunion, isn't it? But it makes me tired to
see grown people cry like children."

"Oho!" exclaimed the Wizard. "How does it happen, Mr.
Goat, that you, who have never been to the Land of Oz,
are able to talk?"

"That's my business," returned Bilbil in a surly
tone.

The Wizard stooped down and gazed fixedly into the
animal's eyes. Then he said, with a pitying sigh: "I
see; you are under an enchantment. Indeed, I believe
you to be Prince Bobo of Boboland."

Bilbil made no reply but dropped his head as if
ashamed.

"This is a great discovery," said the Wizard,
addressing Dorothy and the others of the party. "A good
many years ago a cruel magician transformed the gallant
Prince of Boboland into a talking goat, and this goat,
being ashamed of his condition, ran away and was never
after seen in Boboland, which is a country far to the
south of here but bordering on the Deadly Desert,
opposite the Land of Oz. I heard of this story long ago
and know that a diligent search has been made for the
enchanted Prince, without result. But I am well assured
that, in the animal you call Bilbil, I have discovered
the unhappy Prince of Boboland."

"Dear me, Bilbil," said Rinkitink, "why have you
never told me this?"

"What would be the use?" asked Bilbil in a low voice
and still refusing to look up.

"The use?" repeated Rinkitink, puzzled.

"Yes, that's the trouble," said the Wizard. "It is
one of the most powerful enchantments ever
accomplished, and the magician is now dead and the
secret of the anti-charm lost. Even I, with all my
skill, cannot restore Prince Bobo to his proper form.
But I think Glinda might be able to do so and if you
will all return with Dorothy and me to the Land of Oz,
where Ozma will make you welcome, I will ask Glinda to
try to break this enchantment."

This was willingly agreed to, for they all welcomed
the chance to visit the famous Land of Oz. So they bade
good-bye to King Kaliko, whom Dorothy warned not to be
wicked any more if he could help it, and the entire
party returned over the Magic Carpet to the Land of Oz.
They filled the Red Wagon, which was still waiting for
them, pretty full; but the Sawhorse didn't mind that
and with wonderful speed carried them safely to the
Emerald City.




Chapter Twenty Two

Ozma's Banquet


Ozma had seen in her Magic Picture the liberation of
Inga's parents and the departure of the entire party
for the Emerald City, so with her usual hospitality
she ordered a splendid banquet prepared and invited
all her quaint friends who were then in the Emerald
City to be present that evening to meet the strangers
who were to become her guests.

Glinda, also, in her wonderful Record Book had
learned of the events that had taken place in the
caverns of the Nome King and she became especially
interested in the enchantment of the Prince of
Boboland. So she hastily prepared several of her most
powerful charms and then summoned her flock of sixteen
white storks, which swiftly bore her to Ozma's palace.
She arrived there before the Red Wagon did and was
warmly greeted by the girl Ruler.

Realizing that the costume of Queen Garee of Pingaree
must have become sadly worn and frayed, owing to her
hardships and adventures, Ozma ordered a royal outfit
prepared for the good Queen and had it laid in her
chamber ready for her to put on as soon as she arrived,
so she would not be shamed at the banquet. New costumes
were also provided for King Kitticut and King Rinkitink
and Prince Inga, all cut and made and embellished in
the elaborate and becoming style then prevalent in the
Land of Oz, and as soon as the party arrived at the
palace Ozma's guests were escorted by her servants to
their rooms, that they might bathe and dress
themselves.

Glinda the Sorceress and the Wizard of Oz took charge
of Bilbil the goat and went to a private room where
they were not likely to be interrupted. Glinda first
questioned Bilbil long and earnestly about the manner
of his enchantment and the ceremony that had been used
by the magician who enchanted him. At first Bilbil
protested that he did not want to be restored to his
natural shape, saying that he had been forever
disgraced in the eyes of his people and of the entire
world by being obliged to exist as a scrawny, scraggly
goat. But Glinda pointed out that any person who
incurred the enmity of a wicked magician was liable to
suffer a similar fate, and assured him that his
misfortune would make him better beloved by his
subjects when he returned to them freed from his dire
enchantment.

Bilbil was finally convinced of the truth of this
assertion and agreed to submit to the experiments of
Glinda and the Wizard, who knew they had a hard task
before them and were not at all sure they could
succeed. We know that Glinda is the most complete
mistress of magic who has ever existed, and she was
wise enough to guess that the clever but evil magician
who had enchanted Prince Bobo had used a spell that
would puzzle any ordinary wizard or sorcerer to break;
therefore she had given the matter much shrewd thought
and hoped she had conceived a plan that would succeed.
But because she was not positive of success she would
have no one present at the incantation except her
assistant, the Wizard of Oz.

First she transformed Bilbil the goat into a lamb,
and this was done quite easily. Next she transformed
the lamb into an ostrich, giving it two legs and feet
instead of four. Then she tried to transform the
ostrich into the original Prince Bobo, but this
incantation was an utter failure. Glinda was not
discouraged, however, but by a powerful spell
transformed the ostrich into a tottenhot -- which is a
lower form of a man. Then the tottenhot was transformed
into a mifket, which was a great step in advance and,
finally, Glinda transformed the mifket into a handsome
young man, tall and shapely, who fell on his knees
before the great Sorceress and gratefully kissed her
hand, admitting that he had now recovered his proper
shape and was indeed Prince Bobo of Boboland.

This process of magic, successful though it was in
the end, had required so much time that the banquet was
now awaiting their presence. Bobo was already dressed
in princely raiment and although he seemed very much
humbled by his recent lowly condition, they finally
persuaded him to join the festivities.

When Rinkitink saw that his goat had now become a
Prince, he did not know whether to be sorry or glad,
for he felt that he would miss the companionship of the
quarrelsome animal he had so long been accustomed to
ride upon, while at the same time he rejoiced that poor
Bilbil had come to his own again.

Prince Bobo humbly begged Rinkitink's forgiveness for
having been so disagreeable to him, at times, saying
that the nature of a goat had influenced him and the
surly disposition he had shown was a part of his
enchantment. But the jolly King assured the Prince that
he had really enjoyed Bilbil's grumpy speeches and
forgave him readily. Indeed, they all discovered the
young Prince Bobo to be an exceedingly courteous and
pleasant person, although he was somewhat reserved and
dignified.

Ah, but it was a great feast that Ozma served in her
gorgeous banquet hall that night and everyone was as
happy as could be. The Shaggy Man was there, and so was
Jack Pumpkinhead and the Tin Woodman and Cap'n Bill.
Beside Princess Dorothy sat Tiny Trot and Betsy Bobbin,
and the three little girls were almost as sweet to look
upon as was Ozma, who sat at the head of her table and
outshone all her guests in loveliness.

King Rinkitink was delighted with the quaint people
of Oz and laughed and joked with the tin man and the
pumpkin-headed man and found Cap'n Bill a very
agreeable companion. But what amused the jolly King
most were the animal guests, which Ozma always invited
to her banquets and seated at a table by themselves,
where they talked and chatted together as people do but
were served the sort of food their natures required.
The Hungry Tiger and Cowardly Lion and the Glass Cat
were much admired by Rinkitink, but when he met a mule
named Hank, which Betsy Bobbin had brought to Oz, the
King found the creature so comical that he laughed and
chuckled until his friends thought he would choke. Then
while the banquet was still in progress, Rinkitink
composed and sang a song to the mule and they all
joined in the chorus, which was something like this:


"It's very queer how big an ear
  Is worn by Mr. Donkey;
And yet I fear he could not hear
  If it were on a monkey.

'Tis thick and strong and broad and long
  And also very hairy;
It's quite becoming to our Hank
  But might disgrace a fairy!"


This song was received with so much enthusiasm that
Rinkitink was prevailed upon to sing another. They gave
him a little time to compose the rhyme, which he
declared would be better if he could devote a month or
two to its composition, hut the sentiment he expressed
was so admirable that no one criticized the song or the
manner in which the jolly little King sang it.

Dorothy wrote down the words on a piece of paper, and
here they are:


"We're merry comrades all, to-night,
Because we've won a gallant fight
  And conquered all our foes.
We're not afraid of anything,
So let us gayly laugh and sing
  Until we seek repose.

"We've all our grateful hearts can wish;
King Gos has gone to feed the fish,
  Queen Cor has gone, as well;
King Kitticut has found his own,
Prince Bobo soon will have a throne
  Relieved of magic spell.

"So let's forget the horrid strife
That fell upon our peaceful life
  And caused distress and pain;
For very soon across the sea
We'll all be sailing merrily
To Pingaree again."




Chapter Twenty Three

The Pearl Kingdom


It was unfortunate that the famous Scarecrow - the most
popular person in all Oz, next to Ozma -- was absent at
the time of the banquet, for he happened just then to
be making one of his trips through the country; but the
Scarecrow had a chance later to meet Rinkitink and Inga
and the King and Queen of Pingaree and Prince Bobo, for
the party remained several weeks at the Emerald City,
where they were royally entertained, and where both the
gentle Queen Garee and the noble King Kitticut
recovered much of their good spirits and composure and
tried to forget their dreadful experiences.

At last, however, the King and Queen desired to
return to their own Pingaree, as they longed to be with
their people again and see how well they had rebuilt
their homes. Inga also was anxious to return, although
he had been very happy in Oz, and King Rinkitink, who
was happy anywhere except at Gilgad, decided to go with
his former friends to Pingaree. As for prince Bobo, he
had become so greatly attached to King Rinkitink that
he was loth to leave him.

On a certain day they all bade good-bye to Ozma and
Dorothy and Glinda and the Wizard and all their good
friends in Oz, and were driven in the Red Wagon to the
edge of the Deadly Desert, which they crossed safely on
the Magic Carpet. They then made their way across the
Nome Kingdom and the Wheeler Country, where no one
molested them, to the shores of the Nonestic Ocean.
There they found the boat with the silver lining still
lying undisturbed on the beach.

There were no important adventures during the trip
and on their arrival at the pearl kingdom they were
amazed at the beautiful appearance of the island they
had left in ruins. All the houses of the people had
been rebuilt and were prettier than before, with green
lawns before them and flower gardens in the back yards.
The marble towers of King Kitticut's new palace were
very striking and impressive, while the palace itself
proved far more magnificent than it had been before the
warriors from Regos destroyed it.

Nikobob had been very active and skillful in
directing all this work, and he had also built a pretty
cottage for himself, not far from the King's palace,
and there Inga found Zella, who was living very happy
and contented in her new home. Not only had Nikobob
accomplished all this in a comparatively brief space of
time, but he had started the pearl fisheries again and
when King Kitticut returned to Pingaree he found a
quantity of fine pearls already in the royal treasury.

So pleased was Kitticut with the good judgment,
industry and honesty of the former charcoal-burner of
Regos, that he made Nikobob his Lord High Chamberlain
and put him in charge of the pearl fisheries and all
the business matters of the island kingdom.

They all settled down very comfortably in the new
palace and the Queen gathered her maids about her once
more and set them to work embroidering new draperies
for the royal throne. Inga placed the three Magic
Pearls in their silken bag and again deposited them in
the secret cavity under the tiled flooring of the
banquet hall, where they could be quickly secured if
danger ever threatened the now prosperous island.

King Rinkitink occupied a royal guest chamber built
especially for his use and seemed in no hurry to leave
his friends in Pingaree. The fat little King had to
walk wherever he went and so missed Bilbil more and
more; but he seldom walked far and he was so fond of
Prince BoBo that he never regretted Bilbil's
disenchantment.

Indeed, the jolly monarch was welcome to remain
forever in Pingaree, if he wished to, for his merry
disposition set smiles on the faces of all his friends
and made everyone near him as jolly as he was himself.
When King Kitticut was not too busy with affairs of
state he loved to join his guest and listen to his
brother monarch's songs and stories. For he found
Rinkitink to be, with all his careless disposition, a
shrewd philosopher, and in talking over their
adventures one day the King of Gilgad said:

"The beauty of life is its sudden changes. No one
knows what is going to happen next, and so we are
constantly being surprised and entertained. The many
ups and downs should not discourage us, for if we are
down, we know that a change is coming and we will go up
again; while those who are up are almost certain to go
down. My grandfather had a song which well expresses
this and if you will listen I will sing it."

"Of course I will listen to your song," returned
Kitticut, "for it would be impolite not to."

So Rinkitink sang his grandfather's song:


"A mighty King once ruled the land --
  But now he's baking pies.
A pauper, on the other hand,
  Is ruling, strong and wise.

A tiger once in jungles raged --
  But now he's in a zoo;
A lion, captive-born and caged,
  Now roams the forest through.

A man once slapped a poor boy's pate
  And made him weep and wail.
The boy became a magistrate
  And put the man in jail.

A sunny day succeeds the night;
  It's summer -- then it snows!
Right oft goes wrong and wrong comes right,
  As ev'ry wise man knows."




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Captive King


One morning, just as the royal party was finishing
breakfast, a servant came running to say that a great
fleet of boats was approaching the island from the
south. King Kitticut sprang up at once, in great alarm,
for he had much cause to fear strange boats. The others
quickly followed him to the shore to see what invasion
might be coming upon them.

Inga was there with the first, and Nikobob and Zella
soon joined the watchers. And presently, while all were
gazing eagerly at the approaching fleet, King Rinkitink
suddenly cried out:

"Get your pearls, Prince Inga -- get them quick!"

"Are these our enemies, then?" asked the boy, looking
with surprise upon the fat little King, who had begun
to tremble violently.

"They are my people of Gilgad!" answered Rinkitink,
wiping a tear from his eye. "I recognize my royal
standards flying from the boats. So, please, dear Inga,
get out your pearls to protect me!"

"What can you fear at the hands of your own
subjects?" asked Kitticut, astonished.

But before his frightened guest could answer the
question Prince Bobo, who was standing beside his
friend, gave an amused laugh and said:

"You are caught at last, dear Rinkitink. Your people
will take you home again and oblige you to reign as
King."

Rinkitink groaned aloud and clasped his hands
together with a gesture of despair, an attitude so
comical that the others could scarcely forbear
laughing.

But now the boats were landing upon the beach. They
were fifty in number, beautifully decorated and
upholstered and rowed by men clad in the gay uniforms
of the King of Gilgad. One splended boat had a throne
of gold in the center, over which was draped the King's
royal robe of purple velvet, embroidered with gold
buttercups.

Rinkitink shuddered when he saw this throne; but now
a tall man, handsomely dressed, approached and knelt
upon the grass before his King, while all the other
occupants of the boats shouted joyfully and waved their
plumed hats in the air.

"Thanks to our good fortune," said the man who
kneeled, "we have found Your Majesty at last!"

"Pinkerbloo," answered Rinkitink sternly, "I must
have you hanged, for thus finding me against my will."

"You think so now, Your Majesty, but you will never
do it," returned Pinkerbloo, rising and kissing the
King's hand.

"Why won't I?" asked Rinkitink.

"Because you are much too tender-hearted, Your
Majesty."

"It may be -- it may be," agreed Rinkitink, sadly.
"It is one of my greatest failings. But what chance
brought you here, my Lord Pinkerbloo?"

"We have searched for you everywhere, sire, and all
the people of Gilgad have been in despair since you so
mysteriously disappeared. We could not appoint a new
King, because we did not know but that you still lived;
so we set out to find you, dead or alive. After
visiting many islands of the Nonestic Ocean we at last
thought of Pingaree, from where come the precious
pearls; and now our faithful quest has been rewarded."

"And what now?" asked Rinkitink.

"Now, Your Majesty, you must come home with us, like
a good and dutiful King, and rule over your people,"
declared the man in a firm voice.

"I will not."

"But you must -- begging Your Majesty's pardon for
the contradiction."

"Kitticut," cried poor Rinkitink, "you must save me
from being captured by these, my subjects. What! must I
return to Gilgad and be forced to reign in splendid
state when I much prefer to eat and sleep and sing in
my own quiet way? They will make me sit in a throne
three hours a day and listen to dry and tedious affairs
of state; and I must stand up for hours at the court
receptions, till I get corns on my heels; and forever
must I listen to tiresome speeches and endless
petitions and complaints!"

"But someone must do this, Your Majesty," said
Pinkerbloo respectfully, "and since you were born to be
our King you cannot escape your duty."

"'Tis a horrid fate!" moaned Rinkitink. "I would die
willingly, rather than be a King -- if it did not hurt
so terribly to die."

"You will find it much more comfortable to reign than
to die, although I fully appreciate Your Majesty's
difficult position and am truly sorry for you," said
Pinkerbloo.

King Kitticut had listened to this conversation
thoughtfully, so now he said to his friend:

"The man is right, dear Rinkitink. It is your duty to
reign, since fate has made you a King, and I see no
honorable escape for you. I shall grieve to lose your
companionship, but I feel the separation cannot be
avoided."

Rinkitink sighed.

"Then," said he, turning to Lord Pinkerbloo, "in
three days I will depart with you for Gilgad; but
during those three days I propose to feast and make
merry with my good friend King Kitticut."

Then all the people of Gilgad shouted with delight
and eagerly scrambled ashore to take their part in the
festival.

Those three days were long remembered in Pingaree,
for never -- before nor since -- has such feasting and
jollity been known upon that island. Rinkitink made the
most of his time and everyone laughed and sang with him
by day and by night.

Then, at last, the hour of parting arrived and the
King of Gilgad and Ruler of the Dominion of Rinkitink
was escorted by a grand procession to his boat and
seated upon his golden throne. The rowers of the fifty
boats paused, with their glittering oars pointed into
the air like gigantic uplifted sabres, while the people
of Pingaree -- men, women and children -- stood upon
the shore shouting a royal farewell to the jolly King.

Then came a sudden hush, while Rinkitink stood up
and, with a bow to those assembled to witness his
departure, sang the following song, which he had just
composed for the occasion.

"Farewell, dear Isle of Pingaree --
The fairest land in all the sea!
No living mortals, kings or churls,
Would scorn to wear thy precious pearls.

"King Kitticut, 'tis with regret
I'm forced to say farewell; and yet
Abroad no longer can I roam
When fifty boats would drag me home.

"Good-bye, my Prince of Pingaree;
A noble King some time you'll be
And long and wisely may you reign
And never face a foe again!"


They cheered him from the shore; they cheered him
from the boats; and then all the oars of the fifty
boats swept downward with a single motion and dipped
their blades into the purple-hued waters of the
Nonestic Ocean.

As the boats shot swiftly over the ripples of the sea
Rinkitink turned to Prince Bobo, who had decided not to
desert his former master and his present friend, and
asked anxiously:

"How did you like that song, Bilbil -- I mean Bobo?
Is it a masterpiece, do you think?"

And Bobo replied with a smile:

"Like all your songs, dear Rinkitink, the sentiment
far excels the poetry."





The Wonderful Oz Books
by L. Frank Baum

 1 The Wizard of Oz
 2 The Land of Oz
 3 Ozma of Oz
 4 Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
 5 The Road to Oz
 6 The Emerald City of Oz
 7 The Patchwork Girl of Oz
 8 Tik-Tok of Oz
 9 The Scarecrow of Oz
10 Rinkitink in Oz
11 The Lost Princess of Oz
12 The Tin Woodman of Oz
13 The Magic of Oz
14 Glinda of Oz





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of Rinkitink In Oz by L. Frank Baum

