**Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Tin Woodman of Oz, by Baum**
#12 in the L. Frank Baum's Wonderful World Of Oz Series
We are now naming the files as they are numbered in the books--
i.e. This is #12 in the series so the file name is 12wozxxx.xxx
where the x's are place holders for editon # and file type such
as 12woz10.txt and 12woz10.zip, when we do a .htm, 12woz10h.htm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Tin Woodman of Oz

by L. Frank Baum

June, 1997  [Etext #960]


**Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Tin Woodman of Oz, by Baum**
*****This file should be named 12woz10.txt or 12woz10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 12woz11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 12woz10a.txt.


This Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Anthony Matonac.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





            THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ

A Faithful Story of the Astonishing Adventure
   Undertaken by the Tin Woodman, assisted
     by Woot the Wanderer, the Scarecrow
         of Oz, and Polychrome, the
             Rainbow's Daughter

                    by
              L.  FRANK BAUM
          "Royal historian of Oz"

                This Book
              is dedicated
              to the son of
                  my son
             Frank Alden Baum



TO MY READERS

I know that some of you have been waiting for this
story of the Tin Woodman, because many of  my
correspondents have asked me, time and again what ever
became of the "pretty Munchkin girl" whom Nick Chopper
was engaged to marry before the Wicked Witch enchanted
his axe and he traded his flesh for tin. I, too, have
wondered what became of her, but until Woot the
Wanderer interested himself in the matter the Tin
Woodman knew no more than we did. However, he found
her, after many thrilling adventures, as you will
discover when you have read this story.

I am delighted at the continued interest of both
young and old in the Oz stories. A learned college
professor recently wrote me to ask: "For readers of
what age are your books intended?" It puzzled me to
answer that properly, until I had looked over some of
the letters I have received. One says: "I'm a little
boy 5 years old, and I Just love your Oz stories. My
sister, who is writing this for me, reads me the Oz
books, but I wish I could read them myself." Another
letter says: "I'm a great girl 13 years old, so you'll
be surprised when I tell you I am not too old yet for
the Oz stories."  Here's another letter: "Since I was a
young girl I've never missed getting a Baum book for
Christmas. I'm married, now, but am as eager to get and
read the Oz stories as ever." And still another writes:
"My good wife and I, both more than 70 years of age,
believe that we find more real enjoyment in your Oz
books than in any other books we read." Considering
these statements, I wrote the college professor that my
books are intended for all those whose hearts are
young, no matter what their ages may be.

I think I am justified in promising that there will
be some astonishing revelations about The Magic of Oz
in my book for 1919. Always your loving and grateful
friend,

                             L. FRANK BAUM.

                         Royal Historian of Oz.


 "OZCOT"
at HOLLYWOOD
in CALIFORNIA

  1918.

LIST OF CHAPTERS
 1  Woot the Wanderer
 2  The Heart of the Tin Woodman
 3  Roundabout
 4  The Loons of Loonville
 5  Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess
 6  The Magic of a Yookoohoo
 7  The Lace Apron
 8  The Menace of the Forest
 9  The Quarrelsome Dragons
10  Tommy Kwikstep
11  Jinjur's Ranch
12  Ozma and Dorothy
13  The Restoration
14  The Green Monkey
15  The Man of Tin
16  Captain Fyter
17  The Workshop of Ku-Klip
18  The Tin Woodman Talks to Himself
19  The Invisible Country
20  Over Night
21  Polychrome's Magic
22  Nimmie Amee
23  Through the Tunnel
24  The Curtain Falls




Chapter One

Woot the Wanderer


The Tin Woodman sat on his glittering tin throne in the
handsome tin hall of his splendid tin castle in the
Winkie Country of the Land of Oz. Beside him, in a
chair of woven straw, sat his best friend, the
Scarecrow of Oz. At times they spoke to one another of
curious things they had seen and strange adventures
they had known since first they two had met and become
comrades. But at times they were silent, for these
things had been talked over many times between them,
and they found themselves contented in merely being
together, speaking now and then a brief sentence to
prove they were wide awake and attentive. But then,
these two quaint persons never slept. Why should they
sleep, when they never tired?

And now, as the brilliant sun sank low over the Winkie
Country of Oz, tinting the glistening tin towers and
tin minarets of the tin castle with glorious sunset
hues, there approached along a winding pathway Woot the
Wanderer, who met at the castle entrance a Winkie
servant.

The servants of the Tin Woodman all wore tin helmets
and tin breastplates and uniforms covered with tiny tin
discs sewed closely together on silver cloth, so that
their bodies sparkled as beautifully as did the tin
castle -- and almost as beautifully as did the Tin
Woodman himself.

Woot the Wanderer looked at the man servant --all
bright and glittering -- and at the magnificent castle
-- all bright and glittering -- and as he looked his
eyes grew big with wonder. For Woot was not very big
and not very old and, wanderer though he was, this
proved the most gorgeous sight that had ever met his
boyish gaze.

"Who lives here?" he asked.

"The Emperor of the Winkies, who is the famous Tin
Woodman of Oz," replied the servant, who had been
trained to treat all strangers with courtesy.

"A Tin Woodman?  How queer!" exclaimed the little
wanderer.

"Well, perhaps our Emperor is queer," admitted the
servant; "but he is a kind master and as honest and
true as good tin can make him; so we, who gladly serve
him, are apt to forget that he is not like other
people."

"May I see him?" asked Woot the Wanderer, after a
moment's thought.

"If it please you to wait a moment, I will go and ask
him," said the servant, and then he went into the hall
where the Tin Woodman sat with his friend the
Scarecrow. Both were glad to learn that a stranger had
arrived at the castle, for this would give them
something new to talk about, so the servant was asked
to admit the boy at once.

By the time Woot the Wanderer had passed through the
grand corridors -- all lined with ornamental tin -- and
under stately tin archways and through the many tin
rooms all set with beautiful tin furniture, his eyes
had grown bigger than ever and his whole little body
thrilled with amazement. But, astonished though he was,
he was able to make a polite bow before the throne and
to say in a respectful voice: "I salute your
Illustrious Majesty and offer you my humble services."

"Very good!" answered the Tin Woodman in his
accustomed cheerful manner. "Tell me who you are, and
whence you come."

"I am known as Woot the Wanderer," answered the boy,
"and I have come, through many travels and by
roundabout ways, from my former home in a far corner of
the Gillikin Country of Oz."

"To wander from one's home," remarked the Scarecrow,
"is to encounter dangers and hardships, especially if
one is made of meat and bone. Had you no friends in
that corner of the Gillikin Country? Was it not
homelike and comfortable?"

To hear a man stuffed with straw speak, and speak so
well, quite startled Woot, and perhaps he stared a bit
rudely at the Scarecrow. But after a moment he replied:

"I had home and friends, your Honorable Strawness,
but they were so quiet and happy and comfortable that I
found them dismally stupid. Nothing in that corner of
Oz interested me, but I believed that in other parts of
the country I would find strange people and see new
sights, and so I set out upon my wandering journey. I
have been a wanderer for nearly a full year, and now my
wanderings have brought me to this splendid castle."

"I suppose," said the Tin Woodman, "that in this year
you have seen so much that you have become very wise."

"No," replied Woot, thoughtfully, "I am not at all
wise, I beg to assure your Majesty. The more I wander
the less I find that I know, for in the Land of Oz much
wisdom and many things may be learned."

"To learn is simple. Don't you ask questions?"
inquired the Scarecrow.

"Yes; I ask as many questions as I dare; but some
people refuse to answer questions."

"That is not kind of them," declared the Tin Woodman.
"If one does not ask for information he seldom receives
it; so I, for my part, make it a rule to answer any
civil question that is asked me."

"So do I," added the Scarecrow, nodding.

"I am glad to hear this," said the Wanderer, "for it
makes me bold to ask for something to eat."

"Bless the boy!" cried the Emperor of the Winkies;
"how careless of me not to remember that wanderers are
usually hungry. I will have food brought you at once."

Saying this he blew upon a tin whistle that was
suspended from his tin neck, and at the summons a
servant appeared and bowed low. The Tin Woodman
ordered food for the stranger, and in a few minutes the
servant brought in a tin tray heaped with a choice
array of good things to eat, all neatly displayed on
tin dishes that were polished till they shone like
mirrors. The tray was set upon a tin table drawn
before the throne, and the servant placed a tin chair
before the table for the boy to seat himself.

"Eat, friend Wanderer," said the Emperor cordially,
"and I trust the feast will be to your liking. I,
myself, do not eat, being made in such manner that I
require no food to keep me alive. Neither does my
friend the Scarecrow. But all my Winkie people eat,
being formed of flesh, as you are, and so my tin
cupboard is never bare, and strangers are always
welcome to whatever it contains."

The boy ate in silence for a time, being really
hungry, but after his appetite was somewhat satisfied,
he said:

"How happened your Majesty to be made of tin, and
still be alive?"

"That," replied the tin man, "is a long story."

"The longer the better," said the boy. "Won't you
please tell me the story?"

"If you desire it," promised the Tin Woodman, leaning
back in his tin throne and crossing his tin legs. "I
haven't related my history in a long while, because
everyone here knows it nearly as well as I do. But you,
being a stranger, are no doubt curious to learn how I
became so beautiful and prosperous, so I will recite
for your benefit my strange adventures."

"Thank you," said Woot the Wanderer, still eating.

"I was not always made of tin," began the Emperor,
"for in the beginning I was a man of flesh and bone and
blood and lived in the Munchkin Country of Oz. There I
was, by trade, a woodchopper, and contributed my share
to the comfort of the Oz people by chopping up the
trees of the forest to make firewood, with which the
women would cook their meals while the children warmed
themselves about the fires. For my home I had a little
hut by the edge of the forest, and my life was one of
much content until I fell in love with a beautiful
Munchkin girl who lived not far away."

"What was the Munchkin girl's name?" asked Woot.

"Nimmie Amee. This girl, so fair that the sunsets
blushed when their rays fell upon her, lived with a
powerful witch who wore silver shoes and who had made
the poor child her slave. Nimmie Amee was obliged to
work from morning till night for the old Witch of the
East, scrubbing and sweeping her hut and cooking her
meals and washing her dishes. She had to cut firewood,
too, until I found her one day in the forest and fell
in love with her. After that, I always brought plenty
of firewood to Nimmie Amee and we became very friendly.
Finally I asked her to marry me, and she agreed to do
so, but the Witch happened to overhear our conversation
and it made her very angry, for she did not wish her
slave to be taken away from her. The Witch commanded me
never to come near Nimmie Amee again, but I told her I
was my own master and would do as I pleased, not
realizing that this was a careless way to speak to a
Witch.

"The next day, as I was cutting wood in the forest,
the cruel Witch enchanted my axe, so that it slipped
and cut off my right leg."

"How dreadful!" cried Woot the Wanderer.

"Yes, it was a seeming misfortune," agreed the Tin
Man, "for a one-legged woodchopper is of little use in
his trade. But I would not allow the Witch to conquer
me so easily. I knew a very skillful mechanic at the
other side of the forest, who was my friend, so I
hopped on one leg to him and asked him to help me. He
soon made me a new leg out of tin and fastened it
cleverly to my meat body. It had joints at the knee and
at the ankle and was almost as comfortable as the leg I
had lost."

"Your friend must have been a wonderful workman!"
exclaimed Woot.

"He was, indeed," admitted the Emperor. "He was a
tinsmith by trade and could make anything out of tin.
When I returned to Nimmie Amee, the girl was delighted
and threw her arms around my neck and kissed me,
declaring she was proud of me. The Witch saw the kiss
and was more angry than before. When I went to work in
the forest, next day, my axe, being still enchanted,
slipped and cut off my other leg. Again I hopped -- on
my tin leg -- to my friend the tinsmith, who kindly
made me another tin leg and fastened it to my body. So
I returned joyfully to Nimmie Amee, who was much
pleased with my glittering legs and promised that when
we were wed she would always keep them oiled and
polished. But the Witch was more furious than ever, and
as soon as I raised my axe to chop, it twisted around
and cut off one of my arms. The tinsmith made me a tin
arm and I was not much worried, because Nimmie Amee
declared she still loved me."




Chapter Two

The Heart of the Tin Woodman


The Emperor of the Winkies paused in his story to
reach for an oil-can, with which he carefully oiled the
joints in his tin throat, for his voice had begun to
squeak a little. Woot the Wanderer, having satisfied
his hunger, watched this oiling process with much
curiosity, but begged the Tin Man to go on with his
tale.

"The Witch with the Silver Shoes hated me for having
defied her," resumed the Emperor, his voice now
sounding clear as a bell, "and she insisted that Nimmie
Amee should never marry me.  Therefore she made the
enchanted axe cut off my other arm, and the tinsmith
also replaced that member with tin, including these
finely-jointed hands that you see me using. But, alas!
after that, the axe, still enchanted by the cruel
Witch, cut my body in two, so that I fell to the
ground. Then the Witch, who was watching from a near-by
bush, rushed up and seized the axe and chopped my body
into several small pieces, after which, thinking that
at last she had destroyed me, she ran away laughing in
wicked glee.

"But Nimmie Amee found me. She picked up my arms and
legs and head, and made a bundle of them and carried
them to the tinsmith, who set to work and made me a
fine body of pure tin. When he had joined the arms and
legs to the body, and set my head in the tin collar, I
was a much better man than ever, for my body could not
ache or pain me, and I was so beautiful and bright that
I had no need of clothing. Clothing is always a
nuisance, because it soils and tears and has to be
replaced; but my tin body only needs to be oiled and
polished.

"Nimmie Amee still declared she would marry me, as
she still loved me in spite of the Witch's evil deeds.
The girl declared I would make the brightest husband in
all the world, which was quite true. However, the
Wicked Witch was not yet defeated. When I returned to
my work the axe slipped and cut off my head, which was
the only meat part of me then remaining. Moreover, the
old woman grabbed up my severed head and carried it
away with her and hid it. But Nimmie Amee came into the
forest and found me wandering around helplessly,
because I could not see where to go, and she led me to
my friend the tinsmith. The faithful fellow at once set
to work to make me a tin head, and he had just
completed it when Nimmie Amee came running up with my
old head, which she had stolen from the Witch. But, on
reflection, I considered the tin head far superior to
the meat one -- I am wearing it yet, so you can see its
beauty and grace of outline -- and the girl agreed with
me that a man all made of tin was far more perfect than
one formed of different materials. The tinsmith was as
proud of his workmanship as I was, and for three whole
days, all admired me and praised my beauty. "Being now
completely formed of tin, I had no more fear of the
Wicked Witch, for she was powerless to injure me.
Nimmie Amee said we must be married at once, for then
she could come to my cottage and live with me and keep
me bright and sparkling.

"'I am sure, my dear Nick,' said the brave and
beautiful girl -- my name was then Nick Chopper, you
should be told -- 'that you will make the best husband
any girl could have. I shall not be obliged to cook for
you, for now you do not eat; I shall not have to make
your bed, for tin does not tire or require sleep; when
we go to a dance, you will not get weary before the
music stops and say you want to go home. All day long,
while you are chopping wood in the forest, I shall be
able to amuse myself in my own way -- a privilege few
wives enjoy. There is no temper in your new head, so
you will not get angry with me. Finally, I shall take
pride in being the wife of the only live Tin Woodman in
all the world!' Which shows that Nimmie Amee was as
wise as she was brave and beautiful."

"I think she was a very nice girl," said Woot the
Wanderer. "But, tell me, please, why were you not
killed when you were chopped to pieces?"

"In the Land of Oz," replied the Emperor, "no one can
ever be killed. A man with a wooden leg or a tin leg is
still the same man; and, as I lost parts of my meat
body by degrees, I always remained the same person as
in the beginning, even though in the end I was all tin
and no meat."

"I see," said the boy, thoughtfully. "And did you
marry Nimmie Amee?"

"No," answered the Tin Woodman, "I did not. She said
she still loved me, but I found that I no longer loved
her. My tin body contained no heart, and without a
heart no one can love. So the Wicked Witch conquered in
the end, and when I left the Munchkin Country of Oz,
the poor girl was still the slave of the Witch and had
to do her bidding day and night."

"Where did you go?" asked Woot.

"Well, I first started out to find a heart, so I
could love Nimmie Amee again; but hearts are more
scarce than one would think. One day, in a big forest
that was strange to me, my joints suddenly became
rusted, because I had forgotten to oil them. There I
stood, unable to move hand or foot. And there I
continued to stand -- while days came and went -- until
Dorothy and the Scarecrow came along and rescued me.
They oiled my joints and set me free, and I've taken
good care never to rust again."

"Who was this Dorothy?" questioned the Wanderer.

"A little girl who happened to be in a house when it
was carried by a cyclone all the way from Kansas to the
Land of Oz. When the house fell, in the Munchkin
Country, it fortunately landed on the Wicked Witch and
smashed her flat. It was a big house, and I think the
Witch is under it yet."

"No," said the Scarecrow, correcting him, "Dorothy
says the Witch turned to dust, and the wind scattered
the dust in every direction."

"Well," continued the Tin Woodman, "after meeting the
Scarecrow and Dorothy, I went with them to the Emerald
City, where the Wizard of Oz gave me a heart. But the
Wizard's stock of hearts was low, and he gave me a Kind
Heart instead of a Loving Heart, so that I could not
love Nimmie Amee any more than I did when I was
heartless."

"Couldn't the Wizard give you a heart that was both
Kind and Loving?" asked the boy.

"No; that was what I asked for, but he said he was so
short on hearts, just then, that there was but one in
stock, and I could take that or none at all. So I
accepted it, and I must say that for its kind it is a
very good heart indeed."

"It seems to me," said Woot, musingly, "that the
Wizard fooled you. It can't be a very Kind Heart, you
know."

"Why not?" demanded the Emperor.

"Because it was unkind of you to desert the girl who
loved you, and who had been faithful and true to you
when you were in trouble. Had the heart the Wizard gave
you been a Kind Heart, you would have gone back home
and made the beautiful Munchkin girl your wife, and
then brought her here to be an Empress and live in your
splendid tin castle."

The Tin Woodman was so surprised at this frank speech
that for a time he did nothing but stare hard at the
boy Wanderer. But the Scarecrow wagged his stuffed head
and said in a positive tone:

"This boy is right. I've often wondered, myself, why
you didn't go back and find that poor Munchkin girl."

Then the Tin Woodman stared hard at his friend the
Scarecrow. But finally he said in a serious tone of
voice:

"I must admit that never before have I thought of
such a thing as finding Nimmie Amee and making her
Empress of the Winkies. But it is surely not too late,
even now, to do this, for the girl must still be living
in the Munchkin Country. And, since this strange
Wanderer has reminded me of Nimmie Amee, I believe it
is my duty to set out and find her. Surely it is not
the girl's fault that I no longer love her, and so, if
I can make her happy, it is proper that I should do so,
and in this way reward her for her faithfulness."

"Quite right, my friend!" agreed the Scarecrow.

"Will you accompany me on this errand?" asked the Tin
Emperor.

"Of course," said the Scarecrow.

"And will you take me along?" pleaded Woot the
Wanderer in an eager voice.

"To be sure," said the Tin Woodman, "if you care to
join our party. It was you who first told me it was my
duty to find and marry Nimmie Amee, and I'd like you to
know that Nick Chopper, the Tin Emperor of the Winkies,
is a man who never shirks his duty, once it is pointed
out to him."

"It ought to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, if the
girl is so beautiful," said Woot, well pleased with the
idea of the adventure.

"Beautiful things may be admired, if not loved,"
asserted the Tin Man. "Flowers are beautiful, for
instance, but we are not inclined to marry them. Duty,
on the contrary, is a bugle call to action, whether you
are inclined to act, or not. In this case, I obey the
bugle call of duty."

"When shall we start?" inquired the Scarecrow, who
was always glad to embark upon a new adventure. "I
don't hear any bugle, but when do we go?"

"As soon as we can get ready," answered the Emperor.
"I'll call my servants at once and order them to make
preparations for our journey."




Chapter Three

Roundabout


Woot the Wanderer slept that night in the tin castle of
the Emperor of the Winkies and found his tin bed quite
comfortable. Early the next morning he rose and took a
walk through the gardens, where there were tin
fountains and beds of curious tin flowers, and where
tin birds perched upon the branches of tin trees and
sang songs that sounded like the notes of tin whistles.
All these wonders had been made by the clever Winkie
tinsmiths, who wound the birds up every morning so that
they would move about and sing.

After breakfast the boy went into the throne room,
where the Emperor was having his tin joints carefully
oiled by a servant, while other servants were stuffing
sweet, fresh straw into the body of the Scarecrow.

Woot watched this operation with much interest, for
the Scarecrow's body was only a suit of clothes filled
with straw. The coat was buttoned tight to keep the
packed straw from falling out and a rope was tied
around the waist to hold it in shape and prevent the
straw from sagging down. The Scarecrow's head was a
gunnysack filled with bran, on which the eyes, nose and
mouth had been painted. His hands were white cotton
gloves stuffed with fine straw. Woot noticed that even
when carefully stuffed and patted into shape, the straw
man was awkward in his movements and decidedly wobbly
on his feet, so the boy wondered if the Scarecrow would
be able to travel with them all the way to the forests
of the Munchkin Country of Oz.

The preparations made for this important journey were
very simple. A knapsack was filled with food and given
Woot the Wanderer to carry upon his back, for the food
was for his use alone. The Tin Woodman shouldered an
axe which was sharp and brightly polished, and the
Scarecrow put the Emperor's oil-can in his pocket, that
he might oil his friend's joints should they need it.

"Who will govern the Winkie Country during your
absence?" asked the boy.

"Why, the Country will run itself," answered the
Emperor. "As a matter of fact, my people do not need an
Emperor, for Ozma of Oz watches over the welfare of all
her subjects, including the Winkies. Like a good many
kings and emperors, I have a grand title, but very
little real power, which allows me time to amuse myself
in my own way. The people of Oz have but one law to
obey, which is: 'Behave Yourself,' so it is easy for
them to abide by this Law, and you'll notice they
behave very well. But it is time for us to be off, and
I am eager to start because I suppose that that poor
Munchkin girl is anxiously awaiting my coming."

"She's waited a long time already, seems to me,"
remarked the Scarecrow, as they left the grounds of the
castle and followed a path that led eastward.

"True," replied the Tin Woodman; "but I've noticed
that the last end of a wait, however long it has been,
is the hardest to endure; so I must try to make Nimmie
Amee happy as soon as possible."

"Ah; that proves you have a Kind heart," remarked the
Scarecrow, approvingly.

"It's too bad he hasn't a Loving Heart," said Woot.
"This Tin Man is going to marry a nice girl through
kindness, and not because he loves her, and somehow
that doesn't seem quite right."

"Even so, I am not sure it isn't best for the girl,"
said the Scarecrow, who seemed very intelligent for a
straw man, "for a loving husband is not always kind,
while a kind husband is sure to make any girl content."

"Nimmie Amee will become an Empress!" announced the
Tin Woodman, proudly. "I shall have a tin gown made for
her, with tin ruffles and tucks on it, and she shall
have tin slippers, and tin earrings and bracelets, and
wear a tin crown on her head. I am sure that will
delight Nimmie Amee, for all girls are fond of finery."

"Are we going to the Munchkin Country by way of the
Emerald City?" inquired the Scarecrow, who looked upon
the Tin Woodman as the leader of the party.

"I think not," was the reply. "We are engaged upon a
rather delicate adventure, for we are seeking a girl
who fears her former lover has forgotten her. It will
be rather hard for me, you must admit, when I confess
to Nimmie Amee that I have come to marry her because it
is my duty to do so, and therefore the fewer witnesses
there are to our meeting the better for both of us.
After I have found Nimmie Amee and she has managed to
control her joy at our reunion, I shall take her to the
Emerald City and introduce her to Ozma and Dorothy, and
to Betsy Bobbin and Tiny Trot, and all our other
friends; but, if I remember rightly, poor Nimmie Amee
has a sharp tongue when angry, and she may be a trifle
angry with me, at first, because I have been so long in
coming to her."

"I can understand that," said Woot gravely. "But how
can we get to that part of the Munchkin Country where
you once lived without passing through the Emerald
City?"

"Why, that is easy," the Tin Man assured him.

"I have a map of Oz in my pocket," persisted the boy,
"and it shows that the Winkie Country, where we now
are, is at the west of Oz, and the Munchkin Country at
the east, while directly between them lies the Emerald
City."

"True enough; but we shall go toward the north, first
of all, into the Gillikin Country, and so pass around
the Emerald City," explained the Tin Woodman.

"That may prove a dangerous journey," replied the
boy. "I used to live in one of the top corners of the
Gillikin Country, near to Oogaboo, and I have been told
that in this northland country are many people whom it
is not pleasant to meet. I was very careful to avoid
them during my journey south."

"A Wanderer should have no fear," observed the
Scarecrow, who was wobbling along in a funny, haphazard
manner, but keeping pace with his friends.

"Fear does not make one a coward," returned Woot,
growing a little red in the face, "but I believe it is
more easy to avoid danger than to overcome it. The
safest way is the best way, even for one who is brave
and determined."

"Do not worry, for we shall not go far to the north,"
said the Emperor. "My one idea is to avoid the Emerald
City without going out of our way more than is
necessary. Once around the Emerald City we will turn
south into the Munchkin Country, where the Scarecrow
and I are well acquainted and have many friends."

"I have traveled some in the Gillikin Country,"
remarked the Scarecrow, "and while I must say I have
met some strange people there at times, I have never
yet been harmed by them."

"Well, it's all the same to me," said Woot, with
assumed carelessness. "Dangers, when they cannot be
avoided, are often quite interesting, and I am willing
to go wherever you two venture to go."

So they left the path they had been following and
began to travel toward the northeast, and all that day
they were in the pleasant Winkie Country, and all the
people they met saluted the Emperor with great respect
and wished him good luck on his journey. At night they
stopped at a house where they were well entertained and
where Woot was given a comfortable bed to sleep in.

"Were the Scarecrow and I alone," said the Tin
Woodman, "we would travel by night as well as by day;
but with a meat person in our party, we must halt at
night to permit him to rest."

"Meat tires, after a day's travel," added the
Scarecrow, "while straw and tin never tire at all.
Which proves," said he, "that we are somewhat superior
to people made in the common way."

Woot could not deny that he was tired, and he slept
soundly until morning, when he was given a good
breakfast, smoking hot.

"You two miss a great deal by not eating," he said to
his companions.

"It is true," responded the Scarecrow. "We miss
suffering from hunger, when food cannot be had, and we
miss a stomachache, now and then."

As he said this, the Scarecrow glanced at the Tin
Woodman, who nodded his assent.

All that second day they traveled steadily,
entertaining one another the while with stories of
adventures they had formerly met and listening to the
Scarecrow recite poetry. He had learned a great many
poems from Professor Wogglebug and loved to repeat them
whenever anybody would listen to him. Of course Woot
and the Tin Woodman now listened, because they could
not do otherwise -- unless they rudely ran away from
their stuffed comrade. One of the Scarecrow's
recitations was like this:

  "What sound is so sweet
  As the straw from the wheat
When it crunkles so tender and low?
  It is yellow and bright,
  So it gives me delight
To crunkle wherever I go.


  "Sweet, fresh, golden Straw!
  There is surely no flaw
In a stuffing so clean and compact.
  It creaks when I walk,
  And it thrills when I talk,
And its fragrance is fine, for a fact.
  "To cut me don't hurt,

  For I've no blood to squirt,
And I therefore can suffer no pain;
  The straw that I use
  Doesn't lump up or bruise,
Though it's pounded again and again!


  "I know it is said
  That my beautiful head
Has brains of mixed wheat-straw and bran,
  But my thoughts are so good
  I'd not change, if I could,
For the brains of a common meat man.


  "Content with my lot,
  I'm glad that I'm not
Like others I meet day by day;
  If my insides get musty,
  Or mussed-up, or dusty,
I get newly stuffed right away."




Chapter Four

The Loons of Loonville


Toward evening, the travelers found there was no longer
a path to guide them, and the purple hues of the grass
and trees warned them that they were now in the Country
of the Gillikins, where strange peoples dwelt in places
that were quite unknown to the other inhabitants of Oz.
The fields were wild and uncultivated and there were no
houses of any sort to be seen. But our friends kept on
walking even after the sun went down, hoping to find a
good place for Woot the Wanderer to sleep; but when it
grew quite dark and the boy was weary with his long
walk, they halted right in the middle of a field and
allowed Woot to get his supper from the food he carried
in his knapsack. Then the Scarecrow laid himself down,
so that Woot could use his stuffed body as a pillow,
and the Tin Woodman stood up beside them all night, so
the dampness of the ground might not rust his joints or
dull his brilliant polish. Whenever the dew settled on
his body he carefully wiped it off with a cloth, and so
in the morning the Emperor shone as brightly as ever in
the rays of the rising sun.

They wakened the boy at daybreak, the Scarecrow
saying to him:

"We have discovered something queer, and therefore we
must counsel together what to do about it."

"What have you discovered?" asked Woot, rubbing the
sleep from his eyes with his knuckles and giving three
wide yawns to prove he was fully awake.

"A Sign," said the Tin Woodman. "A Sign, and another path."

"What does the Sign say?" inquired the boy.

"It says that 'All Strangers are Warned not to Follow
this Path to Loonville,'" answered the Scarecrow, who
could read very well when his eyes had been freshly
painted.

"In that case," said the boy, opening his knapsack to
get some breakfast, "let us travel in some other
direction."

But this did not seem to please either of his
companions.

"I'd like to see what Loonville looks like," remarked
the Tin Woodman.

"When one travels, it is foolish to miss any
interesting sight," added the Scarecrow.

"But a warning means danger," protested Woot the
Wanderer, "and I believe it sensible to keep out of
danger whenever we can."

They made no reply to this speech for a while. Then
said the Scarecrow:

"I have escaped so many dangers, during my lifetime,
that I am not much afraid of anything that can happen."

"Nor am I!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman, swinging his
glittering axe around his tin head, in a series of
circles. "Few things can injure tin, and my axe is a
powerful weapon to use against a foe. But our boy
friend," he continued, looking solemnly at Woot, "might
perhaps be injured if the people of Loonville are
really dangerous; so I propose he waits here while you
and I, Friend Scarecrow, visit the forbidden City of
Loonville."

"Don't worry about me," advised Woot, calmly.
"Wherever you wish to go, I will go, and share your
dangers. During my wanderings I have found it more wise
to keep out of danger than to venture in, but at that
time I was alone, and now I have two powerful friends
to protect me."

So, when he had finished his breakfast, they all set
out along the path that led to Loonville.

"It is a place I have never heard of before,"
remarked the Scarecrow, as they approached a dense
forest. "The inhabitants may be people, of some sort,
or they may be animals, but whatever they prove to be,
we will have an interesting story to relate to Dorothy
and Ozma on our return."

The path led into the forest, but the big trees grew
so closely together and the vines and underbrush were
so thick and matted that they had to clear a path at
each step in order to proceed. In one or two places the
Tin Man, who went first to clear the way, cut the
branches with a blow of his axe. Woot followed next,
and last of the three came the Scarecrow, who could not
have kept the path at all had not his comrades broken
the way for his straw-stuffed body.

Presently the Tin Woodman pushed his way through some
heavy underbrush, and almost tumbled headlong into a
vast cleared space in the forest. The clearing was
circular, big and roomy, yet the top branches of the
tall trees reached over and formed a complete dome or
roof for it. Strangely enough, it was not dark in this
immense natural chamber in the woodland, for the place
glowed with a soft, white light that seemed to come
from some unseen source.

In the chamber were grouped dozens of queer
creatures, and these so astonished the Tin Man that
Woot had to push his metal body aside, that he might
see, too. And the Scarecrow pushed Woot aside, so that
the three travelers stood in a row, staring with all
their eyes.

The creatures they beheld were round and ball-like;
round in body, round in legs and arms, round in hands
and feet and round of head.  The only exception to the
roundness was a slight hollow on the top of each head,
making it saucer-shaped instead of dome-shaped. They
wore no clothes on their puffy bodies, nor had they any
hair. Their skins were all of a light gray color, and
their eyes were mere purple spots. Their noses were as
puffy as the rest of them.

"Are they rubber, do you think?" asked the Scarecrow,
who noticed that the creatures bounded, as they moved,
and seemed almost as light as air.

"It is difficult to tell what they are," answered
Woot, "they seem to be covered with warts."

The Loons -- for so these folks were called -- had
been doing many things, some playing together, some
working at tasks and some gathered in groups to talk;
but at the sound of strange voices, which echoed rather
loudly through the clearing, all turned in the
direction of the intruders.  Then, in a body, they all
rushed forward, running and bounding with tremendous
speed.

The Tin Woodman was so surprised by this sudden dash
that he had no time to raise his axe before the Loons
were on them. The creatures swung their puffy hands,
which looked like boxing-gloves, and pounded the three
travelers as hard as they could, on all sides. The
blows were quite soft and did not hurt our friends at
all, but the onslaught quite bewildered them, so that
in a brief period all three were knocked over and fell
flat upon the ground. Once down, many of the Loons
held them, to prevent their getting up again, while
others wound long tendrils of vines about them, binding
their arms and legs to their bodies and so rendering
them helpless.

"Aha!" cried the biggest Loon of all; "we've got 'em
safe; so let's carry 'em to King Bal and have 'em
tried, and condemned and perforated!" They had to drag
their captives to the center of the domed chamber, for
their weight, as compared with that of the Loons,
prevented their being carried. Even the Scarecrow was
much heavier than the puffy Loons. But finally the
party halted before a raised platform, on which stood a
sort of throne, consisting of a big, wide chair with a
string tied to one arm of it. This string led upward to
the roof of the dome.

Arranged before the platform, the prisoners were
allowed to sit up, facing the empty throne.

"Good!" said the big Loon who had commanded the
party. "Now to get King Bal to judge these terrible
creatures we have so bravely captured."

As he spoke he took hold of the string and began to
pull as hard as he could. One or two of the others
helped him and pretty soon, as they drew in the cord,
the leaves above them parted and a Loon appeared at the
other end of the string. It didn't take long to draw
him down to the throne, where he seated himself and was
tied in, so he wouldn't float upward again.

"Hello," said the King, blinking his purple eyes at
his followers; "what's up now!"

"Strangers, your Majesty -- strangers and captives,"
replied the big Loon, pompously

"Dear me!  I see 'em. I see 'em very plainly,"
exclaimed the King, his purple eyes bulging out as he
looked at the three prisoners. "What curious animals!
Are they dangerous, do you think, my good Panta?"

"I'm 'fraid so, your Majesty. Of course, they may not
be dangerous, but we mustn't take chances. Enough
accidents happen to us poor Loons as it is, and my
advice is to condemn and perforate 'em as quickly as
possible."

"Keep your advice to yourself," said the monarch, in
a peeved tone. "Who's King here, anyhow? You or Me?"

"We made you our King because you have less common
sense than the rest of us," answered Panta Loon,
indignantly. "I could have been King myself, had I
wanted to, but I didn't care for the hard work and
responsibility."

As he said this, the big Loon strutted back and forth
in the space between the throne of King Bal and the
prisoners, and the other Loons seemed much impressed by
his defiance. But suddenly there came a sharp report
and Panta Loon instantly disappeared, to the great
astonishment of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and Woot
the Wanderer, who saw on the spot where the big fellow
had stood a little heap of flabby, wrinkled skin that
looked like a collapsed rubber balloon.

"There!" exclaimed the King; "I expected that would
happen. The conceited rascal wanted to puff himself up
until he was bigger than the rest of you, and this is
the result of his folly. Get the pump working, some of
you, and blow him up again."

"We will have to mend the puncture first, your
Majesty," suggested one of the Loons, and the prisoners
noticed that none of them seemed surprised or shocked
at the sad accident to Panta.

"All right," grumbled the King. "Fetch Til to mend
him."

One or two ran away and presently returned, followed
by a lady Loon wearing huge, puffed-up rubber skirts.
Also she had a purple feather fastened to a wart on the
top of her head, and around her waist was a sash of
fibre-like vines, dried and tough, that looked like
strings.

"Get to work, Til," commanded King Bal. "Panta has
just exploded."

The lady Loon picked up the bunch of skin and
examined it carefully until she discovered a hole in
one foot. Then she pulled a strand of string from her
sash, and drawing the edges of the hole together. she
tied them fast with the string, thus making one of
those curious warts which the strangers had noticed on
so many Loons. Having done this, Til Loon tossed the
bit of skin to the other Loons and was about to go away
when she noticed the prisoners and stopped to inspect
them.

"Dear me!" said Til; "what dreadful creatures. Where
did they come from?"

"We captured them," replied one of the Loons.

"And what are we going to do with them?" inquired the
girl Loon.

"Perhaps we'll condemn 'em and puncture 'em,"
answered the King.

"Well," said she, still eyeing the  "I'm not sure
they'll puncture. Let's try it, and see."

One of the Loons ran to the forest's edge and quickly
returned with a long, sharp thorn. He glanced at the
King, who nodded his head in assent, and then he rushed
forward and stuck the thorn into the leg of the
Scarecrow. The Scarecrow merely smiled and said
nothing, for the thorn didn't hurt him at all.

Then the Loon tried to prick the Tin Woodman's leg,
but the tin only blunted the point of the thorn.

"Just as I thought," said Til, blinking her purple
eyes and shaking her puffy head; but just then the Loon
stuck the thorn into the leg of Woot the Wanderer, and
while it had been blunted somewhat, it was still sharp
enough to hurt.

"Ouch!" yelled Woot, and kicked out his leg with so
much energy that the frail bonds that tied him burst
apart. His foot caught the Loon -- who was leaning over
him -- full on his puffy stomach, and sent him shooting
up into the air. When he was high over their heads he
exploded with a loud "pop" and his skin fell to the
ground.

"I really believe," said the King, rolling his
spotlike eyes in a frightened way, "that Panta was
right in claiming these prisoners are dangerous. Is
the pump ready?"

Some of the Loons had wheeled a big machine in front
of the throne and now took Panta's skin and began to
pump air into it. Slowly it swelled out until the King
cried "Stop!"

"No, no!" yelled Panta, "I'm not big enough yet."
"You're as big as you're going to be," declared the
King. "Before you exploded you were bigger than the
rest of us, and that caused you to be proud and
overbearing. Now you're a little smaller than the rest,
and you will last longer and be more humble."

"Pump me up -- pump me up!" wailed Panta "If you
don't you'll break my heart."

"If we do we'll break your skin," replied the King.

So the Loons stopped pumping air into Panta, and
pushed him away from the pump. He was certainly more
humble than before his accident, for he crept into the
background and said nothing more.

"Now pump up the other one," ordered the King. Til
had already mended him, and the Loons set to work to
pump him full of air.

During these last few moments none had paid much
attention to the prisoners, so Woot, finding his legs
free, crept over to the Tin Woodman and rubbed the
bonds that were still around his arms and body against
the sharp edge of the axe, which quickly cut them.

The boy was now free, and the thorn which the Loon
had stuck into his leg was lying unnoticed on the
ground, where the creature had dropped it when he
exploded. Woot leaned forward and picked up the thorn,
and while the Loons were busy watching the pump, the
boy sprang to his feet and suddenly rushed upon the
group.

"Pop" -- "pop" -- "pop!" went three of the Loons,
when the Wanderer pricked them with his thorn, and at
the sounds the others looked around and saw their
danger. With yells of fear they bounded away in all
directions, scattering about the clearing, with Woot
the Wanderer in full chase. While they could run much
faster than the boy, they often stumbled and fell, or
got in one another's way, so he managed to catch
several and prick them with his thorn.

It astonished him to see how easily the Loons
exploded. When the air was let out of them they were
quite helpless. Til Loon was one of those who ran
against his thorn and many others suffered the same
fate. The creatures could not escape from the
enclosure, but in their fright many bounded upward and
caught branches of the trees, and then climbed out of
reach of the dreaded thorn.

Woot was getting pretty tired chasing them, so he
stopped and came over, panting, to where his friends
were sitting, still bound.

"Very well done, my Wanderer," said the Tin Woodman.
"It is evident that we need fear these puffed-up
creatures no longer, so be kind enough to unfasten our
bonds and we will proceed upon our journey."

Woot untied the bonds of the Scarecrow and helped him
to his feet. Then he freed the Tin Woodman, who got up
without help. Looking around them, they saw that the
only Loon now remaining within reach was Bal Loon, the
King, who had remained seated in his throne, watching
the punishment of his people with a bewildered look in
his purple eyes.

"Shall I puncture the King?" the boy asked his
companions.

King Bal must have overheard the question, for he
fumbled with the cord that fastened him to the throne
and managed to release it. Then he floated upward until
he reached the leafy dome, and parting the branches he
disappeared from sight. But the string that was tied to
his body was still connected with the arm of the
throne, and they knew they could pull his Majesty down
again, if they wanted to.

"Let him alone," suggested the Scarecrow. "He seems a
good enough king for his peculiar people, and after we
are gone, the Loons will have something of a job to
pump up all those whom Woot has punctured."

"Every one of them ought to be exploded," declared
Woot, who was angry because his leg still hurt him.

"No," said the Tin Woodman, "that would not be just
fair. They were quite right to capture us, because we
had no business to intrude here, having been warned to
keep away from Loonville. This is their country, not
ours, and since the poor things can't get out of the
clearing, they can harm no one save those who venture
here out of curiosity, as we did."

"Well said, my friend," agreed tile Scarecrow. "We
really had no right to disturb their peace and comfort;
so let us go away."

They easily found the place where they had forced
their way into the enclosure, so the Tin Woodman pushed
aside the underbrush and started first along the path.
The Scarecrow followed next and last came Woot, who
looked back and saw that the Loons were still clinging
to their perches on the trees and watching their former
captives with frightened eyes.

"I guess they're glad to see the last of us,"
remarked the boy, and laughing at the happy ending of
the adventure, he followed his comrades along the path.




Chapter Five

Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess


When they had reached the end of the path, where they
had first seen the warning sign, they set off across
the country in an easterly direction. Before long they
reached Rolling Lands, which were a succession of hills
and valleys where constant climbs and descents were
required, and their journey now became tedious, because
on climbing each hill, they found before them nothing
in the valley below it except grass, or weeds or
stones.

Up and down they went for hours, with nothing to
relieve the monotony of the landscape, until finally,
when they had topped a higher hill than usual, they
discovered a cup-shaped valley before them in the
center of which stood an enormous castle, built of
purple stone.  The castle was high and broad and
long, but had no turrets and towers. So far as they
could see, there was but one small window and one
big door on each side of the great building.

"This is strange!" mused the Scarecrow. "I'd no idea
such a big castle existed in this Gillikin Country. I
wonder who lives here?"

"It seems to me, from this distance," remarked the
Tin Woodman, "that it's the biggest castle I ever saw.
It is really too big for any use, and no one could open
or shut those big doors without a stepladder."

"Perhaps, if we go nearer, we shall find out whether
anybody lives there or not," suggested Woot. "Looks to
me as if nobody lived there."

On they went, and when they reached the center of the
valley, where the great stone castle stood, it was
beginning to grow dark. So they hesitated as to what to
do.

"If friendly people happen to live here," said Woot.
I shall be glad of a bed; but should enemies occupy the
place, I prefer to sleep upon the ground."

"And if no one at all lives here," added the
Scarecrow, "we can enter, and take possession, and
make ourselves at home."

While speaking he went nearer to one of the great
doors, which was three times as high and broad as any
he had ever seen in a house before, and then he
discovered, engraved in big letters upon a stone over
the doorway, the words:

"YOOP CASTLE"

"Oho!" he exclaimed; "I know the place now. This was
probably the home of Mr. Yoop, a terrible giant whom I
have seen confined in a cage, a long way from here.
Therefore this castle is likely to be empty and we may
use it in any way we please."

"Yes, yes," said the Tin Emperor, nodding; "I also
remember Mr. Yoop. But how are we to get into his
deserted castle? The latch of the door is so far above
our heads that none of us can reach it."

They considered this problem for a while, and then
Woot said to the Tin Man:

"If I stand upon your shoulders, I think I can
unlatch the door."

"Climb up, then," was the reply, and when the boy was
perched upon the tin shoulders of Nick Chopper, he was
just able to reach the latch and raise it.

At once the door swung open, its great hinges making
a groaning sound as if in protest, so Woot leaped down
and followed his companions into a big, bare hallway.
Scarcely were the three inside, however, when they
heard the door slam shut behind them, and this
astonished them because no one had touched it. It had
closed of its own accord, as if by magic. Moreover,
the latch was on the outside, and the thought occurred
to each one of them that they were now prisoners in
this unknown castle.

"However," mumbled the Scarecrow, "we are not to
blame for what cannot be helped; so let us push bravely
ahead and see what may be seen."

It was quite dark in the hallway, now that the
outside door was shut, so as they stumbled along a
stone passage they kept close together, not knowing
what danger was likely to befall them.

Suddenly a soft glow enveloped them. It grew
brighter, until they could see their surroundings
distinctly. They had reached the end of the passage and
before them was another huge door. This noiselessly
swung open before them, without the help of anyone, and
through the doorway they observed a big chamber, the
walls of which were lined with plates of pure gold,
highly polished.

This room was also lighted, although they could
discover no lamps, and in the center of it was a great
table at which sat an immense woman. She was clad in
silver robes embroidered with gay floral designs, and
wore over this splendid raiment a short apron of
elaborate lace-work. Such an apron was no protection,
and was not in keeping with the handsome gown, but the
huge woman wore it, nevertheless. The table at which
she sat was spread with a white cloth and had golden
dishes upon it, so the travelers saw that they had
surprised the Giantess while she was eating her supper.

She had her back toward them and did not even turn
around, but taking a biscuit from a dish she began to
butter it and said in a voice that was big and deep but
not especially unpleasant:

"Why don't you come in and allow the door to shut?
You're causing a draught, and I shall catch cold and
sneeze. When I sneeze, I get cross, and when I get
cross I'm liable to do something wicked. Come in, you
foolish strangers; come in!"

Being thus urged, they entered the room and
approached the table, until they stood where they faced
the great Giantess. She continued eating, but smiled in
a curious way as she looked at them. Woot noticed that
the door had closed silently after they had entered,
and that didn't please him at all.

"Well," said the Giantess, "what excuse have you to
offer?"

"We didn't know anyone lived here, Madam," explained
the Scarecrow; "so, being travelers and strangers in
these parts, and wishing to find a place for our boy
friend to sleep, we ventured to enter your castle."

"You knew it was private property, I suppose?" said
she, buttering another biscuit.

"We saw the words, 'Yoop Castle,' over the door, but
we knew that Mr. Yoop is a prisoner in a cage in a far-
off part of the land of Oz, so we decided there was no
one now at home and that we might use the castle for
the night."

"I see," remarked the Giantess, nodding her head and
smiling again in that curious way -- a way that made
Woot shudder. "You didn't know that Mr. Yoop was
married, or that after he was cruelly captured his wife
still lived in his castle and ran it to suit herself."

"Who captured Mr. Yoop?" asked Woot, looking gravely
at the big woman.

"Wicked enemies. People who selfishly objected to
Yoop's taking their cows and sheep for his food. I must
admit, however, that Yoop had a bad temper, and had the
habit of knocking over a few houses, now and then, when
he was angry. So one day the little folks came in a
great crowd and captured Mr. Yoop, and carried him away
to a cage somewhere in the mountains. I don't know
where it is, and I don't care, for my husband treated
me badly at times, forgetting the respect a giant owes
to a giantess. Often he kicked me on my shins, when I
wouldn't wait on him. So I'm glad he is gone."

"It's a wonder the people didn't capture you, too,"
remarked Woot.

"Well, I was too clever for them," said she, giving a
sudden laugh that caused such a breeze that the wobbly
Scarecrow was almost blown off his feet and had to grab
his friend Nick Chopper to steady himself. "I saw the
people coining," continued Mrs. Yoop, "and knowing they
meant mischief I transformed myself into a mouse and
hid in a cupboard. After they had gone away, carrying
my shin-kicking husband with them, I transformed myself
back to my former shape again, and here I've lived in
peace and comfort ever since."

"Are you a Witch, then? " inquired Woot.

"Well, not exactly a Witch," she replied, "but I'm an
Artist in Transformations. In other words, I'm more of
a Yookoohoo than a Witch, and of course you know that
the Yookoohoos are the cleverest magic-workers in the
world."

The travelers were silent for a time, uneasily
considering this statement and the effect it might have
on their future. No doubt the Giantess had wilfully
made them her prisoners; yet she spoke so cheerfully,
in her big voice, that until now they had not been
alarmed in the least.

By and by the Scarecrow, whose mixed brains had been
working steadily, asked the woman:

"Are we to consider you our friend, Mrs. Yoop, or do
you intend to be our enemy?"

"I never have friends," she said in a matter-of-fact
tone, "because friends get too familiar and always
forget to mind their own business. But I am not your
enemy; not yet, anyhow. Indeed, I'm glad you've come,
for my life here is rather lonely. I've had no one to
talk to since I transformed Polychrome, the Daughter of
the Rainbow, into a canary-bird."

"How did you manage to do that?" asked the Tin
Woodman, in amazement. "Polychrome is a powerful
fairy!"

"She was," said the Giantess; "but now she's a
canary-bird. One day after a rain, Polychrome danced
off the Rainbow and fell asleep on a little mound in
this valley, not far from my castle. The sun came out
and drove the Rainbow away, and before Poly wakened, I
stole out and transformed her into a canary-bird in a
gold cage studded with diamonds. The cage was so she
couldn't fly away. I expected she'd sing and talk and
we'd have good times together; but she has proved no
company for me at all. Ever since the moment of her
transformation, she has refused to speak a single
word."

"Where is she now?" inquired Woot, who had heard tales
of lovely Polychrome and was much interested in her.

"The cage is hanging up in my bedroom," said the
Giantess, eating another biscuit. The travelers were
now  more uneasy and suspicious of the Giantess than
before. If Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter, who was
a real fairy, had been transformed and enslaved by this
huge woman, who claimed to be a Yookoohoo, what was
liable to happen to them? Said the Scarecrow, twisting
his stuffed head around in Mrs. Yoop's direction:

"Do you know, Ma'am, who we are?"

"Of course," said she; "a straw man, a tin man and a boy."

"We are very important people," declared the Tin Woodman.

"All the better," she replied. "I shall enjoy your
society the more on that account. For I mean to keep
you here as long as I live, to amuse me when I get
lonely. And," she added slowly, "in this Valley no one
ever dies."

They didn't like this speech at all, so the Scarecrow
frowned in a way that made Mrs. Yoop smile, while
the Tin Woodman looked so fierce that Mrs. Yoop
laughed. The Scarecrow suspected she was going to
laugh, so he slipped behind his friends to escape the
wind from her breath.  From this safe position he
said warningly:

"We have powerful friends who will soon come to
rescue us."

"Let them come," she returned, with an accent of
scorn. "When they get here they will find neither a
boy, nor a tin man, nor a scarecrow, for tomorrow
morning I intend to transform you all into other
shapes, so that you cannot be recognized."

This threat filled them with dismay. The good-natured
Giantess was more terrible than they had imagined. She
could smile and wear pretty clothes and at the same
time be even more cruel than her wicked husband had been.

Both the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman tried to
think of some way to escape from the castle before
morning, but she seemed to read their thoughts and
shook her head.

"Don't worry your poor brains," said she. "You can't
escape me, however hard you try. But why should you
wish to escape? I shall give you new forms that are
much better than the ones you now have. Be contented
with your fate, for discontent leads to unhappiness,
and unhappiness, in any form, is the greatest evil that
can befall you."

"What forms do you intend to give us?" asked Woot
earnestly.

"I haven't decided, as yet. I'll dream over it
tonight, so in the morning I shall have made up my mind
how to transform you. Perhaps you'd prefer to choose
your own transformations?"

"No," said Woot, "I prefer to remain as I am."

"That's funny," she retorted. "You are little, and
you're weak; as you are, you're not much account,
anyhow. The best thing about you is that you're alive,
for I shall be able to make of you some sort of live
creature which will be a great improvement on your
present form."

She took another biscuit from a plate and dipped it
in a pot of honey and calmly began eating it.

The Scarecrow watched her thoughtfully.

"There are no fields of grain in your Valley," said he;
"where, then. did you get the flour to make your biscuits?"

"Mercy me! do you think I'd bother to make biscuits
out of flour?" she replied. "That is altogether too
tedious a process for a Yookoohoo. I set some traps
this afternoon and caught a lot of field-mice, but as I
do not like to eat mice, I transformed them into hot
biscuits for my supper. The honey in this pot was once
a wasp's nest, but since being transformed it has
become sweet and delicious. All I need do, when I wish
to eat, is to take something I don't care to keep, and
transform it into any sort of food I like, and eat it.
Are you hungry?"

"I don't eat, thank you," said the Scarecrow.

"Nor do I," said the Tin Woodman.

"I have still a little natural food in my knapsack,"
said Woot the Wanderer, "and I'd rather eat that than
any wasp's nest."

"Every one to his taste," said the Giantess
carelessly, and having now finished her supper she rose
to her feet, clapped her hands together, and the supper
table at once disappeared.




Chapter Six

The Magic of a Yookoohoo


Woot had seen very little of magic during his
wanderings, while the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman had
seen a great deal of many sorts in their lives, yet all
three were greatly impressed by Mrs. Yoop's powers. She
did not affect any mysterious airs or indulge in chants
or mystic rites, as most witches do, nor was the
Giantess old and ugly or disagreeable in face or
manner. Nevertheless, she frightened her prisoners more
than any witch could have done.

"Please be seated," she said to them, as she sat
herself down in a great arm-chair and spread her
beautiful embroidered skirts for them to admire. But
all the chairs in the room were so high that our
friends could not climb to the seats of them. Mrs. Yoop
observed this and waved her hand, when instantly a
golden ladder appeared leaning against a chair opposite
her own.

"Climb up," said she, and they obeyed, the Tin Man
and the boy assisting the more clumsy Scarecrow. When
they were all seated in a row on the cushion of the
chair, the Giantess continued: "Now tell me how you
happened to travel in this direction, and where you
came from and what your errand is."

So the Tin Woodman told her all about Nimmie Amee,
and how he had decided to find her and marry her,
although he had no Loving Heart. The story seemed to
amuse the big woman, who then began to ask the
Scarecrow questions and for the first time in her life
heard of Ozma of Oz, and of Dorothy and Jack
Pumpkinhead and Dr. Pipt and Tik-tok and many other Oz
people who are well known in the Emerald City. Also
Woot had to tell his story, which. was very simple and
did not take long. The Giantess laughed heartily when
the boy related their adventure at Loonville, but said
she knew nothing of the Loons because she never left
her Valley.

"There are wicked people who would like to capture
me, as they did my giant husband, Mr. Yoop," said she;
"so I stay at home and mind my own business."

"If Ozma knew that you dared to work magic without
her consent, she would punish you severely," declared
the Scarecrow, "for this castle is in the Land of Oz,
and no persons in the Land of Oz are permitted to work
magic except Glinda the Good and the little Wizard who
lives with Ozma in the Emerald City."

"That for your Ozma!" exclaimed the Giantess,
snapping her fingers in derision. "What do I care for a
girl whom I have never seen and who has never seen me?"

"But Ozma is a fairy," said the Tin Woodman, and
therefore she is very powerful. Also, we are under
Ozma's protection, and to injure us in any way would
make her extremely angry."

"What I do here, in my own private castle in this
secluded Valley -- where no one comes but fools like
you -- can never be known to your fairy Ozma," returned
the Giantess. "Do not seek to frighten me from my
purpose, and do not allow yourselves to be frightened,
for it is best to meet bravely what cannot be avoided.
I am now going to bed, and in the morning I will give
you all new forms, such as will be more interesting to
me than the ones you now wear. Good night, and pleasant dreams."

Saying this, Mrs. Yoop rose from her chair and walked
through a doorway into another room. So heavy was the
tread of the Giantess that even the walls of the big
stone castle trembled as she stepped. She closed the
door of her bedroom behind her, and then suddenly the
light went out and the three prisoners found themselves
in total darkness.

The Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow didn't mind the
dark at all, but Woot the Wanderer felt worried to be
left in this strange place in this strange manner,
without being able to see any danger that might threaten.

"The big woman might have given me a bed, anyhow," he
said to his companions, and scarcely had he spoken when
he felt something press against his legs, which were
then dangling from the seat of the chair. Leaning down,
he put out his hand and found that a bedstead had
appeared, with mattress, sheets and covers, all
complete. He lost no time in slipping down upon the bed
and was soon fast asleep.

During the night the Scarecrow and the Emperor talked
in low tones together, and they got out of the chair
and moved all about the room, feeling for some hidden
spring that might open a door or window and permit them
to escape.

Morning found them still unsuccessful in the quest
and as soon as it was daylight Woot's bed suddenly
disappeared, and he dropped to the floor with a thump
that quickly wakened him. And after a time the Giantess
came from her bedroom, wearing another dress that was
quite as elaborate as the one in which she had been
attired the evening before, and also wearing the pretty
lace apron. Having seated herself in a chair, she said:

"I'm hungry; so I'll have breakfast at once."

She clapped her hands together and instantly the
table appeared before her, spread with snowy linen
and laden with golden dishes. But there was no
food upon the table, nor anything else except a
pitcher of water, a bundle of weeds and a handful
of pebbles. But the Giantess poured some water into
her coffee-pot, patted it once or twice with her hand,
and then poured out a cupful of steaming hot coffee.

"Would you like some?" she asked Woot.

He was suspicious of magic coffee, but it smelled so
good that he could not resist it; so he answered: "If
you please, Madam."

The Giantess poured out another cup and set it on the
floor for Woot. It was as big as a tub, and the golden
spoon in the saucer beside the cup was so heavy the boy
could scarcely lift it. But Woot managed to get a sip
of the coffee and found it delicious.

Mrs. Yoop next transformed the weeds into a dish of
oatmeal, which she ate with good appetite.

"Now, then," said she, picking up the pebbles. "I'm
wondering whether I shall have fish-balls or lamb-chops
to complete my meal. Which would you prefer, Woot the Wanderer?"

"If you please, I'll eat the food in my knapsack,"
answered the boy. "Your magic food might taste good,
but I'm afraid of it."

The woman laughed at his fears and transformed the
pebbles into fish-balls.

"I suppose you think that after you had eaten this
food it would turn to stones again and make you sick,"
she remarked; "but that would be impossible. Nothing I
transform ever gets back to its former shape again, so
these fish-balls can never more be pebbles. That is why
I have to be careful of my transformations," she added,
busily eating while she talked, "for while I can change
forms at will I can never change them back again --
which proves that even the powers of a clever Yookoohoo
are limited. When I have transformed you three people,
you must always wear the shapes that I have given you."

"Then please don't transform us," begged Woot, "for
we are quite satisfied to remain as we are."

"I am not expecting to satisfy you, but intend to
please myself," she declared, "and my pleasure is to
give you new shapes. For, if by chance your friends
came in search of you, not one of them would be able to
recognize you."

Her tone was so positive that they knew it would be
useless to protest. The woman was not unpleasant to
look at; her face was not cruel; her voice was big but
gracious in tone; but her words showed that she
possessed a merciless heart and no pleadings would
alter her wicked purpose.

Mrs. Yoop took ample time to finish her breakfast and
the prisoners had no desire to hurry her, but finally
the meal was concluded and she folded her napkin and
made the table disappear by clapping her hands
together. Then she turned to her captives and said:

"The next thing on the programme is to change your
forms."

"Have you decided what forms to give us?" asked the
Scarecrow, uneasily.

"Yes; I dreamed it all out while I was asleep. This
Tin Man seems a very solemn person " -- indeed, the Tin
Woodman was looking solemn, just then, for he was
greatly disturbed -- "so I shall change him into an
Owl."

All she did was to point one finger at him as she
spoke, but immediately the form of the Tin Woodman
began to change and in a few seconds Nick Chopper, the
Emperor of the Winkies, had been transformed into an
Owl, with eyes as big as saucers and a hooked beak and
strong claws.  But he was still tin. He was a Tin Owl,
with tin legs and beak and eyes and feathers. When he
flew to the back of a chair and perched upon it, his
tin feathers rattled against one another with a tinny
clatter. The Giantess seemed  much amused by the Tin
Owl's appearance, for her laugh was big and jolly.

"You're not liable to get lost," said she, "for your
wings and feathers will make a racket wherever you go.
And, on my word, a Tin Owl is so rare and pretty that
it is an improvement on the ordinary bird. I did not
intend to make you tin, but I forgot to wish you to be
meat. However, tin you were, and tin you are, and as
it's too late to change you, that settles it."

Until now the Scarecrow had rather doubted the
possibility of Mrs. Yoop's being able to transform him,
or his friend the Tin Woodman, for they were not made
as ordinary people are. He had worried more over what
might happen to Woot than to himself, but now he began
to worry about himself.

"Madam," he said hastily, "I consider this action
very impolite. It may even be called rude, considering
we are your guests."

"You are not guests, for I did not invite you here,"
she replied.

"Perhaps not; but we craved hospitality. We threw
ourselves upon your mercy, so to speak, and we now find
you have no mercy. Therefore, if you will excuse the
expression, I must say it is downright wicked to take
our proper forms away from us and give us others that
we do not care for."

"Are you trying to make me angry?" she asked,
frowning.

"By no means," said the Scarecrow; "I'm just trying
to make you act more ladylike."

"Oh, indeed! In my opinion, Mr. Scarecrow, you are
now acting like a bear -- so a Bear you shall be!"

Again the dreadful finger pointed, this time in the
Scarecrow's direction, and at once his form began to
change. In a few seconds he had become a small Brown
Bear, but he was stuffed with straw as he had been
before, and when the little Brown Bear shuffled across
the floor he was just as wobbly as the Scarecrow had
been and moved just as awkwardly.

Woot was amazed, but he was also thoroughly
frightened.

"Did it hurt?" he asked the little Brown Bear.

"No, of course not," growled the Scarecrow in the
Bear's form; "but I don't like walking on four legs;
it's undignified."

"Consider my humiliation!" chirped the Tin Owl,
trying to settle its tin feathers smoothly with its tin
beak. "And I can't see very well, either. The light
seems to hurt my eyes."

"That's because you are an Owl," said Woot. "I think
you will see better in the dark."

"Well," remarked the Giantess, "I'm very well pleased
with these new forms, for my part, and I'm sure you
will like them better when you get used to them. So
now," she added, turning to the boy, "it is your turn."

"Don't you think you'd better leave me as I am?"
asked Woot in a trembling voice.

"No," she replied, "I'm going to make a Monkey of
you. I love monkeys -- they're so cute! -- and I think
a Green Monkey will be lots of fun and amuse me when I
am sad."

Woot shivered, for again the terrible magic finger
pointed, and pointed directly his way. He felt himself
changing; not so very much, however, and it didn't hurt
him a bit. He looked down at his limbs and body and
found that his clothes were gone and his skin covered
with a fine, silk-like green fur. His hands and feet
were now those of a monkey. He realized he really was a
monkey, and his first feeling was one of anger. He
began to chatter as monkeys do. He bounded to the seat
of a giant chair, and then to its back and with a wild
leap sprang upon the laughing Giantess. His idea was to
seize her hair and pull it out by the roots, and so
have revenge for her wicked transformations. But she
raised her hand and said:

"Gently, my dear Monkey -- gently!  You're not angry;
you're happy as can be!"

Woot stopped short. No; he wasn't a bit angry now; he
felt as good-humored and gay as ever he did when a boy.
Instead of pulling Mrs. Yoop's hair, he perched on her
shoulder and smoothed her soft cheek with his hairy
paw. In return, she smiled at the funny green animal
and patted his head.

"Very good," said the Giantess. "Let us all become
friends and be happy together. How is my Tin Owl
feeling?"

"Quite comfortable," said the Owl. "I don't like it,
to be sure, but I'm not going to allow my new form to
make me unhappy. But, tell me, please: what is a Tin
Owl good for?"

"You are only good to make me laugh," replied the
Giantess.

"Will a stuffed Bear also make you laugh?" inquired
the Scarecrow, sitting back on his haunches to look up
at her.

"Of course," declared the Giantess; "and I have added
a little magic to your transformations to make you all
contented with wearing your new forms. I'm sorry I
didn't think to do that when I transformed Polychrome
into a Canary-Bird. But perhaps, when she sees how
cheerful you are, she will cease to be silent and
sullen and take to singing. I will go get the bird and
let you see her."

With this, Mrs. Yoop went into the next room and soon
returned bearing a golden cage in which sat upon a
swinging perch a lovely yellow Canary. "Polychrome,"
said the Giantess, "permit me to introduce to you a
Green Monkey, which used to be a boy called Woot the
Wanderer, and a Tin Owl, which used to be a Tin Woodman
named Nick Chopper, and a straw-stuffed little Brown
Bear which used to be a live Scarecrow."

"We already know one another," declared the
Scarecrow. "The bird is Polychrome, the Rainbow's
Daughter, and she and I used to be good friends."

"Are you really my old friend, the Scarecrow?" asked;
the bird, in a sweet, low voice.

"There!" cried Mrs. Yoop; "that's the first time she
has spoken since she was transformed."

"I am really your old friend," answered the
Scarecrow; "but you must pardon me for appearing just
now in this brutal form."

"I am a bird, as you are, dear Poly," said the Tin
Woodman; "but, alas! a Tin Owl is not as beautiful as a
Canary-Bird."

"How dreadful it all is!" sighed the Canary.
"Couldn't you manage to escape from this terrible
Yookoohoo?"

No," answered the Scarecrow, "we tried to escape, but
failed. She first made us her prisoners and then
transformed us. But how did she manage to get you,
Polychrome?"'

"I was asleep, and she took unfair advantage of me,"
answered the bird sadly. "Had I been awake, I could
easily have protected myself."

"Tell me," said the Green Monkey earnestly, as he
came close to the cage, "what must we do, Daughter of
the Rainbow, to escape from these transformations?
Can't you help us, being a Fairy?" "At present I am
powerless to help even myself," replied the Canary.

"That's the exact truth!" exclaimed the Giantess, who
seemed pleased to hear the bird talk, even though it
complained; "you are all helpless and in my power, so
you may as well make up your minds to accept your fate
and be content. Remember that you are transformed for
good, since no magic on earth can break your
enchantments. I am now going out for my morning walk,
for each day after breakfast I walk sixteen times
around my castle for exercise. Amuse yourselves while I
am gone, and when I return I hope to find you all
reconciled and happy."

So the Giantess walked to the door by which our
friends had entered the great hall and spoke one word:
"Open!" Then the door swung open and after Mrs. Yoop
had passed out it closed again with a snap as its
powerful bolts shot into place. The Green Monkey had
rushed toward the opening, hoping to escape, but he was
too late and only got a bump on his nose as the door
slammed shut.




Chapter Seven

The Lace Apron


"Now," said the Canary, in a tone more brisk than
before, "we may talk together more freely, as Mrs. Yoop
cannot hear us. Perhaps we can figure out a way to
escape."

"Open!" said Woot the Monkey, still facing the door;
but his command had no effect and he slowly rejoined
the others.

"You cannot open any door or window in this enchanted
castle unless you are wearing the Magic Apron," said
the Canary.

"What Magic Apron do you mean?" asked the Tin Owl, in
a curious voice.

"The lace one, which the Giantess always wears. I
have been her prisoner, in this cage, for several
weeks, and she hangs my cage in her bedroom every
night, so that she can keep her eye on me," explained
Polychrome the Canary. "Therefore I have discovered
that it is the Magic Apron that opens the doors and
windows, and nothing else can move them. when she goes
to bed, Mrs. Yoop hangs her apron on the bedpost, and
one morning she forgot to put it on when she commanded
the door to open, and the door would not move. So then
she put on the lace apron and the door obeyed her. That
was how I learned the magic power of the apron."

"I see -- I see!" said the little Brown Bear, wagging
his stuffed head. "Then, if we could get the apron from
Mrs. Yoop, we could open the doors and escape from our
prison."

"That is true, and it is the plan I was about to
suggest," replied  Polychrome  the  Canary-Bird.
"However, I don't believe the Owl could steal the
apron, or even the Bear, but perhaps the Monkey could
hide in her room at night and get the apron while she
is asleep."

"I'll try it!" cried Woot the Monkey. "I'll try it
this very night, if I can manage to steal into her
bedroom."

"You mustn't think about it, though," warned the
bird, "for she can read your thoughts whenever she
cares to do so. And do not forget, before you escape,
to take me with you. Once I am out of the power of the
Giantess, I may discover a way to save us all."

"We won't forget our fairy friend," promised the boy;
"but perhaps you can tell me how to get into the
bedroom."

"No," declared Polychrome, "I cannot advise you as to
that. You must watch for a chance, and slip in when
Mrs. Yoop isn't looking."

They talked it over for a while longer and then Mrs.
Yoop returned.  When she entered, the door opened
suddenly, at her command, and closed as soon as her
huge form had passed through the doorway. During that
day she entered her bedroom several times, on one
errand or another, but always she commanded the door to
close behind her and her prisoners found not the
slightest chance to leave the big hall in which they
were confined.

The Green Monkey thought it would be wise to make a
friend of the big woman, so as to gain her confidence,
so he sat on the back of her chair and chattered to her
while she mended her stockings and sewed silver buttons
on some golden shoes that were as big as row-boats.
This pleased the Giantess and she would pause at times
to pat the Monkey's head. The little Brown Bear curled
up in a corner and lay still all day. The Owl and the
Canary found they could converse together in the bird
language, which neither the Giantess nor the Bear nor
the Monkey could understand; so at times they twittered
away to each other and passed the long, dreary day
quite cheerfully.

After dinner Mrs. Yoop took a big fiddle from a big
cupboard and played such loud and dreadful music that
her prisoners were all thankful when at last she
stopped and said she was going to bed.

After cautioning the Monkey and Bear and Owl to
behave themselves during the night, she picked up the
cage containing the Canary and, going to the door of
her bedroom, commanded it to open. just then, however,
she remembered she had left her fiddle lying upon a
table, so she went back for it and put it away in the
cupboard, and while her back was turned the Green
Monkey slipped through the open door into her bedroom
and hid underneath the bed. The Giantess, being sleepy,
did not notice this, and entering her room she made the
door close behind her and then hung the bird-cage on a
peg by the window. Then she began to undress, first
taking off the lace apron and laying it over the
bedpost, where it was within easy reach of her hand.

As soon as Mrs. Yoop was in bed the lights all went
out, and Woot the Monkey crouched under the bed and
waited patiently until he heard the Giantess snoring.
Then he crept out and in the dark felt around until he
got hold of the apron, which he at once tied around his
own waist.

Next, Woot tried to find the Canary, and there was
just enough moonlight showing through the window to
enable him to see where the cage hung; but it was out
of his reach. At first he was tempted to leave
Polychrome and escape with his other friends, but
remembering his promise to the Rainbow's Daughter Woot
tried to think how to save her.

A chair stood near the window, and this -- showing
dimly in the moonlight -- gave him an idea. By pushing
against it with all his might, he found he could move
the giant chair a few inches at a time. So he pushed
and pushed until the chair was beneath the bird-cage,
and then he sprang noiselessly upon the seat -- for his
monkey form enabled him to jump higher than he could do
as a boy -- and from there to the back of the chair,
and so managed to reach the cage and take it off the
peg. Then down he sprang to the floor and made his way
to the door. "Open!" he commanded, and at once the door
obeyed and swung open, But his voice wakened Mrs. Yoop,
who gave a wild cry and sprang out of bed with one
bound. The Green Monkey dashed through the doorway,
carrying the cage with him, and before the Giantess
could reach the door it slammed shut and imprisoned her
in her own bed-chamber!

The noise she made, pounding upon the door, and her
yells of anger and dreadful threats of vengeance,
filled all our friends with terror, and Woot the Monkey
was so excited that in the dark he could not find the
outer door of the hall. But the Tin Owl could see very
nicely in the dark, so he guided his friends to the
right place and when all were grouped before the door
Woot commanded it to open. The Magic Apron proved as
powerful as when it had been worn by the Giantess, so a
moment later they had rushed through the passage and
were standing in the fresh night air outside the
castle, free to go wherever they willed.




Chapter Eight

The Menace of the Forest


"Quick!" cried Polychrome the Canary; "we must hurry,
or Mrs. Yoop may find some way to recapture us, even
now. Let us get out of her Valley as soon as possible."

So they set off toward the east, moving as swiftly as
they could, and for a long time they could hear the
yells and struggles of the imprisoned Giantess. The
Green Monkey could run over the ground very swiftly,
and he carried with him the bird-cage containing
Polychrome the Rain-bow's Daughter. Also the Tin Owl
could skip and fly along at a good rate of speed, his
feathers rattling against one another with a tinkling
sound as he moved. But the little Brown Bear, being
stuffed with straw, was a clumsy traveler and the
others had to wait for him to follow.

However, they were not very long in reaching the
ridge that led out of Mrs. Yoop's Valley, and when they
had passed this ridge and descended into the next
valley they stopped to rest, for the Green Monkey was
tired.

"I believe we are safe, now," said Polychrome, when
her cage was set down and the others had all gathered
around it, "for Mrs. Yoop dares not go outside of her
own Valley, for fear of being captured by her enemies.
So we may take our time to consider what to do next."

"I'm afraid poor Mrs. Yoop will starve to death, if
no one lets her out of her bedroom," said Woot, who had
a heart as kind as that of the Tin Woodman. "We've
taken her Magic Apron away, and now the doors will
never open."

"Don't worry about that," advised Polychrome. "Mrs.
Yoop has plenty of magic left to console her."

"Are you sure of that?" asked the Green Monkey.

"Yes, for I've been watching her for weeks," said the
Canary. "She has six magic hairpins, which she wears in
her hair, and a magic ring which she wears on her thumb
and which is invisible to all eyes except those of a
fairy, and magic bracelets on both her ankles. So I am
positive that she will manage to find a way out of her
prison."

"She might transform the door into an archway,"
suggested the little Brown Bear.

"That would be easy for her," said the Tin Owl; "but
I'm glad she was too angry to think of that before we
got out of her Valley."

"Well, we have escaped the big woman, to be sure,"
remarked the Green Monkey, "but we still wear the
awful forms the cruel yookoohoo gave us. How are we
going to get rid of these shapes, and become ourselves
again?"

None could answer that question. They sat around the
cage, brooding over the problem, until the Monkey fell
asleep. Seeing this, the Canary tucked her head under
her wing and also slept, and the Tin Owl and the Brown
Bear did not disturb them until morning came and it was
broad daylight.

"I'm hungry," said Woot, when he wakened, for his
knapsack of food had been left behind at the castle.

"Then let us travel on until we can find something
for you to eat," returned the Scarecrow Bear.

"There is no use in your lugging my cage any
farther," declared the Canary. "Let me out, and throw
the cage away. Then I can fly with you and find my own
breakfast of seeds. Also I can search for water, and
tell you where to find it."

So the Green Monkey unfastened the door of the golden
cage and the Canary hopped out. At first she flew high
in the air and made great circles overhead, but after a
time she returned and perched beside them.

"At the east in the direction we were following,"
announced the Canary, "there is a fine forest, with a
brook running through it. In the forest there may be
fruits or nuts growing, or berry bushes at its edge, so
let us go that way."

They agreed to this and promptly set off, this time
moving more deliberately. The Tin Owl, which had guided
their way during the night, now found the sunshine very
trying to his big eyes, so he shut them tight and
perched upon the back of the little Brown Bear, which
carried the Owl's weight with ease. The Canary
sometimes perched upon the Green Monkey's shoulder and
sometimes fluttered on ahead of the party, and in this
manner they traveled in good spirits across that valley
and into the next one to the east of it.

This they found to be an immense hollow, shaped like
a saucer, and on its farther edge appeared the forest
which Polychrome had seen from the sky.

"Come to think of it," said the Tin Owl, waking up
and blinking comically at his friends, "there's no
object, now, in our traveling to the Munchkin Country.
My idea in going there was to marry Nimmie Amee, but
however much the Munchkin girl may have loved a Tin
Woodman, I cannot reasonably expect her to marry a Tin
Owl."

"There is some truth in that, my friend," remarked
the Brown Bear. "And to think that I, who was
considered the handsomest Scarecrow in the world, am
now condemned to be a scrubby, no-account beast, whose
only redeeming feature is that he is stuffed with
straw!"

"Consider my case, please," said Woot. "The cruel
Giantess has made a Monkey of a Boy, and that is the
most dreadful deed of all!"

"Your color is rather pretty," said the Brown Bear,
eyeing Woot critically. "I have never seen a pea-green
monkey before, and it strikes me you are quite
gorgeous."

"It isn't so bad to be a bird," asserted the Canary,
fluttering from one to another with a free and graceful
motion, "but I long to enjoy my own shape a gam."

"As Polychrome, you were the loveliest maiden I have
ever seen -- except, of course, Ozma," said the Tin
Owl; "so the Giantess did well to transform you into
the loveliest of all birds, if you were to be
transformed at all. But tell me, since you are a fairy,
and have a fairy wisdom: do you think we shall be able
to break these enchantments?"

"Queer things happen in the Land of Oz," replied the
Canary, again perching on the Green Monkey's shoulder
and turning one bright eye thoughtfully toward her
questioner. "Mrs. Yoop has declared that none of her
transformations can ever be changed, even by herself,
but I believe that if we could get to Glinda the Good
Sorceress, she might find a way to restore us to our
natural shapes. Glinda, as you know, is the most
powerful Sorceress in the world, and there are few
things she cannot do if she tries."

"In that case," said the Little Brown Bear, "let us
return southward and try to get to Glinda's castle. It
lies in the Quadling Country, you know, so it is a good
way from here."

"First, however, let us visit the forest and search
for something to eat," pleaded Woot. So they continued
on to the edge of the forest, which consisted of many
tall and beautiful trees. They discovered no fruit
trees, at first, so the Green Monkey pushed on into the
forest depths and the others followed close behind him.

They were traveling quietly along, under the shade of
the trees, when suddenly an enormous jaguar leaped upon
them from a limb and with one blow of his paw sent the
little Brown Bear tumbling over and over until he was
stopped by a tree-trunk. Instantly they all took alarm.
The Tin Owl shrieked: "Hoot -- hoot!" and flew straight
up to the branch of a tall tree, although he could
scarcely see where he was going. The Canary swiftly
darted to a place beside the Owl, and the Green Monkey
sprang up, caught a limb, and soon scrambled to a high
perch of safety.

The Jaguar crouched low and with hungry eyes regarded
the little Brown Bear, which slowly got upon its feet
and asked reproachfully:

"For goodness' sake, Beast, what were you trying to
do?"

"Trying to get my breakfast," answered the Jaguar
with a snarl, "and I believe I've succeeded. You ought
to make a delicious meal -- unless you happen to be old
and tough."

"I'm worse than that, considered as a breakfast,"
said the Bear, "for I'm only a skin stuffed with straw,
and therefore not fit to eat."

"Indeed!" cried the Jaguar, in a disappointed voice;
"then you must be a magic Bear, or enchanted, and I
must seek my breakfast from among your companions."

With this he raised his lean head to look up at the
Tin Owl and the Canary and the Monkey, and he lashed
his tail upon the ground and growled as fiercely as any
jaguar could.

"My friends are enchanted, also," said the little
Brown Bear.

"All of them?" asked the Jaguar.

"Yes. The Owl is tin, so you couldn't possibly eat
him. The Canary is a fairy -- Polychrome, the Daughter
of the Rainbow -- and you never could catch her because
she can easily fly out of your reach."

"There still remains the Green Monkey," remarked the
Jaguar hungrily. "He is neither made of tin nor stuffed
with straw, nor can he fly. I'm pretty good at climbing
trees, myself, so I think I'll capture the Monkey and
eat him for my breakfast."

Woot the Monkey, hearing this speech from his perch
on the tree, became much frightened, for he knew the
nature of jaguars and realized they could climb trees
and leap from limb to limb with the agility of cats. So
he at once began to scamper through the forest as fast
as he could go, catching at a branch with his long
monkey arms and swinging his green body through space
to grasp another branch in a neighboring tree, and so
on, while the Jaguar followed him from below, his eyes
fixed steadfastly on his prey. But presently Woot got
his feet tangled in the Lace Apron, which he was still
wearing, and that tripped him in his flight and made
him fall to the ground, where the Jaguar placed one
huge paw upon him and said grimly:
 I've got you, now!"
The fact that the Apron had tripped him made Woot
remember its magic powers, and in his terror he cried
out: "Open!" without stopping to consider how this
command might save him. But, at the word, the earth
opened at the exact spot where he lay under the
Jaguar's paw, and his body sank downward, the earth
closing over it again. The last thing Woot the Monkey
saw, as he glanced upward, was the Jaguar peering into
the hole in astonishment.

"He's gone!" cried the beast, with a long-drawn sigh
of disappointment; "he's gone, and now I shall have no
breakfast."

The clatter of the Tin Owl's wings sounded above him,
and the little Brown Bear came trotting up and asked:

"Where is the monkey? Have you eaten him so quickly?"

"No, indeed," answered the Jaguar. "He disappeared
into the earth before I could take one bite of him!"

And now the Canary perched upon a stump, a little way
from the forest beast, and said:

"I am glad our friend has escaped you; but, as it is
natural for a hungry beast to wish his breakfast, I
will try to give you one."

"Thank you," replied the Jaguar. "You're rather small
for a full meal, but it's kind of you to sacrifice
yourself to my appetite."

"Oh, I don't intend to be eaten, I assure you," said
the Canary, "but as I am a fairy I know something of
magic, and though I am now transformed into a bird's
shape, I am sure I can conjure up a breakfast that will
satisfy you."

"If you can work magic, why don't you break the
enchantment you are under and return to your proper
form?" inquired the beast doubtingly.

"I haven't the power to do that," answered the
Canary, "for Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess who transformed
me, used a peculiar form of yookoohoo magic that is
unknown to me. However, she could not deprive me of my
own fairy knowledge, so I will try to get you a
breakfast."

"Do you think a magic breakfast would taste good, or
relieve the pangs of hunger I now suffer?" asked the
Jaguar.

"I am sure it would. What would you like to eat?"

"Give me a couple of fat rabbits," said the beast.

"Rabbits! No, indeed. I'd not allow you to eat the
dear little things," declared Polychrome the Canary.

"Well, three or four squirrels, then," pleaded the
Jaguar.

"Do you think me so cruel?" demanded the Canary,
indignantly. "The squirrels are my especial friends."

"How about a plump owl?" asked the beast. "Not a tin
one, you know, but a real meat owl."

"Neither beast nor bird shall you have," said
Polychrome in a positive voice.

"Give me a fish, then; there's a river a little way
off," proposed the Jaguar.

"No living thing shall be sacrificed to feed you,"
returned the Canary.

"Then what in the world do you expect me to
eat?" said the Jaguar in a scornful tone.

"How  would  mush-and-milk  do?"  asked  the
Canary.

The Jaguar snarled in derision and lashed his tail
against the ground angrily

"Give him some scrambled eggs on toast, Poly,"
suggested the Bear Scarecrow. "He ought to like that."

"I will," responded the Canary, and fluttering her
wings she made a flight of three circles around the
stump. Then she flew up to a tree and the Bear and the
Owl and the Jaguar saw that upon the stump had appeared
a great green leaf upon which was a large portion of
scrambled eggs on toast, smoking hot.

"There!" said the Bear; "eat your breakfast, friend
Jaguar, and be content."

The Jaguar crept closer to the stump and sniffed the
fragrance of the scrambled eggs. They smelled so good
that he tasted them, and they tasted so good that he
ate the strange meal in a hurry, proving he had been
really hungry.

"I prefer rabbits," he muttered, licking his chops,
"but I must admit the magic breakfast has filled my
stomach full, and brought me comfort. So I'm much
obliged for the kindness, little Fairy, and I'll now
leave you in peace."

Saying this, he plunged into the thick underbrush and
soon disappeared, although they could hear his great
body crashing through the bushes until he was far
distant.

"That was a good way to get rid of the savage beast,
Poly," said the Tin Woodman to the Canary; "but I'm
surprised that you didn't give our friend Woot a magic
breakfast, when you knew he was hungry."

"The reason for that," answered Polychrome, "was
that my mind was so intent on other things that I quite
forgot my power to produce food by magic. But where is
the monkey boy?"

"Gone!" said the Scarecrow Bear, solemnly. "The earth
has swallowed him up."




Chapter Nine

The Quarrelsome Dragons


The Green Monkey sank gently into the earth for a
little way and then tumbled swiftly through space,
landing on a rocky floor with a thump that astonished
him. Then he sat up, found that no bones were broken,
and gazed around him.

He seemed to be in a big underground cave, which was
dimly lighted by dozens of big round discs that looked
like moons. They were not moons, however, as Woot
discovered when he had examined the place more
carefully. They were eyes. The eyes were in the heads
of enormous beasts whose bodies trailed far behind
them. Each beast was bigger than an elephant, and three
times as long, and there were a dozen or more of the
creatures scattered here and there about the cavern. On
their bodies were big scales, as round as pie-plates,
which were beautifully tinted in shades of green,
purple and orange. On the ends of their long tails were
clusters of jewels. Around the great, moon-like eyes
were circles of diamonds which sparkled in the subdued
light that glowed from the eyes.

Woot saw that the creatures had wide mouths and rows
of terrible teeth and, from tales he had heard of such
beings, he knew he had fallen into a cavern inhabited
by the great Dragons that had been driven from the
surface of the earth and were only allowed to come out
once in a hundred years to search for food. Of course
he had never seen Dragons before, yet there was no
mistaking them, for they were unlike any other living
creatures.

Woot sat upon the floor where he had fallen, staring
around, and the owners of the big eyes returned his
look, silently and motionless. Finally one of the
Dragons which was farthest away from him asked, in a
deep, grave voice:

"What was that?"

And the greatest Dragon of all, who was just in front
of the Green Monkey, answered in a still deeper voice:

"It is some foolish animal from Outside."

"Is it good to eat?" inquired a smaller Dragon beside
the great one. "I'm hungry."

"Hungry!" exclaimed all the Dragons, in a reproachful
chorus; and then the great one said chidingly: "Tut-
tut, my son! You've no reason to be hungry at this
time."

"Why not?" asked the little Dragon. "I haven't eaten
anything in eleven years."

"Eleven years is nothing," remarked another Dragon,
sleepily opening and closing his eyes; "I haven't
feasted for eighty-seven years, and I dare not get
hungry for a dozen or so years to come. Children who
eat between meals should be broken of the habit."

"All I had, eleven years ago, was a rhinoceros, and
that's not a full meal at all," grumbled the young one.
"And, before that, I had waited sixty-two years to be
fed; so it's no wonder I'm hungry."

"How old are you now?" asked Woot, forgetting his own
dangerous position in his interest in the conversation.

"Why, I'm -- I'm -- How old am I, Father?" asked the
little Dragon.

"Goodness gracious! what a child to ask questions. Do
you want to keep me thinking all the time? Don't you
know that thinking is very bad for Dragons?" returned
the big one, impatiently.

"How old am I, Father?" persisted the small Dragon.

"About six hundred and thirty, I believe. Ask your
mother."

"No; don't!" said an old Dragon in the background;
"haven't I enough worries, what with being wakened in
the middle of a nap, without being obliged to keep
track of my children's ages?"

"You've been fast asleep for over sixty years,
Mother," said the child Dragon. "How long a nap do you
wish?"

"I should have slept forty years longer. And this
strange little green beast should be punished for
falling into our cavern and disturbing us."

"I didn't know you were here, and I didn't know I was
going to fall in," explained Woot.

"Nevertheless, here you are," said the great Dragon,
"and you have carelessly wakened our entire tribe; so
it stands to reason you must be punished."

"In what way?" inquired the Green Monkey, trembling a
little.

"Give me time and I'll think of a way. You're in no
hurry, are you?" asked the great Dragon.

"No, indeed," cried Woot. "Take your time. I'd much
rather you'd all go to sleep again, and punish me when
you wake up in a hundred years or so."

"Let me eat him!" pleaded the littlest Dragon.

"He is too small," said the father. "To eat this one
Green Monkey would only serve to make you hungry for
more, and there are no more."

"Quit this chatter and let me get to sleep,"
protested another Dragon, yawning in a fearful manner,
for when he opened his mouth a sheet of flame leaped
forth from it and made Woot jump back to get out of its
way.

In his jump he bumped against the nose of a Dragon
behind him, which opened its mouth to growl and shot
another sheet of flame at him. The flame was bright,
but not very hot, yet Woot screamed with terror and
sprang forward with a great bound. This time he landed
on the paw of the great Chief Dragon, who angrily
raised his other front paw and struck the Green Monkey
a fierce blow. Woot went sailing through the air and
fell sprawling upon the rocky floor far beyond the
place where the Dragon Tribe was grouped.

All the great beasts were now thoroughly wakened and
aroused, and they blamed the monkey for disturbing
their quiet. The littlest Dragon darted after Woot and
the others turned their unwieldy bodies in his
direction and followed, flashing from their eyes and
mouths flames which lighted up the entire cavern. Woot
almost gave himself up for lost, at that moment, but he
scrambled to his feet and dashed away to the farthest
end of the cave, the Dragons following more leisurely
because they were too clumsy to move fast. Perhaps they
thought there was no need of haste, as the monkey could
not escape from the cave. But, away up at the end of
the place, the cavern floor was heaped with tumbled
rocks, so Woot, with an agility born of fear, climbed
from rock to rock until he found himself crouched
against the cavern roof. There he waited, for he could
go no farther, while on over the tumbled rocks slowly
crept the Dragons -- the littlest one coming first
because he was hungry as well as angry.

The beasts had almost reached him when Woot,
remembering his lace apron -- now sadly torn and soiled
-- recovered his wits and shouted: "Open!" At the cry a
hole appeared in the roof of the cavern, just over his
head, and through it the sunlight streamed full upon
the Green Monkey

The Dragons paused, astonished at the magic and
blinking at the sunlight, and this gave Woot time to
climb through the opening. As soon as he reached the
surface of the earth the hole closed again, and the boy
monkey realized, with a thrill of joy, that he had seen
the last of the dangerous Dragon family

He sat upon the ground, still panting hard from his
exertions, when the bushes before him parted and his
former enemy, the Jaguar, appeared.

"Don't run," said the woodland beast, as Woot sprang
up; "you are perfectly safe, so far as I am concerned,
for since you so mysteriously disappeared I have had my
breakfast. I am now on my way home to sleep the rest of
the day."

"Oh, indeed!" returned the Green Monkey, in a tone
both sorry and startled. "Which of my friends did you
manage to eat?"

"None of them," returned the Jaguar, with a sly grin
had a dish of magic scrambled eggs-on toast -- and it
wasn't a bad feast, at all. There isn't room in me for
even you, and I don't regret it because I judge, from
your green color, that you are not ripe, and would make
an indifferent meal. We jaguars have to be careful of
our digestions. Farewell, Friend Monkey. Follow the
path I made through the bushes and you will find your
friends."

With this the Jaguar marched on his way and Woot took
his advice and followed the trail he had made until he
came to the place where the little Brown Bear, and the
Tin Owl, and the Canary were conferring together and
wondering what had become of their comrade, the Green
Monkey.




Chapter Ten

Tommy Kwikstep


"Our best plan," said the Scarecrow Bear, when the
Green Monkey had related the story of his adventure
with the Dragons, "is to get out of this Gillikin
Country as soon as we can and try to find our way to
the castle of Glinda, the Good Sorceress. There are too
many dangers lurking here to suit me, and Glinda may be
able to restore us to our proper forms."

"If we turn south now," the Tin Owl replied, "we
might go straight into the Emerald City. That's a place
I wish to avoid, for I'd hate to have my friends see me
in this sad plight," and he blinked his eyes and
fluttered his tin wings mournfully.

"But I am certain we have passed beyond Emerald
City," the Canary assured him, sailing lightly around
their heads. "So, should we turn south from here, we
would pass into the Munchkin Country, and continuing
south we would reach the Quadling Country where
Glinda's castle is located."

"Well, since you're sure of that, let's start right
away," proposed the Bear. "It's a long journey, at the
best, and I'm getting tired of walking on four legs."

"I thought you never tired, being stuffed with
straw," said Woot.

"I mean that it annoys me, to be obliged to go on all
fours, when two legs are my proper walking equipment,"
replied the Scarecrow. "I consider it beneath my
dignity. In other words, my remarkable brains can tire,
through humiliation, although my body cannot tire."

"That is one of the penalties of having brains,"
remarked the Tin Owl with a sigh. "I have had no brains
since I was a man of meat, and so I never worry.
Nevertheless, I prefer my former manly form to this
owl's shape and would be glad to break Mrs. Yoop's
enchantment as soon as possible. I am so noisy, just
now, that I disturb myself," and he fluttered his wings
with a clatter that echoed throughout the forest.

So, being all of one mind, they turned southward,
traveling steadily on until the woods were left behind
and the landscape turned from purple tints to blue
tints, which assured them they had entered the Country
of the Munchkins.

"Now I feel myself more safe," said the Scarecrow
Bear. "I know this country pretty well, having been
made here by a Munchkin farmer and having wandered over
these lovely blue lands many times. Seems to me,
indeed, that I even remember that group of three tall
trees ahead of us; and, if I do, we are not far from
the home of my friend Jinjur."

"Who is Jinjur?" asked Woot, the Green Monkey.

"Haven't you heard of Jinjur?" exclaimed the
Scarecrow, in surprise.

"No," said Woot. "Is Jinjur a man, a woman, a beast
or a bird?"

"Jinjur is a girl," explained the Scarecrow Bear.
"She's a fine girl, too, although a bit restless and
liable to get excited. Once, a long time ago, she
raised an army of girls and called herself 'General
Jinjur.' With her army she captured the Emerald City,
and drove me out of it, because I insisted that an army
in Oz was highly improper. But Ozma punished the rash
girl, and afterward Jinjur and I became fast friends.
Now Jinjur lives peacefully on a farm, near here, and
raises fields of cream-puffs, chocolate-caramels and
macaroons. They say she's a pretty good farmer, and in
addition to that she's an artist, and paints pictures
so perfect that one can scarcely tell them from nature.
She often repaints my face for me, when it gets worn or
mussy, and the lovely expression I wore when the
Giantess transformed me was painted by Jinjur only a
month or so ago."

"It was certainly a pleasant expression," agreed
Woot.

"Jinjur can paint anything," continued the Scarecrow
Bear, with enthusiasm, as they walked along together.
"Once, when I came to her house, my straw was old and
crumpled, so that my body sagged dreadfully. I needed
new straw to replace the old, but Jinjur had no straw
on all her ranch and I was really unable to travel
farther until I had been restuffed. When I explained
this to Jinjur, the girl at once painted a straw-stack
which was so natural that I went to it and secured
enough straw to fill all my body. It was a good quality
of straw, too, and lasted me a long time."

This seemed very wonderful to Woot, who knew that
such a thing could never happen in any place but a
fairy country like Oz.

The Munchkin Country was much nicer than the Gillikin
Country, and all the fields were separated by blue
fences, with grassy lanes and paths of blue ground, and
the land seemed well cultivated. They were on a little
hill looking down upon this favored country, but had
not quite reached the settled parts, when on turning a
bend in the path they were halted by a form that barred
their way

A more curious creature they had seldom seen, even in
the Land of Oz, where curious creatures abound. It had
the head of a young man -- evidently a Munchkin -- with
a pleasant face and hair neatly combed. But the body
was very long, for it had twenty legs -- ten legs on
each side -- and this caused the body to stretch out
and lie in a horizontal position, so that all the legs
could touch the ground and stand firm. From the
shoulders extended two small arms; at least, they
seemed small beside so many legs.

This odd creature was dressed in the regulation
clothing of the Munchkin people, a dark blue coat neatly
fitting the long body and each pair of legs having a
pair of sky-blue trousers, with blue-tinted stockings
and blue leather shoes turned up at the pointed toes.

"I wonder who you are?" said Polychrome the Canary,
fluttering above the strange creature, who had probably
been asleep on the path.

"I sometimes wonder, myself, who I am," replied the
many-legged young man; "but, in reality, I am Tommy
Kwikstep, and I live in a hollow tree that fell to the
ground with age. I have polished the inside of it, and
made a door at each end, and that's a very comfortable
residence for me because it just fits my shape."

"How did you happen to have such a shape?" asked the
Scarecrow Bear, sitting on his haunches and regarding
Tommy Kwikstep with a serious look. "Is the shape
natural?"

"No; it was wished on me," replied Tommy, with a
sigh. "I used to be very active and loved to run
errands for anyone who needed my services. That was how
I got my name of Tommy Kwikstep. I could run an errand
more quickly than any other boy, and so I was very
proud of myself. One day, however, I met an old lady
who was a fairy, or a witch, or something of the sort,
and she said if I would run an errand for her -- to
carry some magic medicine to another old woman -- she
would grant me just one Wish, whatever the Wish
happened to be. Of course I consented and, taking the
medicine, I hurried away. It was a long distance,
mostly up hill, and my legs began to grow weary.
Without thinking what I was doing I said aloud: 'Dear
me; I wish I had twenty legs!' and in an instant I
became the unusual creature you see beside you. Twenty
legs! Twenty on one man! You may count them, if you
doubt my word."

"You've got 'em, all right," said Woot the Monkey,
who had already counted them.

"After I had delivered the magic medicine to the old
woman, I returned and tried to find the witch, or
fairy, or whatever she was, who had given me the
unlucky wish, so she could take it away again. I've
been searching for her ever since, but never can I find
her," continued poor Tommy Kwikstep, sadly "I suppose,
said the  Tin Owl, blinking at him, "you can travel
very fast, with those twenty legs."

"At first I was able to," was the reply; "but I
traveled so much, searching for the fairy, or witch, or
whatever she was, that I soon got corns on my toes.
Now, a corn on one toe is not so bad, but when you have
a hundred toes -- as I have -- and get corns on most of
them, it is far from pleasant. Instead of running, I
now painfully crawl, and although I try not to be
discouraged I do hope I shall find that witch or fairy,
or whatever she was, before long."

"I hope so, too," said the Scarecrow. "But, after
all, you have the pleasure of knowing you are unusual,
and therefore remarkable among the people of Oz. To be
just like other persons is small credit to one, while
to be unlike others is a mark of distinction."

"That sounds very pretty," returned Tommy Kwikstep,
"but if you had to put on ten pair of trousers every
morning, and tie up twenty shoes, you would prefer not
to be so distinguished."

"Was the witch, or fairy, or whatever she was, an old
person, with wrinkled skin and half her teeth gone?"
inquired the Tin Owl.

"No," said Tommy Kwikstep.

"Then she wasn't Old Mombi," remarked the transformed
Emperor.

"I'm not interested in who it wasn't, so much as I am
in who it was," said the twenty-legged young man. "And,
whatever or whomsoever she was, she has managed to keep
out of my way."

"If you found her, do you suppose she'd change you
back into a two-legged boy?" asked Woot.

"Perhaps so, if I could run another errand for her
and so earn another wish."

"Would you really like to be as you were before?"
asked Polychrome the Canary, perching upon the Green
Monkey's shoulder to observe Tommy Kwikstep more
attentively.

"I would, indeed," was the earnest reply.

"Then I will see what I can do for you," promised the
Rainbow's Daughter, and flying to the ground she took a
small twig in her bill and with it made several mystic
figures on each side of Tommy Kwikstep.

"Are you a witch, or fairy, or something of the
sort?" he asked as he watched her wonderingly.

The Canary made no answer, for she was busy, but the
Scarecrow Bear replied: "Yes; she's something of the
sort, and a bird of a magician."

The twenty-legged boy's transformation happened so
queerly that they were all surprised at its method.
First, Tommy Kwikstep's last two legs disappeared; then
the next two, and the next, and as each pair of legs
vanished his body shortened. All this while Polychrome
was running around him and chirping mystical words, and
when all the young man's legs had disappeared but two
he noticed that the Canary was still busy and cried out
in alarm:

"Stop -- stop! Leave me two of my legs, or I shall be
worse off than before."

"I know," said the Canary. "I'm only removing with my
magic the corns from your last ten toes."

"Thank you for being so thoughtful," he said
gratefully, and now they noticed that Tommy Kwikstep
was quite a nice looking young fellow.

"What will you do now~" asked Woot the Monkey.

"First," he answered, "I must deliver a note which
I've carried in my pocket ever since the witch, or
fairy, or whatever she was, granted my foolish wish.
And I am resolved never to speak again without taking
time to think carefully on what I am going to say, for
I realize that speech without thought is dangerous. And
after I've delivered the note, I shall run errands
again for anyone who needs my services."

So he thanked Polychrome again and started away in a
different direction from their own, and that was the
last they saw of Tommy Kwikstep.




Chapter Eleven

Jinjur's Ranch


As they followed a path down the blue-grass hillside,
the first house that met the view of the travelers was
joyously recognized by the Scarecrow Bear as the one
inhabited by his friend Jinjur, so they increased their
speed and hurried toward it.

On reaching the place, how ever, they found the house
deserted. The front door stood open, but no one was
inside. In the garden surrounding the house were neat
rows of bushes bearing cream-puffs and macaroons, some
of which were still green, but others ripe and ready to
eat. Farther back were fields of caramels, and all the
land seemed well cultivated and carefully tended. They
looked through the fields for the girl farmer, but she
was nowhere to be seen.

"Well," finally remarked the little Brown Bear, "let
us go into the house and make ourselves at home. That
will be sure to please my friend Jinjur, who happens to
be away from home just now. When she returns, she will
be greatly surprised."

"Would she care if I ate some of those ripe cream-
puffs?" asked the Green Monkey.

"No, indeed; Jinjur is very generous. Help yourself
to all you want," said the Scarecrow Bear.

So Woot gathered a lot of the cream-puffs that were
golden yellow and filled with a sweet, creamy
substance, and ate until his hunger was satisfied. Then
he entered the house with his friends and sat in a
rocking-chair -- just as he was accustomed to do when a
boy. The Canary perched herself upon the mantel and
daintily plumed her feathers; the Tin Owl sat on the
back of another chair; the Scarecrow squatted on his
hairy haunches in the middle of the room.

"I believe I remember the girl Jinjur," remarked the
Canary, in her sweet voice. "She cannot help us very
much, except to direct us on our way to Glinda's
castle, for she does not understand magic. But she's a
good girl, honest and sensible, and I'll be glad to see
her."

"All our troubles," said the Owl with a deep sigh,
"arose from my foolish resolve to seek Nimmie Amee and
make her Empress of the Winkies, and while I wish to
reproach no one, I must say that it was Woot the
Wanderer who put the notion into my head."

"Well, for my part, I am glad he did," responded the
Canary. "Your journey resulted in saving me from the
Giantess, and had you not traveled to the Yoop Valley,
I would still be Mrs. Yoop's prisoner. It is much nicer
to be free, even though I still bear the enchanted form
of a Canary-Bird."

"Do you think we shall ever be able to get our proper
forms back again?" asked the Green Monkey earnestly.

Polychrome did not make reply at once to this
important question, but after a period of
thoughtfulness she said:

"I have been taught to believe that there is an
antidote for every magic charm, yet Mrs. Yoop insists
that no power can alter her transformations. I realize
that my own fairy magic cannot do it, although I have
thought that we Sky Fairies have more power than is
accorded to Earth Fairies. The yookoohoo magic is
admitted to be very strange in its workings and
different from the magic usually practiced, but perhaps
Glinda or Ozma may understand it better than I. In them
lies our only hope. Unless they can help us, we must
remain forever as we are."

"A Canary-Bird on a Rainbow wouldn't be so bad,"
asserted the Tin Owl, winking and blinking with his
round tin eyes, "so if you can manage to find your
Rainbow again you need have little to worry about."

"That's nonsense, Friend Chopper," exclaimed Woot. "I
know just how Polychrome feels. A beautiful girl is
much superior to a little yellow bird, and a boy --
such as I was -- far better than a Green Monkey.
Neither of us can be happy again unless we recover our
rightful forms."

"I feel the same way," announced the stuffed Bear.
"What do you suppose my friend the Patchwork Girl would
think of me, if she saw me wearing this beastly shape?"

"She'd laugh till she cried," admitted the Tin Owl.
"For my part, I'll have to give up the notion of
marrying Nimmie Amee, but I'll try not to let that make
me unhappy. If it's my duty, I'd like to do my duty,
but if magic prevents my getting married I'll flutter
along all by myself and be just as contented."

Their serious misfortunes made them all silent for a
time, and as their thoughts were busy in dwelling upon
the evils with which fate had burdened them, none
noticed that Jinjur had suddenly appeared in the
doorway and was looking at them in astonishment. The
next moment her astonishment changed to anger, for
there, in her best rocking-chair, sat a Green Monkey. A
great shiny Owl perched upon another chair and a Brown
Bear squatted upon her parlor rug. Jinjur did not
notice the Canary, but she caught up a broomstick and
dashed into the room, shouting as she came:

"Get out of here, you wild creatures!  How dare you
enter my house?"

With a blow of her broom she knocked the Brown Bear
over, and the Tin Owl tried to fly out of her reach and
made a great clatter with his tin wings. The Green
Monkey was so startled by the sudden attack that he
sprang into the fireplace -- where there was
fortunately no fire -- and tried to escape by climbing
up the chimney. But he found the opening too small, and
so was forced to drop down again. Then he crouched
trembling in the fireplace, his pretty green hair all
blackened with soot and covered with ashes. From this
position Woot watched to see what would happen next.

"Stop, Jinjur -- stop!" cried the Brown Bear, when
the broom again threatened him. "Don't you know me? I'm
your old friend the Scarecrow?"

"You're trying to deceive me, you naughty beast! I
can see plainly that you are a bear, and a mighty poor
specimen of a bear, too," retorted the girl.

"That's because I'm not properly stuffed," he assured
her. "When Mrs. Yoop transformed me, she didn't realize
I should have more stuffing."

"Who is Mrs. Yoop?" inquired Jinjur, pausing with the
broom still upraised.

"A Giantess in the Gillikin Country."

"Oh; I begin to understand. And Mrs. Yoop transformed
you? You are really the famous Scarecrow of Oz."

"I was, Jinjur. Just now I'm as you see me -- a
miserable little Brown Bear with a poor quality of
stuffing. That Tin Owl is none other than our dear Tin
Woodman -- Nick Chopper, the Emperor of the Winkies --
while this Green Monkey is a nice little boy we
recently became acquainted with, Woot the Wanderer."

"And I," said the Canary, flying close to Jinjur, "am
Polychrome, the Daughter of the Rainbow, in the form of
a bird."

"Goodness me!" cried Jinjur, amazed; "that Giantess
must be a powerful Sorceress, and as wicked as she is
powerful."

"She's a yookoohoo," said Polychrome. "Fortunately,
we managed to escape from her castle, and we are now on
our way to Glinda the Good to see if she possesses the
power to restore us to our former shapes."

"Then I must beg your pardons; all of you must
forgive me," said Jinjur, putting away the broom. "I
took you to be a lot of wild, unmannerly animals, as
was quite natural. You are very welcome to my home and
I'm sorry I haven't the power to help you out of your
troubles. Please use my house and all that I have, as
if it were your own."

At this declaration of peace, the Bear got upon his
feet and the Owl resumed his perch upon the chair and
the Monkey crept out of the fireplace. Jinjur looked at
Woot critically, and scowled.

"For a Green Monkey," said she, "you're the blackest
creature I ever saw. And you'll get my nice clean room
all dirty with soot and ashes. Whatever possessed you
to jump up the chimney?"

"I -- I was scared," explained Woot, somewhat
ashamed.

"Well, you need renovating, and that's what will
happen to you, right away. Come with me!" she
commanded.

"What are you going to do?" asked Woot.

"Give you a good scrubbing," said Jinjur.

Now, neither boys nor monkeys relish being scrubbed,
so Woot shrank away from the energetic girl, trembling
fearfully. But Jinjur grabbed him by his paw and
dragged him out to the back yard, where, in spite of
his whines and struggles, she plunged him into a tub of
cold water and began to scrub him with a stiff brush
and a cake of yellow soap.

This was the hardest trial that Woot had endured
since he became a monkey, but no protest had any
influence with Jinjur, who lathered and scrubbed him in
a business-like manner and afterward dried him with a
coarse towel.

The Bear and the Owl gravely watched this operation
and nodded approval when Woot's silky green fur shone
clear and bright in the afternoon sun. The Canary
seemed much amused and laughed a silvery ripple of
laughter as she said:

"Very well done, my good Jinjur; I admire your energy
and judgment. But I had no idea a monkey could look so
comical as this monkey did while he was being bathed."

"I'm not a monkey!" declared Woot, resentfully; "I'm
just a boy in a monkey's shape, that's all."

"If you can explain to me the difference," said
Jinjur, "I'll agree not to wash you again -- that is,
unless you foolishly get into the fireplace. All
persons are usually judged by the shapes in which they
appear to the eyes of others. Look at me, Woot; what am
I?"

Woot looked at her.

"You're as pretty a girl as I've ever seen," he
replied.

Jinjur frowned. That is, she tried hard to frown.

"Come out into the garden with me," she said, "and
I'll give you some of the most delicious caramels you
ever ate. They're a new variety, that no one can grow
but me, and they have a heliotrope flavor."




Chapter Twelve

Ozma and Dorothy


In her magnificent palace in the Emerald City, the
beautiful girl Ruler of all the wonderful Land of Oz
sat in her dainty boudoir with her friend Princess
Dorothy beside her. Ozma was studying a roll of
manuscript which she had taken from the Royal Library,
while Dorothy worked at her embroidery and at times
stooped to pat a shaggy little black dog that lay at
her feet. The little dog's name was Toto, and he was
Dorothy's faithful companion.

To judge Ozma of Oz by the standards of our world,
you would think her very young -- perhaps fourteen or
fifteen years of age -- yet for years she had ruled the
Land of Oz and had never seemed a bit older. Dorothy
appeared much younger than Ozma. She had been a little
girl when first she came to the Land of Oz, and she was
a little girl still, and would never seem to be a day
older while she lived in this wonderful fairyland.

Oz was not always a fairyland, I am told. Once it was
much like other lands, except it was shut in by a
dreadful desert of sandy wastes that lay all around it,
thus preventing its people from all contact with the
rest of the world. Seeing this isolation, the fairy
band of Queen Lurline, passing over Oz while on a
journey, enchanted the country and so made it a
Fairyland. And Queen Lurline left one of her fairies to
rule this enchanted Land of Oz, and then passed on and
forgot all about it.

From that moment no one in Oz ever died. Those who
were old remained old; those who were young and strong
did not change as years passed them by; the children
remained children always, and played and romped to
their hearts' content, while all the babies lived in
their cradles and were tenderly cared for and never
grew up. So people in Oz stopped counting how old they
were in years, for years made no difference in their
appearance and could not alter their station. They did
not get sick, so there were no doctors among them.
Accidents might happen to some, on rare occasions, it
is true, and while no one could die naturally, as other
people do, it was possible that one might be totally
destroyed. Such incidents, however, were very unusual,
and so seldom was there anything to worry over that the
Oz people were as happy and contented as can be.

Another strange thing about this fairy Land of Oz was
that whoever managed to enter it from the outside world
came under the magic spell of the place and did not
change in appearance as long as they lived there. So
Dorothy, who now lived with Ozma, seemed just the same
sweet little girl she had been when first she came to
this delightful fairyland.

Perhaps all parts of Oz might not be called truly
delightful, but it was surely delightful in the
neighborhood of the Emerald City, where Ozma reigned.
Her loving influence was felt for many miles around,
but there were places in the mountains of the Gillikin
Country, and the forests of the Quadling Country, and
perhaps in far-away parts of the Munchkin and Winkie
Countries, where the inhabitants were somewhat rude and
uncivilized and had not yet come under the spell of
Ozma's wise and kindly rule. Also, when Oz first became
a fairyland, it harbored several witches and magicians
and sorcerers and necromancers, who were scattered in
various parts, but most of these had been deprived of
their magic powers, and Ozma had issued a royal edict
forbidding anyone in her dominions to work magic except
Glinda the Good and the Wizard of Oz. Ozma herself,
being a real fairy, knew a lot of magic, but she only
used it to benefit her subjects.

This little explanation will help you to understand
better the story you are reaching, but most of it is
already known to those who are familiar with the Oz
people whose adventures they have followed in other Oz
books.

Ozma and Dorothy were fast friends and were much
together. Everyone in Oz loved Dorothy almost as well
as they did their lovely Ruler, for the little Kansas
girl's good fortune had not spoiled her or rendered her
at all vain. She was just the same brave and true and
adventurous child as before she lived in a royal palace
and became the chum of the fairy Ozma.

In the room in which the two sat -- which was one of
Ozma's private suite of apartments -- hung the famous
Magic Picture. This was the source of constant interest
to little Dorothy. One had but to stand before it and
wish to see what any person was doing, and at once a
scene would flash upon the magic canvas which showed
exactly where that person was, and like our own moving
pictures would reproduce the actions of that person as
long as you cared to watch them. So today, when Dorothy
tired of her embroidery, she drew the curtains from
before the Magic Picture and wished to see what her
friend Button Bright was doing. Button Bright, she saw,
was playing ball with Ojo, the Munchkin boy, so Dorothy
next wished to see what her Aunt Em was doing. The
picture showed Aunt Em quietly engaged in darning socks
for Uncle Henry, so Dorothy wished to see what her old
friend the Tin Woodman was doing.

The Tin Woodman was then just leaving his tin castle
in the company of the Scarecrow and Woot the Wanderer.
Dorothy had never seen this boy before, so she wondered
who he was. Also she was curious to know where the
three were going, for she noticed Woot's knapsack and
guessed they had started on a long journey. She asked
Ozma about it, but Ozma did not know

That afternoon Dorothy again saw the travelers in the
Magic Picture, but they were merely tramping through
the country and Dorothy was not much interested in
them. A couple of days later, however, the girl, being
again with Ozma, wished to see her friends, the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman in the Magic Picture, and
on this occasion found them in the great castle of Mrs.
Yoop, the Giantess, who was at the time about to
transform them. Both Dorothy and Ozma now became
greatly interested and watched the transformations with
indignation and horror.

"What a wicked Giantess!" exclaimed Dorothy.

"Yes," answered Ozma, "she must be punished for this
cruelty to our friends, and to the poor boy who is with
them."

After this they followed the adventure of the little
Brown Bear and the Tin Owl and the Green Monkey with
breathless interest, and were delighted when they
escaped from Mrs. Yoop. They did not know, then, who
the Canary was, but realized it must be the
transformation of some person of consequence, whom the
Giantess had also enchanted.

When, finally, the day came when the adventurers
headed south into the Munchkin Country, Dorothy asked
anxiously:

"Can't something be done for them, Ozma? Can't you
change 'em back into their own shapes? They've suffered
enough from these dreadful transformations, seems to
me."

"I've been studying ways to help them, ever since
they were transformed," replied Ozma. "Mrs. Yoop is now
the only yookoohoo in my dominions, and the yookoohoo
magic is very peculiar and hard for others to
understand, yet I am resolved to make the attempt to
break these enchantments. I may not succeed, but I
shall do the best I can. From the directions our
friends are taking, I believe they are going to pass by
Jinjur's Ranch, so if we start now we may meet them
there. Would you like to go with me, Dorothy?"

"Of course," answered the little girl; "I wouldn't
miss it for anything."

"Then order the Red Wagon," said Ozma of Oz, "and we
will start at once."

Dorothy ran to do as she was bid, while Ozma went to
her Magic Room to make ready the things she believed
she would need. In half an hour the Red Wagon stood
before the grand entrance of the palace, and before it
was hitched the Wooden Sawhorse, which was Ozma's
favorite steed.

This Sawhorse, while made of wood, was very much
alive and could travel swiftly and without tiring. To
keep the ends of his wooden legs from wearing down
short, Ozma had shod the Sawhorse with plates of pure
gold. His harness was studded with brilliant emeralds
and other jewels and so, while he himself was not at
all handsome, his outfit made a splendid appearance.

Since the Sawhorse could understand her spoken words,
Ozma used no reins to guide him. She merely told him
where to go. When she came from the palace with
Dorothy, they both climbed into the Red Wagon and then
the little dog, Toto, ran up and asked:

"Are you going to leave me behind, Dorothy?" Dorothy
looked at Ozma, who smiled in return and said:

"Toto may go with us, if you wish him to."

So Dorothy lifted the little dog into the wagon, for,
while he could run fast, he could not keep up with the
speed of the wonderful Sawhorse.


Away they went, over hills and through meadows,
covering the ground with astonishing speed. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the Red Wagon arrived
before Jinjur's house just as that energetic young lady
had finished scrubbing the Green Monkey and was about
to lead him to the caramel patch.




Chapter Thirteen

The Restoration


The Tin Owl gave a hoot of delight when he saw the Red
Wagon draw up before Jinjur's house, and the Brown Bear
grunted and growled with glee and trotted toward Ozma
as fast as he could wobble. As for the Canary, it flew
swiftly to Dorothy's shoulder and perched there, saying
in her ear:

"Thank goodness you have come to our rescue!"

"But who are you?" asked Dorothy

"Don't you know?" returned the Canary.

"No; for the first time we noticed you in the Magic
Picture, you were just a bird, as you are now. But
we've guessed that the giant woman had transformed you,
as she did the others."

"Yes; I'm Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter,"
announced the Canary.

"Goodness me!" cried Dorothy. "How dreadful."

"Well, I make a rather pretty bird, I think,"
returned Polychrome, "but of course I'm anxious to
resume my own shape and get back upon my rainbow."

"Ozma will help you, I'm sure," said Dorothy. "How
does it feel, Scarecrow, to be a Bear?" she asked,
addressing her old friend.

"I don't like it," declared the Scarecrow Bear. "This
brutal form is quite beneath the dignity of a wholesome
straw man."

"And think of me," said the Owl, perching upon the
dashboard of the Red Wagon with much noisy clattering
of his tin feathers. "Don't I look horrid, Dorothy,
with eyes several sizes too big for my body, and so
weak that I ought to wear spectacles?"

"Well," said Dorothy critically, as she looked him
over, "you're nothing to brag of, I must confess. But
Ozma will soon fix you up again."

The Green Monkey had hung back, bashful at meeting
two lovely girls while in the form of a beast; but
Jinjur now took his hand and led him forward while she
introduced him to Ozma, and Woot managed to make a low
bow, not really ungraceful, before her girlish Majesty,
the Ruler of Oz.

"You have all been forced to endure a sad
experience," said Ozma, "and so I am anxious to do all
in my power to break Mrs. Yoop's enchantments. But
first tell me how you happened to stray into that
lonely Valley where Yoop Castle stands."

Between them they related the object of their
journey, the Scarecrow Bear telling of the Tin
Woodman's resolve to find Nimmie Amee and marry her, as
a just reward for her loyalty to him. Woot told of
their adventures with the Loons of Loonville, and the
Tin Owl described the manner in which they had been
captured and transformed by the Giantess. Then
Polychrome related her story, and when all had been
told, and Dorothy had several times reproved Toto for
growling at the Tin Owl, Ozma remained thoughtful for a
while, pondering upon what she had heard. Finally she
looked up, and with one of her delightful smiles, said
to the anxious group:

"I am not sure my magic will be able to restore
every one of you, because your transformations are
of such a strange and unusual character. Indeed,
Mrs. Yoop was quite justified in believing no power
could alter her enchantments. However, I am sure
I can restore the Scarecrow to his original shape.
He was stuffed with straw from the beginning, and
even the yookoohoo magic could not alter that. The
Giantess was merely able to make a bear's shape of
a man's shape, but the bear is stuffed with straw,
just as the man was. So I feel confident I can make
a man of the bear again."

"Hurrah!" cried the Brown Bear, and tried clumsily to
dance a jig of delight.

"As for the Tin Woodman, his case is much the same,"
resumed Ozma, still smiling. "The power of the Giantess
could not make him anything but a tin creature,
whatever shape she transformed him into, so it will not
be impossible to restore him to his manly form. Anyhow,
I shall test my magic at once, and see if it will do
what I have promised."

She drew from her bosom a small silver Wand and,
making passes with the Wand over the head of the Bear,
she succeeded in the brief space of a moment in
breaking his enchantment. The original Scarecrow of Oz
again stood before them, well stuffed with straw and
with his features nicely painted upon the bag which
formed his head.

The Scarecrow was greatly delighted, as you may
suppose, and he strutted proudly around while the
powerful fairy, Ozma of Oz, broke the enchantment that
had transformed the Tin Woodman and made a Tin Owl into
a Tin Man again.

"Now, then," chirped the Canary, eagerly; "I'm
next, Ozma!"

"But your case is different," replied Ozma, no
longer smiling but wearing a grave expression on
her sweet face. "I shall have to experiment on you,
Polychrome, and I may fail in all my attempts."

She then tried two or three different methods of
magic, hoping one of them would succeed in breaking
Polychrome's enchantment, but still the Rainbow's
Daughter remained a Canary-Bird. Finally, however, she
experimented in another way. She transformed the Canary
into a Dove, and then transformed the Dove into a
Speckled Hen, and then changed the Speckled Hen into a
rabbit, and then the rabbit into a Fawn. And at the
last, after mixing several powders and sprinkling them
upon the Fawn, the yookoohoo enchantment was suddenly
broken and before them stood one of the daintiest and
loveliest creatures in any fairyland in the world.
Polychrome was as sweet and merry in disposition as she
was beautiful, and when she danced and capered around
in delight, her beautiful hair floated around her like
a golden mist and her many-hued raiment, as soft as
cobwebs, reminded one of drifting clouds in a summer
sky.

Woot was so awed by the entrancing sight of this
exquisite Sky Fairy that he quite forgot his own sad
plight until be noticed Ozma gazing upon him with an
intent expression that denoted sympathy and sorrow.
Dorothy whispered in her friend's ear, but the Ruler of
Oz shook her head sadly.

Jinjur, noticing this and understanding Ozma's looks,
took the paw of the Green Monkey in her own hand and
patted it softly.

"Never mind," she said to him. "You are a very
beautiful color, and a monkey can climb better than a
boy and do a lot of other things no boy can ever do."

"What's the matter?" asked Woot, a sinking feeling at
his heart. "Is Ozma's magic all used up?"

Ozma herself answered him.

"Your form of enchantment, my poor boy," she said
pityingly, "is different from that of the others.
Indeed, it is a form that is impossible to alter by any
magic known to fairies or yookoohoos. The wicked
Giantess was well aware, when she gave you the form of
a Green Monkey, that the Green Monkey must exist in the
Land of Oz for all future time."

Woot drew a long sigh.

"Well, that's pretty hard luck," he said bravely,
"but if it can't be helped I must endure it; that's
all. I don't like being a monkey, but what's the use of
kicking against my fate?"

They were all very sorry for him, and Dorothy
anxiously asked Ozma:

"Couldn't Glinda save him?"

"No," was the reply. "Glinda's power in trans-
formations is no greater than my own. Before I left my
palace I went to my Magic Room and studied Woot's case
very carefully. I found that no power can do away with
the Green Monkey. He might transfer, or exchange his
form with some other person, it is true; but the Green
Monkey we cannot get rid of by any magic arts known to
science."

"But -- see here," said the Scarecrow, who had
listened intently to this explanation, "why not put the
monkey's form on some one else?"

"Who would agree to make the change?" asked Ozma. "If
by force we caused anyone else to become a Green
Monkey, we would be as cruel and wicked as Mrs. Yoop.
And what good would an exchange do?" she continued.
"Suppose, for instance, we worked the enchantment, and
made Toto into a Green Monkey. At the same moment Woot
would become a little dog."

"Leave me out of your magic, please," said Toto, with
a reproachful growl. "I wouldn't become a Green Monkey
for anything."

"And I wouldn't become a dog," said Woot. "A green
monkey is much better than a dog, it seems to me."

"That is only a matter of opinion," answered Toto.

"Now, here's another idea," said the Scarecrow. "My
brains are working finely today, you must admit. Why
not transform Toto into Woot the Wanderer, and then
have them exchange forms? The dog would become a green
monkey and the monkey would have his own natural shape
again."

"To be sure!" cried Jinjur. "That's a fine idea."

"Leave me out of it," said Toto. "I won't do it."

"Wouldn't you be willing to become a green monkey --
see what a pretty color it is -- so that this poor boy
could be restored to his own shape?" asked Jinjur,
pleadingly

"No," said Toto.

"I don't like that plan the least bit," declared
Dorothy, "for then I wouldn't have any little dog."

"But you'd have a green monkey in his place,"
persisted Jinjur, who liked Woot and wanted to help
him.

"I don't want a green monkey," said Dorothy
positively.

"Don't speak of this again, I beg of you," said Woot.
"This is my own misfortune and I would rather suffer it
alone than deprive Princess Dorothy of her dog, or
deprive the dog of his proper shape. And perhaps even
her Majesty, Ozma of Oz, might not be able to transform
anyone else into the shape of Woot the Wanderer."

"Yes; I believe I might do that," Ozma returned; "but
Woot is quite right; we are not justified in inflicting
upon anyone -- man or dog -- the form of a green
monkey. Also it is certain that in order to relieve the
boy of the form he now wears, we must give it to
someone else, who would be forced to wear it always."

"I wonder," said Dorothy, thoughtfully, "if we
couldn't find someone in the Land of Oz who would be
willing to become a green monkey? Seems to me a monkey
is active and spry, and he can climb trees and do a lot
of clever things, and green isn't a bad color for a
monkey -- it makes him unusual."

"I wouldn't ask anyone to take this dreadful form,"
said Woot; "it wouldn't be right, you know. I've been a
monkey for some time, now, and I don't like it. It
makes me ashamed to be a beast of this sort when by
right of birth I'm a boy; so I'm sure it would be
wicked to ask anyone else to take my place."

They were all silent, for they knew he spoke the
truth. Dorothy was almost ready to cry with pity and
Ozma's sweet face was sad and disturbed. The Scarecrow
rubbed and patted his stuffed head to try to make it
think better, while the Tin Woodman went into the house
and began to oil his tin joints so that the sorrow of
his friends might not cause him to weep. Weeping is
liable to rust tin, and the Emperor prided himself upon
his highly polished body -- now doubly dear to him
because for a time he had been deprived of it.

Polychrome had danced down the garden paths and back
again a dozen times, for she was seldom still a moment,
yet she had heard Ozma's speech and understood very
well Woot's unfortunate position. But the Rainbow's
Daughter, even while dancing, could think and reason
very clearly, and suddenly she solved the problem in
the nicest possible way. Coming close to Ozma, she
said:

"Your Majesty, all this trouble was caused by the
wickedness of Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess. Yet even now
that cruel woman is living in her secluded castle,
enjoying the thought that she has put this terrible
enchantment on Woot the Wanderer. Even now she is
laughing at our despair because we can find no way to
get rid of the green monkey. Very well, we do not wish
to get rid of it. Let the woman who created the form
wear it herself, as a just punishment for her
wickedness. I am sure your fairy power can give to Mrs.
Yoop the form of Woot the Wanderer -- even at this
distance from her --and then it will be possible to
exchange the two forms. Mrs. Yoop will become the Green
Monkey, and Woot will recover his own form again."

Ozma's face brightened as she listened to this clever
proposal.

"Thank you, Polychrome," said she. "The task you
propose Is not so easy as you suppose, but I will make
the attempt, and perhaps I may succeed."




Chapter Fourteen

The Green Monkey


They now entered the house, and as an interested group,
watched Jinjur, at Ozma's command, build a fire and put
a kettle of water over to boil. The Ruler of Oz stood
before the fire silent and grave, while the others,
realizing that an important ceremony of magic was about
to be performed, stood quietly in the background so as
not to interrupt Ozma's proceedings. Only Polychrome
kept going in and coming out, humming softly to herself
as she danced, for the Rainbow's Daughter could not
keep still for long, and the four walls of a room
always made her nervous and ill at ease. She moved so
noiselessly, however, that her movements were like the
shifting of sunbeams and did not annoy anyone.

When the water in the kettle bubbled, Ozma drew from
her bosom two tiny packets containing powders. These
powders she threw into the kettle and after briskly
stirring the contents with a branch from a macaroon
bush, Ozma poured the mystic broth upon a broad platter
which Jinjur had placed upon the table. As the broth
cooled it became as silver, reflecting all objects from
its smooth surface like a mirror.

While her companions gathered around the table,
eagerly attentive -- and Dorothy even held little Toto
in her arms that he might see -- Ozma waved her wand
over the mirror-like surface. At once it reflected the
interior of Yoop Castle, and in the big hall sat Mrs.
Yoop, in her best embroidered silken robes, engaged in
weaving a new lace apron to replace the one she had
lost.

The Giantess seemed rather uneasy, as if she had a
faint idea that someone was spying upon her, for she
kept looking behind her and this way and that, as
though expecting danger from an unknown source. Perhaps
some yookoohoo instinct warned her. Woot saw that she
had escaped from her room by some of the magical means
at her disposal, after her prisoners had escaped her.
She was now occupying the big hall of her castle as she
used to do. Also Woot thought, from the cruel
expression on the face of the Giantess, that she was
planning revenge on them, as soon as her new magic
apron was finished

But Ozma was now making passes over the platter with
her silver Wand, and presently the form of the Giantess
began to shrink in size and to change its shape. And
now, in her place sat the form of Woot the Wanderer,
and as if suddenly realizing her transformation Mrs.
Yoop threw down her work and rushed to a looking-glass
that stood against the wall of her room. When she saw
the boy's form reflected as her own, she grew violently
angry and dashed her head against the mirror, smashing
it to atoms.

Just then Ozma was busy with her magic Wand, making
strange figures, and she had also placed her left hand
firmly upon the shoulder of the Green Monkey. So now,
as all eyes were turned upon the platter, the form of
Mrs. Yoop gradually changed again. She was slowly
transformed into the Green Monkey, and at the same time
Woot slowly regained his natural form.

It was quite a surprise to them all when they raised
their eyes from the platter and saw Woot the Wanderer
standing beside Ozma. And, when they glanced at the
platter again, it reflected nothing more than the walls
of the room in Jinjur's house in which they stood. The
magic ceremonial was ended, and Ozma of Oz had
triumphed over the wicked Giantess.

"What will become of her, I wonder?" said Dorothy, as
she drew a long breath.

"She will always remain a Green Monkey," replied
Ozma, "and in that form she will be unable to perform
any magical arts whatsoever. She need not be unhappy,
however, and as she lives all alone in her castle she
probably won't mind the transformation very much after
she gets used to it."

"Anyhow, it serves her right," declared Dorothy, and
all agreed with her.

"But," said the kind hearted Tin Woodman, "I'm afraid
the Green Monkey will starve, for Mrs. Yoop used to get
her food by magic, and now that the magic is taken away
from her, what can she eat?"

"Why, she'll eat what other monkeys do," returned the
Scarecrow. "Even in the form of a Green Monkey, she's a
very clever person, and I'm sure her wits will show her
how to get plenty to eat."

"Don't worry about her," advised Dorothy. "She didn't
worry about you, and her condition is no worse than the
condition she imposed on poor Woot. She can't starve to
death in the Land of Oz, that's certain, and if she
gets hungry at times it's no more than the wicked thing
deserves. Let's forget Mrs. Yoop; for, in spite of her
being a yookoohoo, our fairy friends have broken all of
her transformations."




Chapter Fifteen

The Man of Tin


Ozma and Dorothy were quite pleased with Woot the
Wanderer, whom they found modest and intelligent and
very well mannered. The boy was truly grateful for his
release from the cruel enchantment, and he promised to
love, revere and defend the girl Ruler of Oz forever
afterward, as a faithful subject.

"You may visit me at my palace, if you wish," said
Ozma, "where I will be glad to introduce you to two
other nice boys, Ojo the Munchkin and Button-Bright."

"Thank your Majesty," replied Woot, and then he
turned to the Tin Woodman and inquired: "What are your
further plans, Mr. Emperor? Will you still seek Nimmie
Amee and marry her, or will you abandon the quest and
return to the Emerald City and your own castle?"

The Tin Woodman, now as highly polished and well-
oiled as ever, reflected a while on this question and
then answered:

"Well, I see no reason why I should not find Nimmie
Amee. We are now in the Munchkin Country, where we are
perfectly safe, and if it was right for me, before our
enchantment, to marry Nimmie Amee and make her Empress
of the Winkies, it must be right now, when the
enchantment has been broken and I am once more myself.
Am I correct, friend Scarecrow?"

"You are, indeed," answered the Scarecrow. "No one
can oppose such logic."

"But I'm afraid you don't love Nimmie Amee,"
suggested Dorothy.

"That is just because I can't love anyone," replied
the Tin Woodman. "But, if I cannot love my wife, I can
at least be kind to her, and all husbands are not able
to do that."

"Do you s'pose Nimmie Amee still loves you, after all
these years?" asked Dorothy

"I'm quite sure of it, and that is why I am going to
her to make her happy. Woot the Wanderer thinks I ought
to reward her for being faithful to me after my meat
body was chopped to pieces and I became tin. What do
you think, Ozma?"

Ozma smiled as she said:

"I do not know your Nimmie Amee, and so I cannot tell
what she most needs to make her happy. But there is no
harm in your going to her and asking her if she still
wishes to marry you. If she does, we will give you a
grand wedding at the Emerald City and, afterward, as
Empress of the Winkies, Nimmie Amee would become one
of the most important ladies in all Oz."

So it was decided that the Tin Woodman would continue
his journey, and that the Scarecrow and Woot the
Wanderer should accompany him, as before. Polychrome
also decided to join their party, somewhat to the
surprise of all.

"I hate to be cooped up in a palace," she said to
Ozma, "and of course the first time I meet my Rainbow I
shall return to my own dear home in the skies, where my
fairy sisters are even now awaiting me and my father is
cross because I get lost so often. But I can find my
Rainbow just as quickly while traveling in the Munchkin
Country as I could if living in the Emerald City -- or
any other place in Oz -- so I shall go with the Tin
Woodman and help him woo Nimmie Amee."

Dorothy wanted to go, too, but as the Tin Woodman did
not invite her to join his party, she felt she might be
intruding if she asked to be taken. she hinted, but she
found he didn't take the hint. It is quite a delicate
matter for one to ask a girl to marry him, however much
she loves him, and perhaps the Tin Woodman did not
desire to have too many looking on when he found his
old sweetheart, Nimmie Amee. So Dorothy contented
herself with the thought that she would help Ozma
prepare a splendid wedding feast, to be followed by a
round of parties and festivities when the Emperor of
the Winkies reached the Emerald City with his bride.

Ozma offered to take them all in the Red Wagon to a
place as near to the great Munchkin forest as a wagon
could get. The Red Wagon was big enough to seat them
all, and so, bidding good-bye to Jinjur, who gave Woot
a basket of ripe cream-puffs and caramels to take with
him, Ozma commanded the Wooden Sawhorse to start, and
the strange creature moved swiftly over the lanes and
presently came to the Road of Yellow Bricks. This road
led straight to a dense forest, where the path was too
narrow for the Red Wagon to proceed farther, so here
the party separated.

Ozma and Dorothy and Toto returned to the Emerald
City, after wishing their friends a safe and successful
journey, while the Tin Woodman, the Scarecrow, Woot the
Wanderer and Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter,
prepared to push their way through the thick forest.
However, these forest paths were well known to the Tin
Man and the Scarecrow, who felt quite at home among the
trees.

"I was born in this grand forest," said Nick Chopper,
the tin Emperor, speaking proudly, "and it was here
that the Witch enchanted my axe and I lost different
parts of my meat body until I became all tin. Here,
also -- for it is a big forest -- Nimmie Amee lived
with the Wicked Witch, and at the other edge of the
trees stands the cottage of my friend Ku-Klip, the
famous tinsmith who made my present beautiful form."

"He must be a clever workman," declared Woot,
admiringly.

"He is simply wonderful," declared the Tin Woodman.

"I shall be glad to make his acquaintance," said
Woot.

"If you wish to meet with real cleverness," remarked
the Scarecrow, "you should visit the Munchkin farmer
who first made me. I won't say that my friend the
Emperor isn't all right for a tin man, but any judge of
beauty can understand that a Scarecrow is far more
artistic and refined."

"You are too soft and flimsy," said the Tin Woodman.

"You are too hard and stiff," said the Scarecrow, and
this was as near to quarreling as the two friends ever
came. Polychrome laughed at them both, as well she
might, and Woot hastened to change the subject.

At night they all camped underneath the trees. The
boy ate cream-puffs for supper and offered Polychrome
some, but she preferred other food and at daybreak
sipped the dew that was clustered thick on the forest
flowers. Then they tramped onward again, and presently
the Scarecrow paused and said:

"It was on this very spot that Dorothy and I first
met the Tin Woodman, who was rusted so badly that none
of his joints would move. But after we had oiled him
up, he was as good as new and accompanied us to the
Emerald City."

"Ah, that was a sad experience," asserted the Tin
Woodman soberly. "I was caught in a rainstorm while
chopping down a tree for exercise, and before I
realized it, I was firmly rusted in every joint. There
I stood, axe in hand, but unable to move, for days and
weeks and months! Indeed, I have never known exactly
how long the time was; but finally along came Dorothy
and I was saved. See! This is the very tree I was
chopping at the time I rusted."

"You cannot be far from your old home, in that case,"
said Woot.

"No; my little cabin stands not a great way off, but
there is no occasion for us to visit it. Our errand is
with Nimmie Amee, and her house is somewhat farther
away, to the left of us."

"Didn't you say she lives with a Wicked Witch, who
makes her a slave?" asked the boy.

"She did, but she doesn't," was the reply. "I am told
the Witch was destroyed when Dorothy's house fell on
her, so now Nimmie Amee must live all alone. I haven't
seen her, of course, since the Witch was crushed, for
at that time I was standing rusted in the forest and
had been there a long time, but the poor girl must have
felt very happy to be free from her cruel mistress."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "let's travel on and find
Nimmie Amee. Lead on, your Majesty, since you know the
way, and we will follow."

So the Tin Woodman took a path that led through the
thickest part of the forest, and they followed it for
some time. The light was dim here, because vines and
bushes and leafy foliage were all about them, and often
the Tin Man had to push aside the branches that
obstructed their way, or cut them off with his axe.
After they had proceeded some distance, the Emperor
suddenly stopped short and exclaimed: "Good gracious!"

The Scarecrow, who was next, first bumped into his
friend and then peered around his tin body, and said in
a tone of wonder:

"Well, I declare!"

Woot the Wanderer pushed forward to see what was the
matter, and cried out in astonishment: "For goodness'
sake!"

Then the three stood motionless, staring hard, until
Polychrome's merry laughter rang out behind them and
aroused them from their stupor.

In the path before them stood a tin man who was the
exact duplicate of the Tin Woodman. He was of the same
size, he was jointed in the same manner, and he was
made of shining tin from top to toe. But he stood
immovable, with his tin jaws half parted and his tin
eyes turned upward. In one of his hands was held a
long, gleaming sword. Yes, there was the difference,
the only thing that distinguished him from the Emperor
of the Winkies. This tin man bore a sword, while the
Tin Woodman bore an axe.

"It's a dream; it must be a dream!" gasped Woot.

"That's it, of course," said the Scarecrow; "there
couldn't be two Tin Woodmen."

"No," agreed Polychrome, dancing nearer to the
stranger, "this one is a Tin Soldier. Don't you see his
sword?"

The Tin Woodman cautiously put out one tin hand and
felt of his double's arm. Then he said in a voice that
trembled with emotion:

"Who are you, friend?"

There was no reply

"Can't you see he's rusted, just as you were once?"
asked Polychrome, laughing again. "Here, Nick Chopper,
lend me your oil-can a minute!"

The Tin Woodman silently handed her his oil-can,
without which he never traveled, and Polychrome
first oiled the stranger's tin jaws and then worked
them gently to and fro until the Tin Soldier said:

"That's enough. Thank you. I can now talk. But please
oil my other joints."

Woot seized the oil-can and did this, but all the
others helped wiggle the soldier's joints as soon as
they were oiled, until they moved freely.

The Tin Soldier seemed highly pleased at his release.
He strutted up and down the path, saying in a high,
thin voice:


"The Soldier is a splendid man
   When marching on parade,
And when he meets the enemy
   He never is afraid.

He rights the wrongs of nations,
 His country's flag defends,
The foe he'll fight with great delight,
   But seldom fights his friends."





Chapter Sixteen

Captain Fyter


"Are you really a soldier?" asked Woot, when they had
all watched this strange tin person parade up and down
the path and proudly flourish his sword.

"I was a soldier," was the reply, "but I've been a
prisoner to Mr. Rust so long that I don't know exactly
what I am."

"But -- dear me!" cried the Tin Woodman, sadly
perplexed; "how came you to be made of tin?"

"That," answered the Soldier, "is a sad, sad story I
was in love with a beautiful Munchkin girl, who lived
with a Wicked Witch. The Witch did not wish me to marry
the girl, so she enchanted my sword, which began
hacking me to pieces. When I lost my legs I went to the
tinsmith, Ku-Klip, and he made me some tin legs. When I
lost my arms, Ku-Klip made me tin arms, and when I lost
my head he made me this fine one out of tin. It was the
same way with my body, and finally I was all tin. But I
was not unhappy, for Ku-Klip made a good job of me,
having had experience in making another tin man before
me."

"Yes," observed the Tin Woodman, "it was Ku-Klip who
made me. But, tell me, what was the name of the
Munchkin girl you were in love with?"

"She is called Nimmie Amee," said the Tin Soldier.

Hearing this, they were all so astonished that they
were silent for a time, regarding the stranger with
wondering looks. Finally the Tin Woodman ventured to
ask:

"And did Nimmie Amee return your love?"

"Not at first," admitted the Soldier. "When first I
marched into the forest and met her, she was weeping
over the loss of her former sweetheart, a woodman whose
name was Nick Chopper."

"That is me," said the Tin Woodman.

"She told me he was nicer than a soldier, because he
was all made of tin and shone beautifully in the sun.
She said a tin man appealed to her artistic instincts
more than an ordinary meat man, as I was then. But I
did not despair, because her tin sweetheart had
disappeared, and could not be found. And finally Nimmie
Amee permitted me to call upon her and we became
friends. It was then that the Wicked Witch discovered
me and became furiously angry when I said I wanted to
marry the girl. She enchanted my sword, as I said, and
then my troubles began. When I got my tin legs, Nimmie
Amee began to take an interest in me; when I got my tin
arms, she began to like me better than ever, and when I
was all made of tin, she said I looked like her dear
Nick Chopper and she would be willing to marry me.

"The day of our wedding was set, and it turned out to
be a rainy day. Nevertheless I started out to get
Nimmie Amee, because the Witch had been absent for some
time, and we meant to elope before she got back. As I
traveled the forest paths the rain wetted my joints,
but I paid no attention to this because my thoughts
were all on my wedding with beautiful Nimmie Amee and I
could think of nothing else until suddenly my legs
stopped moving. Then my arms rusted at the joints and I
became frightened and cried for help, for now I was
unable to oil myself. No one heard my calls and before
long my jaws rusted, and I was unable to utter another
sound. So I stood helpless in this spot, hoping some
wanderer would come my way and save me. But this forest
path is seldom used, and I have been standing here so
long that I have lost all track of time. In my mind I
composed poetry and sang songs, but not a sound have I
been able to utter. But this desperate condition has
now been relieved by your coming my way and I must
thank you for my rescue."

"This is wonderful!" said the Scarecrow, heaving a
stuffy, long sigh. "I think Ku-Klip was wrong to make
two tin men, just alike, and the strangest thing of all
is that both you tin men fell in love with the same
girl."

"As for that," returned the Soldier, seriously, "I
must admit I lost my ability to love when I lost my
meat heart. Ku-Klip gave me a tin heart, to be sure,
but it doesn't love anything, as far as I can discover,
and merely rattles against my tin ribs, which makes me
wish I had no heart at all."

"Yet, in spite of this condition, you were going to
marry Nimmie Amee?"

"Well, you see I had promised to marry her, and I am
an honest man and always try to keep my promises. I
didn't like to disappoint the poor girl, who had been
disappointed by one tin man already."

"That was not my fault," declared the Emperor of the
Winkies, and then he related how he, also, had rusted
in the forest and after a long time had been rescued by
Dorothy and the Scarecrow and had traveled with them to
the Emerald City in search of a heart that could love.

"If you have found such a heart, sir," said the
Soldier, "I will gladly allow you to marry Nimmie Amee
in my place."

"If she loves you best, sir," answered the Woodman,
"I shall not interfere with your wedding her. For, to
be quite frank with you, I cannot yet love Nimmie Amee
as I did before I became tin."

"Still, one of you ought to marry the poor girl,"
remarked Woot; "and, if she likes tin men, there is not
much choice between you. Why don't you draw lots for
her?"

"That wouldn't be right," said the Scarecrow.

"The girl should be permitted to choose her own
husband," asserted Polychrome. "You should both go to
her and allow her to take her choice. Then she will
surely be happy."

"That, to me, seems a very fair arrangement," said
the Tin Soldier.

"I agree to it," said the Tin Woodman, shaking the
hand of his twin to show the matter was settled. "May I
ask your name, sir?" he continued.

"Before I was so cut up," replied the other, "I was
known as Captain Fyter, but afterward I was merely
called 'The Tin Soldier.'"

"Well, Captain, if you are agreeable, let us now go
to Nimmie Amee's house and let her choose between us."

"Very well; and if we meet the Witch, we will both
fight her -- you with your axe and I with my sword."

"The Witch is destroyed," announced the Scarecrow,
and as they walked away he told the Tin Soldier of much
that had happened in the Land of Oz since he had stood
rusted in the forest.

"I must have stood there longer than I had imagined,"
he said thoughtfully




Chapter Seventeen

The Workshop of Ku-Klip


It was not more than a two hours' journey to the house
where Nimmie Amee had lived, but when our travelers
arrived there they found the place deserted. The door
was partly off its hinges, the roof had fallen in at
the rear and the interior of the cottage was thick with
dust. Not only was the place vacant, but it was evident
that no one had lived there for a long time.

"I suppose," said the Scarecrow, as they all stood
looking wonderingly at the ruined house, "that after
the Wicked Witch was destroyed, Nimmie Amee became
lonely and went somewhere else to live."

"One could scarcely expect a young girl to live all
alone in a forest," added Woot. "She would want
company, of course, and so I believe she has gone where
other people live."

"And perhaps she is still crying her poor little
heart out because no tin man comes to marry her,"
suggested Polychrome.

"Well, in that case, it is the clear duty of you two
tin persons to seek Nimmie Amee until you find her,"
declared the Scarecrow.

"I do not know where to look for the girl," said the
Tin Soldier, "for I am almost a stranger to this part
of the country."

"I was born here," said the Tin Woodman, "but the
forest has few inhabitants except the wild beasts. I
cannot think of anyone living near here with whom
Nimmie Amee might care to live."

"Why not go to Ku-Klip and ask him what has become of
the girl?" proposed Polychrome.

That struck them all as being a good suggestion, so
once more they started to tramp through the forest,
taking the direct path to Ku-Klip's house, for both the
tin twins knew the way, having followed it many times.

Ku-Klip lived at the far edge of the great forest,
his house facing the broad plains of the Munchkin
Country that lay to the eastward. But, when they came
to this residence by the forest's edge, the tinsmith
was not at home.

It was a pretty place, all painted dark blue with
trimmings of lighter blue. There was a neat blue fence
around the yard and several blue benches had been
placed underneath the shady blue trees which marked the
line between forest and plain. There was a blue lawn
before the house, which was a good sized building. Ku-
Klip lived in the front part of the house and had his
work-shop in the back part, where he had also built a
lean-to addition, in order to give him more room.

Although they found the tinsmith absent on their
arrival, there was smoke coming out of his chimney,
which proved that he would soon return.

"And perhaps Nimmie Amee will be with him," said the
Scarecrow in a cheerful voice.

While they waited, the Tin Woodman went to the door
of the workshop and, finding it unlocked, entered and
looked curiously around the room where he had been
made.

"It seems almost like home to me," hie told his
friends, who had followed him in. "The first time I
came here I had lost a leg, so I had to carry it in my
hand while I hopped on the other leg all the way from
the place in the forest where the enchanted axe cut me.
I remember that old Ku-Klip carefully put my meat leg
into a barrel -- I think that is the same barrel, still
standing in the corner yonder -- and then at once he
began to make a tin leg for me. He worked fast and with
skill, and I was much interested in the job."

"My experience was much the same," said the Tin
Soldier. "I used to bring all the parts of me, which
the enchanted sword had cut away, here to the tinsmith,
and Ku-Klip would put them into the barrel."

"I wonder," said Woot, "if those cast-off parts of you two
unfortunates are still in that barrel in the corner?"

"I suppose so." replied the Tin Woodman. "In the Land
of Oz no part of a living creature can ever be destroyed."

"If that is true, how was that Wicked Witch destroyed?" inquired Woot.

"Why, she was very old and was all dried up and
withered before Oz became a fairyland," explained the
Scarecrow. "Only her magic arts had kept her alive so
long, and when Dorothy's house fell upon her she just
turned to dust, and was blown away and scattered by the
wind. I do not think, however, that the parts cut away
from these two young men could ever be entirely
destroyed and, if they are still in those barrels,
they are likely to be just the same as when the
enchanted axe or sword severed them."

"It doesn't matter, however," said the Tin Woodman;
"our tin bodies are more brilliant and durable, and
quite satisfy us."

"Yes, the tin bodies are best," agreed the Tin
Soldier. "Nothing can hurt them."

"Unless they get dented or rusted," said Woot, but
both the tin men frowned on him.

Scraps of tin, of all shapes and sizes, lay scattered
around the workshop. Also there were hammers and anvils
and soldering irons and a charcoal furnace and many
other tools such as a tinsmith works with. Against two
of the side walls had been built stout work-benches and
in the center of the room was a long table. At the end of
the shop, which adjoined the dwelling, were several cupboards.

After examining the interior of the workshop until
his curiosity was satisfied, Woot said;

"I think I will go outside until Ku-Klip comes. It
does not seem quite proper for us to take possession of
his house while he is absent."

"That is true," agreed the Scarecrow, and they were
all about to leave the room when the Tin Woodman said:
"Wait a minute," and they halted in obedience to the
command.




Chapter Eighteen

The Tin Woodman Talks to Himself


The Tin Woodman had just noticed the cupboards and was
curious to know what they contained, so he went to one
of them and opened the door. There were shelves inside,
and upon one of the shelves which was about on a level
with his tin chin the Emperor discovered a Head -- it
looked like a doll's head, only it was larger, and he
soon saw it was the Head of some person. It was facing
the Tin Woodman and as the cupboard door swung back,
the eyes of the Head slowly opened and looked at him.
The Tin Woodman was not at all surprised, for in the
Land of Oz one runs into magic at every turn.

"Dear me!" said the Tin Woodman, staring hard. "It
seems as if I had met you, somewhere, before. Good
morning, sir!"

"You have the advantage of me," replied the Head. "I
never saw you before in my life."

"Still, your face is very familiar," persisted the
Tin Woodman. "Pardon me, but may I ask if you -- eh --
eh -- if you ever had a Body?"

"Yes, at one time," answered the Head, "but that is
so long ago I can't remember it. Did you think," with a
pleasant smile, "that I was born just as I am? That a
Head would be created without a Body?"

"No, of course not," said the other. "But how came
you to lose your body?"

"Well, I can't recollect the details; you'll have to
ask Ku-Klip about it," returned the Head. "For, curious
as it may seem to you, my memory is not good since my
separation from the rest of me. I still possess my
brains and my intellect is as good as ever, but my
memory of some of the events I formerly experienced is
quite hazy."

"How long have you been in this cupboard?" asked the
Emperor.

"I don't know."

"Haven't you a name?"

"Oh, yes," said the Head; "I used to be called Nick
Chopper, when I was a woodman and cut down trees for a
living."

"Good gracious!" cried the Tin Woodman in
astonishment. "If you are Nick Chopper's Head, then you
are Me -- or I'm You -- or -- or -- What relation are
we, anyhow?"

"Don't ask me," replied the Head. "For my part, I'm
not anxious to claim relationship with any common,
manufactured article, like you. You may be all right in
your class, but your class isn't my class. You're tin."

The poor Emperor felt so bewildered that for a time he could
only stare at his old Head in silence. Then he said:

"I must admit that I wasn't at all bad looking before
I became tin. You're almost handsome -- for meat. If
your hair was combed, you'd be quite attractive."

"How do you expect me to comb my hair without help?"
demanded the Head, indignantly. "I used to keep it
smooth and neat, when I had arms, but after I was
removed from the rest of me, my hair got mussed,
and old Ku-Klip never has combed it for me."

"I'll speak to him about it," said the Tin Woodman.
"Do you remember loving a pretty Munchkin girl named
Nimmie Amee?"

"No," answered the Head. "That is a foolish question.
The heart in my body -- when I had a body -- might have
loved someone, for all I know, but a head isn't made to
love; it's made to think."

"Oh; do you think, then?"

"I used to think."

"You must have been shut up in this cupboard for
years and years. What have you thought about, in all
that time?"

"Nothing. That's another foolish question. A little
reflection will convince you that I have had nothing to
think about, except the boards on the inside of the
cupboard door, and it didn't take me long to think of
everything about those boards that could be thought of.
Then, of course, I quit thinking."

"And are you happy?"

"Happy? What's that?"

"Don't you know what happiness is?" inquired the Tin
Woodman.

"I haven't the faintest idea whether it's round or
square, or black or white, or what it is. And, if you
will pardon my lack of interest in it, I will say that
I don't care."

The Tin Woodman was much puzzled by these answers.
His traveling companions had grouped themselves at his
back, and had fixed their eyes on the Head and listened
to the conversation with much interest, but until now,
they had not interrupted because they thought the Tin
Woodman had the best right to talk to his own head and
renew acquaintance with it.

But now the Tin Soldier remarked:

"I wonder if my old head happens to be in any of
these cupboards," and he proceeded to open all the
cupboard doors. But no other head was to be found on
any of the shelves.

"Oh, well; never mind," said Woot the Wanderer; "I
can't imagine what anyone wants of a cast-off head,
anyhow."

"I can understand the Soldier's interest," asserted
Polychrome, dancing around the grimy workshop until her
draperies formed a cloud around her dainty form. "For
sentimental reasons a man might like to see his old
head once more, just as one likes to revisit an old
home."

"And then to kiss it good-bye," added the Scarecrow.

"I hope that tin thing won't try to kiss me good-
bye!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman's former head. "And I
don't see what right you folks have to disturb my peace
and comfort, either."

"You belong to me," the Tin Woodman declared.

"I do not!"

"You and I are one."

"We've been parted," asserted the Head. "It would be
unnatural for me to have any interest in a man made of
tin. Please close the door and leave me alone."

"I did not think that my old Head could be so
disagreeable," said the Emperor. "I -- I'm quite
ashamed of myself; meaning you."

"You ought to be glad that I've enough sense to know
what my rights are," retorted the Head. "In this
cupboard I am leading a simple life, peaceful and
dignified, and when a mob of people in whom I am not
interested disturb me, they are the disagreeable ones;
not I."

With a sigh the Tin Woodman closed and latched the
cupboard door and turned away.

"Well," said the Tin Soldier, "if my old head would
have treated me as coldly and in so unfriendly a manner
as your old head has treated you, friend Chopper, I'm
glad I could not find it."

"Yes; I'm rather surprised at my head, myself,"
replied the Tin Woodman, thoughtfully. "I thought I had
a more pleasant disposition when I was made of meat."

But just then old Ku-Klip the Tinsmith arrived, and
he seemed surprised to find so many visitors. Ku-Klip
was a stout man and a short man. He had his sleeves
rolled above his elbows, showing muscular arms, and he
wore a leathern apron that covered all the front of
him, and was so long that Woot was surprised he didn't
step on it and trip whenever he walked. And Ku-Klip had
a gray beard that was almost as long as his apron, and
his head was bald on top and his ears stuck out from
his head like two fans. Over his eyes, which were
bright and twinkling, he wore big spectacles. It was
easy to see that the tinsmith was a kind hearted man,
as well as a merry and agreeable one. "Oh-ho!" he cried
in a joyous bass voice; "here are both my tin men come
to visit me, and they and their friends are welcome
indeed. I'm very proud of you two characters, I assure
you, for you are so perfect that you are proof that I'm
a good workman. Sit down. Sit down, all of you -- if
you can find anything to sit on -- and tell me why you
are here."

So they found seats and told him all of their
adventures that they thought he would like to know. Ku-
Klip was glad to learn that Nick Chopper, the Tin
Woodman, was now Emperor of the Winkies and a friend of
Ozma of Oz, and the tinsmith was also interested in the
Scarecrow and Polychrome.

He turned the straw man around, examining him
curiously, and patted him on all sides, and then said:

"You are certainly wonderful, but I think you would
be more durable and steady on your legs if you were
made of tin. Would you like me to --"

"No, indeed!" interrupted the Scarecrow hastily; "I
like myself better as I am."

But to Polychrome the tinsmith said:

"Nothing could improve you, my dear, for you are the
most beautiful maiden I have ever seen. It is pure
happiness just to look at you."

"That is praise, indeed, from so skillful a workman,"
returned the Rainbow's Daughter, laughing and dancing
in and out the room.

"Then it must be this boy you wish me to help," said
Ku-Klip, looking at Woot.

"No," said Woot, "we are not here to seek your skill,
but have merely come to you for information."

Then, between them, they related their search for
Nimmie Amee, whom the Tin Woodman explained he had
resolved to marry, yet who had promised to become the
bride of the Tin Soldier before he unfortunately became
rusted. And when the story was told, they asked Ku-Klip
if he knew what had become of Nimmie Amee.

"Not exactly," replied the old man, "but I know that
she wept bitterly when the Tin Soldier did not come to
marry her, as he had promised to do. The old Witch was
so provoked at the girl's tears that she beat Nimmie
Amee with her crooked stick and then hobbled away to
gather some magic herbs, with which she intended to
transform the girl into an old hag, so that no one
would again love her or care to marry her. It was while
she was away on this errand that Dorothy's house fell
on the Wicked Witch, and she turned to dust and blew
away. When I heard this good news, I sent Nimmie Amee
to find the Silver Shoes which the Witch had worn, but
Dorothy had taken them with her to the Emerald City."

"Yes, we know all about those Silver Shoes," said the
Scarecrow.

"Well," continued Ku-Klip, "after that, Nimmie Amee
decided to go away from the forest and live with some
people she was acquainted with who had a house on Mount
Munch. I have never seen the girl since."

"Do you know the name of the people on Mount Munch,
with whom she went to live?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"No, Nimmie Amee did not mention her friend's name,
and I did not ask her. She took with her all that she
could carry of the goods that were in the Witch's
house, and she told me I could have the rest. But when
I went there I found nothing worth taking except some
magic powders that I did not know how to use, and a
bottle of Magic Glue."

"What is Magic Glue?" asked Woot.

"It is a magic preparation with which to mend people
when they cut themselves. One time, long ago, I cut off
one of my fingers by accident, and I carried it to the
Witch, who took down her bottle and glued it on again
for me. See!" showing them his finger, "it is as good
as ever it was. No one else that I ever heard of had
this Magic Glue, and of course when Nick Chopper cut
himself to pieces with his enchanted axe and Captain
Fyter cut himself to pieces with his enchanted sword,
the Witch would not mend them, or allow me to glue them
together, because she had herself wickedly enchanted
the axe and sword. Nothing remained but for me to make
them new parts out of tin; but, as you see, tin
answered the purpose very well, and I am sure their tin
bodies are a great improvement on their meat bodies."
"Very true," said the Tin Soldier.

"I quite agree with you," said the Tin Woodman. "I
happened to find my old head in your cupboard, a while
ago, and certainly it is not as desirable a head as the
tin one I now wear."

"By the way," said the Tin Soldier, "what ever became
of my old head, Ku-Klip?"

"And of the different parts of our bodies?" added the
Tin Woodman.

"Let me think a minute," replied Ku-Klip. "If I
remember right, you two boys used to bring me most of
your parts, when they were cut off, and I saved them in
that barrel in the corner. You must not have brought me
all the parts, for when I made Chopfyt I had hard work
finding enough pieces to complete the job. I finally
had to finish him with one arm."

"Who is Chopfyt?"inquired Woot.

"Oh, haven't I told you about Chopfyt?" exclaimed Ku-
Klip. "Of course not! And he's quite a curiosity, too.
You'll be interested in hearing about Chopfyt. This is
how he happened:

"One day, after the Witch had been destroyed and
Nimmie Amee had gone to live with her friends on Mount
Munch, I was looking around the shop for something and
came upon the bottle of Magic Glue which I had brought
from the old Witch's house. It occurred to me to piece
together the odds and ends of you two people, which of
course were just as good as ever, and see if I couldn't
make a man out of them. If I succeeded, I would have an
assistant to help me with my work, and I thought it
would be a clever idea to put to some practical use the
scraps of Nick Chopper and Captain Fyter. There were
two perfectly good heads in my cupboard, and a lot of
feet and legs and parts of bodies in the barrel, so I
set to work to see what I could do.

"First, I pieced together a body, gluing it with the
Witch's Magic Glue, which worked perfectly. That was
the hardest part of my job, however, because the bodies
didn't match up well and some parts were missing. But
by using a piece of Captain Fyter here and a piece of
Nick Chopper there, I finally got together a very
decent body, with heart and all the trimmings
complete."

"Whose heart did you use in making asked the Tin.
Woodman anxiously. the body?"

"I can't tell, for the parts had no tags on them and
one heart looks much like another. After the body was
completed, I glued two fine legs and feet onto it. One
leg was Nick Chopper's and one was Captain Fyter's and,
finding one leg longer than the other, I trimmed it
down to make them match. I was much disappointed to
find that I had but one arm. There was an extra leg in
the barrel, but I could find only one arm. Having glued
this onto the body, I was ready for the head, and I had
some difficulty in making up my mind which head to use.
Finally I shut my eyes and reached out my hand toward
the cupboard shelf, and the first head I touched I
glued upon my new man."

"It was mine!" declared the Tin Soldier, gloomily.

"No, it was mine," asserted Ku-Klip, "for I had given
you another in exchange for it -- the beautiful tin
head you now wear. When the glue had dried, my man was
quite an interesting fellow. I named him Chopfyt, using
a part of Nick Chopper's name and a part of Captain
Fyter's name, because he was a mixture of both your
cast-off parts. Chopfyt was interesting, as I said,
but he did not prove a very agreeable companion. He
complained bitterly because I had given him but one arm
-- as if it were my fault! -- and he grumbled because the
suit of blue Munchkin clothes, which I got for him from
a neighbor, did not fit him perfectly."

"Ah, that was because he was wearing my old head,"
remarked the Tin Soldier. "I remember that head used to
be very particular about its clothes."

"As an assistant," the old tinsmith continued,
"Chopfyt was not a success. He was awkward with tools
and was always hungry. He demanded something to eat six
or eight times a day, so I wondered if I had fitted his
insides properly. Indeed, Chopfyt ate so much that
little food was left for myself; so, when he proposed,
one day, to go out into the world and seek adventures,
I was delighted to be rid of him. I even made him a tin
arm to take the place of the missing one, and that
pleased him very much, so that we parted good friends."

"What became of Chopfyt after that?" the Scarecrow
inquired.

"I never heard. He started off toward the east, into
the plains of the Munchkin Country, and that was the
last I ever saw of him."

"It seems to me," said the Tin Woodman reflectively,
"that you did wrong in making a man out of our cast-off
parts. It is evident that Chopfyt could, with justice,
claim relationship with both of us."

"Don't worry about that," advised Ku-Klip cheerfully;
"it is not likely that you will ever meet the fellow.
And, if you should meet him, he doesn't know who he is
made of, for I never told him the secret of his
manufacture. Indeed, you are the only ones who know of
it, and you may keep the secret to yourselves, if you
wish to."

"Never mind Chopfyt," said the Scarecrow. "Our
business now is to find poor Nimmie Amee and let her
choose her tin husband. To do that, it seems, from the
information Ku-Klip has given us, we must travel to
Mount Munch."

"If that's the programme, let us start at once,"
suggested Woot.

So they all went outside, where they found Polychrome
dancing about among the trees and talking with the
birds and laughing as merrily as if she had not lost
her Rainbow and so been separated from all her fairy
sisters.

They told her they were going to Mount Munch, and she
replied:

"Very well; I am as likely to find my Rainbow there
as here, and any other place is as likely as there. It
all depends on the weather. Do you think it looks like
rain?"

They shook their heads, and Polychrome laughed again
and danced on after them when they resumed their
journey.




Chapter Nineteen

The Invisible Country


They were proceeding so easily and comfortably on their
way to Mount Munch that Woot said in a serious tone of
voice:

"I'm afraid something is going to happen."

"Why?" asked Polychrome, dancing around the group of
travelers.

"Because," said the boy, thoughtfully, "I've noticed
that when we have the least reason for getting into
trouble, something is sure to go wrong. Just now the
weather is delightful; the grass is beautifully blue
and quite soft to our feet; the mountain we are seeking
shows clearly in the distance and there is no reason
anything should happen to delay us in getting there.
Our troubles all seem to be over, and -- well, that's
why I'm afraid," he added, with a sigh.

"Dear me!" remarked the Scarecrow, "what unhappy
thoughts you have, to be sure. This is proof that born
brains cannot equal manufactured brains, for my brains
dwell only on facts and never borrow trouble. When
there is occasion for my brains to think, they think,
but I would be ashamed of my brains if they kept
shooting out thoughts that were merely fears and
imaginings, such as do no good, but are likely to do
harm."

"For my part," said the Tin Woodman, "I do not think
at all, but allow my velvet heart to guide me at all
times."

"The tinsmith filled my hollow head with scraps and
clippings of tin," said the Soldier, "and he told me
they would do nicely for brains, but when I begin to
think, the tin scraps rattle around and get so mixed
that I'm soon bewildered. So I try not to think. My tin
heart is almost as useless to me, for it is hard and
cold, so I'm sure the red velvet heart of my friend
Nick Chopper is a better guide."

"Thoughtless people are not unusual," observed the
Scarecrow, "but I consider them more fortunate than
those who have useless or wicked thoughts and do not
try to curb them. Your oil can, friend Woodman, is
filled with oil, but you only apply the oil to your
joints, drop by drop, as you need it, and do not keep
spilling it where it will do no good. Thoughts should
be restrained in the same way as your oil, and only
applied when necessary, and for a good purpose. If used
carefully, thoughts are good things to have."

Polychrome laughed at him, for the Rainbow's Daughter
knew more about thoughts than the Scarecrow did. But
the others were solemn, feeling they had been rebuked,
and tramped on in silence.

Suddenly Woot, who was in the lead, looked around and
found that all his comrades had mysteriously
disappeared. But where could they have gone to? The
broad plain was all about him and there were neither
trees nor bushes that could hide even a rabbit, nor any
hole for one to fall into. Yet there he stood, alone.

Surprise had caused him to halt, and with a
thoughtful and puzzled expression on his face he looked
down at his feet. It startled him anew to discover that
he had no feet. He reached out his hands, but he could
not see them. He could feel his hands and arms and
body; he stamped his feet on the grass and knew they
were there, but in some strange way they had become
invisible.

While Woot stood, wondering, a crash of metal sounded
in his ears and he heard two heavy bodies tumble to the
earth just beside him.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed the voice of the Tin
Woodman.

"Mercy me!" cried the voice of the Tin Soldier.

"Why didn't you look where you were going?" asked the
Tin Woodman reproachfully.

"I did, but I couldn't see you," said the Tin
Soldier. "Something has happened to my tin eyes. I
can't see you, even now, nor can I see anyone else!"

"It's the same way with me," admitted the Tin
Woodman.

Woot couldn't see either of them, although he heard
them plainly, and just then something smashed against
him unexpectedly and knocked him over; but it was only
the straw-stuffed body of the Scarecrow that fell upon
him and while he could not see the Scarecrow he managed
to push him off and rose to his feet just as Polychrome
whirled against him and made him tumble again.

Sitting upon the ground, the boy asked:

"Can you see us, Poly?"

"No, indeed," answered the Rainbow's Daughter; "we've
all become invisible."

"How did it happen, do you suppose?" inquired the
Scarecrow, lying where he had fallen.

"We have met with no enemy," answered Poly-chrome,
"so it must be that this part of the country has the
magic quality of making people invisible --even fairies
falling under the charm. We can see the grass, and the
flowers, and the stretch of plain before us, and we can
still see Mount Munch in the distance; but we cannot
see ourselves or one another."

"Well, what are we to do about it?" demanded Woot.

"I think this magic affects only a small part of the
plain," replied Polychrome; "perhaps there is only a
streak of the country where an enchantment makes people
become invisible. So, if we get together and hold
hands, we can travel toward Mount Munch until the
enchanted streak is passed."

"All right," said Woot, jumping up, "give me your
hand, Polychrome. Where are you?"

"Here," she answered. "Whistle, Woot, and keep
whistling until I come to you."

So Woot whistled, and presently Polychrome found him
and grasped his hand.

"Someone must help me up," said the Scarecrow, lying
near them; so they found the straw man and sat him upon
his feet, after which he held fast to Polychrome's
other hand.

Nick Chopper and the Tin Soldier had managed to
scramble up without assistance, but it was awkward for
them and the Tin Woodman said:

"I don't seem to stand straight, somehow. But my
joints all work, so I guess I can walk."

Guided by his voice, they reached his side, where
Woot grasped his tin fingers so they might keep
together.

The Tin Soldier was standing near by and the
Scarecrow soon touched him and took hold of his arm.

"I hope you're not wobbly," said the straw man,
"for if two of us walk unsteadily we will be sure
to fall."

"I'm not wobbly," the Tin Soldier assured him, "but
I'm certain that one of my legs is shorter than the
other. I can't see it, to tell what's gone wrong, but
I'll limp on with the rest of you until we are out of
this enchanted territory."

They now formed a line, holding hands, and turning
their faces toward Mount Munch resumed their journey.
They had not gone far, however, when a terrible growl
saluted their ears. The sound seemed to come from a
place just in front of them, so they halted abruptly
and remained silent, listening with all their ears.

"I smell straw!" cried a hoarse, harsh voice, with
more growls and snarls. "I smell straw, and I'm a
Hip-po-gy-raf who loves straw and eats all he can find.
I want to eat this straw! Where is it? Where is it?"

The Scarecrow, hearing this, trembled but kept
silent. All the others were silent, too, hoping that
the invisible beast would be unable to find them. But
the creature sniffed the odor of the straw and drew
nearer and nearer to them until he reached the Tin
Woodman, on one end of the line. It was a big beast and
it smelled of the Tin Woodman and grated two rows of
enormous teeth against the Emperor's tin body.

"Bah! that's not straw," said the harsh voice, and
the beast advanced along the line to Woot.

"Meat! Pooh, you're no good! I can't eat meat,"
grumbled the beast, and passed on to Polychrome.

"Sweetmeats and perfume -- cobwebs and dew! Nothing
to eat in a fairy like you," said the creature.

Now, the Scarecrow was next to Polychrome in the
line, and he realized if the beast devoured his straw
he would be helpless for a long time, because the last
farmhouse was far behind them and only grass covered
the vast expanse of plain. So in his fright he let go
of Polychrome's hand and put the hand of the Tin
Soldier in that of the Rainbow's Daughter. Then he
slipped back of the line and went to the other end,
where he silently seized the Tin Woodman's hand.

Meantime, the beast had smelled the Tin Soldier and
found he was the last of the line.

"That's funny!" growled the Hip-po-gy-raf; "I can
smell straw, but I can't find it. Well, it's here,
somewhere, and I must hunt around until I do find it,
for I'm hungry."

His voice was now at the left of them, so they
started on, hoping to avoid him, and traveled as fast
as they could in the direction of Mount Munch.

"I don't like this invisible country," said Woot with
a shudder. "We can't tell how many dreadful, invisible
beasts are roaming around us, or what danger we'll come
to next."

"Quit thinking about danger, please," said the
Scarecrow, warningly.

"Why?" asked the boy.

"If you think of some dreadful thing, it's liable to
happen, but if you don't think of it, and no one else
thinks of it, it just can't happen. Do you see?"

"No," answered Woot. "I won't be able to see much of
anything until we escape from this enchantment."

But they got out of the invisible strip of country
as suddenly as they had entered it, and the instant
they got out they stopped short, for just before them
was a deep ditch, running at right angles as far as
their eyes could see and stopping all further progress
toward Mount Munch.

"It's not so very wide," said Woot, "but I'm sure
none of us can jump across it."

Polychrome began to laugh, and the Scarecrow said:
"What's the matter?"

"Look at the tin men!" she said, with another burst
of merry laughter.

Woot and the Scarecrow looked, and the tin men looked
at themselves.

"It was the collision," said the Tin Woodman
regretfully. "I knew something was wrong with me, and
now I can see that my side is dented in so that I lean
over toward the left. It was the Soldier's fault; he
shouldn't have been so careless."

"It is your fault that my right leg is bent, making
it shorter than the other, so that I limp badly,"
retorted the Soldier. "You shouldn't have stood where I
was walking."

"You shouldn't have walked where I was standing,"
replied the Tin Woodman.

It was almost a quarrel, so Polychrome said
soothingly:

"Never mind, friends; as soon as we have time I am
sure we can straighten the Soldier's leg and get the
dent out of the Woodman's body. The Scarecrow needs
patting into shape, too, for he had a bad tumble, but
our first task is to get over this ditch."

"Yes, the ditch is the most important thing, just
now," added Woot

They were standing in a row, looking hard at the
unexpected barrier, when a fierce growl from behind
them made them all turn quickly. Out of the invisible
country marched a huge beast with a thick, leathery
skin and a surprisingly long neck. The head on the top
of this neck was broad and flat and the eyes and mouth
were very big and the nose and ears very small. When
the head was drawn down toward the beast's shoulders,
the neck was all wrinkles, but the head could shoot up
very high indeed, if the creature wished it to.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, "this must be the
Hip-po-gy-raf."

"Quite right," said the beast; "and you're the straw
which I'm to eat for my dinner. Oh, how I love straw! I
hope you don't resent my affectionate appetite?"

With its four great legs it advanced straight toward
the Scarecrow, but the Tin Woodman and the Tin Soldier
both sprang in front of their friend and flourished
their weapons.

"Keep off!" said the Tin Woodman, warningly, or I'll
chop you with my axe."

"Keep off!" said the Tin Soldier, "or I'll cut you
with my sword."

"Would you really do that?" asked the Hip-po-gy-raf,
in a disappointed voice.

"We would," they both replied, and the Tin Woodman
added: "The Scarecrow is our friend, and he would be
useless without his straw stuffing. So, as we are
comrades, faithful and true, we will defend our
friend's stuffing against all enemies."

The Hip-po-gy-raf sat down and looked at them
sorrowfully.

"When one has made up his mind to have a meal of
delicious straw, and then finds he can't have it, it is
certainly hard luck," he said. "And what good is the
straw man to you, or to himself, when the ditch keeps
you from going any further?"

"Well, we can go back again," suggested Woot.

"True," said the Hip-po; "and if you do, you'll be as
disappointed as I am. That's some comfort, anyhow."

The travelers looked at the beast, and then they
looked across the ditch at the level plain beyond. On
the other side the grass had grown tall, and the sun
had dried it, so there was a fine crop of hay that only
needed to be cut and stacked.

"Why don't you cross over and eat hay?" the boy asked
the beast.

"I'm not fond of hay," replied the Hip-po-gy-raf;
"straw is much more delicious, to my notion, and it's
more scarce in this neighborhood, too. Also I must
confess that I can't get across the ditch, for my body
is too heavy and clumsy for me to jump the distance. I
can stretch my neck across, though, and you will notice
that I've nibbled the hay on the farther edge -- not
because I liked it, but because one must eat, and if
one can't get the sort of food he desires, he must take
what is offered or go hungry."

"Ah, I see you are a philosopher," remarked the
Scarecrow.

"No, I'm just a Hip-po-gy-raf," was the reply.

Polychrome was not afraid of the big beast. She
danced close to him and said:

"If you can stretch your neck across the ditch, why
not help us over? We can sit on your big head, one at a
time, and then you can lift us across."

"Yes; I can, it is true," answered the Hip-po; "but I
refuse to do it. Unless --" he added, and stopped
short.

"Unless what?" asked Polychrome.

"Unless you first allow me to eat the straw with
which the Scarecrow is stuffed."

"No," said the Rainbow's Daughter, "that is too high
a price to pay. Our friend's straw is nice and fresh,
for he was restuffed only a little while ago."

"I know," agreed the Hip-po-gy-raf. "That's why I
want it. If it was old, musty straw, I wouldn't care
for it."

"Please lift us across," pleaded Polychrome.

"No," replied the beast; "since you refuse my
generous offer, I can be as stubborn as you are."

After that they were all silent for a time, but then
the Scarecrow said bravely:

"Friends, let us agree to the beast's terms. Give him
my straw, and carry the rest of me with you across the
ditch. Once on the other side, the Tin Soldier can cut
some of the hay with his sharp sword, and you can stuff
me with that material until we reach a place where
there is straw. It is true I have been stuffed with
straw all my life and it will be somewhat humiliating
to be filled with common hay, but I am willing to
sacrifice my pride in a good cause. Moreover, to
abandon our errand and so deprive the great Emperor of
the Winkies -- or this noble Soldier -- of his bride,
would be equally humiliating, if not more so."

"You're a very honest and clever man!" exclaimed the
Hip-po-gy-raf, admiringly. "When I have eaten your
head, perhaps I also will become clever."

"You're not to eat my head, you know," returned the
Scarecrow hastily. "My head isn't stuffed with straw
and I cannot part with it. When one loses his head he
loses his brains."

"Very well, then; you may keep your head," said the
beast.

The Scarecrow's companions thanked him warmly for his
loyal sacrifice to their mutual good, and then he laid
down and permitted them to pull the straw from his
body. As fast as they did this, the Hip-po-gy-raf ate
up the straw, and when all was consumed Polychrome made
a neat bundle of the clothes and boots and gloves and
hat and said she would carry them, while Woot tucked
the Scarecrow's head under his arm and promised to
guard its safety.

"Now, then," said the Tin Woodman, "keep your
promise, Beast, and lift us over the ditch."

"M-m-m-mum, but that was a fine dinner!" said the
Hip-po, smacking his thick lips in satisfaction, "and
I'm as good as my word. Sit on my head, one at a time,
and I'll land you safely on the other side."

He approached close to the edge of the ditch and
squatted down. Polychrome climbed over his big body and
sat herself lightly upon the flat head, holding the
bundle of the Scarecrow's raiment in her hand. Slowly
the elastic neck stretched out until it reached the far
side of the ditch, when the beast lowered his head and
permitted the beautiful fairy to leap to the ground.

Woot made the queer journey next, and then the Tin
Soldier and the Tin Woodman went over, and all were
well pleased to have overcome this serious barrier to
their progress.

"Now, Soldier, cut the hay," said the Scarecrow's
head, which was still held by Woot the Wanderer.

"I'd like to, but I can't stoop over, with my bent
leg, without falling," replied Captain Fyter.

"What can we do about that leg, anyhow?" asked Woot,
appealing to Polychrome.

She danced around in a circle several times without
replying, and the boy feared she had not heard him; but
the Rainbow's Daughter was merely thinking upon the
problem, and presently she paused beside the Tin
Soldier and said:

"I've been taught a little fairy magic, but I've
never before been asked to mend tin legs with it, so
I'm not sure I can help you. It all depends on the good
will of my unseen fairy guardians, so I'll try, and if
I fail, you will be no worse off than you are now."

She danced around the circle again, and then laid
both hands upon the twisted tin leg and sang in her
sweet voice:


"Fairy Powers, come to my aid!

This bent leg of tin is made;

Make it straight and strong and true,

And I'll render thanks to you."


"Ah!" murmured Captain Fyter in a glad voice, as she
withdrew her hands and danced away, and they saw he was
standing straight as ever, because his leg was as
shapely and strong as it had been before his accident.

The Tin Woodman had watched Polychrome with much
interest, and he now said:

"Please take the dent out of my side, Poly, for I am
more crippled than was the Soldier."

So the Rainbow's Daughter touched his side lightly
and sang:


"Here's a dent by accident;
Such a thing was never meant.
Fairy Powers, so wondrous great,
Make our dear Tin Woodman straight!"


"Good!" cried the Emperor, again standing erect and
strutting around to show his fine figure. "Your fairy
magic may not be able to accomplish all things, sweet
Polychrome, but it works splendidly on tin. Thank you
very much."

"The hay -- the hay!" pleaded the Scarecrow's head.

"Oh, yes; the hay," said Woot. "What are you waiting
for, Captain Fyter?"

At once the Tin Soldier set to work cutting hay with
his sword and in a few minutes there was quite enough
with which to stuff the Scarecrow's body. Woot and
Polychrome did this and it was no easy task because the
hay packed together more than straw and as they had
little experience in such work their job, when
completed, left the Scarecrow's arms and legs rather
bunchy. Also there was a hump on his back which made
Woot laugh and say it reminded him of a camel, but it
was the best they could do and when the head was fastened
on to the body they asked the Scarecrow how he felt.

"A little heavy, and not quite natural," he
cheerfully replied; "but I'll get along somehow until
we reach a straw-stack. Don't laugh at me, please,
because I'm a little ashamed of myself and I don't want
to regret a good action."

They started at once in the direction of Mount Munch,
and as the Scarecrow proved very clumsy in his
movements, Woot took one of his arms and the Tin
Woodman the other and so helped their friend to walk in
a straight line.

And the Rainbow's Daughter, as before, danced ahead
of them and behind them and all around them, and they
never minded her odd ways, because to them she was like
a ray of sunshine.




Chapter Twenty

Over Night


The Land of the Munchkins is full of surprises, as our
travelers had already learned, and although Mount Munch
was constantly growing larger as they advanced toward
it, they knew it was still a long way off and were not
certain, by any means, that they had escaped all danger
or encountered their last adventure.

The plain was broad, and as far as the eye could see,
there seemed to be a level stretch of country between
them and the mountain, but toward evening they came
upon a hollow, in which stood a tiny blue Munchkin
dwelling with a garden around it and fields of grain
filling in all the rest of the hollow.

They did not discover this place until they came
close to the edge of it, and they were astonished at
the sight that greeted them because they had imagined
that this part of the plain had no inhabitants.

"It's a very small house," Woot declared. "I wonder
who lives there?"

"The way to find out is to knock on the door and
ask," replied the Tin Woodman. "Perhaps it is the home
of Nimmie Amee."

"Is she a dwarf?" asked the boy.

"No, indeed; Nimmie Amee is a full sized woman."

"Then I'm sure she couldn't live in that little house," said Woot.

"Let's go down," suggested the Scarecrow. "I'm almost
sure I can see a straw-stack in the back yard."

They descended the hollow, which was rather steep at
the sides, and soon came to the house, which was indeed
rather small. Woot knocked upon a door that was not
much higher than his waist, but got no reply. He
knocked again, but not a sound was heard.

"Smoke is coming out of the chimney," announced
Polychrome, who was dancing lightly through the garden,
where cabbages and beets and turnips and the like were
growing finely

"Then someone surely lives here," said Woot, and
knocked again.

Now a window at the side of the house opened and a
queer head appeared. It was white and hairy and had a
long snout and little round eyes. The ears were hidden
by a blue sunbonnet tied under the chin.

"Oh; it's a pig!" exclaimed Woot.

"Pardon me; I am Mrs. Squealina Swyne, wife of
Professor Grunter Swyne, and this is our home," said
the one in the window. "What do you want?"

"What sort of a Professor is your husband?" inquired
the Tin Woodman curiously.

"He is Professor of Cabbage Culture and Corn
Perfection. He is very famous in his own family, and
would be the wonder of the world if he went abroad,"
said Mrs. Swyne in a voice that was half proud and half
irritable. "I must also inform you intruders that the
Professor is a dangerous individual, for he files his
teeth every morning until they are sharp as needles. If
you are butchers, you'd better run away and avoid
trouble."

"We are not butchers," the Tin Woodman assured her.

"Then what are you doing with that axe?  And why has
the other tin man a sword?"

"They are the only weapons we have to defend our
friends from their enemies," explained the Emperor of
the Winkies, and Woot added:

"Do not be afraid of us, Mrs. Swyne, for we are
harmless travelers. The tin men and the Scarecrow never
eat anything and Polychrome feasts only on dewdrops. As
for me, I'm rather hungry, but there is plenty of food
in your garden to satisfy me."

Professor Swyne now joined his wife at the window,
looking rather scared in spite of the boy's assuring
speech. He wore a blue Munchkin hat, with pointed crown
and broad brim, and big spectacles covered his eyes. He
peeked around from behind his wife and after looking
hard at the strangers, he said:

"My wisdom assures me that you are merely travelers,
as you say, and not butchers. Butchers have reason to
be afraid of me, but you are safe. We cannot invite you
in, for you are too big for our house, but the boy who
eats is welcome to all the carrots and turnips he
wants. Make yourselves at home in the garden and stay
all night, if you like; but in the morning you must go
away, for we are quiet people and do not care for company."

"May I have some of your straw?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Help yourself," replied Professor Swyne.

"For pigs, they're quite respectable," remarked Woot,
as they all went toward the straw-stack.

"I'm glad they didn't invite us in," said Captain
Fyter. "I hope I'm not too particular about my
associates, but I draw the line at pigs."

The Scarecrow was glad to be rid of his hay, for
during the long walk it had sagged down and made him
fat and squatty and more bumpy than at first.

"I'm not specially proud," he said, "but I love a
manly figure, such as only straw stuffing can create.
I've not felt like myself since that hungry Hip-po ate
my last straw."

Polychrome and Woot set to work removing the hay and
then they selected the finest straw, crisp and golden,
and with it stuffed the Scarecrow anew. He certainly
looked better after the operation, and he was so
pleased at being reformed that he tried to dance a
little jig, and almost succeeded.

"I shall sleep under the straw-stack tonight," Woot
decided, after he had eaten some of the vegetables from
the garden, and in fact he slept very well, with the
two tin men and the Scarecrow sitting silently beside
him and Polychrome away somewhere in the moonlight
dancing her fairy dances.

At daybreak the Tin Woodman and the Tin Soldier took
occasion to polish their bodies and oil their joints,
for both were exceedingly careful of their personal
appearance. They had forgotten the quarrel due to their
accidental bumping of one another in the invisible
country, and being now good friends the Tin Woodman
polished the Tin Soldier's back for him and then the
Tin Soldier polished the Tin Woodman's back.

For breakfast the Wanderer ate crisp lettuce and
radishes, and the Rainbow's Daughter, who had now
returned to her friends, sipped the dewdrops that had
formed on the petals of the wild-flowers.

As they passed the little house to renew their
journey, Woot called out:

"Good-bye, Mr. and Mrs. Swyne!"

The window opened and the two pigs looked out.

"A pleasant journey," said the Professor.

"Have you any children?" asked the Scarecrow, who was
a great friend of children.

"We have nine," answered the Professor; "but they do
not live with us, for when they were tiny piglets the
Wizard of Oz came here and offered to care for them and
to educate them. So we let him have our nine tiny
piglets, for he's a good Wizard and can be relied upon
to keep his promises."

"I know the Nine Tiny Piglets," said the Tin Woodman.

"So do I," said the Scarecrow. "They still live in
the Emerald City, and the Wizard takes good care of
them and teaches them to do all sorts of tricks."

"Did they ever grow up?" inquired Mrs. Squealina
Swyne, in an anxious voice.

"No," answered the Scarecrow; "like all other
children in the Land of Oz, they will always remain
children, and in the case of the tiny piglets that is a
good thing, because they would not be nearly so cute
and cunning if they were bigger."

"But are they happy?" asked Mrs. Swyne.

"Everyone in the Emerald City is happy," said the Tin
Woodman. "They can't help it."

Then the travelers said good-bye, and climbed the
side of the basin that was toward Mount Munch.




Chapter Twenty-One

Polychrome's Magic


On this morning, which ought to be the last of this
important journey, our friends started away as bright
and cheery as could be, and Woot whistled a merry tune
so that Polychrome could dance to the music.

On reaching the top of the hill, the plain spread out
before them in all its beauty of blue grasses and
wildflowers, and Mount Munch seemed much nearer than it
had the previous evening. They trudged on at a brisk
pace, and by noon the mountain was so close that they
could admire its appearance. Its slopes were partly
clothed with pretty evergreens, and its foot-hills were
tufted with a slender waving bluegrass that had a
tassel on the end of every blade. And, for the first
time, they perceived, near the foot of the mountain, a
charming house, not of great size but neatly painted
and with many flowers surrounding it and vines climbing
over the doors and windows.

It was toward this solitary house that our travelers
now directed their steps, thinking to inquire of the
people who lived there where Nimmie Amee might be
found.

There were no paths, but the way was quite open and
clear, and they were drawing near to the dwelling when
Woot the Wanderer, who was then in the lead of the
little party, halted with such an abrupt jerk that he
stumbled over backward and lay flat on his back in the
meadow. The Scarecrow stopped to look at the boy.

"Why did you do that?" he asked in surprise.

Woot sat up and gazed around him in amazement.

"I -- I don't know!" he replied.

The two tin men, arm in arm, started to pass them
when both halted and tumbled, with a great clatter,
into a heap beside Woot. Polychrome, laughing at the
absurd sight, came dancing up and she, also, came to a
sudden stop, but managed to save herself from falling.

Everyone of them was much astonished, and the
Scarecrow said with a puzzled look:

"I don't see anything."

"Nor I," said Woot; "but something hit me, just the
same."

"Some invisible person struck me a heavy blow,"
declared the Tin Woodman, struggling to separate
himself from the Tin Soldier, whose legs and arms were
mixed with his own.

"I'm not sure it was a person," said Polychrome,
looking more grave than usual. "It seems to me that I
merely ran into some hard substance which barred my way.
In order to make sure of this, let me try another place."

She ran back a way and then with much caution
advanced in a different place, but when she reached a
position on a line with the others she halted, her arms
outstretched before her.

"I can feel something hard - something smooth as
glass," she said, "but I'm sure it is not glass."

"Let me try," suggested Woot, getting up; but when he
tried to go forward, he discovered the same barrier
that Polychrome had encountered.

"No," he said, "it isn't glass. But what is it?"

"Air," replied a small voice beside him. "Solid air;
that's all."

They all looked downward and found a sky-blue rabbit
had stuck his head out of a burrow in the ground. The
rabbit's eyes were a deeper blue than his fur, and the
pretty creature seemed friendly and unafraid.

"Air!" exclaimed Woot, staring in astonishment into
the rabbit's blue eyes; "whoever heard of air so solid
that one cannot push it aside?"

"You can't push this air aside," declared the rabbit,
"for it was made hard by powerful sorcery, and it forms
a wall that is intended to keep people from getting to
that house yonder."

"Oh; it's a wall, is it?" said the Tin Woodman.

"Yes, it is really a wall," answered the rabbit, "and
it is fully six feet thick."

"How high is it?" inquired Captain Fyter, the Tin
Soldier.

"Oh, ever so high; perhaps a mile," said the rabbit.

"Couldn't we go around it?" asked Woot.

"Of course, for the wall is a circle," explained the
rabbit. "In the center of the circle stands the house,
so you may walk around the Wall of Solid Air, but you
can't get to the house."

"Who put the air wall around the house?" was the
Scarecrow's question.

"Nimmie Amee did that."

"Nimmie Amee!" they all exclaimed in surprise.

"Yes," answered the rabbit. "She used to live with an
old Witch, who was suddenly destroyed, and when Nimmie
Amee ran away from the Witch's house, she took with her
just one magic formula --pure sorcery it was -- which
enabled her to build this air wall around her house --
the house yonder. It was quite a clever idea, I think,
for it doesn't mar the beauty of the landscape, solid
air being invisible, and yet it keeps all strangers
away from the house."

"Does Nimmie Amee live there now?" asked the Tin
Woodman anxiously.

"Yes, indeed," said the rabbit.

"And does she weep and wail from morning till night?"
continued the Emperor.

"No; she seems quite happy," asserted the rabbit.

The Tin Woodman seemed quite disappointed to hear
this report of his old sweetheart, but the Scarecrow
reassured his friend, saying:

"Never mind, your Majesty; however happy Nimmie Amee
is now, I'm sure she will be much happier as Empress of
the Winkies."

"Perhaps," said Captain Fyter, somewhat stiffly, "she
will be still more happy to become the bride of a Tin
Soldier."

"She shall choose between us, as we have agreed," the
Tin Woodman promised; "but how shall we get to the poor
girl?"

Polychrome, although dancing lightly back and forth,
had listened to every word of the conversation. Now she
came forward and sat herself down just in front of the
Blue Rabbit, her many-hued draperies giving her the
appearance of some beautiful flower. The rabbit didn't
back away an inch. Instead, he gazed at the Rainbow's
Daughter admiringly.

"Does your burrow go underneath this Wall of Air?"
asked Polychrome.

"To be sure," answered the Blue Rabbit; "I dug it
that way so I could roam in these broad fields, by
going out one way, or eat the cabbages in Nimmie Amee's
garden by leaving my burrow at the other end. I don't
think Nimmie Amee ought to mind the little I take from
her garden, or the hole I've made under her magic wall.
A rabbit may go and come as he pleases, but no one who
is bigger than I am could get through my burrow."

"Will you allow us to pass through it, if we are able
to? " inquired Polychrome.

"Yes, indeed," answered the Blue Rabbit. "I'm no
especial friend of Nimmie Amee, for once she threw
stones at me, just because I was nibbling some lettuce,
and only yesterday she yelled 'Shoo!' at me, which made
me nervous. You're welcome to use my burrow in any way
you choose."

"But this is all nonsense!" declared Woot the
Wanderer. "We are every one too big to crawl through a
rabbit's burrow."

"We are too big now," agreed the Scarecrow, "but you
must remember that Polychrome is a fairy, and fairies
have many magic powers."

Woot's face brightened as he turned to the lovely
Daughter of the Rainbow.

"Could you make us all as small as that rabbit?" he
asked eagerly.

"I can try," answered Polychrome, with a smile. And
presently she did it -- so easily that Woot was not the
only one astonished. As the now tiny people grouped
themselves before the rabbit's burrow the hole appeared
to them like the entrance to a tunnel, which indeed it
was.

"I'll go first," said wee Polychrome, who had made
herself grow as small as the others, and into the
tunnel she danced without hesitation. A tiny Scarecrow
went next and then the two funny little tin men.

"Walk in; it's your turn," said the Blue Rabbit to
Woot the Wanderer. "I'm coming after, to see how you
get along. This will be a regular surprise party to
Nimmie Amee."

So Woot entered the hole and felt his way along its
smooth sides in the dark until he finally saw the
glimmer of daylight ahead and knew the journey was
almost over. Had he remained his natural size, the
distance could have been covered in a few steps, but to
a thumb-high Woot it was quite a promenade. When he
emerged from the burrow he found himself but a short
distance from the house, in the center of the vegetable
garden, where the leaves of rhubarb waving above his
head seemed like trees. Outside the hole, and waiting
for him, he found all his friends.

"So far, so good!" remarked the Scarecrow cheerfully.

"Yes; so far, but no farther," returned the Tin
Woodman in a plaintive and disturbed tone of voice. "I
am now close to Nimmie Amee, whom I have come ever so
far to seek, but I cannot ask the girl to marry such a
little man as I am now."

"I'm no bigger than a toy soldier!" said Captain
Fyter, sorrowfully. "Unless Polychrome can make us big
again, there is little use in our visiting Nimmie Amee
at all, for I'm sure she wouldn't care for a husband
she might carelessly step on and ruin."

Polychrome laughed merrily.

"If I make you big, you can't get out of here again,"
said she, "and if you remain little Nimmie Amee will
laugh at you. So make your choice."

"I think we'd better go back," said Woot seriously

"No," said the Tin Woodman, stoutly, "I have decided
that it's my duty to make Nimmie Amee happy, in case
she wishes to marry me."

"So have I," announced Captain Fyter. "A good soldier
never shrinks from doing his duty."

"As for that," said the Scarecrow, "tin doesn't
shrink any to speak of, under any circumstances. But
Woot and I intend to stick to our comrades, whatever
they decide to do, so we will ask Polychrome to make us
as big as we were before."

Polychrome agreed to this request and in half a
minute all of them, including herself, had been
enlarged again to their natural sizes. They then
thanked the Blue Rabbit for his kind assistance, and at
once approached the house of Nimme Amee.




Chapter Twenty-Two

Nimmie Amee


We may be sure that at this moment our friends were all
anxious to see the end of the adventure that had caused
them so many trials and troubles. Perhaps the Tin
Woodman's heart did not beat any faster, because it was
made of red velvet and stuffed with sawdust, and the
Tin Soldier's heart was made of tin and reposed in his
tin bosom without a hint of emotion. However, there is
little doubt that they both knew that a critical moment
in their lives had arrived, and that Nimmie Amee's
decision was destined to influence the future of one or
the other.

As they assumed their natural sizes and the rhubarb
leaves that had before towered above their heads now
barely covered their feet, they looked around the
garden and found that no person was visible save
themselves. No sound of activity came from the house,
either, but they walked to the front door, which had a
little porch built before it, and there the two tinmen
stood side by side while both knocked upon the door
with their tin knuckles.

As no one seemed eager to answer the summons they
knocked again; and then again. Finally they heard a
stir from within and someone coughed.

"Who's there?" called a girl's voice.

"It's I!" cried the tin twins, together.

"How did you get there?" asked the voice.

They hesitated how to reply, so Woot answered for
them:

"By means of magic."

"Oh," said the unseen girl. "Are you friends, or
foes?"

"Friends!" they all exclaimed.

Then they heard footsteps approach the door, which
slowly opened and revealed a very pretty Munchkin girl
standing in the doorway.

"Nimmie Amee!" cried the tin twins.

"That's my name," replied the girl, looking at them
in cold surprise. "But who can you be?"

"Don't you know me, Nimmie?" said the Tin Woodman.
"I'm your old sweetheart, Nick Chopper!"

"Don't you know me, my dear?" said the Tin Soldier.
"I'm your old sweetheart, Captain Fyter!"

Nimmie Amee smiled at them both. Then she looked
beyond them at the rest of the party and smiled again.
However, she seemed more amused than pleased.

"Come in," she said, leading the way inside. "Even
sweethearts are forgotten after a time, but you and
your friends are welcome."

The room they now entered was cosy and comfortable,
being neatly furnished and well swept and dusted. But
they found someone there besides Nimmie Amee. A man
dressed in the attractive Munchkin costume was lazily
reclining in an easy chair, and he sat up and turned
his eves on the visitors with a cold and indifferent
stare that was almost insolent. He did not even rise
from his seat to greet the strangers, but after glaring
at them he looked away with a scowl, as if they were of
too little importance to interest him.

The tin men returned this man's stare with interest,
but they did not look away from him because neither of
them seemed able to take his eyes off this Munchkin,
who was remarkable in having one tin arm quite like
their own tin arms.

"Seems to me," said Captain Fyter, in a voice that
sounded harsh and indignant, "that you, sir, are a vile
impostor!"

"Gently -- gently!" cautioned the Scarecrow; "don't
be rude to strangers, Captain."

"Rude?" shouted the Tin Soldier, now very much
provoked; "why, he's a scoundrel -- a thief! The
villain is wearing my own head!"

"Yes," added the Tin Woodman, "and he's wearing my
right arm! I can recognize it by the two warts on the
little finger."

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Woot. "Then this must be
the man whom old Ku-Klip patched together and named
Chopfyt."

The man now turned toward them, still scowling.

"Yes, that is my name," he said in a voice like a
growl, "and it is absurd for you tin creatures, or for
anyone else, to claim my head, or arm, or any part of
me, for they are my personal property."

"You? You're a Nobody!" shouted Captain Fyter.

"You're just a mix-up," declared the Emperor.

"Now, now, gentlemen," interrupted Nimmie Amee, "I
must ask you to be more respectful to poor Chopfyt.
For, being my guests, it is not polite for you to
insult my husband."

"Your husband!" the tin twins exclaimed in dismay.

"Yes," said she. "I married Chopfyt a long time ago,
because my other two sweethearts had deserted me."

This reproof embarrassed both Nick Chopper and
Captain Fyter. They looked down, shamefaced, for a
moment, and then the Tin Woodman explained in an
earnest voice:

"I rusted."

"So did I," said the Tin Soldier.

"I could not know that, of course," asserted Nimmie
Amee. "All I knew was that neither of you came to marry
me, as you had promised to do. But men are not scarce
in the Land of Oz. After I came here to live, I met Mr.
Chopfyt, and he was the  more interesting because he
reminded me strongly of both of you, as you were before
you became tin. He even had a tin arm, and that
reminded me of you the more.

"No wonder!" remarked the Scarecrow.

"But, listen, Nimmie Amee!" said the astonished Woot;
"he really is both of them, for he is made of their
cast-off parts."

"Oh, you're quite wrong," declared Polychrome,
laughing, for she was greatly enjoying the confusion of
the others. "The tin men are still themselves, as they
will tell you, and so Chopfyt must be someone else."

They looked at her bewildered, for the facts in the
case were too puzzling to be grasped at once.

"It is all the fault of old Ku-Klip," muttered the
Tin Woodman. "He had no right to use our castoff parts
to make another man with."

"It seems he did it, however," said Nimmie Amee
calmly, "and I married him because he resembled you
both. I won't say he is a husband to be proud of,
because he has a mixed nature and isn't always an
agreeable companion. There are times when I have to
chide him gently, both with my tongue and with my
broomstick. But he is my husband, and I must make the
best of him."

"If you don't like him," suggested the Tin Woodman,
"Captain Fyter and I can chop him up with our axe and
sword, and each take such parts of the fellow as belong
to him. Then we are willing for you to select one of
us as your husband."

"That is a good idea," approved Captain Fyter,
drawing his sword.

"No," said Nimmie Amee; "I think I'll keep the
husband I now have. He is now trained to draw the water
and carry in the wood and hoe the cabbages and weed the
flower-beds and dust the furniture and perform many
tasks of a like character. A new husband would have to
be scolded -- and gently chided -- until he learns my
ways. So I think it will be better to keep my Chopfyt,
and I see no reason why you should object to him. You
two gentlemen threw him away when you became tin,
because you had no further use for him, so you cannot
justly claim him now. I advise you to go back to your
own homes and forget me, as I have forgotten you."

"Good advice!" laughed Polychrome, dancing.

"Are you happy?" asked the Tin Soldier.

"Of course I am," said Nimmie Amee; "I'm the mistress
of all I survey -- the queen of my little domain."

"Wouldn't you like to be the Empress of the Winkies?"
asked the Tin Woodman.

"Mercy, no," she answered. "That would be a lot of
bother. I don't care for society, or pomp, or posing.
All I ask is to be left alone and not to be annoyed by
visitors."

The Scarecrow nudged Woot the Wanderer.

"That sounds to me like a hint," he said.

"Looks as if we'd had our journey for nothing,"
remarked Woot, who was a little ashamed and
disappointed because he had proposed the journey.

"I am glad, however," said the Tin Woodman, "that I
have found Nimmie Amee, and discovered that she is
already married and happy. It will relieve me of any
further anxiety concerning her."

"For my part," said the Tin Soldier, "I am not sorry
to be free. The only thing that really annoys me is
finding my head upon Chopfyt's body."

"As for that, I'm pretty sure it is my body, or a
part of it, anyway," remarked the Emperor of the
Winkies. "But never mind, friend Soldier; let us be
willing to donate our cast-off members to insure the
happiness of Nimmie Amee, and be thankful it is not our
fate to hoe cabbages and draw water --and be chided --
in the place of this creature Chopfyt."

"Yes," agreed the Soldier, "we have much to be
thankful for."

Polychrome, who had wandered outside, now poked her
pretty head through an open window and exclaimed in a
pleased voice:

"It's getting cloudy. Perhaps it is going to rain!"




Chapter Twenty-Three

Through the Tunnel


It didn't rain just then, although the clouds in the
sky grew thicker and more threatening. Polychrome hoped
for a thunder-storm, followed by her Rainbow, but the
two tin men did not relish the idea of getting wet.
They even preferred to remain in Nimmie Amee's house,
although they felt they were not welcome there, rather
than go out and face the coming storm. But the
Scarecrow, who was a very thoughtful person, said to
his friends:

"If we remain here until after the storm, and
Polychrome goes away on her Rainbow, then we
will be prisoners inside the Wall of Solid Air; so
it seems best to start upon our return journey at
once. If I get wet, my straw stuffing will be ruined,
and if you two tin gentlemen get wet, you may
perhaps rust again, and become useless. But even
that is better than to stay here. Once we are free
of the barrier, we have Woot the Wanderer to help
us, and he can oil your joints and restuff my body,
if it becomes necessary, for the boy is made of meat,
which neither rusts nor gets soggy or moldy."

"Come along, then!" cried Polychrome from the window,
and the others, realizing the wisdom of the Scarecrow's
speech, took leave of Nimmie Amee, who was glad to be
rid of them, and said good-bye to her husband, who
merely scowled and made no answer, and then they
hurried from the house.

"Your old parts are not very polite, I must say,"
remarked the Scarecrow, when they were in the garden.

"No," said Woot, "Chopfyt is a regular grouch. He
might have wished us a pleasant journey, at the very
least."

"I beg you not to hold us responsible for that
creature's actions," pleaded the Tin Woodman. "We are
through with Chopfyt and shall have nothing further to
do with him."

Polychrome danced ahead of the party and led them
straight to the burrow of the Blue Rabbit, which they
might have had some difficulty in finding without her.
There she lost no time in making them all small again.
The Blue Rabbit was busy nibbling cabbage leaves in
Nimmie Amee's garden, so they did not ask his
permission but at once entered the burrow.

Even now the raindrops were beginning to fall, but it
was quite dry inside the tunnel and by the time they
had reached the other end, outside the circular Wall of
Solid Air, the storm was at its height and the rain was
coming down in torrents.

"Let us wait here," proposed Polychrome, peering out
of the hole and then quickly retreating. "The Rainbow
won't appear until after the storm and I can make you
big again in a jiffy, before I join my sisters on our
bow."

"That's a good plan," said the Scarecrow approvingly.
"It will save me from getting soaked and soggy."

"It will save me from rusting," said the Tin Soldier.

"It will enable me to remain highly polished," said
the Tin Woodman.

"Oh, as for that, I myself prefer not to get my
pretty clothes wet," laughed the Rainbow's daughter.

"But while we wait I will bid you all adieu. I must
also thank you for saving me from that dreadful
Giantess, Mrs. Yoop. You have been good and patient
comrades and I have enjoyed our adventures together,
but I am never so happy as when on my dear Rainbow."

"Will your father scold you for getting left on the
earth?" asked Woot.

"I suppose so," said Polychrome gaily; "I'm always
getting scolded for my mad pranks, as they are called.
My sisters are so sweet and lovely and proper that they
never dance off our Rainbow, and so they never have any
adventures. Adventures to me are good fun, only I never
like to stay too long on earth, because I really don't
belong here. I shall tell my Father the Rainbow that
I'll try not to be so careless again, and he will
forgive me because in our sky mansions there is always
joy and happiness."

They were indeed sorry to part with their dainty and
beautiful companion and assured her of their devotion
if they ever chanced to meet again. She shook hands
with the Scarecrow and the Tin Men and kissed Woot the
Wanderer lightly upon his forehead.

And then the rain suddenly ceased, and as the tiny
people left the burrow of the Blue Rabbit, a glorious
big Rainbow appeared in the sky and the end of its arch
slowly descended and touched the ground just where they
stood.

Woot was so busy watching a score of lovely maidens
-- sisters of Polychrome -- who were leaning over the
edge of the bow, and another score who danced gaily
amid the radiance of the splendid hues, that he did not
notice he was growing big again. But now Polychrome
joined her sisters on the Rainbow and the huge arch
lifted and slowly melted away as the sun burst from the
clouds and sent its own white beams dancing over the
meadows.

"Why, she's gone!" exclaimed the boy, and turned to
see his companions still waving their hands in token of
adieu to the vanished Polychrome.




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Curtain Falls


Well, the rest of the story is quickly told, for the
return Journey of our adventurers was without any
important incident. The Scarecrow was so afraid of
meeting the Hip-po-gy-raf, and having his straw eaten
again, that he urged his comrades to select another
route to the Emerald City, and they willingly
consented, so that the Invisible Country was wholly
avoided.

Of course, when they reached the Emerald City their
first duty was to visit Ozma's palace, where they were
royally entertained. The Tin Soldier and Woot the
Wanderer were welcomed as warmly as any strangers might
be who had been the traveling companions of Ozma's dear
old friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.

At the banquet table that evening they related the
manner in which they had discovered Nimmie Amee, and
told how they had found her happily married to Chopfyt,
whose relationship to Nick Chopper and Captain Fyter
was so bewildering that they asked Ozma's advice what
to do about it.

"You need not consider Chopfyt at all," replied the
beautiful girl Ruler of Oz. "If Nimmie Amee is content
with that misfit man for a husband, we have not even
just cause to blame Ku-Klip for gluing him together."

"I think it was a very good idea," added little
Dorothy, "for if Ku-Klip hadn't used up your castoff
parts, they would have been wasted. It's wicked to be
wasteful, isn't it?"

"Well, anyhow," said Woot the Wanderer, "Chopfyt,
being kept a prisoner by his wife, is too far away from
anyone to bother either of you tin men in any way. If
you hadn't gone where he is and discovered him, you
would never have worried about him."

"What do you care, anyhow," Betsy Bobbin asked the
Tin Woodman, "so long as Nimmie Amee is satisfied?"

"And just to think," remarked Tiny Trot, "that any
girl would rather live with a mixture like Chopfyt, on
far-away Mount Munch, than to be the Empress of the
Winkies!"

"It is her own choice," said the Tin Woodman
contentedly; "and, after all, I'm not sure the Winkies
would care to have an Empress."

It puzzled Ozma, for a time, to decide what to do
with the Tin Soldier. If he went with the Tin Woodman
to the Emperor's castle, she felt that the two tin men
might not be able to live together in harmony, and
moreover the Emperor would not be so distinguished if
he had a double constantly beside him. So she asked
Captain Fyter if he was willing to serve her as a
soldier, and he promptly declared that nothing would
please him more. After he had been in her service for
some time, Ozma sent him into the Gillikin Country,
with instructions to keep order among the wild people
who inhabit some parts of that unknown country of Oz.

As for Woot, being a Wanderer by profession, he was
allowed to wander wherever he desired, and Ozma
promised to keep watch over his future journeys and to
protect the boy as well as she was able, in case he
ever got into more trouble.

All this having been happily arranged, the Tin
Woodman returned to his tin castle, and his chosen
comrade, the Scarecrow, accompanied him on the way. The
two friends were sure to pass many pleasant hours
together in talking over their recent adventures, for
as they neither ate nor slept they found their greatest
amusement in conversation.






THE FAMOUS OZ BOOKS
By L. Frank Baum:

The Wizard of Oz
The Land of Oz
Ozma of Oz
Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
The Road to Oz
The Emerald City of Oz
The Patchwork Girl of Oz
Tik-Tok of Oz
The Scarecrow of Oz
Rinkitink in Oz
The Lost Princess of Oz
The Tin Woodman of Oz
The Magic Of Oz
Glinda of Oz





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Tin Woodman of Oz, by Baum

