***Project Gutenberg's Etext of Tom Swift And His Big Tunnel***
#19 in the Victor Appleton's Tom Swift Series
We name the Tom Swift files as they are numbered in the books--
i.e. This is #19 in the series so the file name is 19tomxxx.xxx
where the x's are place holders for editon # and file type such
as 19tom10.txt and 19tom10.zip, when we do a .htm, 19tom10h.htm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Tom Swift And His Big Tunnel

by Victor Appleton

June, 1997  [Etext #953]


***Project Gutenberg's Etext of Tom Swift And His Big Tunnel***
*****This file should be named 19tom10.txt or 19tom10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 19tom11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 19tom10a.txt.


This Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Anthony Matonac.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
or
The Hidden City of the Andes

by
Victor Appleton



CONTENTS
    I  An Appeal for Aid
   II  Explanations
  III  A Face at the Window
   IV  Tom's Experiments
    V  Mary's Present
   VI  Mr. Nestor's Letter
  VII  Off for Peru
 VIII  The Bearded Man
   IX  The Bomb
    X  Professor Bumper
   XI  In the Andes
  XII  The Tunnel
 XIII  Tom's Explosive
  XIV  Mysterious Disappearances
   XV  Frightened Indians
  XVI  On the Watch
 XVII  The Condor
XVIII  The Indian Strike
  XIX  A Woman Tells
   XX  Despair
  XXI  A New Explosive
 XXII  The Fight
XXIII  A Great Blast
 XXIV  The Hidden City
  XXV  Success




TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL




Chapter I

An Appeal for Aid



Tom Swift, seated in his laboratory engaged in trying to
solve a puzzling question that had arisen over one of his
inventions, was startled by a loud knock on the door. So
emphatic, in fact, was the summons that the door trembled,
and Tom started to his feet in some alarm.

"Hello there!" he cried. "Don't break the door, Koku!" and
then he laughed. "No one but my giant would knock like
that," he said to himself. "He never does seem able to do
things gently. But I wonder why he is knocking. I told him
to get the engine out of the airship, and Eradicate said
he'd be around to answer the telephone and bell. I wonder if
anything has happened?

Tom shoved back his chair, pushed aside the mass of papers
over which he had been puzzling, and strode to the door.
Flinging it open he confronted a veritable giant of a man,
nearly eight feet tall, and big in proportion. The giant,
Koku, for that was his name, smiled in a good-natured way,
reminding one of an overgrown boy.

"Master hear my knock?" the giant asked cheerfully.

"Hear you, Koku? Say, I couldn't hear anything else!"
exclaimed Tom. "Did you think you had to arouse the whole
neighborhood just to let me know you were at the door? Jove!
I thought you'd have it off the hinges."

"If me break, me fix," said Koku, who, from his appearance
and from his imperfect command of English, was evidently a
foreigner.

"Yes, I know you can fix lots of things, Koku," Tom went
on, kindly enough. "But you musn't forget what enormous
strength you have. That's the reason I sent you to take the
engine out of the airship. You can lift it without using the
chain hoist, and I can't get the chain hoist fast unless I
remove all the superstructure. I don't want to do that. Did
you get the engine out?"

"Not quite. Almost, Master."

"Then why are you here? Has anything gone wrong?"

"No, everything all right, Master.  But man come to
machine shop and say he must have talk with you. I no let
him come past the gate, but I say I come and call you."

"That's right, Koku. Don't let any strangers past the
gate. But why didn't Eradicate come and call me. He isn't
doing anything, is he? Unless, indeed, he has gone to feed
his mule, Boomerang."

"Eradicate, he come to call you, but that black man no
good!" and Koku chuckled so heartily that he shook the floor
of the office.

"What's the matter with Eradicate?" asked Tom, somewhat
anxiously. "I hope you and he haven't had another row?"
Eradicate had served Tom and his father long before Koku,
the giant, had been brought back from one of the young
inventor's many strange trips, and ever since then there had
been a jealous rivalry between the twain as to who should
best serve Tom.

"No trouble, Master," said Koku. "Eradicate he start to
come and tell you strange man want to have talk, but
Eradicate he no come fast enough. So I pick him up, and I
set him down by gate to stand on guard, and I come to tell
you. Koku come quick!"

"Oh, I knew it must be something like that!" exclaimed Tom
in some vexation. "Now I'll have Eradicate complaining to me
that you mauled him. Picked him up and set him down again;

"Sure. One hand!" boasted the giant. "Eradicate him not be
heavy. More as a sack of flour now."

"No, poor Eradicate is getting pretty old and thin,"
commented Tom. "He can't move very quickly. But you should
have let him come, Koku. It makes him feel badly when he
thinks he can't be of service to me any more.

"Man say he in hurry." The giant spoke softly, as though
he felt the gentle rebuke Tom administered. "Koku run quick
tell you--bang on door."

"Yes, you banged all right, Koku. Well, it can't be
helped, I reckon. Where is this strange man? Who is he? Did
you ever see him before?"

"Me no can tell, Master. Not sure. But him now be at the
outer gate. Eradicate watch."

"All right. I'll go and see who it is. I don't want any
strangers poking around here, especially With the plans of
my new gyroscope lying in plain view."

Before he left the laboratory Tom swept into a desk drawer
the mass of papers and blue prints, and locked the
receptacle.

"No use taking any chances," he remarked. "I've had too
much trouble with people trying to get inside information
about dad's and my patents. Now, Koku, I'll go and see this
man."

The buildings composing the plant of Tom Swift and his
father at Shopton were enclosed by a high, board fence, and
at one of the entrances was a sort of gate-house, where some
one was always on guard. Only those who could give a good
account of themselves, workmen in the plant, or those known
to the sentinel were admitted.

It happened that the colored man, Eradicate, was on guard
at the gates this day when the stranger asked to see Tom.
Koku, working on the airship engine not far away, saw the
stranger. Hearing the man say he was in a hurry and noting
the slow progress of the aged Eradicate, who was troubled
with rheumatism, the giant took matters into his own hands.

Tom Swift entered the gate-house and saw, seated in a
chair, a man who was impatiently tapping the floor with his
thick-soled shoe.

"Looks like a detective or a policeman in disguise,"
thought Tom, for, almost invariably, members of this
profession wear very thick-soled shoes. Opposite the
stranger sat Eradicate, a much-injured look on his honest,
black face.

"Oh, Massa Tom!" exclaimed Eradicate, as soon as the young
inventor entered. "Dat Koku he--he--he done gone and cotch
me by de collar ob mah coat, an' den he lif' me up, an' he
sot me down so hard--so hard--dat he jar loose all mah back
teef!" and Eradicate opened his mouth wide to display his
gleaming ivories.

"Eradicate, he no can come quick. He walk like so
fashion!" and Koku, who had followed the young inventor,
imitated the limping gait of the colored man with such a
queer effect that Tom could not help laughing, and the
stranger smiled.

"Ef I gits holt on yo'--ef I does, yo' great, big,
overgrown lummox, Ah'll--Ah'll--" began the colored man,
stammeringly.

"There. That will do now!" interrupted Tom. "Don't quarrel
in here. Koku, get back to that engine and lift out the
motor. Eradicate, didn't father tell you to whitewash the
chicken coops to-day?"

"Dat's what he done, Massa Tom.

"Well, go and see about that. I'll stay here for a while,
and when I leave I'll call one of you, or some one else, to
be on guard. Skip now!"

Having thus disposed of the warring factions, Tom turned
to the stranger and after apologizing for the little
interruption, asked:

"You wished to see me?"

"If you're Tom Swift; yes."

"Well, I'm Tom Swift," and the young owner of the name
smiled.

"I hope you will pardon a stranger for calling on you,"
resumed the man, "but I'm in a lot of trouble, and I think
you are the only one who can help me out."

"What sort of trouble?" Tom inquired.

"Contracting trouble--tunnel blasting, to be exact. But if
you have a few minutes to spare perhaps you will listen to
my story. You will then be better able to understand my
difficulty."

Tom Swift considered a moment. He was used to having
appeals for help made to him, and usually they were of a
begging nature. He was often asked for money to help some
struggling inventor complete his machine.

In many cases the machines would have been of absolutely
no use if perfected. In other cases the inventions were of
the utterly hopeless class, incapable of perfection, like
some perpetual motion apparatus. In these cases Tom turned a
deaf ear, though if the inventor were in want our hero
relieved him.

But this case did not seem to be like anything Tom had
ever met with before.

"Contracting trouble--blasting," repeated the youth, as he
mused over what he had heard.

"That's it," the man went on. "Permit me to introduce
myself" and he held out a card, on which was the name

MR. JOB TITUS


Down in the lower left-hand corner was a line:

"Titus Brothers, Contractors."

"I am glad to meet you, "Mr. Titus," Tom said warmly,
offering his hand. "I don't know anything about the
contracting business, but if you do blasting I suppose you
use explosives, and I know a little about them."

"So I have heard, and that's why I came to you," the
contractor went on. "Now if you'll give me a few minutes of
your time--"

"You had better come up to the house," interrupted Tom.
"We can talk more quietly there."

Calling a young fellow who was at work near by to occupy
the gate-house, Tom led Mr. Titus toward the Swift
homestead, and, a little later, ushered him into the
library.

"Now I'll listen to you," the youth said, "though I can't
promise to aid you."

"I realize that," returned Mr. Titus. "This is a sort of
last chance I'm taking. My brother and I have heard a lot
about you, and when he wrote to me that he was unable to
proceed with his contract of tunneling the Andes Mountains
for the Peruvian government, I made up my mind you were the
one who could help us if you would."

"Tunneling the Andes Mountains!" exclaimed Tom.

"Yes. The firm represented by my brother and myself have a
contract to build a railroad for the Peruvian government. At
a point some distance back in the district east of Lima,
Peru, we are making a tunnel under the mountain. That is, we
have it started, but now we can't advance any further."

"Why not?"

"Because of the peculiar character of the rock, which
seems to defy the strongest explosive we can get. Now I
understand you used a powder in your giant cannon that--"

Mr. Titus paused in his explanation, for at that moment
there arose such a clatter out on the front piazza as
effectually to drown conversation. There was a noise of the
hoofs of a horse, the fall of a heavy body, a tattoo on the
porch floor and then came an excited shout:

"Whoa there! Whoa! Stop! Look out where you're kicking!
Bless my saddle blanket! Ouch! There I go!"




Chapter II

Explanations



"What in the world is that?" cried Mr. Job Titus, in alarm.

Tom Swift did not answer. Instead he jumped up from his
chair and ran toward the front door. Mr. Titus followed.
They both saw a strange sight.

Standing on the front porch, which he seemed to occupy
completely, was a large horse, with a saddle twisted
underneath him. The animal was looking about him as calmly
as though he always made it a practice to come up on the
front piazza when stopping at a house.

Off to one side, with a crushed hat on the back of his
head, with a coat split up the back, with a broken riding
crop in one hand and a handkerchief in the other, sat a
dignified, elderly gentleman.

That is, he would have been dignified had it not been for
his position and condition. No gentleman can look dignified
with a split coat and a crushed hat on, sitting under the
nose of a horse on a front piazza, with his raiment
otherwise much disheveled, while he wipes his scratched and
bleeding face with a handkerchief.

"Bless my--bless my--" began the elderly gentleman, and he
seemed at a loss what particular portion of his anatomy or
that of the horse, to bless, or what portion of the universe
to appeal to, for he ended up with: "Bless everything, Tom
Swift!"

"I heartily agree with you, Mr. Damon!" cried Tom. "But
what in the world happened?"

"That!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, pointing with his broken crop
at the horse on the piazza. "I was riding him when he ran
away--just as my motorcycle tried to climb a tree. No more
horses for me! I'll stick to airships," and slamming his
riding crop down on the porch floor with such force that the
horse started back, Mr. Damon arose, painfully enough if the
contortions on his face and his grunts of pain went for
anything.

"Let me help you!" begged Tom, striding forward. "Mr.
Titus, perhaps you will kindly lead the horse down off the
piazza?"

"Certainly!" answered the tunnel contractor. "Whoa now!"
he called soothingly, as the steed evinced a disposition to
sit down on the side railing. "Steady now!"

The horse finally allowed himself to be led down the broad
front steps, sadly marking them, as well as the floor of the
piazza, with his sharp shoes.

"Ouch! Oh, my back!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as Tom helped
him to stand up.

"Is it hurt?" asked Tom, anxiously.

"No, I've just got what old-fashioned folks call a 'crick'
in it," explained the elderly horseman. "But it feels more
like a river than a 'crick.' I'll be all right presently."

"How did it happen?" asked Tom, as he led his guest toward
the hall. Meanwhile Mr. Titus, wondering what it was all
about, had tied the horse to a post out near the street
curb, and had re-entered the library.

"I was riding over to see you, Tom, to ask you if you
wouldn't go to South America with me," began Mr. Damon,
rubbing his leg tenderly.

"South America?" cried Tom, with a sudden look at Mr.
Titus.

"Yes, South America. Why, there isn't anything strange in
that, is there? You've been to wilder countries, and
farther away than that."

"Yes, I know--it's just a coincidence. Go on."

"Let me get where I can sit down," begged Mr. Damon. "I
think that crick in my back is running down into my legs,
Tom. I feel a bit weak. Let me sit down, and get me a glass
of water. I shall be all right presently."

Between them Tom and Mr. Titus assisted the horseman into
an easy chair, and there, under the influence of a cup of
hot tea, which Mrs. Baggert, the housekeeper, insisted on
making for him, he said he felt much better, and would
explain the reason for his call which had culminated in such
a sensational manner.

And while Mr. Damon is preparing his explanation I will
take just a few moments to acquaint my new readers with some
facts about Tom Swift, and the previous volumes of this
series in which he has played such prominent parts.

Tom Swift was the son of an inventor, and not only
inherited his father's talents, but had greatly added to
them, so that now Tom had a wonderful reputation.

Mr. Swift was a widower, and he and Tom lived in a big
house in Shopton, New York State, with Mrs. Baggert for a
housekeeper. About the house, from time to time, shops and
laboratories had been erected, until now there was a large
and valuable establishment belonging to Tom and his father.

The first volume of this series is entitled, "Tom Swift
and His Motor Cycle." It was through a motor cycle that Tom
became acquainted with Mr. Wakefield Damon, who lived in a
neighboring town. Mr. Damon had bought the motor cycle for
himself, but, as he said, one day in riding it the machine
tried to climb a tree near the Swift house.

The young inventor (for even then he was working on
several patents) ministered to Mr. Damon, who, disgusted
with the motor cycle, and wishing to reward Tom, let the
young fellow have the machine.

Tom's career began from that hour. For he learned to ride
the motor cycle, after making some improvements in it, and
from then on the youth had led a busy life. Soon afterward
he secured a motor boat and from that it was but a step to
an airship.

The medium of the air having been conquered, Tom again
turned his attention to the water, or rather, under the
water, and he and his father made a submarine. Then he built
an electric runabout, the speediest car on the road.

It was when Ton Swift had occasion to send his wireless
message from a lonely island where he had been shipwrecked
that he was able to do Mr. and Mrs. Nestor a valuable
service, and this increased the regard which Miss Mary
Nestor felt for the young inventor, a regard that bid fair,
some day, to ripen into something stronger.

Tom Swift might have made a fortune when he set out to
discover the secret of the diamond makers. But Fate
intervened, and soon after that quest he went to the caves
of ice, where he and his friends met with disaster. In his
sky racer Tom broke all records for speed, and when he went
to Africa to rescue a missionary, had it not been for his
electric rifle the tide of battle would have gone against
him and his party.

Marvelous, indeed, were the adventures underground, which
came to Tom when he went to look for the city of gold, but
the treasure there was not more valuable than the platinum
which Tom sought in dreary Siberia by means of his air
glider.

Tom thought his end had come when he fell into captivity
among the giants; but even that turned out well, and he
brought two of the giants away with him. Koku, one of the
two giants, became devotedly attached to the lad, much to
the disgust of Eradicate Sampson, the old negro who had
worked for the Swifts for a generation, and who, with his
mule Boomerang, "eradicated" from the place as much dirt as
possible.

With his wizard camera Tom did much to advance the cause
of science. His great searchlight was of great help to the
United States government in putting a stop to the Canadian
smugglers, while his giant cannon was a distinct advance in
ordnance, not excepting the great German guns used in the
European war.

When Tom perfected his photo telephone the last objection
to rendering telephonic conversation admissible evidence in
a law court was done away with, for by this invention a
person was able to see, as well as to hear, over the
telephone wire. One practically stood face to face with the
person, miles away, to whom one was talking.

The volume immediately preceding this present one is
called: "Tom Swift and His Aerial Warship." The young
inventor perfected a marvelous aircraft that was the naval
terror of the seas, and many governments, recognizing what
an important part aircraft were going to play in all future
conflicts, were anxious to secure Tom's machine. But he was
true to his own country, though his rivals were nearly
successful in their plots against him.

The Mars, which was the name of Tom's latest craft, proved
to be a great success, and the United States government
purchased it. It was not long after the completion of this
transaction that the events narrated in the first chapter of
this book took place.

Mr. Damon and Tom had been firm friends ever since the
episode of the motor cycle, and the eccentric gentleman (who
blessed so many things) often went with Tom on his trips.
Besides Mary Nestor, Tom had other friends. The one, after
Miss Nestor, for whom he cared most (if we except Mr. Damon)
was Ned Newton, who was employed in a Shopton bank. Ned also
had often gone with Tom, though lately, having a better
position, he had less time to spare.

"Well, do you feel better, Mr. Damon?" asked Tom, after a
bit.

"Yes, very much, thank you. Bless my pen wiper! but I
thought I was done for when I saw my horse bolt for your
front stoop. He rushed up it, fell down, but, fortunately, I
managed to get out of his way, though the saddle girth
slipped. And all I could think of was that my wife would
say: 'I told you so!' for she warned me not to ride this
animal.

"But he never ran away with me before, and I was in a
hurry to get over to see you, Tom. Now then, let's get down
to business. Will you go to South America with me?"

"Whereabout in South America are you going, Mr. Damon, and
why?" Tom asked.

"To Peru, Tom."

"What a coincidence!" exclaimed Mr. Titus.

"I beg your pardon?" said Mr. Damon, interrogatively.

"I said what a coincidence. I am going there myself."

"Excuse me," interposed Tom, "I don't believe, in the
excitement of the moment, I introduced you gentlemen. Allow
me--Mr. Damon--Mr. Titus."

The presentation over, Mr. Damon went on:

"You see, Tom, I have lately invested considerable money
in a wholesale drug concern. We deal largely in Peruvian
remedies, principally the bark of the cinchona tree, from
which quinine is made. Of late there has been some trouble
over our concession from the Peruvian government, and the
company has decided to send me down there to investigate.

"Of course, as soon as I made up my mind to go I thought
of you. So I came over to see if you would not accompany me.
All went well until I reached your front gate. Then my horse
became frightened by a yellow toy balloon some boy was
blowing up in the street and bolted with me. I suppose if it
had been a red or green balloon the effect would have been
the same. However, here I am, somewhat the worse for wear.
Now Tom, what do you say? Will you go to South America--to
Peru--with me, and help look up this Quinine business?"

Once more Mr. Titus and Tom looked at each other.




Chapter III

A Face at the Window



"What is the matter?" asked Mr. Damon, catching the glance
between Tom and the contractor. "Is there anything wrong
with South America--Peru? I know they have lots of
revolutions in those countries, but I don't believe Peru is
what they call a 'banana republic'; is it?"

"No," and Mr. Titus shook his head. "It isn't a question
of revolutions."

"But it's something!" insisted Mr. Damon. "Bless my ink
bottle! but it's something. As soon as I mention Peru, Tom,
you and Mr. Titus eye each other as if I'd said something
dreadful. Out with it! What is it?"

"It's just--just a coincidence," Tom said. "But go on, Mr.
Damon. Finish what you have to say and then we'll explain."

"Well, I guess I've told you all you need to know for the
present. I went into this wholesale drug concern, hoping to
make some money, but now, on account of the trouble down in
Peru, we stand to lose considerable unless I can get back
the cinchona concession."

"What does that mean?" Tom asked.

"Well, it means that our concern secured from the Peruvian
government the right to take this quinine-producing bark
from the trees in a certain tropical section. But there has
been a change in the government in the district where our
men were working, and now the privilege, or concession, has
been withdrawn. I'm going down to see if I can't get it
back. And I want you to go with me."

"And I came here for very nearly the same thing," went on
Mr. Titus. "That is where the coincidence comes in. It is
strange that we should both appeal to Mr. Swift at the same
time."

"Well, Tom's a valuable helper!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I
know him of old, for I've been on many a trip with him."

"This is the first time I have had the pleasure of meeting
him," resumed the tunnel contractor, "but I have heard of
him. I did not ask him to go to South America for us. I only
wanted to get some superior explosive for my brother, who is
in charge of driving the railroad tunnel through a spur of
the Andes. I look after matters up North here, but I may
have to go to Peru myself.

"As I told Mr. Swift, I had read of his invention of the
giant cannon and the special powder he used in it to send a
projectile such a distance. The cannon is now mounted as one
of the pieces of ordnance for the defense of the Panama
Canal, is it not?" he asked Tom.

The young inventor nodded in assent.

"Having heard of you, and the wonderful explosive used in
your big cannon," the contractor went on, "I wrote to my
brother that I would try and get some for him.

"You see," he resumed, "this is the situation. Back in the
Andes Mountains, a couple of hundred miles east of Lima, the
government is building a short railroad line to connect two
others. If this is done it will mean that the products of
Peru--quinine bark, coffee, cocoa, sugar, rubber, incense
and gold can more easily be transported. But to connect the
two railroad lines a big tunnel must be constructed.

"My brother and I make a specialty of such work, and when
we saw bids advertised for, our firm put in an estimate.
There was some trouble with a rival firm, which also bid,
but we secured the contract, and bound ourselves to have the
tunnel finished within a certain time, or forfeit a large
sum.

"That was over a year ago. Since then our men, aided by
the native Indians of Peru, have been tunneling the
mountain, until, about a month back, we struck a snag."

"What sort of snag?" Tom asked.

"A snag in the shape of extra hard rock," replied the
tunnel contractor. "Briefly, Paleozoic rocks make up the
eastern part of the Andean Mountains in Peru, while the
western range is formed of Mesozoic beds, volcanic ashes and
lava of comparatively recent date. Near the coast the lower
hills are composed of crystalline rocks, syenite and
granite, with, here and there, a strata of sandstone or
limestone. These are, undoubtedly, relics of the lower
Cretaceous age, and we, or rather, my brother, states that
he has found them covered with marine Tertiary deposits.

"Now this Mesozoic band varies greatly. Porphyritic tuffs
and massive limestone compose the western chain of the Andes
above Lima, while in the Oroya Valley we find carbonaceous
sandstones. Some of the tuffs may be of the Jurassic age,
though the Cretaceous period is also largely represented.

"Now while these different masses of rock formation offer
hard enough problems to the tunnel digger, still we are more
or less prepared to meet them, and we figured on a certain
percentage of them. Up to the present time we have met with
just about what we expected, but what we did not expect was
something we came upon when the tunnel had been driven three
miles into the mountain."

"What did you find?" asked Tom, who knew enough about
geology to understand the terms used. Mr. Damon did not,
however, and when Mr. Titus rolled off some of the technical
words, the drug investor softly murmured such expressions as

"Bless my thermometer! Bless my porous plaster!"

"We found," resumed Mr. Titus, "after we bad bored for a
considerable distance into the mountain, a mass of volcanic
rock which is so hard that our best diamond drills are
dulled in a short time, and the explosives we use merely
shatter the face of the cutting, and give us hardly any
progress at all.

"It was after several trials, and when my brother found
that he was making scarcely any progress, compared to the
energy of his men and the blasting, that he wrote to me,
explaining matters. I at once thought of you, Tom Swift, and
your powerful explosive, for I had read about it.

"Now then, will you sell us some of your powder--explosive
or whatever you call it--Mr. Swift, or tell us where we can
get it? We need it soon, for we are losing valuable time."

Mr. Titus paused to draw on a piece of paper a rough map
of Peru, and the district where the tunnel was being
constructed. He showed where the two railroad lines were,
and where the new route would bring them together, the
tunnel eliminating a big grade up which it would have been
impossible to haul trains of any weight.

"What do you say, Mr. Swift?" the contractor concluded.
"Will you let us have some of your powder? Or, better still,
will you come to Peru yourself? That would suit us
immensely, for you could be right on the ground. And you
could carry out your plan of going with your friend here,"
and Mr. Titus nodded toward Mr. Damon. "That is, if you were
thinking of going."

"Well, I was thinking of it," Tom admitted. "Mr. Damon and
I have been on so many trips together that it seems sort of
natural for us to 'team it.' I have never been to Peru, and
I should like to see the country. There is only one matter
though, that bothers me."

"What is it?" asked Mr. Titus quickly. "If it is a
question of money dismiss it from your mind. The Peruvian
government is paying a large sum for this tunnel, and we
stand to make considerable, even if we were the lowest
bidders. We can afford to pay you well--that is, we shall be
able to if we can complete the bore on time. That is what is
bothering me now--the unexpected strata of hard rock we have
met with, which seems impossible to blast. But I feel sure
we can do it with the explosive used in your giant cannon."

"That is just the point!" Tom exclaimed. "I am not so sure
my explosive would do."

"Why not?" the tunnel contractor asked. "It's powerful
enough; isn't it?"

"Yes, it is powerful enough, but whether it will have the
right effect on volcanic rock is hard to say. I should like
to see a rock sample."

"I can telegraph to have some sent here to you," said Mr.
Titus eagerly. "Meantime, here is a description of it. I can
read you that"; and, taking a letter from his pocket, he
read to Tom a geological description of the hard rock.

"Hum! Yes," mused Tom, as he listened. "It seems to be of
the nature of obsidian."

"Bless my watch chain!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's that?"

"Obsidian is a volcanic rock--a sort of combination of
glass and flint for hardness," Tom explained. "It is
brittle, black in color, and the natives of the Admiralty
Islands use it for tipping their spears with which they slay
victims for their cannibalistic feasts."

"Bless my--bless my ear-drums!" gasped Mr. Damon.
"Cannibals!"

"Obsidian was also used by the ancient Mexicans to make
knives and daggers," Tom went on. "When Cortez conquered
Mexico he found the priests cutting the hearts from their
living victims with knives made from this volcanic glass-
like rock, known as obsidian. It may be that your brother
has met with a vein of that in the tunnel," Tom said to
the contractor.

"Possibly," admitted Mr. Titus.

"In that case," Tom stated, "I may have to use a new kind
of explosive. That used for my giant cannon would merely
crumble the hard rock for a short distance."

"Then will you accept the contract, and help us out?"
asked Mr. Titus eagerly. "We will pay you well. Will you
come to Peru and look over the ground?"

"And kill two birds with one stone, and come with me
also?" put in Mr. Damon.

Tom pondered for a moment. He was about to answer when the
tunnel contractor, who was looking from the library window,
suddenly jumped from his chair crying:

"There he is again! Once more dogging me!"

As he rushed from the room, Tom and Mr. Damon had a
glimpse of a face at one of the low library windows--a face
that had an evil look. It disappeared as Mr. Titus ran from
the room.




Chapter IV

Tom's Experiments



"Bless my looking glass, Tom, what does that mean?"
exclaimed Mr. Damon. "That face!"

"I don't know," answered the young inventor. "But the
sight of some one looking in here seemed to disturb Mr.
Titus. We must follow him."

"Perhaps he saw your giant Koku looking in," suggested the
odd, little man who blessed everything he could think of.
"The sight of his face, to any one not knowing him, Tom,
would be enough to cause fright."

"It wasn't Koku who looked in the window," said Tom,
decidedly. "It was some stranger. Come on."

The young inventor and Mr. Damon hurried out after the
tunnel contractor, who was running down the road that led in
front of the Swift homestead.

"He's chasing some one, Tom," called Mr. Damon.

"Yes, I see he is. But who?"

"I can't see any one," reported Mr. Damon, who had run
down to the gate, at which his horse was still standing.
Mr. Damon had washed the dirt from his hands and face, and
was wearing one of Mr. Swift's coats in place of his own
split one.

Tom joined the eccentric man and together they looked down
the road after the running Mr. Titus. They were in half a
mind to join him, when they saw him pull up short, raise his
hands as though he had given over the pursuit, and turn
back.

"I guess he got away, whoever he was," remarked Tom.
"We'll walk down and meet Mr. Titus, and ask him what it all
means."

Shortly afterward they came up to the contractor, who was
breathing heavily after his run, for he was evidently not
used to such exercise.

"I beg your pardon, Tom Swift, for leaving you and Mr.
Damon in such a fashion," said Mr. Titus, "but I had to act
quickly or lose the chance of catching that rascal. As it
was, he got away, but I think I gave him a scare, and h~e
knows that I saw him. It will make him more cautious in the
future."

"Who was it?" asked Tom.

"Well, I didn't have as close a look as I could have
wished for," the contractor said, as he walked back toward
the house with Tom and Mr. Damon, "but I'm pretty sure the
face that peered in at us through the library window was
that of Isaac Waddington."

"And who is he, if it isn't asking information that ought
not be given out?" inquired Mr. Damon.

"Oh, no, certainly. I can tell you," said the contractor.
"Only perhaps we had better wait until we get back to the
house.

"Since one of their men was seen lurking around here there
may be others," went on Mr. Titus, when the three were once
more seated in the Swift library. "It is best to be on the
safe side. The face I saw, I'm sure, was that of Waddington,
who is a tool of Blakeson & Grinder, rival tunnel
contractors. They put in a bid on this Andes tunnel, but we
were lower in our figures by several thousand dollars, and
the contract was awarded to us.

"Blakeson & Grinder tried, by every means in their power,
to get the job away from us. They even invoked the aid of
some Peruvian revolutionists and politicians, but we held
our ground and began the work. Since then they have had
spies and emissaries on our trail, trying their best to make
us fail in our work, so the Peruvian officials might
abrogate the contract and give it to them.

"But, so far, we've managed to come out ahead. This
Waddington is a sort of spy, and I've found him dodging me
several times of late. I suppose he wants to find out my
plans so as to be ready to jump in the breach in case we
fail."

"Do you think your rivals had anything to do with the
difficulties you are now meeting with in digging the
tunnel?" asked Mr. Damon. Mr. Titus shook his head.

"The present difficulties are all of Nature's doing," he
said. "It's just the abnormally hard rock that is bothering
us. Only for that we'd be all right, though we might have
petty difficulties because of the mean acts of Blakeson &
Grinder. But I don't fear them."

"How do you think this Waddington, if it was he, knew you
were coming here?" asked Tom.

"I can only guess. My brother and I have had some
correspondence regarding you, Tom Swift. That is, I
announced my intention of coming to see you, and my brother
wrote me to use my discretion. I wrote back that I would
consult you

"Our main office is in New York, where we employ a large
clerical and expert force. There is nothing to prevent one
of our stenographers, for instance, turning traitor and
giving copies of the letters of my brother and myself to our
rivals.

"Mind you, I don't say this was done, and I don't suspect
any of our employees, but it would be an easy matter for any
one to know my plans. I never thought of making a secret of
them, or of my trip here. In some way Waddington found out
about the last, and he must have followed me here. Then he
sneaked up under the window, and tried to hear what we
said."

"Do you think he did?" asked Tom.

"I wouldn't be surprised. We took no pains to lower our
voices. But, after all, he hasn't learned much that he
didn't know before, if he knew I was coming here. He didn't
learn the secret of the explosive that must be used, and
that is the vital thing. For I defy him, or any other
contractor, to blast that hard rock with any known
explosive. We've tried every kind on the market and we've
failed. We'll have to depend on you, Tom Swift, to help us
out with some of your giant cannon powder."

"And I'm not sure that will work," said the young
inventor. "I think I'll have to experiment and make a new
explosive, if I conclude to go to Peru."

"Oh, you'll go all right!" declared Mr. Titus with a
smile. "I can see that you are eager for the adventures I am
sure you'll find there, and, besides, your friend here, Mr.
Damon, needs you."

"That's what I do, Tom!" exclaimed the odd man. "Bless my
excursion ticket, but you must come!"

"I'll have to invent the new powder first," Tom said.

"That's what I like to hear!" exclaimed Mr. Titus. "It
shows you are thinking of coming with us."

Tom only smiled.

"I am so anxious to get the proper explosive," Went on Mr.
Titus, "that I would even purchase it from our rivals,
Blakeson & Grinder, if I thought they had it. But I'm sure
they have not, though they may think they can get it.

"That may be the reason they are following me so closely.
They may want to know just when we will fail, and have to
give up the contract, and they may think they can step in
and finish the work. But I don't believe, without your help,
Tom Swift, that they can blast that hard rock, and--"

"Well, I'll say this," interrupted Tom, "first come, first
served with me, other things being equal. You have applied
to me and, like a lawyer, I won't go over to the other side
now. I consider myself retained by your firm, Mr. Titus, to
invent some sort of explosive, and if I am successful I
shall expect to be paid."

"Oh, of course!" cried the contractor eagerly.

"Very good," Tom went on. "You needn't fear that I'll help
the other fellows. Now to get down to business. I must see
some samples of this rock in order to know what kind of
explosive force is needed to rend it."

"I have some in New York," went on the contractor. "I'll
have it sent to you at once. I would have brought it, only
it is too heavy to carry easily, and I was not sure I could
engage you."

"Did that fellow--Waddington, I believe you called him--
get away from you?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Clean away," the contractor answered. "He was a better
runner than I."

"It doesn't matter much," Tom said. "He didn't hear
anything that would benefit him, and I'll give my men orders
to be on the lookout for him. What sort of fellow is he, Mr.
Titus?"

The contractor described the eavesdropper, and Mr. Damon
exclaimed:

"Bless my turkey wish-bone! I'm sure I passed that chap
when I was riding over to see you a while ago, Tom."

"You did?"

"Yes, on the highway. He inquired the way to your place.
But there was nothing strange in that, since you employ a
number of men, and I thought this one was coming to look for
work. I can't say I liked his appearance, though."

"No, he isn't a very prepossessing individual," commented
Mr. Titus. "Well, now what's the first thing to be done, Tom
Swift?"

"Get me some samples of the rock, so I can begin my
experiments."

"I'll do that. And now let us consider about going to
Peru. For I'm sure you will be successful in your
experiments, and will find for us just the powder or
explosive we need."

"We can go together." said Mr. Damon. "I shall certainly
feel more at home in that wild country if I know Tom Swift
is with me, and I will appreciate the help of you and your
friends, Mr. Titus, in straightening out the tangles of our
drug business."

"I'll do all I can for you, Mr. Damon."

The three then talked at some length regarding possible
plans. Tom sent out word to one of his men to keep a sharp
watch around the house and grounds, against the possible
return of Waddington, but nothing more was seen of him, at
least for the time being.

Mr. Titus drew up a sort of tentative agreement with Tom,
binding his firm to pay a large sum in case the young
inventor was successful, and then the contractor left,
promising to have the rock samples come on later by express.

Mr. Damon, after blessing a few dozen more or less
impersonal objects, took his departure, his fractious horse
having quieted down in the meanwhile, and Tom was left to
himself.

"I wonder what I've let myself in for now," the youth
mused, as he went back to his laboratory. "It's a new field
for me--tunnel blasting. Well, perhaps something may come of
it."

But of the strange adventure that was to follow his
agreement to help Mr. Titus, our hero, Tom Swift, had not
the least inkling.

Tom went back to his labors over the gyroscope problem,
but he could arrive at no satisfactory conclusion, and,
tossing aside the papers, covered with intricate figures, he
exclaimed:

"Oh, I'm going for a walk! This thing is getting on my
nerves."

He strolled through the Shopton streets, and as he reached
the outskirts of the town, he saw just ahead of him the
figure of a girl. Tom quickened his pace, and presently was
beside her.

"Where are you going, Mary?" he asked.

"Oh, Tom! How you startled me!" she exclaimed, turning
around. "I was just thinking of you."

"Thanks! Something nice?"

"I shan't tell you!" and she blushed. "But where are you
going?"

"Walking with you!"

Tom was nothing if not bold.

"Hadn't you better wait until you're asked?" she retorted,
mischievously.

"If I did I might not get an invitation. So I'm going to
invite myself, and then I'm going to invite you in here to
have an ice cream soda," and he and Miss Nestor were soon
seated at a table in a candy shop.

Tom had nearly finished his ice cream when he glanced
toward the door, and started at the sight of a man who was
entering the place.

"What's the matter?" asked Mary. "Did you drop some ice
cream, Tom?"

"No, Mary. But that man--"

Mary turned in time to see an excited man hurry out of the
candy shop after a hasty glance at Tom Swift.

"Who was he?" the girl asked.

"I--er--oh, some one I thought I knew, but I guess I
don't," said Tom, quickly. "Have some more cream, Mary?"

"No, thank you. Not now."

Tom was glad she did not care for any, as he was anxious
to get outside, and have a look at the man, for he thought
he had recognized the face as the same that had peered in
his window. But when he and Miss Nestor reached the front of
the shop the strange man was not in sight.

"I guess he came in to cool off after his run," mused Tom,
"but when he saw me he didn't care about it. I wonder if
that was Waddington? He's a persistent individual if it was
he."

"Are you undertaking any new adventures, Tom?" asked Mary.

"Well, I'm thinking of going to Peru."

"Peru!" she cried. "Oh, what a long way to go! And when
you get there will you write to me? I'm collecting stamps,
and I haven't any from Peru."

"Is that--er--the only reason you want me to write?" asked
Tom.

"No," said Mary softly, as she ran up the walk.

Tom smiled as he turned away.

Three days later he received a box from New York. It
contained the samples from the Andes tunnel, and Tom at once
began his experiments to discover a suitable explosive for
rending the hard stone.

"It is compressed molten lava," said Mr. Swift. "You'll
never get an explosive that will successfully blast that,
Tom."

"We'll see," declared the young inventor.




Chapter V

Mary's Present



Outside a rudely-constructed shack, in the middle of a
large field, about a mile away from the nearest of the
buildings owned by Tom Swift and his father, were gathered a
group of figures one morning. From the shack, trailing over
the ground, were two insulated wires, which led to a pile of
rocks and earth some distance off. Out of the temporary
building came Koku, the giant, bearing in his arms a big
rock, of peculiar formation.

"That's it, Koku!" exclaimed Tom Swift. "Now don't drop it
on your toes."

"No, Master, me no drop," the giant said, as he strode off
with the heavy load as easily as a boy might carry a stone
for his sling-shot.

Koku placed the big rock on top of the pile of dirt and
stones and came back to the hut, just as Eradicate, the
colored man-of-all-work, emerged. Koku was not looking
ahead, and ran into Eradicate with such force that the
latter would have fallen had not the giant clasped his big
arms about him.

"Heah now!  Whut yo' all doin' t' me?" angrily demanded
Eradicate. "Yo' done gone an' knocked de breff outen me,
dat's whut yo' all done! I'll bash yo' wif a rock, dat's
what I'll do!"

Koku, laughing, tried to explain that it was all an
accident, but Eradicate would not listen. He looked about
for a stone to throw at the giant, though it was doubtful,
with his feeble strength, and considering the great frame of
the big man, if any damage would have been done. But
Eradicate saw no rocks nearer than the pile in which ended
the two insulated wires, and, with mutterings, the negro set
off in that direction, shuffling along on his rheumatic
legs.

From the shack Tom Swift hailed:

"Hi there, Rad! Come back! Where are you going?"

"I'se gwine t' git a rock, Massa Tom, an' bash de haid ob
dat big lummox ob a giant! He done knocked de breff outen
me, so he did."

"You come back from that stone pile!" Tom ordered. "I'm
going to blow it up in a minute, and if you get too near
you'll have the breath knocked out of you worse than Koku
did it. Come back, I say!"

But Eradicate was obstinate and kept on. Tom, who was
adjusting a firing battery in the shack, laughed, and then
in exasperation cried:

"Koku, go and get him and bring him back. Carry him if he
won't come any other way. I don't want the dear old chump to
get the fright of his life, and he sure will if he goes too
close. Bring him back!"

"Koku bring, Master," was the giant's answer.

He ran toward Eradicate, who, seeing his tormentor
approaching, redoubled his shuffling pace toward the stone
pile. But he was no match for the giant, who, ignoring his
struggles, picked up Eradicate, and, flinging him over his
shoulder like a sack of meal, brought him to the shack.

"There him be, Master!" said the giant.

"So I see," laughed Torn. "Now you stay here, Rad."

"No, sah!  No, sah, Massa Tom! I--I'se gwine t' git a rock
an'--an' bash his haid--dat's what I'se gwine t' do!" and
the colored man tried to struggle to his feet.

"Look out now!" cried Tom, suddenly. "If things go right
there won't be a rock left for you to 'bash' anybody's head
with, Rad. Look out!"

The three cowered inside the shack, which, though it was
rudely made, was built of beavy logs and planks, with a
fronting of sod and bags of sand.

Tom turned a switch. There was a loud report, and where
the stone pile had been there was a big hole in the ground,
while the air was filled with fragments of rock and dirt.
These came down in a shower on the roof of the shack, and
Eradicate covered his ears with his trembling hands.

"Am--am de world comin' to de end, Massa Tom?" he asked.
"Am dat Gabriel's trump I done heah?"

"No, you dear old goose!" laughed the young inventor.
"That was just a charge of my new explosive--a small charge,
too. But it seems to have done the work."

He ran from the shack to the place where the rock pile had
been, and picked up several small fragments.

"Busted all to pieces!" exulted Tom Swift. "Not a piece
left as big as a hickory nut. That's going some! I've got
the right mixture at last. If an ounce did that, a few
hundred pounds ought to knock that Andes tunnel through the
mountain in no time. I'll telegraph to Mr. Titus."

Leaving Koku and Rad to collect the wires and firing
apparatus, there being no danger now, as no explosive was
left in the shack, Tom made his way back to the house. His
father met him.

"Well, Tom," he asked, "another failure?"

"No, Dad! Success! This time I turned the trick. I seem to
have gotten just the right mixture. Look, these are some of
the pieces left from the big rock--one of the samples Mr.
Titus sent me. It was all cracked up as small as this," and
he held out the fragments he had picked up in the field.

Mr. Swift regarded them for a few moments.

"That's better, Tom," he said. "I didn't think you could
get an explosive that would successfully shatter that hard
rock, but you seem to have done it. Have you the formula all
worked out?"

"All worked out, Dad. I only made a small quantity, but
the same proportions will hold good for the larger amounts.
I'm going to start in and make it now. And then--Ho! for
Peru!"

Tom struck an attitude, such as some old discoverer might
have assumed, and then he hurried into the house to
telephone a telegram to the Shop' ton office. The message
was to Mr. Titus, and read:


"Explosive success. Start making it at once. Ready for
Peru in month's time."


"Thirteen words," repeated Tom, as the operator called
them back to him. "I hope that doesn't mean bad luck."

The experiment which Tom Swift had just brought to a
successful conclusion was one of many he had conducted,
extending over several wearying weeks.

As soon as Tom had received the samples of the rock he had
begun to experiment. First he tried some of the explosive
that was so successful in the giant cannon, As he had
feared, it was not what was needed. It cracked the rock,
but did not disintegrate it, and that was what was needed.
The hard rock must be broken up into fragments that could be
easily handled. Merely to crack it necessitated further
explosions, which would only serve to split it more and
perhaps wedge it fast in the tunnel.

So Tom tried different mixtures, using various chemicals,
but none seemed to be just right. The trials were not
without danger, either. Once, in mixing some ingredients,
there was an explosion that injured one man, and blew Tom
some distance away. Fortunately for him, there was an open
window in the direction in which he was propelled, and he
went through that, escaping with only some cuts and bruises.

Another time there was a hang-fire, and the explosive
burned instead of detonating, so that one of the shops
caught, and there was no little work in subduing the flames.

But Tom would not give up, and finally, after many trials,
he hit on what he felt to be the right mixture. This he took
out to the big lot, and having made a miniature tunnel with
some of the sample rock, and having put some of the
explosive in a hole bored in the big chunk Koku carried, Tom
fired the charge. The result we have seen, It was a success.

A day after receiving Tom's message Mr. Titus came on and
a demonstration was given of the powerful explosive.

"Tom, that's great!" cried the tunnel contractor. "Our
troubles are at an end now."

But, had he known it, new ones were only just beginning.

Tom at once began preparations for making the explosive on
a large scale, as much of it would be needed in the Andes
tunnel. Then, having turned the manufacturing end of it over
to his men, Tom began his preparations for going to Peru.

Mr. Damon was also getting ready, and it was arranged that
he, with Tom and Mr. Titus, should take a vessel from San
Francisco, crossing the continent by train. The supply of
explosive would follow them by special freight.

"We might have gone by Panama except for the slide in the
canal," Tom said. "And I suppose I could take you across the
continent in my airship, Mr. Titus, if you object to
railroad travel."

"No, thank you, Tom. If it's just the same to you, I'd
rather stay on the ground," the contractor said. "I'm more
used to it."

A day or so before the start for San Francisco was to be
made, Tom, passing a store in Shopton, saw something in the
window he thought Mary Nestor would like. It was a mahogany
work-box, of unique design, beautifully decorated, and Tom
purchased it.

"Shall I have it sent?" asked the clerk.

"No, thank you," Tom answered.

He knew the young lady who had waited on him, and, for
reasons of his own, he did not want her to know that Mary
was to get the box.

Carrying the present to his laboratory, Tom prepared to
wrap it up suitably to send to Mary, with a note. Just,
however, as he was looking for a box suitable to contain the
gift, he received a summons to the telephone. Mr. Titus, in
New York, wanted to speak to him.

"Here, Rad!" Tom called. "Just box this up for me, like a
good fellow, and then take it to Miss Nestor at this
address; will you?" and Tom handed his man the addressed
letter he had written to Mary. "Be careful of it," Tom
cautioned.

"Oh, I'll be careful, Massa Tom," was the reply. "I'll
shore be careful."

And Eradicate was--all too careful.




Chapter VI

Mr. Nestor's Letter



"Got t' git a good strong box fo' dish yeah," murmured
Eradicate, as he looked at the beautiful mahogany present
Tom had turned over to him to take to Mary. "Mah Landy! Dat
suttinly am nice; Ah! Um! Jest laik some ob de old mahogany
furniture dat was in our fambily down Souf." Eradicate did
not mean his family, exactly, but the one in which he had
been a slave.

"Yassum, dat shore am nice!" he went on, talking to
himself as he admired the present. "I shore got t' put dat
in a good box! An' dish year note, too. Let's see what it
done say on de outside."

Eradicate held the envelope carefully upside down, and
read--or rather pretended to read--the name and address.
Eradicate knew well enough where Mary lived, for this was
not the first time he had gone there with messages from his
young master.

"Massa Tom shore am a fine writer," mused the negro, as he
slowly turned the envelope around. "I cain't read nobody's
writin' but hisen, nohow."

Had Eradicate been strictly honest with himself, he would
have confessed that he could not read any writing, or
printing either. His education had been very limited, but
one could show him, say, a printed sign and tell him it read
"Danger" or "Five miles to Branchville," or anything like
that, and the next time he saw it, Eradicate would know what
that sign said. He seemed to fix a picture of it in his
mind, though the letters and figures by themselves meant
nothing to him. So when Tom told him the envelope contained
the name and address of Miss Nestor, Eradicate needed
nothing more.

He rummaged about in some odds and ends in the corner of
the laboratory, and brought out a strong, wooden box, which
had a cover that screwed down.

"Dat'll be de ticket!" Eradicate exclaimed. De mahogany
present will jest fit." Eradicate took some excelsior to pad
the box, and then, dropping inside it the gift, already
wrapped in tissue paper, he proceeded to screw on the cover.

There was something printed in red letters on the outside
box, but Eradicate could not read, so it did not trouble
him.

"Dat Miss Nestor shore will laik her present," he
murmured. "An' I'll be mighty keerful ob it' laik Massa Tom
tole me. He wouldn't trust dat big lummox Koku wif anyt'ing
laik dis."

Screwing on the cover, and putting a piece of wrapping
paper outside the rough, wooden box. with the letter in his
hand, Eradicate, full of his own importance, set off for
Miss Nestor's house. Tom had not returned from the
telephone, over which he was talking to Mr. Titus.

The message was an important one. The contractor said he
had received word from his brother in Peru that his presence
was urgently needed there.

"Could you arrange to get off sooner than we planned,
Tom?" asked Mr. Titus. "I am afraid something has happened
down there. Have you sent the first shipment of explosive?"

"Yes, that went three days ago. It ought to arrive at Lima
soon after we do. Why yes, I can start to-night if we have
to. I'll find out if Mr. Damon can be with us on such short
notice."

"I wish you would," came from Mr. Titus. "And say, Tom, do
you think you could take that giant Koku with you?"

"Why?"

"Well, I think he'd come in handy. There are some pretty
rough characters in those Andes Mountains, and your big
friend might be useful."

"All right. I was thinking of it, anyhow. Glad you
mentioned it. Now I'll call up Mr. Damon, and I'll let you
know, in an hour or so, if he can make it."

"Bless my hair brush, yes, Tom!" exclaimed the eccentric
man, when told of the change in plans. "I can leave
to-night as well as not."

Word to this effect was sent on to Mr. Titus, and then
began some hurrying on the part of Tom Swift. He told Koku
to get ready to leave for New York at once, where he and the
giant would join Mr. Titus and Mr. Damon, and start across
the continent to take for steamer for Lima, Peru.

"Rad, did you send that present to Miss Nestor?" asked
Tom, later, as he finished packing his grip.

"Yas, sah. I done did it. Took it mase'f!"

"That's good! I guess I'll have to say good-bye to Mary
over the telephone. I won't have time to call. I'm glad I
thought of the present."

Tom got the Nestor house on the wire. But Mary was not in.

"There's a package here for her," said the girl's
mother. "Did you--?"

"Yes, I sent that," Tom said. "Sorry I won't he able to
call and say good-bye, but I'm in a terrible rush. I'll see
her as soon as I get back, and I'll write as soon as I
arrive."

"Do," urged Mrs. Nestor. "We'll all be glad to hear from
you," for Tom and Mary were tentatively engaged to be
married.

Tom and Koku went on with their hurried preparations to
leave for New York. Eradicate begged to be taken along, but
Tom gently told the faithful old servant that it was out of
the question.

"Besides, Rad," he said, "it's dangerous in those Andes
Mountains. Why, they have birds there, as big as cows, and
they can swoop down and carry off a man your size."

"Am dat shorely so, Massa Tom?"

"Of course it is! You get the dictionary and read about
the condors of the Andes Mountains."

"Dat's what I'll do, Massa Tom. Birds as big as cows what
kin pick up a man in dere beaks, an' carry him off! Oh, my!
No, sah, Massa Tom! I don't want t' go. I'll stay right
yeah!"

Shortly before Tom and Koku departed for the railroad
station, where they were to take a train for New York, Mary
Nestor returned home.

"Tom called you on the telephone to say good-bye," her
mother informed her, "and said he was sorry he could not see
you. But he sent some sort of gift."

"Oh, how sweet of him!" Mary exclaimed. "Where is it?"

"On the dining room table. Eradicate brought it with a
note."

Mary read the note first.

In it Tom begged Mary to accept the little token, and to
think of him when she used it.

"Oh! I wonder what it can be," she cried in delight.

"Better open it and see," advised Mr. Nestor, who had come
in at that moment.

Mary cut the string of the outside paper, and folded back
the wrapper. A wooden box was exposed to view, a solid,
oblong, wooden box, and on the top, in bold, red letters
Mary, her father and her mother read:

DYNAMITE! HANDLE WITH CARE!


"Oh! Oh!" murmured Mrs. Nestor.

"Dynamite! Handle with care!" repeated Mr. Nestor, in a
sort of dazed voice. "Quick! Get a pail of water! Dump it in
the bathtub!  Soak it good, and then telephone for the
police. Dynamite! What does this mean?"

He rushed toward the kitchen, evidently with the intention
of getting a pail of water, but Mary clasped him by the arm.

"Father!" she exclaimed. "Don't get so excited!"

"Excited!" he cried. "Who's excited? Dynamite! We'll all
be blown up! This is some plot! I don't believe Tom sent
this at all! Look out! Call the police! Excited! Who's
getting excited?"

"You are, Daddy dear!" said Mary calmly. "This is some
mistake. Tom did send this--I know his writing. And wasn't
it Eradicate who brought this package, Mother?"

"Yes, my dear. But your father is right. Let him put it in
water, then it will be safe. Oh, we'll all be blown up. Get
the water!"

"No!" cried Mary. "There is some mistake. Tom wouldn't
send me dynamite, There must be a present for me in there.
Tom must have put it in the wrong box by mistake. I'm going
to open it."

Mary's calmness had its effect on her parents. Mr. Nestor
cooled down, as did his wife, and a closer examination of
the outer box did not seem to show that it was an infernal
machine of any kind.

"It's all a mistake, Daddy," Mary said. "I'll show you.
Get me a screw driver."

After some delay one was found, and Mr. Nestor himself
opened the box. When the tissue paper wrappings of the
mahogany gift were revealed he gave a sigh of relief, and
when Mary undid the wrappings, and saw what Tom had sent
her, she cried:

"Oh, how perfectly dear! Just what I wanted! I wonder how
he knew? Oh, I just love it!" and she hugged the beautiful
box in her arms.

"Humph!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor, a slowly gathering light of
anger showing in his eyes. "It is a nice present, but that
is a very poor sort of joke to play, in my estimation."

"Joke! What joke?" asked Mary.

"Putting a present in a box labeled Dynamite, and giving
us such a scare," went on her father.

"Oh, Father, I'm sure he didn't mean to do it!" Mary said,
earnestly.

"Well, maybe he didn't! He may have thought it a joke, and
he may not have! But, at any rate, it was a piece of gross
carelessness on his part, and I don't care to consider for a
son-in-law a young man as careless as that!"

"Oh, Daddy!" expostulated Mary.

"Now, now! Tut, tut!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor. "It isn't your
fault, Mary, but this Tom Swift must be taught a lesson. He
was careless, if nothing worse, and, for all he knew, there
might have been some stray bits of dynamite in that packing
box. It won't do! It won't do! I'll write him a letter, and
give him a piece of my mind!"

And in spite of all his wife and his daughter could say,
Mr. Nestor did write Tom a scathing letter. He accused him
of either perpetrating a joke, or of being careless, or
both, and he intimated that the less he saw of Tom at the
Nestor home hereafter the better pleased he would be.

"There! I guess that will make him wish he hadn't done
it!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor, as he called a messenger and sent
the letter to Tom's house.

Mary and her mother did not know the con tents of the
note, but Mary tried to get Tom on the wire and explain.
However, she was unable to reach him, as Tom was on the
point of leaving.

The messenger, with Mr. Nestor's letter, arrived just as
our hero was receiving the late afternoon mail from the
postman, and just as Tom and Koku were getting in an
automobile to leave for the depot.

"Good-bye, Dad!" Tom called. "Good-bye, Mrs. Baggert!" He
thrust Mr. Nestor's letter, unopened, together with some
other mail matter, which he took to be merely circulars,
into an inner pocket, and jumped into the car.

Tom and Koku were off on the first stage of their journey.




Chapter VII

Off for Peru



"Well, Tom Swift, you're on time I see," was Mr. Job
Titus' greeting, when our hero, and Koku, the giant,
alighted from a taxicab in New York, in front of the hotel
the contractor had appointed as a meeting place.

"Yes, I'm here."

"Did you have a good trip?"

"Oh, all right, yes. Nothing happened to speak of, though
we were delayed by a freight wreck. Has Mr. Damon got here
yet?"

"Not yet, Tom. But I had a message saying he was on his
way. "Come on up to the rooms I have engaged. Hello, what's
all the crowd here for?" asked the contractor in some
surprise, for a throng had gathered at the hotel entrance.

"I expect it's Koku they're staring at," announced Tom,
and the giant it was who had attracted the attention. He
was carrying his own big valise, and a small steamer trunk
belonging to Tom, as easily as though they weighed nothing,
the trunk being under one arm.

"I guess they don't see men of his size outside of
circuses," commented the contractor. "We can pretty nearly,
though not quite match him, down in Peru though, Tom. Some
of the Indians are big fellows."

"We'll get up a wrestling match between one of them and
Koku," suggested Tom. "Come on!" he called to the giant, who
was surrounded by a crowd.

Koku pushed his way through as easily as a bull might make
his way through a throng of puppies about his heels, and as
Tom, Mr. Titus and the giant were entering the hotel
corridor, the chauffeur of the taxicab called out with a
laugh:

"I say, boss, don't you think you ought to pay double
rates on that chap," and he nodded in the direction of the
giant.

"That's right!" added some one in the crowd with a laugh.
"He might have broken the springs."

"All right," assented Tom, good-naturedly, tossing the
chauffeur a coin. "Here you are, have a cigar on the giant."

There was more laughter, and even Koku grinned, though it
is doubtful if he knew what about, for he could not
understand much unless Tom spoke to him in a sort of code
they had arranged between them.

"Sorry to have hastened your departure," began Mr. Titus
when he and Tom sat in the comfortable hotel rooms, while
Koku stood at a window, looking out at what to him were the
marvelous wonders of the New York streets.

"It didn't make any difference," replied the young
inventor. "I was about ready to come anyhow. I just had to
hustle a little," and he thought of how he had had to send
Mary's present to her instead of taking it himself. As yet
he was all unaware of the commotion it had caused.

"Did you get the powder shipment off all right?"

"Yes, and it will be there almost as soon as we. Other
shipments will follow as we need them. My father will see to
that."

"I'm glad you hit on the right kind of powder," went on
the contractor. "I guess I didn't make any mistake in coming
to you, Tom."

"Well, I hope not. Of course the explosive worked all
right in experimental charges with samples of the tunnel
rock. It remains to be seen what it will do under actual
conditions, and in big service charges."

"Oh, I've no doubt it will work all right."

"What time do we leave here?" Tom asked.

"At two-thirty this afternoon. We have just time to get a
good dinner and have our baggage transferred to the Chicago
limited. In less than a week we ought to be in San Francisco
and aboard the steamer. I hope Mr. Damon arrives on time."

"Oh, you can generally depend on him," said
Tom. "I telephoned him, just before I started
from Shopton, and he said--"

"Bless my carpet slippers!" cried a voice outside the
hotel apartment. "But I can find my way all right. I know
the number of the room. No! you needn't take my bag. I can
carry it my self!"

"There he is!" laughed Tom, opening the door to disclose
the eccentric gentleman himself, struggling to keep
possession of his valise against the importunities of a
bellboy.

"Ah, Tom--Mr. Titus! Glad to see you!" exclaimed Mr.
Damon. "I--I am a little late, I fear--had an accident--wait
until I get my breath," and he sank, panting, into a chair.

"Accident?" cried Tom. "Are you--?"

"Yes--my taxicab ran into another. Nobody hurt though."

"But you're all out of breath," said Mr. Titus. "Did you
run?"

"No, but I walked upstairs."

"What! Seven flights?" exclaimed Tom. "Weren't the hotel
elevators running?"

Yes, but I don't like them. I'd rather walk. And I did--
carried my valise--bellboy tried to take it away from me
every step--here you are, son--it wasn't the tip I was
trying to get out of," and he tossed the waiting and
grinning lad a quarter.

"There, I'm better now," went on Mr. Damon, when Tom had
given him a glass of water. "Bless my paper weight! The drug
concern will have to vote me an extra dividend for what I've
gone through. "Well, I'm here, anyhow. How is everything?"

"Fine!" cried Tom. "We'll soon be off for Peru!"

They talked over plans and made sure nothing had been
forgotten. Their railroad tickets had been secured by Mr.
Titus so there was nothing more to do save wait for train-
time.

"I've never been to Peru," Tom remarked shortly before
lunch. "What sort of country is it?"

"Quite a wonderful country," Mr. Titus answered. "I have
been very much interested in it since my brother and I
accepted this tunnel contract. Peru seems to have taken its
name from Peru, a small river on the west coast of Colombia,
where Pizarro landed. The country, geographically, may be
divided into three sections longitudinally. The coast
region is a sandy desert, with here and there rivers flowing
through fertile valleys. The sierra region is the Andes
division, about two hundred and fifty miles in width."

"Is that where we're going?" asked Tom.

"Yes. And beyond the Andes (which in Peru consist of great
chains of mountains, some very high, interspersed with table
lands, rich plains and valleys) there is the montana region
of tropical forests, running down to the valley of the
Amazon.

"That sounds interesting," commented Mr. Damon.

"It is interesting," declared Mr. Titus. "For it is from
this tropical region that your quinine comes, Mr. Damon,
though you may not have to go there to straighten out your
affairs. I think you can do better bargaining with the
officials in Lima, or near there."

"Are there any wild animals in Peru?" Tom inquired.

"Well, not many. Of course there are the llamas and
alpacas, which are the beasts of burden--almost like little
camels you might say, though much more gentle. Then there is
the wild vicuna, the fleece of which is made into a sort of
wool, after which a certain kind of cloth is named.

"Then there is the taruco, a kind of deer, the viscacha,
which is a big rat, the otoc, a sort of wild dog, or fox,
and the ucumari, a black bear with a white nose. This bear
is often found on lofty mountain tops, but only when driven
there in search of food.

"The condors, of course, are big birds of prey in the
Andes. You must have read about them; how they seem to lie
in the upper regions of the air, motionless, until suddenly
they catch sight of some dead animal far down below when
they sweep toward it with the swiftness of the wink. There
is another bird of the vulture variety, with wings of black
and white feathers. The ancient Incas used to decorate their
head dresses with these wing feathers."

"Well, I'm glad I'm going to Peru," said Tom. "I never
knew it was such an interesting country. But I don't suppose
we'll have time to see much of it."

"Oh, I think you will," commented Mr. Titus. "We don't
always have to work on the tunnel. There are numerous
holidays, or holy-days, which our Indian workers take off,
and we can do nothing without them. I'll see that you have a
chance to do some exploring if you wish."

"Good!" exclaimed Tom. "I brought my electric rifle with
me, and I may get a chance to pop over one of those bears
with a white nose. Are they good to eat?"

"The Indians eat them, I believe, when they can get them,
but I wouldn't fancy the meat," said the contractor.

Luncheon over, the three travelers departed with their
baggage for the Chicago Limited, which left from the
Pennsylvania Station at Twenty-third Street. As usual, Koku
attracted much attention because of his size.

The trip to San Francisco was without incident worth
narrating and in due time our friends reached the Golden
Gate where they were to go aboard their steamer. They had to
wait a day, during which time Tom and Mr. Titus made
inquiries regarding the first powder shipment. They had had
unexpected good luck, for the explosive, having been sent on
ahead by fast freight, was awaiting them.

"So we can take it with us on the Bellaconda," said, Tom,
naming the vessel on which they were to sail.

The powder was safely stowed away, and our friends having
brought their baggage aboard, putting what was wanted on the
voyage in their staterooms, went out on deck to watch the
lines being cast off.

A bell clanged and an officer cried:

"All ashore that's going ashore!"

There were hasty good-byes, a scramble on the part of
those who had come to bid friends farewell, and preparations
were made to haul in the gangplank.

Just as the tugs were slowly pushing against the
Bellaconda to get her in motion to move her away from the
wharf, there was a shout down the pier and a taxicab, driven
at reckless speed, dashed up.

"Wait a minute! Hold that gangway. I have a passenger for
you!" cried the chauffeur.

He pulled up with a screeching of brakes, and a man with a
heavy black beard fairly leaped from the vehicle, running
toward the plank which was all but cast off.

"My fare! My fare!" yelled the tax~cab driver.

"Take it out of that! Keep the change!" cried the bearded
man over his shoulder, tossing a crumpled bill to the
chauffeur. And then, clutching his valise in a firm hand,
the belated passenger rushed up the gangplank just in time
to board the steamer which was moving away from the dock.

"Close shave--that," observed Tom.

"That's right," assented Mr. Titus.

"Well, we're off for Peru!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as the
vessel moved down the bay.




Chapter VIII

The Bearded Man



Travel to Tom and Mr. Damon presented no novelties. They
had been on too many voyages over the sea, under the sea and
even in the air above the sea to find anything unusual in
merely taking a trip on a steamer.

Mr. Titus, though he admitted he had never been in a
submarine or airship, had done considerable traveling about
the world in his time, and had visited many countries,
either for business or pleasure, so he was an old hand at
it.

But to Koku, who, since he had been brought from the land
where Tom Swift had been made captive, had gone about but
little, everything was novel, and he did not know at what to
look first.

The giant was interested in the ship, in the water, in the
passengers, in the crew and in the sights to be seen as they
progressed down the harbor.

And the big man himself was a source of wonder to all save
his own party. Everywhere he went about the decks, or below,
he was followed by a staring but respectful crowd.  Koku
took it all good-naturedly, however, and even consented to
show his great strength by lifting heavy weights. Once when
several sailors were shifting one of the smaller anchors (a
sufficiently heavy one for all that) Koku pushed them aside
with a sweep of his big arm, and, picking up the big "hook,"
turned to the second mate and asked:

"Where you want him?"

"Good land, man!" cried the astonished officer. "You'll
kill yourself!"

But Koku carried the anchor where it ought to go, and from
then on he was looked up to with awe and admiration by the
sailors.

From San Francisco to Callao, Peru (the latter city being
the seaport of Lima, which is situated inland), is
approximately nine hundred miles. But as the Bellaconda was
a coasting steamer, and would make several stops on her
trip, it would be more than a week before our friends would
land at Callao, then to proceed to Lima, where they expected
to remain a day or so before striking into the interior to
where the tunnel was being bored through the mountain.

The first day was spent in getting settled, becoming used
to their new surroundings, finding their places and
neighbors at table, and in making acquaintances. There
were some interesting men and women aboard the Bellaconda,
and Tom Swift, Mr. Damon and Mr. Titus soon made friends
with them. This usually came about through the medium of
Koku, the giant. Persons seeing him would inquire about him,
and when they learned he was Tom Swift's helper it was an
easy topic with which to open conversation.

Tom told, modestly enough, how he had come to get Koku in
his escape from captivity, but Mr. Damon was not so simple
in describing Tom's feats, so that before many days had
passed our hero found himself regarded as a personage of
considerable importance, which was not at all to his liking.

"But bless my fountain pen!" cried Mr. Damon, When Tom
objected to so much notoriety. "You did it all; didn't you?"

"Yes, I know. But these people won't believe it."

"Oh, yes they will!" said the odd man. "I'll take good
care that they believe it."

"If any one say it not so, you tell me!" broke Koku,
shaking his huge fist.

"No, I guess I'd better keep still," said Tom, with a
laugh.

The weather was pleasant, if we except a shower or two,
and as the vessel proceeded south, tropical clothing became
the order of the day, while all who could, spent most of
their time on deck under the shade of awnings.

"Did you ever hear anything more of that fellow,
Waddington?" asked Tom of Mr. Titus one day.

"Not a thing. He seems to have dropped out of sight."

"And are your rivals, Blakeson & Grinder, making any
trouble?"

"Not that I've heard of. Though just what the situation
may be down in Peru I don't know. I fancy everything isn't
going just right or my brother would not be so anxious for
me to come on in such a hurry."

"Do you anticipate any real trouble?"

Mr. Titus paused a moment before answering.

"Well, yes," he said, finally, "I do!"

"What sort?" asked Tom.

"That I can't say. I'll be perfectly frank with you, Tom.
You know I told you at the time that we were in for
difficulties. I didn't want you to go into this thing
blindly."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of trouble," Tom hastened to assure
his friend. "I've had more or less of it in my life, and I'm
willing to meet it again. Only I like to know what kind it
is."

"Well, I can't tell you--exactly," went an the tunnel
contractor. "Those rivals of ours, Blakeson & Grinder, are
unscrupulous fellows. They feel very bitter about not
getting the contract, I hear. And they would be only too
glad to have us fail in the work. That would mean that they,
as the next lowest bidders, would be given the job. And we
would have to make up the difference out of our pockets, as
well as lose all the work we have, so far, put on the
tunnel."

"And you don't want that to happen!"

"I guess not, my boy! Well, it won't happen if we get
there in time with this new explosive of yours. That will do
the business I'm sure."

"I hope so," murmured Tom. "Well, we'll soon see. And now
I think I'll go and write a few letters. We are going to put
in at Panama, and I can mail them there."

Tom started for his stateroom, and rapidly put his hand in
the inner pocket of his coat. He drew out a bundle of
letters and papers, and, as he looked at them, a cry of
astonishment came from his lips.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Titus.

"Matter!" cried Tom. "Why here's a letter from Mary--from
Mr. Nestor," he went on, as he scanned the familiar
handwriting. "I never opened it! Let's see--when did I get
that?"

His memory went back to the day of his departure from
Shopton when he had sent Mary the gift, and he recalled that
the letter had arrived just as he was getting into the
automobile.

"I stuck it in my pocket with some other mail," he mused,
"and I never thought of it again until just now. But this is
the first time I've worn this coat since that day. A letter
from Mr. Nestor! Probably Mary wrote, thanking me for the
box, and her father addressed the envelope for her. Well,
let's see what it says."

Tom retired to the privacy of his stateroom to read the
note, but he had not glanced over more than the first half
of it before he cried out:

"Dynamite! Great Scott! What does this mean? 'Gross
carelessness! Poor idea of a joke! No person with your idea
of responsibility will ever be my son-in-law!' Box labeled
'open with care!' Why--why--what does it all mean?"

Tom read the letter over again, and his murmurs of
astonishment were so loud that Mr. Damon, in the next room,
called out:

"What's the matter, Tom?" Get bad news?"

"Bad news? I should say so! Mary--her father--he forbids
me to see her again. Says I tried to dynamite them all--or
at least scare them into believing I was going to. I can't
understand it!"

"Tell me about it, Tom," suggested Mr. Damon, coming into
Tom's stateroom. "Bless my gunpowder keg! what does it
mean?"

Thereupon Tom told of having purchased the gift for Mary,
and of having, at the last minute, told Eradicate to put it
in a box and deliver it at the Nestor home.

"Which he evidently did," Tom went on, "but when it got
there Mary's present was in a box labeled 'Dynamite. Handle
with care.' I never sent that."

Mr. Damon read over Mr. Nestor's letter which had lain so
long in Tom's pocket unopened.

"I think I see how it happened," said the old man.
"Eradicate can't read; can he, Tom?"

"No, but he pretends he can."

"And did you have any empty boxes marked dynamite in your
laboratory?"

"Why yes, I believe I did. I used dynamite as one of the
ingredients of my new explosive."

"Well then, it's as clear as daylight. Eradicate, being
unable to read, took one of the empty dynamite boxes in
which to pack Mary's present. That's how it happened."

Tom thought for a moment. Then he burst into a laugh.

"That's it," he said, a bit ruefully. "That's the
explanation. No wonder Mr. Nestor was roiled. He thought I
was playing a joke. I'll have to explain. But how?"

"By letter," said Mr. Damon.

"Too slow. I'll send a wireless," decided Tom, and he
began the composition of a message that cost him
considerable in tolls before he had hit on the explanation
that suited him.

"That ought to clear the atmosphere," he said when the
wireless had shot his message into the ether. "Whew!  And to
think, all this while, Mary and her folks have believed that
I tried to play a miserable joke on them! My! My! I wonder
if they'll ever forgive me. When I get hold of Eradicate--"

"Better teach him to read if he's going to do up love
packages," interrupted Mr. Damon, dryly.

"I will," decided the young inventor.

The Bellaconda stopped at Panama and then kept on her way
south. Soon after that she ran into a severe tropical storm,
and for a time there was some excitement among the
passengers. The more timid of them put on life preservers,
though the captain and his officers assured them there was
no danger.

Tom and Mr. Titus, descending from the deck, whence they
had been warned by one of the mates, were on their way to
their stateroom, walking with some difficulty owing to the
roll of the ship.

As they approached their quarters the door of a stateroom
farther up the passage opened, and a head was thrust out.

"Will you send a steward to me?" a man requested. "I am
feeling very ill, and need assistance."

"Certainly," Tom answered, and at that moment he heard Mr.
Titus utter an exclamation.

"What is it?" asked Tom, for the man who had appealed for
help, had withdrawn his head.

"That--that man!" exclaimed the contractor. "That was
Waddington, the tool of our rivals."

"Waddington!" repeated Tom, with a look at the now closed
door. "Why, the bearded man has that stateroom--the bearded
man who so nearly lost the steamer. He isn't Waddington!"

"And I tell you Waddington is in that room!" insisted the
contractor. "I only saw the upper part of his face, but I'd
know his eyes anywhere. Waddington is spying on us!"




Chapter IV

The Bomb



Tom Swift and Mr. Titus withdrew a little way down the
corridor, around a bulkhead and out of sight of any one who
might look out from the stateroom whence had come the appeal
for help. But, at the same time, they could keep watch over
it.

"I tell you Waddington is in there!" insisted Mr. Titus,
hoarsely whispering.

"Well, perhaps he may be," admitted Tom. "But several
times I have seen the bearded man going in there, and it's
only a single stateroom, for it's so marked on the deck
plan."

"Waddington might be disguised with a false beard, Tom."

"Yes, he might. But did the man who just now looked out
have a beard?"

"I couldn't tell, as I saw only the upper part of his
face. But those were Waddington's shifty eyes, I'm
positive."

"If Waddington were on board don't you suppose you would
have seen him before this?"

"Not positively, no. If he and the bearded man are one and
the same that would account for it. But I haven't noticed
the bearded man once since he came aboard in such a hurry."

"Nor have I, now that I come to think of it," Tom
admitted. "However, there is an easy way to prove who is in
there."

"How?"

"We'll knock on the door and go in."

"Perhaps he won't let us."

"He'll think it's the steward he called for. Come, you
know Waddington better than I do. You knock and go in."

"I don't know Waddington very well," admitted the
contractor. "I have only seen him a few times, but I am
sure that was he. But what shall I do when he sees I'm not
the steward?"

"Tell him you have sent for one. I'll go with the message,
so it will be true enough. Even if you have only a momentary
glance at him in close quarters you ought to be able to tell
whether or not he has on a false beard, and whether or not
it is Waddington."

Mr. Titus considered for a moment, and then he said:

"Yes, I guess that is a good plan. You go for the steward,
Tom, and I'll see if I can get in that stateroom. But I'm
sure I'm not mistaken. I'll find Waddington in there,
perhaps in the person of the bearded man, disguised. Or else
they are using a single stateroom as a double one." And
while Tom went off down the pitching and rolling corridor to
find a steward, Mr. Titus, not without some apprehension,
advanced to knock on the door of the suspect.

"If it is Waddington he'll know me at once, of course,"
thought the contractor, "and there may be a row. Well, I
can't help it. The success of my brother and myself depends
on finishing that tunnel, and we can't have Waddington, and
those whose tool he is, interfering. Here goes!"

He tapped on the door, and a faint voice called:

"Come in!"

The contractor entered, and saw the bearded man lying in
his berth.

"Is there anything I can do for you?" asked the
contractor, bending close over the man. He wanted to see if
the beard were false. Somewhat to his surprise the
contractor saw that undoubtedly it was real.

"Steward, will you kindly get me--Oh, you're not the
steward!" the bearded man exclaimed.

"No, my friend and I heard you call," replied the
contractor. "He has gone for the steward, who will be here
soon. Can I do anything for you in the meanwhile?"

"No--not a thing!" was the rather snappish answer, and the
man turned his face away. "I beg your pardon," he went on,
as if conscious that he had acted rudely, "but I am
suffering very much. The steward knows just what I want. I
have had these attacks before. I am a poor sailor. If you
will send the steward to me I will be obliged to you. He can
fix me up."

"Very well," assented Mr. Titus. "But if there is anything
I can do --"

At that moment footsteps and voices were heard in the
corridor, and as the door of the bearded man's stateroom was
opened, Mr. Titus had a glimpse of Tom and one of the
stewards.

"Yes, I'll look after him," the steward said "He's been
this way before. Thank you, sir, for calling me."

"I guess the steward has been well tipped," thought Tom.
As Mr. Titus came out and the door was shut, the young
inventor asked in a whisper

"Well, was it be?"

The contractor shook his head.

"No," he answered. "I never was more surprised in my life.
I felt sure it was Waddington in there, but it wasn't. That
man's beard is real, and while he has a look like Waddington
about the eyes and upper part of his face, the man is a
stranger to me. That is I think so, but in spite of all
that, I have a queer feeling that I have met him before."

"Where?" Tom inquired.

"That I can't say," and the tunnel contractor shook his
head. "Whew! That was a bad one!" he exclaimed, as the
steamer pitched and tossed in an alarming manner.

"Yes, the storm seems to be getting worse instead of
better," agreed Tom. "I hope none of the cargo shifts and
comes banging up against my new explosive. If it does,
there'll be no more tunnel digging for any of us."

"Better not mention the fact of the explosives on board,"
suggested Mr. Titus.

"I won't," promised Tom. "The passengers are frightened
enough as it is. But I watched the powder being stored away.
I guess it is safe."

The storm raged for two days before it began to die away.
Meanwhile, nothing was seen, on deck or in the dining
cabins, of the bearded man.

Tom and Mr. Titus made some guarded inquiries of the
steward who had attended the sick man, and from him learned
that he was down on the passenger list as Senor Pinto, from
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. He was traveling in the interests
of a large firm of coffee importers of the United States,
and was going to Lima.

"And there's no trace of Waddington?" asked Tom of Mr.
Titus, as they were discussing matters in their stateroom
one day.

"Not a trace. He seems to have dropped out of sight, and
I'm glad of it."

"Perhaps Blakeson & Grinder have given up the fight
against you."

"I wish they had, though I don't look for any such good
luck. But I'm willing to fight them, now that we have an
even chance, thanks to your explosive."

The storm blew itself out. The Bellaconda "crossed the
line," and there was the usual horseplay among the sailors
when Father Neptune came aboard to hold court. Those who had
never before been below the equator were made to undergo
more or less of an initiation, being lathered and shaved,
and then pushed backward into a canvas tank of water on
deck.

While Tom enjoyed the voyage, with the possible exception
of the storm, he was anxious, and so was Mr. Titus, for the
time to come when they should get to the tunnel and try the
effect of the new explosive. Mr. Damon found an elderly
gentleman as fond of playing chess as was the eccentric man
himself, and his days were fully occupied with castles,
pawns, knights, kings, queens and so on. As for Koku he was
taken in charge by the sailors and found life forward very
agreeable.

Senor Pinto had recovered from his seasickness, the
steward told Tom and Mr. Titus, but still he kept to his
stateroom.

It was when the Bellaconda was within a day or two of
Callao that a wireless message was received for Mr. Titus.
It was from his brother. The message read:


"Have information from New York office that rivals are
after you. Look out for explosive."

"What does that mean?" asked Tom.

"Well, I presume it means our rival contractors know we
have a supply of your new powder on board, and they may try
to get it away from us."

"Why?" Tom demanded.

"To prevent our using it to complete the tunnel. In that
case they'll get the secret of it to use for themselves,
when the contract goes to them by default. Can we do
anything to protect the powder, Tom?"

"Well, I don't know that we'll need to while it's stowed
away in the cargo. They can't get at it any more than we
can, until the ship unloads. I guess it's safe enough. We'll
just have to keep our eyes open when it's taken out of the
hold, though."

Tom and Mr. Titus, both of whom were fond of fresh air and
exercise, had made it a practice to get up an hour before
breakfast and take a constitutional about the steamer deck.
They did this as usual the morning after the wireless
warning was received, and they were standing near the port
rail, talking about this, when they heard a thud on the deck
behind them. Both turned quickly, and saw a round black
object rolling toward them. From the object projected what
seemed to be a black cord, and the end of this cord was
glowing and smoking.

For a moment neither Tom nor Mr. Titus spoke. Then, as a
slow motion of the ship rolled the round black thing toward
Tom, he cried:

"It a bomb!"

He darted toward it, but Mr. Titus pulled him back.

"Run!" yelled the contractor.

Before either of them could do anything, a queer figure of
an elderly gentleman stepped partly from behind a deck-
house, and stooped over the smoking object.

"Look out!" yelled Mr. Titus, crouching low. "That's an
explosive bomb! Toss it overboard!"




Chapter X

Professor Bumper



Fairly fascinated by the spluttering fuse, neither Tom nor
Mr. Titus moved for a second, while the deadly fire crept on
through the black string-like affair, nearer and nearer to
the bomb itself.

Then, just as Tom, holding back his natural fear, was
about to thrust the thing overboard with his foot, hardly
realizing that it might be even more deadly to the ship in
the water than it was on the deck, the foot of the newcomer
was suddenly thrust out from behind the deck-house, and the
sizzling fuse was trodden upon.

It went out in a puff of smoke, but the owner of the foot
was not satisfied with that for a hand reached down, lifted
the bomb, the fuse of which still showed a smouldering spark
of fire, and calmly pulled out the "tail" of the explosive.
It was harmless then, for the fuse, with a trail of smoke
following, was tossed into the sea, and the little man came
out from behind the deck-house, holding the unexploded bomb.

For a moment neither Tom nor Mr. Titus could speak. They
felt an inexpressible sense of relief. Then Tom managed to
gasp out:

"You--you saved our lives!"

The little man who had stepped on the fuse, and had then
torn it from the bomb, looked at the object in his hand as
though it were the most natural thing in the world to pick
explosives up off the deck of passenger steamers, as he
remarked:

"Well, perhaps I did. Yes, I think it would have gone off
in another second or two. Rather curious; isn't it?"

"Curious? Curious!" asked and exclaimed Mr. Titus.

"Why, yes," went on the little man, in the most matter of
fact tone. "You see, most explosive bombs are round, made
that way so the force will be equal in all directions. But
this one, you notice, has a bulge, or protuberance, on one
side, so to speak. Very curious!

"It might have been made that way to prevent its rolling
overboard, or the bomb's walls might be weaker near that
bulge to make sure that the force of the explosion would be
in that direction. And the bulge was pointed toward you
gentlemen, if you noticed."

"I should say I did!" cried Mr. Titus. "My dear sir, you
have put us under a heavy debt to you! You saved our lives!
I--I am in no frame of mind to thank you now, but--"

He strode over to the little man, holding out his hand.

"No, no, I'd better keep it," went on the person who had
rendered the bomb ineffective. "You might drop it you know.
You are nervous--your hand shakes."

"I want to shake hands with you!" exclaimed Mr. Titus--
"to thank you!"

"Oh, that's it. I thought you wanted the bomb. Shake
hands? Certainly!"

And while this ceremony was being gone through with, Tom
had a moment to study the appearance of the man who had
saved their lives. He had seen the passenger once or twice
before, but had taken no special notice of him. Now he had
good reason to observe him.

Tom beheld a little, thin man, little in the sense of
being of the "bean pole" construction. His head was as bald
as a billiard ball, as the young inventor could notice when
the stranger took off his hat to bow formally in response to
the greeting of some ladies who passed, while Mr. Titus was
shaking hands with him.

The bald head was sunk down between two high shoulders,
and when the owner wished to observe anything closely, as he
was now observing the bomb, the head was thrust forward
somewhat as an eagle might do. And Tom noticed that the
eyes of the little man were as bright as those of an eagle.
Nothing seemed to escape them.

"I want to add my thanks to those of Mr. Titus for saving
our lives," said Tom, as he advanced. "We don't know what to
make of it all, but you certainly stopped that bomb from
going off."

"Yes, perhaps I did," admitted the little man coolly and
calmly, as though preventing bomb explosions was his daily
exercise before breakfast.

Tom and Mr. Titus introduced themselves by name.

"I am Professor Swyington Bumper," said the bomb-holder,
with a bow, removing his hat, and again disclosing his shiny
bald head. "I am very glad to have met you indeed."

"And we are more than glad," said Tom, fervently, as he
glanced at the explosive.

"Now that the danger is over," went on Mr. Titus, "suppose
we make an investigation, and find out how this bomb came to
be here."

"Just what I was about to suggest," remarked Professor
Bumper. "Bombs, such as this, do not sprout of themselves on
bare decks. And I take it this one is explosive."

"Let me look at it," suggested Tom. "I know something of
explosives."

It needed but a casual examination on the part of one who
had done considerable experimenting with explosives to
disclose the fact that it had every characteristic of a
dangerous bomb. Only the pulling out of the fuse had
rendered it harmless.

"If it had gone off," said Tom, "we would both have been
killed, or. at least, badly injured, Mr. Titus."

"I believe you, Tom. And we owe our lives to Professor
Bumper."

"I'm glad I could be of service, gentlemen," the scientist
remarked, in an easy tone. "Explosives are out of my line,
but I guessed it was rather dangerous to let this go off.
Have you any idea how it got here?"

"Not in the least," said Tom. "But some one must have
placed it here, or dropped it behind us."

"Would any one have an object in doing such a thing?" the
professor asked.

Tom and Mr. Titus looked at one another.

"Waddington!" murmured the contractor. "If he were on
board I should say he might have done it to get us out of
the way, though I would not go so far as to say he meant to
kill us. It may be this bomb has only a light charge in it,
and he only meant to cripple us."

"We'll find out about that," said Tom. "I'll open it."

"Better be careful," urged Mr. Titus.

"I will," the young inventor promised. "I beg your
pardon," he went on to Professor Bumper. "We have been
talking about something of which you know nothing. Briefly,
there is a certain man who is trying to interfere in some
work in which Mr. Titus and I are interested, and we think,
if he were on board, he might have placed this bomb where it
would injure us."

"Is he here?" asked the professor.

"No. And that is what makes it all the more strange," said
Mr. Titus. "At one time I thought he was here, but I was
mistaken."

Tom took the now harmless bomb to his stateroom, and
there, after taking the infernal machine apart, he
discovered that it was not as dangerous as he had at first
believed.

The bomb contained no missiles, and though it held a
quantity of explosive, it was of a slow burning kind. Had it
gone off it would have sent out a sheet of flame that would
have severely burned him and Mr. Titus, but unless
complications had set in death would not have resulted.

"They just wanted to disable us," said the contractor.
"That was their game. Tom, who did it?"

"I don't know. Did you ever see this Professor Bumper
before?"

"I never did."

"And did it strike you as curious that he should happen to
be so near at hand when the bomb fell behind us?"

"I hadn't thought of that," admitted the contractor. "Do
you mean that he might have dropped it himself?"

"Well, I wouldn't go so far as to say that," replied Tom,
slowly. "But I think it would be a good idea to find out
all we can of Professor Swyington Bumper."

"I agree with you, Tom. We'll investigate him."




Chapter XI

In the Andes



Professor Swyington Bumper seemed to live in a region all
by himself. Though he was on board the Bellaconda, he might
just as well have been in an airship, or riding along on the
back of a donkey, as far as his knowledge, or recognition,
of his surroundings went. He seemed to be thinking thoughts
far, far away, and he was never without a book--either a
bound volume or a note-book. In the former he buried his
hawk-like nose, and Tom, looking over his shoulder once, saw
that the book was printed in curious characters, which,
later, he learned were Sanskrit. If he had a note-book the
bald-headed professor was continually jotting down memoranda
in it.

"I can hardly think of him as a conspirator against us,"
said Tom to Mr. Titus.

"After you have been in the contracting business as long
as I have you'll distrust every one," was the answer.
"Waddington isn't on board, or I'd distrust him. That
Spaniard, Senor Pinto. seems to be out of consideration, and
there only remains the professor. We must watch him."

But Professor Bumper proved to be above suspicion.
Carefully guarded inquiries made of the captain, the purser
and other ships' officers, brought out the fact that he was
well known to all of them, having traveled on the line
before.

"He is making a search for something, but he won't say
what it is," the captain said. "At first we thought it was
gold or jewels, for he goes away off into the Andes
Mountains, where both gold and jewels have been found. He
never looks for treasure, though, for though some of his
party have made rather rich discoveries, he takes no
interest in them."

"What is he after then?" asked Mr. Titus.

"No one knows, and he won't tell. But whatever it is he
has never found it yet. Always, when he comes back,
unsuccessful, from a trip to the interior and goes back
North with us, he will remark that he has not the right
directions. That he must seek again.

"Back he comes next season, as full of hope as before, but
only to be disappointed. Each time he goes to a new place in
the mountains where he digs and delves, so members of the
parties he hires tell me, but with no success. He carries
with him something in a small iron box, and, whatever this
is, he consults it from time to time. It may be directions
for finding whatever he is after. But there seems to be
something wrong."

"This is quite a mystery," remarked Tom.

"It certainly is. But Professor Bumper is a fine man. I
have known him for years."

"This seems to dispose of the theory that he planted the
bomb, and that he is one of the plotters in the pay of
Blakeson & Grinder," said Mr. Titus, when he and Tom were
alone.

"Yes, I guess it does. But who can have done it?"

That was a question neither could answer.

Tom had a theory, which he did not disclose to Mr. Titus,
that, after all, the somewhat mysterious Senor Pinto might,
in some way, be mixed up in the bomb attempt. But a close
questioning of the steward on duty near the foreigner's
cabin at the time disclosed the fact that Pinto had been ill
in his berth all that day.

"Well, unless the bomb fell from some passing airship, I
don't see how it got on deck," said Tom with a shake of his
head. "And I'm sure no airship passed over us."

They had kept the matter secret, not telling even Mr.
Damon, for they feared the eccentric man would make a fuss
and alarm the whole vessel. So Mr. Damon, occasionally
blessing his necktie or his shoe laces, played chess with
his elderly gentleman friend and was perfectly happy.

That Professor Bumper not only had kept his promise about
not mentioning the bomb, but that he had forgotten all about
it, was evident a day or two after the happening. Tom and
Mr. Titus passed him on deck, and bowed cordially. The
professor returned the salutation, but looked at the two in
a puzzled sort of fashion.

"I beg your pardon," he remarked, "but your faces are
familiar, though I cannot recall your names. Haven't I seen
you before?"

"You have," said Tom, with a smile. "You saved our lives
from a bomb the other day."

"Oh, yes! So I did! So I did!" exclaimed Professor Bumper.
"I felt sure I had seen you before. Are you all right?"

"Yes. There haven't been any more bombs thrown at us," the
contractor said. "By the way, Professor Bumper, I understand
you are quite a traveler in the Andes, in the vicinity of
Lima."

"Yes, I have been there," admitted the bald-headed
scientist in guarded tones.

"Well, I am digging a tunnel in that vicinity," went on
Mr. Titus, "and if you ever get near Rimac, where the first
cutting is made, I wish you would come and see me--Tom too,
as he is associated with me."

"Rimac-Rimac," murmured the professor, looking sharply at
the contractor. "Digging a tunnel there? Why are you doing
that?" and he seemed to resent the idea.

"Why, the Peruvian government engaged me to do it to
connect the two railroad lines," was the answer. "Do you
know anything about the place?"

"Not so much as I hope to later on," was the unexpected
answer. "As it happens I am going to Rimac, and I may visit
your tunnel."

"I wish you would," returned Mr. Titus.

Later on, in their stateroom, the contractor remarked to
the young inventor:

"Sort of queer; isn't it?"

"What?" asked Tom. "His not remembering us?"

"No, though that was odd. But I suppose he is forgetful,
or pretends to be. I mean it's queer he is going to Rimac."

"What do you mean?" asked Tom.

"Well, I don't know exactly what I mean," went on the
tunnel contractor, "but our tunnel happens to start at
Rimac, which is a small town at the base of the mountains."

"Maybe the professor is a geologist," suggested Tom, "and
he may want to get some samples of that hard rock."

"Maybe," admitted Mr. Titus. "But I shall keep my eyes on
him all the same. I'm not going to have any strangers, who
happen to be around when bombs drop near us, get into my
tunnel."

"I think you're wrong to doubt Professor Bumper," Tom
said.

A few days after this, when Tom and Mr. Titus were
casually discussing the weather on deck and wondering how
much longer it would be before they reached Callao, Mr.
Damon, who had been playing numberless games of chess, came
up for a breath of air.

"Mr. Damon," called Tom, "come over here and meet a friend
of ours, Professor Bumper," and he was about to introduce
them, for the two, as far as Tom knew, had not yet met. But
no sooner had the professor and Mr. Damon caught sight of
each other than there was a look of mutual recognition.

"Bless my fountain pen!" cried the eccentric man. "If it
isn't my old friend!"

"Mr. Damon!" cried the professor. "I am delighted to see
you again. I did not know you were on board!"

"Nor I you. Bless my apple dumpling! Are you still after
those Peruvian antiquities?"

"I am, Mr. Damon. But I did not know you were acquainted
with Mr. Swift."

"Oh, Tom and I are old friends."

"Professor Bumper saved the lives of Mr. Titus and
myself," said Tom, "or at least he saved us from severe
injury by a bomb."

"Pray do not mention it, my friends," put in the
professor, casually. "It was nothing."

Of course he did not mean it just that way.

Then, naturally, Mr. Damon had to be told all about the
bomb for the first time, and his wonder was great. He
blessed everything he could think of.

"And to think it should be my old friend, Professor
Bumper, who saved you," said the odd man to Tom and Mr.
Titus later that day.

"Do you know him well?" asked Mr. Titus.

"Very well indeed. Our drug concern sells him many
chemicals for his experiments."

"Well, if you know him I guess he can't be what I thought
he was," the contractor went on. "I'm glad to know it. Why
is he going to the Andes?"

"Oh, for many years he has been interested in collecting
Peruvian antiquities. He has a certain theory in regard to
something or other about their ancient civilization, but
just what it is I have, at this moment, forgotten. Only I
know you can thoroughly trust Professor Bumper, for a finer
man never lived, though he is a bit absent-minded at times.
But you will like him very much."

Thus the last lingering doubt of Professor Bumper was
removed. Mr. Damon told something of how the scientist had
been honored by degrees from many colleges and was regarded
as an authority on Peruvian matters.

But who had placed the bomb on deck remained a mystery.

In due time Callao, the seaport of Lima, was reached and
our friends disembarked. Tom saw to the unloading of the
explosive, which was to be sent direct to the tunnel at
Rimac. Mr. Titus, Tom and Mr. Damon would remain in Lima a
day or so.

Professor Bumper disembarked with our friends, and stopped
at the same hotel. Tom kept a lookout for Senor Pinto, but
did not see him, and concluded that the Spaniard was ill,
and would be carried ashore on a stretcher, perhaps.

Lima, the principal city and capital of Peru, proved an
interesting place. It was about eight miles inland and was
built on an arid plain about five hundred feet above sea
level. Yet, though it was on what might be termed a desert,
the place, by means of irrigation, had been made into a
beauty spot.

Tom found the older part of the city was laid out with
mathematical regularity, each street crossing the other at
right angles. But in the new portions there was not this
adherence to straightness.

"Bless my transfer! Why, they have electric cars here!"
exclaimed Mr. Damon, catching sight of one on the line
between Callao and the capital.

"What did you think they'd have?" asked Mr. Titus,
"elephants or camels?"

"I--I didn't just know," was the answer.

"Oh, you'll find a deal of civilization here," the
contractor said. "Of course much of the population is negro
or Indian, but they are often rich and able to buy what they
want. There is a population of over 150,000, and there are
two steam railroads between Callao and Lima, while there is
one running into the interior for 130 miles, crossing the
Andes at an elevation of over three miles. It is a branch of
that road, together with a branch of the one running to
Ancon, that I am to connect with a tunnel."

Tom found some beautiful churches and cathedrals in Lima,
and spent some time visiting them. He and Mr. Damon also
visited, in the outskirts, the tobacco, cocoa and other
factories.

Three days after reaching the capital, Mr. Titus having
attended to some necessary business while Mr. Damon set on
foot matters connected with his affairs, it was decided to
strike inland to Rimac, and to try the effect of Tom Swift's
explosive on the tunnel.

The journey was to be made in part by rail, though the
last stages of it were over a rough mountain trail, with
llamas for beasts of burden, while our friends rode mules.

As Tom, Mr. Damon, Koku, and Mr. Titus were going to the
railroad station they saw Professor Bumper also leaving the
hotel.

"I believe our roads lie together for a time," said the
bald-headed scientist, "and, if you have no objections, I
will accompany you."

"Come, and welcome!" exclaimed Mr. Titus, all his
suspicions now gone.

"And it may be that you will be able to help me," the
scientist went on.

"Help you--how?" asked Tom.

"I will tell you when we reach the Andes," was the
mysterious answer.

It was a day later when they left the train at a small
station, and struck off into the foothills of the great
Andes Mountains, where the tunnel was started, that the
professor again mentioned his object.

"Friends," he said, as he gazed up at the towering cliffs
and crags, "I am searching for the lost city of Pelone,
located somewhere in these mountains. Will you help me to
find it?"




Chapter XII

The Tunnel



Mr. Damon, of the three who heard Professor Bumper make
this statement, showed the least sign of astonishment. It
would have been more correct to say that he showed none at
all. But Tom could not restrain himself.

"The lost city of Pelone!" he exclaimed.

"Is it here--in these mountains?" asked Mr. Titus.

"I have reason to hope that it is," went on the professor.
"The golden tablets are very vague, but I have tried many
locations, and now I am about to try here. I hope I shall
succeed. At any rate, I shall have agreeable company, which
has not always been my luck on my previous expeditions
seeking to find the lost city."

"Oh, Professor, are you still on that quest?" asked Mr.
Damon, in a matter-of-fact tone.

"Yes, Mr. Damon, I am. And now that I look about me, and
see the shape of these mountains, I feel that they conform
more to the description on the golden plates than any
location I have yet tried. Somehow I feel that I shall be
successful here."

"Did you know Professor Bumper was searching for a lost
city of the Andes?" asked Tom, of his eccentric friend.

"Why yes," answered Mr. Damon. "He has been searching for
years to locate it."

"Why didn't you tell us?" inquired Mr. Titus.

"Why, I never thought of it. Bless my memorandum book! it
never occurred to me. I did not think you would be
interested.  Tell them your story, Professor Bumper."

"I will soon. Just now I must see to my equipment. The
story will keep."

And though Tom and Mr. Titus were both anxious to hear
about the lost city, they, too, had much to do to get ready
for the trip into the interior.

The beginning of the tunnel under one of the smaller of
the ranges of the Andes lay two days journey from the end of
the railroad line. And the trip must be made on mules, with
llamas as beasts of burden, transporting the powder and
other supplies.

"We'll only need to take enough food with us for the two
days," said Mr. Titus. "We have a regular camp at the tunnel
mouth, and my brother has supplies of grub and other things
constantly coming in. We also have shacks to live in; but on
this trip we will use tents, as the weather at this season
is fine."

It was quite a little expedition that set off up the
mountain trail that afternoon, for they had arrived at the
end of the railroad line shortly before dinner, and had
eaten at a rather poor restaurant.

Professor Bumper had made up his own exploring party,
consisting of himself and three native Indian diggers with
their picks and shovels. They were to do whatever excavating
he decided was necessary to locate the hidden city.

Several mules and llamas, laden with the new explosive,
and burdened with camp equipment and food, and a few Indian
servants made up the cavalcade of Tom, the contractor, Mr.
Damon and Koku. The giant was almost as much a source of
wonder to the Peruvians as he had been on board the ship.
And he was a great help, too. For some of the Indians were
under-sized, and could not lift the heavy boxes and packages
to the backs of the beasts of burden.

But Koku, thrusting the little men aside, grasped with one
hand what two of them had tried in vain to lift, and set it
on the back of mule or llama.

The way was rough but they took their time to it, for the
trail was an ascending one. Above and beyond them towered
the great Andes, and Tom, gazing up into the sky, which in
places seemed almost pierced by the snow-covered peaks, saw
some small black specks moving about.

"Condors," said Mr. Titus, when his attention was called
to them. "Some of them are powerful birds, and they
sometimes pick up a sheep and make off with it, though
usually their food consists of carrion."

They went into camp before the sun went down, for it grew
dark soon after sunset, and they wanted to be prepared.
Supper was made ready by the Indian helpers, and when this
was over, and they sat about a camp fire, Tom said:

"Now, Professor Bumper, perhaps you'll explain about the
lost city."

"I wish I could explain about it," began the scientist.
"For years I have dreamed of finding it, but always I have
been disappointed. Now, perhaps, my luck may change."

"Do you think it may be near here?" asked Mr. Titus,
motioning toward the dark and frowning peaks all about them.

"It may be. The signs are most encouraging. In brief, the
story of the lost city of Pelone is this. Thousands of years
ago--in fact I do not know how many--there existed somewhere
in Peru an ancient city that was the centre of civilization
for this region. Older it was than the civilization of the
Mexicans--the Montezumas--older and more cultured.

"It is many years since I became interested in Peruvian
antiquities, and then I had no idea of the lost city. But
some of the antiques I picked up contained in their
inscriptions references to Pelone. At first I conceived this
to be a sort of god, a deity, or perhaps a powerful ruler.
But as I went on in my work of gathering ancient things from
Peru, I saw that the name Pelone referred to a city--a seat
of government, whence everything had its origin.

"Then I got on the track more closely. I examined ancient
documents. I found traces of an ancient language and
writings, different from anything else in the world. I
managed to construct an alphabet and to read some of the
documents. From them I learned that Pelone was a city
situated in some fertile valley of the Andes. It had existed
for thousands of years; it was the seat of learning and
culture. Much light would be thrown on the lives of the
people who lived in Peru before the present races inhabited
it, if I could but locate Pelone.

"Then I came across two golden tablets on which were
graven the information that Pelone had utterly vanished."

"How?" asked Tom.

"The golden tablets did not say. They simply stated the
fact that Pelone was lost, and one sentence read: 'He who
shall find it again shall be richly rewarded.' But it is not
for that that I seek. It is that I may give to the world the
treasures it must contain--the treasures of an ancient
civilization."

"And how do you think the city disappeared?" asked Mr.
Titus.

"I do not know. Whether it was destroyed by enemies,
whether it was buried under the ashes of a volcano, whether
it still exists, deserted and solitary in some valley amid
the mountain fastnesses of the Andes, I do not know. But I
am certain the city once existed, and it may exist yet,
though it may be in dust-covered ruins. That is what I seek
to find. See! Here are the tablets telling about it. I got
them from an old Peruvian grave."

He took from a box two thin sheets of yellow metal. They
were covered with curious marks, but Tom and the others
could make nothing of them. Only Professor Bumper was able
to decipher them.

"And that is the story of the lost city of Pelone --as
much as I know," he said. "For years I have sought it. If I
can find it I shall be famous, for I shall have added to
human knowledge."

"If the people of that city wrote on golden tablets, the
yellow metal must have been plentiful," commented Mr. Titus.
"You might strike a rich mine."

"I have no use for riches," said the professor.

"Well, I have," the contractor said, with a laugh. "That's
why I'm putting through this tunnel. And if my brother and I
don't do it we'll be in a bad way financially. We have
struck traces of gold, but not in paying quantities. I
should like to see this lost city of yours, Professor
Bumper. It may contain gold."

"You may have all the gold, if I am allowed to keep the
antiquities we find," stipulated the scientist. "Then you
will help me in my search?"

"As much as we can spare time for from the tunnel work,"
promised Mr. Titus. "I'll instruct my men to keep their eyes
open for any sign of ancient writings on the rocks we blast
out."

"Thank you," said the professor.

The night passed uneventfully enough, if one excepts the
mosquitoes which seemed to get through the nets, making life
miserable for all. And once Tom thought he heard gruntings
in the bush back of the tent, which noises might, he
imagined, have been caused by a bear. Toward morning he
heard an unearthly screech in the woods, and one of the
Indians, tending the fire, grunted out a word which meant
pumas.

"I can see it isn't going to be dull here," Tom mused, as
he turned over and tried to sleep.

Breakfast made them all feel better, and they set off on
the final stage of their journey.

"If all goes well we'll be at the tunnel entrance and camp
to-night," said the contractor. "This second half of the
trip is the roughest."

There was no need of saying that, for it was perfectly
evident. The trail was a most precarious one, and only a
mule or llama could have traveled it. The mules were most
sure-footed, but, as it was, one slipped, and came near
falling over a cliff.

But no real accident occurred, and finally, about an hour
before sunset, the cavalcade turned down the slope and
emerged on a level plain, which ended against the face of a
great cliff.

As Tom rode nearer the cliff he could make out around it
groups of rude buildings, covered with corrugated iron.
There was quite a settlement it seemed.

Then, in the face of the cliff there showed something
black--like a blot of ink, though more regular in outline.

"The mouth of the tunnel," said Mr. Titus to Tom. "Come on
over to the office and I'll introduce you to my brother. I
guess he will be glad we've arrived."

Tom dismounted from his mule, an example followed by the
others. Professor Bumper gazed up at the great mountains and
murmured:

"I wonder if the lost city of Pelone lies among them?"

Suddenly the silence of the evening was broken by a dull,
rumbling sound.

"Bless my court plaster!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's that?"

"A blast," answered Mr. Titus. "But I never knew them to
set off one so late before. I hope nothing is wrong!"

And, as he spoke, panic-stricken men began running out of
the mouth of the tunnel, while those outside hastened toward
them, shouting and calling.




Chapter XIII

Tom's Explosive



"Something has happened!" cried Mr. Titus as he ran
forward, followed by Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku. Professor
Bumper started with them, but on the way he saw a curious
bit of rock which he stopped to pick up and examine.

At the entrance of the tunnel, from which came rushing
dirt-stained and powder-blackened men, Mr. Titus was met by
a man who seemed to be in authority.

"Hello, Job!" he cried. "Glad you're back. We're in
trouble!"

"What's the matter?" was the question. "This is my brother
Walter," he said. "This is Tom Swift and Mr. Damon," thus
hurriedly he introduced them. "What happened, Walter?"

"Premature blast. Third one this week. Somebody is working
against us!"

"Never mind that now," cried Job Titus. "We must see to
the poor fellows who are hurt." "I guess there aren't many,"
his brother said. "They were on their way out when the
charge went off. Some more of Blakeson & Grinder's work,
I'll wager!"

They were rushing in to the smoke-filled tunnel now,
followed by Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku, who would follow his
young master anywhere. Tom saw that the tunnel was lighted
with incandescent lamps, suspended here and there from the
rocky roof or sides. The electric lights were supplied with
current from a dynamo run by a gasoline engine.

"Where is it, Serato? Where was the blast?" asked Walter
Titus, of a tall Indian, who seemed to be in some authority.

"Back at second turn," was the answer, in fairly good
English. "I go get beds."

"He means stretchers," translated Job. "That's our
Peruvian foreman. A good fellow, but easily scared."

They ran on into the tunnel, Tom and Mr. Damon noticing
that a small narrow-gage railroad was laid on the floor,
mules being the motive power to bring out the small dump
cars loaded with rock and dirt, excavated from the big hole.

"Mind the turn!" called Job Titus, who was ahead of Tom
and Mr. Damon. "It's rough here."

Tom found it so, for he slipped over some pieces of rock,
and would have fallen had not Koku held him up.

"Thanks," gasped Tom, as on he ran.

A little later he came to a place where a cluster of
electric lights gave better illumination, and he could see
it was there that the damage had been done.

A number of men were lying on the dirt and rock floor of
the tunnel, and some of them were bleeding. Others were
staggering about as though shocked or stunned.

"We must get the injured ones out of here!" cried Walter
Titus. "Where are the men with stretchers?"

"I sint that Spalapeen Serato for thim!" broke in a voice,
rich in Irish brogue. "But he's thot stupid he might think I
was after sindin' him fer wather!"

"No, Tim. Serato is after the stretchers all right," said
Walter. "We passed him on the way."

"That's Tim Sullivan, our Irish foreman, though he has
only a few of his own kind to boss," explained Job Titus in
a whisper.

Some of the workmen (all of whom save the few Irish
referred to were Peruvian Indians) had now recovered from
their shock, or fright, and began to help the Titus
brothers, Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku in looking after the
injured. Of these there were five, only two of whom were,
seemingly, seriously hurt.

"Me take them out," said Koku, and placing one gently over
his left shoulder, and the other over his right, out of the
tunnel he stalked with them, not waiting for the stretchers.

And it was well he did so, for one man was in need of an
immediate operation, which was performed at the rude
hospital the contractors maintained at the tunnel mouth. The
other man died as Koku was carrying him out, but the giant
had saved one life.

Serato, the Indian foreman, with some of his men now came
in, and the other injured were carried out on stretchers,
being attended to by the two doctors who formed part of the
tunnel force. Among a large body of men some were always
falling ill or getting hurt, and in that wild country a
doctor had to be kept near at hand.

When the excitement had died down, and it was found that
one death would be the total toll of the accident and that
the premature blast had done no damage to the tunnel, the
two Titus brothers began to consider matters.

Tom, Mr. Damon and the two contractors sat in the main
office and talked things over. Koku was eating supper,
though the others had finished. but, naturally, it took Koku
twice as long as any one else. Professor Bumper was busy
transcribing material in his note-book.

"Well, I'm glad you've come back, Job," said his brother.
"Things have been going at sixes and sevens here since you
went to get some new kind of blasting powder. By the way, I
hope you got it, for we are practically at a standstill."

"Oh, I got it all right--some of Tom Swift's best--
specially made for us. And, better still, I've brought Tom
back with me."

"So I see. Well, I'm glad he's here."

"Now what about this accident to-day?" went on Job.

"Well, as I said, it's the third this week. All of them
seemed to be premature blasts. But I've sent for some of the
fuses used. I'm going to get at the bottom of this. Here is
Sullivan with them now. Come in, Tim," he called, as the
Irishman knocked at the door.

"Are they the fuses used in the blasts?" Walter asked.

"They are, sor. An' they mostly burn five minutes, which
is plenty of time fer all th' min t' git out of danger. Only
this time th' fuse didn't seem to burn more than a minute,
an' I lit it meself."

"Let's see how long they burn now," suggested Job.

One of the longer fuses was lighted. It spluttered and
smoked, while the contractors timed it with their watches.

"Four minutes!" exclaimed Job. "That's queer, and they're
the regular ten minute length. I wonder what this means.

He took up another fuse, and examined it closely.

"Why!" he cried. "These aren't our fuses at all. They're
another make, and much more rapid in burning. No wonder
you've been having premature blasts. They go off in about
half the time they should."

"I can't understhand thot!" said Tim, thoughtfully. "I
keep all the fuses locked up, and only take thim out when I
need thim."

"Then somebody has been at your box, Tim, and they took
out our regular fuses and put in these quicker ones. It's a
game to make trouble for us among our men, and to damage the
tunnel."

"Bless my rubber boots!" cried Mr. Damon. "Who would do a
thing like that?"

"Our rivals, perhaps, though I do not like to accuse any
man on such small evidence," said Walter. "But we must adopt
new measures."

"And be very careful of the fuses," said Job.

"Thot's what I will!" declared Tim. "I'll put th' supply
in a new place. No wonder there was blasts before th' min
could git out th' way! Bad cess t' th' imps thot did this!"
and he banged his big fist down on the table.

Since the trouble began a guard had been always posted
around the tunnel entrance and surrounding buildings, and
this night the patrol was doubled. Tom, Mr. Damon and the
two Titus brothers sat up quite late, talking over plans
and ideas.

Professor Bumper went to bed early, as he said he was
going to set off before sunrise to make a search for the
lost city.

"I regard him as more or less of a visionary," said Mr.
Job Titus; "but he seems a harmless gentleman, and we'll do
all we can to help him."

"Surely," agreed his brother.

The night was not marked by any disturbance, and after
breakfast, Tom, under the guidance of the Titus brothers,
looked over the tunnel with a view to making his first
experiment with the new explosive.

The tunnel was being driven straight into the face of one
of the smaller ranges of the Andes Mountains. It was to be
four miles in length, and when it emerged on the other side
it would enable trains to make connections between the two
railroads, thus tapping a rich and fertile country.

On the site of the tunnel, which was two days' mule travel
east from Rimac, the Titus brothers had assembled their
heavy machinery. They had brought some of their own men,
including Tim Sullivan, with them, but the other labor was
that of Peruvian Indians, with a native foreman, Serato,
over them.

There were engines, boilers, dynamos, motors, diamond
drills, steam shovels and a miniature railway, with mules as
the motive power. A small village had sprung up at the
tunnel mouth, and there was a general store, besides many
buildings for the sleeping and eating quarters of the
laborers, as well as places where the white men could live.
Their quarters were some distance from the native section.

Powder, supplies, in fact everything save what game could
be obtained in the forest, or what grains or fruits were
brought in by natives living near by, had to be brought over
the rough trail. But Titus Brothers had a large experience
in engineering matters in wild and desolate countries, and
they knew how to be as comfortable as possible.

Mr. Damon learned that one of the districts whence his
company had been in the habit of getting quinine was distant
a day's journey over the mountain, so he decided to make the
trip, with a native guide, and see if he could get at the
bottom of the difficulty in forwarding shipments.

This was a few days after the arrival of our friends.
Meanwhile, Tom had been shown all through the tunnel by the
Titus Brothers and had had his first sight of the hard cliff
of rock which seemed to be a veritable stone wall in the way
of progress--or at least such progress as was satisfactory
to the contractors.

"Well, we'll try what some of my explosive will do," said
Tom, when he had finished the examination. "I don't claim it
will be as successful as the sample blast we set off at
Shopton, but we'll do our best."

Holes were drilled in the face of the rock, and several
charges of the new explosive tamped in. Wires were attached
to the fuses, which were of a new kind, and warning was
given to clear the tunnel. The wires ran out to the mouth of
the horizontal shaft and Tom, holding the switch in his hand
made ready to set off the blast.

"Are they all out?" he asked Tim Sullivan, who had
emerged, herding the Indian laborers before him. Tim
insisted on being the last man to seek safety when an
explosion was to take place.

"All ready, sor," answered the foreman.

"Here she goes!" cried Tom, as his fingers closed the
circuit.




Chapter XIV

Mysterious Disappearances



There was a dull, muffled report, a sort of rumbling that
seemed to extend away down under the earth and then echo
back again until the ground near the mouth of the tunnel,
where the party was standing, appeared to rock and heave.
There followed a cloud of yellow, heavy smoke which made one
choke and gasp, and Tom, seeing it, cried:

"Down! Down, everybody! There's a back draft, and if you
breathe any of that powder vapor you'll have a fearful
headache! Get down, until the smoke rises!"

The tunnel contractors and their men understood the
danger, for they had handled explosives before. It is a
well-known fact that the fumes of dynamite and other giant
powders will often produce severe headaches, and even
illness. Tom's explosive contained a certain percentage of
dynamite, and he knew its ill effects. Stretched prone, or
crouching on the ground, there was little danger, as the
fumes, being lighter than air, rose. The yellow haze soon
drifted away, and it was safe to rise.

"Well, I wonder how much rock your explosive tore loose
for us, Tom," observed Job Titus, as he looked at the thin,
yellowish cloud of smoke that was still lazily drifting from
the tunnel.

"Can't tell until we go in and take a look," replied the
young inventor. "It won't be safe to go in for a while yet,
though. That smoke will hang in there a long time. I didn't
think there'd be a back draft."

"There is, for we've often had the same trouble with our
shots," Walter Titus said. "I can't account for it unless
there is some opening in the shaft, connecting with the
outer air, which admits a wind that drives the smoke out of
the mouth, instead of forward into the blast hole. It's a
queer thing and we haven't been able to get at the bottom of
it."

"That's right," agreed his brother. "We've looked for some
opening, or natural shaft, but haven't been able to find it.
Sometimes we shoot off a charge and everything goes well,
the smoke disappears in a few minutes. Again it will all
blow out this way and we lose half a day waiting for the air
to clear. There's a hidden shaft, or natural chimney, I'm
sure, but we can't find it."

"Thot blast didn't make much racket," commented Tim
Sullivan. "I doubt thot much rock come down. An' thot's not
sayin' anythin' ag'in yer powder, lad," he went on to Tom.

"Oh, that's all right," Tom Swift replied, with a laugh.
"My explosive doesn't work by sound. It has lots of power,
but it doesn't produce much concussion."

"We've often made more noise with our blasts," confirmed
Job Titus, "but I can't say much for our results."

They were all anxious, Tom included, to hurry into the
tunnel to see how much rock had been loosened by the blast,
but it was not safe to venture in until the fumes had been
allowed to disperse. In about an hour, however, Tim
Sullivan, venturing part way in, sniffed the air and called:

"It's all right, byes! Air's clear. Now come on!"

They all hurried eagerly into the shaft, Mr. Damon
stumbling along at Tom's side, as anxious as the lad
himself. Before they reached the face of the cliff against
which the bore had been driven, and which was as a solid
wall of rock to further progress, they began to tread on
fragments of stone.

"Well, it blew some as far back as here," said Walter
Titus. "That's a good sign."

"I hope so," Tom remarked.

There were still some fumes noticeable in the tunnel, and
Mr. Damon complained of a slight feeling of illness, while
Koku, who kept at Tom's side, murmured that it made his eyes
smart. But the sensations soon passed.

They came to a stop as the face of the cliff loomed into
view in the glare of a searchlight which Job Titus switched
on. Then a murmur of wonder came from every one, save from
Tom Swift. He, modestly, kept silent.

"Bless my breakfast orange!" cried Mr. Damon. "What a big
hole!"

There was a great gash blown in the hard rock which had
acted as a bar to the further progress of the tunnel. A
great heap of rock, broken into small fragments, was on the
floor of the shaft, and there was a big hole filled with
debris which would have to be removed before the extent of
the blast could be seen.

"That's doing the work!" cried Job Titus.

"It beats any two blasts we ever set off," declared his
brother.

"Much fine!" muttered the Peruvian foreman, Serato.

"It's a lalapaloosa, lad!  Thot's what it is!"
enthusiastically exclaimed Tim Sullivan. "Now the black
beggars will have some rock to shovel! Come on there,
Serato, git yer lazy imps t' work cartin' this stuff away.
We've got a man on th' job now in this new powder of Tom
Swift's. Git busy!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian, and he called to his men who
were soon busy with picks and shovels, loading the loosened
rock and earth into the mule-hauled dump cars which took it
to the mouth of the tunnel, whence it was shunted off on
another small railroad to fill in a big gulch to save
bridging it.

Tom's first blast was very successful, and enough rock was
loosed to keep the laborers busy for a week. The contractors
were more than satisfied.

"At this rate we'll finish ahead of time, and earn a
premium," said Job to his brother.

"That's right. You didn't make any mistake in appealing to
Tom Swift. But I wonder if Blakeson & Grinder have given up
trying to get the job away from us?"

"I don't know. I'd never trust them. We must watch out for
Waddington. That bomb on the vessel had a funny look, even
if it was not meant to kill Tom or me. I won't relax any."

"No, I guess it wouldn't be safe."

But a week went by without any manifestation having been
made by the rival tunnel contractors. During that week more
of Tom's explosive arrived, and he busied himself getting
ready another blast which could be set off as soon as the
debris from the first should have been cleared away.

Meanwhile, Professor Bumper, with his Indian guides and
helpers, had made several trips into the mountain regions
about Rimac, but each time that he returned to the tunnel
camp to renew his supplies, he had only a story of failure
to recite.

"But I am positive that somewhere in this vicinity is the
lost Peruvian city of Pelone," he said. "Every indication
points to this as the region, and the more I study the
plates of gold, and read their message, the more I am
convinced that this is the place spoken of.

"But we have been over many mountains, and in more
valleys, without finding a trace of the ancient civilization
I feel sure once flourished here. There are no relics of a
lost race--not so much as an arrow or spear head. But,
somehow or other, I feel that I shall find the lost city.
And when I do I shall be famous!"

"Mr. Damon and I will help you all we can, Tom said. "As
soon as I get ready the next blast I'll have a little time
to myself, and we will go with you on a trip or two."

"I shall be very glad to have you," the bald-headed
scientist remarked.

Tom's second blast was even more successful than the
first, and enough of the hard rock was loosed and pulverized
to give the Indian laborers ten days' work in removing it
from the tunnel.

Then, as the services of the young inventor would not be
needed for a week or more, he decided to go on a little trip
with Professor Bumper.

"I'll come too," said Mr. Damon. "One of the sub-
contractors whose men are gathering the cinchona bark for
our firm has his headquarters in the region where you are
going, and I can go over there and see why he isn't up to
the mark."

Accordingly, preparations having been made to spend a week
in camp in the forests of the Andes, Tom and his party set
off one morning. Professor Bumper's Indian helpers would do
the hard work, and, of course, Koku, who went wherever Tom
went, would be on hand in case some feat of strength were
needed.

It was a blind search, this hunt for a lost city, and as
much luck might be expected going in one direction as in
another; so the party had no fixed point toward which to
travel. Only Mr. Damon stipulated that he wanted to reach a
certain village, and they planned to include that on their
route.

Tom Swift took his electric rifle with him, and with it he
was able to bring down a couple of deer which formed a
welcome addition to the camp fare.

The rifle was a source of great wonder to the Peruvians.
They were familiar with ordinary firearms, and some of them
possessed old-fashioned guns. But Tom's electric weapon,
which made not a sound, but killed with the swiftness of
light, was awesome to them. The interpreter accompanying
Professor Bumper confided privately to Tom that the other
Indians regarded the young inventor as a devil who could, if
he wished, slay by the mere winking of an eye.

Mr. Damon located the quinine-gathering force he was
anxious to see, and, through the interpreter, told the chief
that more bark must be brought in to keep up to the terms of
the contract.

But something seemed to be the matter. The Indian chief
was indifferent to the interpreted demands of Mr. Damon, and
that gentleman, though he blessed any number of animate and
inanimate objects, seemed to make no impression.

"No got men to gather bark, him say," translated the
interpreter.

"Hasn't got any men!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Why, look at
all the lazy beggars around the village."

This was true enough, for there were any number of able-
bodied Indians lolling in the shade.

"Him say him no got," repeated the translator, doggedly.

At that moment screams arose back of one the grass huts,
and a child ran out into the open, followed by a savage dog
which was snapping at the little one's bare legs.

"Bless my rat trap!" gasped Mr. Damon. "A mad dog!"

Shouts and cries arose from among the Indians. Women
screamed, and those who had children gathered them up in
their arms to run to shelter. The men threw all sorts of
missiles at the infuriated animal, but seemed afraid to
approach it to knock it over with a club, or to go to the
relief of the frightened child which was now only a few feet
ahead of the animal, running in a circle.

"Me git him!" cried Koku, jumping forward.

"No,  Wait!" exclaimed Tom Swift. "You can kill the dog
all right, Koku," he said, "but a scratch from his tooth
might be fatal. I'll fix him!"

Snatching his electric rifle from the Indian bearer who
carried it, Tom took quick aim. There was no flash, no
report and no puff of smoke, but the dog suddenly crumpled
up in a heap, and, with a dying yelp, rolled to one side.
The child was saved.

The little one, aware that something had happened, turned
and saw the stretched out form of its enemy. Then, sobbing
and crying, it ran toward its mother who had just heard the
news.

While the mothers gathered about the child, and while the
older boys and girls made a ring at a respectful distance
from the dog, there was activity noticed among the men of
the village. They began hurrying out along the forest paths.

"Where are they going?" asked Tom. "Is there some trouble?
Was that a sacred dog, and did I get in bad by killing it?"

The interpreter and the native chief conversed rapidly for
a moment and then the former, turning to Tom, said:

"Men go git cinchona bark now. Plenty get for him," and he
pointed to Mr. Damon. "They no like stay in village. T'ink
yo' got lightning in yo' pocket," and he pointed to the
electric rifle.

"Oh, I see!" laughed Tom. "They think I'm a sort of
wizard. Well, so I am. Tell them if they don't get lots of
quinine bark I'll have to stay here until all the mad dogs
are shot."

The interpreter translated, and when the chief had ceased
replying, Tom and the others were told:

"Plenty bark git. Plenty much. Yo' go away with yo'
lightning. All right now."

"Well, it's a good thing I keeled over that dog," Tom
said. "It was the best object lesson I could give them.~'

And from then on there was no more trouble in this
district about getting a supply of the medicinal bark.

A week passed and Professor Bumper was no nearer finding
the lost city than he had been at first. Reluctantly, he
returned to the tunnel camp to get more provisions.

"And then I'll start out again," he said.

"We'll go with you some other time," promised Tom. "But
now I expect I'll have to get another blast ready."

He found the debris brought down by the second one all
removed, and in a few days, preparations for exploding more
of the powder were under way.

Many holes had been drilled in the face of the cliff of
hard rock, and the charges tamped in. Electric wires
connected them, and they were run out to the tunnel mouth
where the switch was located.

This was done late one afternoon, and it was planned to
set off the blast at the close of the working day, to allow
all night for the fumes to be blown away by the current of
air in the tunnel.

"Get the men out, Tim," said Tom, when all was ready.

"All right, sor," was the answer, and the Irish foreman
went back toward the far end of the bore to tell the last
shift of laborers to come out so the blast could be set off.

But in a little while Tim came running back with a queer
look on his face.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom. "Why didn't you bring the
men with you?"

"Because, sor, they're not there!"

"Not in the tunnel? Why, they were working there a little
while ago, when I made the last connection!"

"I know they were, but they've disappeared."

"Disappeared?"

"Yis sir. There's no way out except at this end an' you
didn't see thim come out: did you?"

"Then they've disappeared! That's all there is to it! Bad
goin's on, thot's what it is, sor! Bad!" and Tim shook his
head mournfully.




Chapter XV

Frightened Indians



"There must be some mistake," said Tom, wondering if the
Irish foreman were given to joking. Yet he did not seem that
kind of man.

"Mistake? How can there be a mistake, sor? I wint in there
to tell th' black imps t' come out, but they're not there to
tell!"

"What's the trouble?" asked Job Titus, coming out of the
office near the tunnel mouth. "What's wrong, Tom?"

"Why, I sent Tim in to tell the men to come out, as I was
going to set off a blast, but he says the men aren't in
there. And I'm sure the last shift hasn't come out."

By this time Koku, Mr. Damon and Walter Titus had come up
to find out what the trouble was.

"The min have disappeared--that's all there is to it!" Tim
said.

"Perhaps they have missed their way--the lights may have
gone out, and they might have wandered into some abandoned
cutting," suggested Tom.

"There aren't any abandoned cuttin's," declared Tim. "It's
a straight bore, not a shaft of any kind. I've looked
everywhere, and th' min aren't there I tell ye!"

"Are the lights going?" asked Job. "You might have missed
them in the dark, Tim."

"The lights are going all right, Mr. Titus," said the
young man in charge of the electrical arrangements. "The
dynamo hasn't been stopped to-day."

"Come on, we'll have a look," proposed Walter Titus.
"There must be some mistake. Hold back the blast, Tom."

"All right," and the young inventor disconnected the
electrical detonating switch. "I'll come along and have a
look too," he added. "Don't let anybody meddle with the
wires, Jack," he said to the young Englishman who was in
charge of the dynamo.

Into the dimly-lit tunnel advanced the party of
investigators, with Tim Sullivan in the lead.

"Not a man could I find!" he said, murmuring to himself.
"Not a man! An' I mind th' time in Oireland whin th' little
people made vanish a whole village like this, jist bekase
ould Mike Maguire uprooted a bed of shamrocks."

"That's enough of your superstitions, Tim," warned Job
Titus. "If some of the other Indians hear you go on this way
they'll desert as they did once before."

"Did they do that?" asked Tom.

"Yes, we had trouble that way when we first began the
work. The place here was a howling wilderness then, and
there were lots of pumas around.

"A puma is a small sized lion, you know, not specially
dangerous unless cornered. Well, some of the men had their
families here with them, and a couple of children
disappeared. The story got started that there was a big
puma--the king of them all--carrying off the little ones,
and my brother and I awoke one morning to find every laborer
missing. They departed bag and baggage. Afraid of the
pumas."

"What did you do?"

"Well, we organized ourselves and our white helpers into a
hunting party and killed a lot of the beasts. There wasn't
any big one though."

"And what had become of the children?"

"They weren't eaten at all. They had wandered off into the
woods, and some natives found them and took care of them.
Eventually, they got back home. But it was a long while
before we could persuade the Indians to come back. Since
then we haven't had any trouble, and I don't want Tim, with
his superstitious fancies, to start any."

"But the min are gone!" insisted the Irish foreman, who
had listened to this story as he and the others walked
along.

"We'll find them," declared Mr. Titus.

But though they looked all along the big shaft, and though
the place was well lighted by extra lamps that were turned
on when the investigation started, no trace could be found
of the workmen, who had been left in the tunnel to finish
tamping the blast charges. The party reached the rocky
heading, in the face of which the powerful explosive had
been placed, and not an Indian was in sight. Nor, as far as
could be told, was there any side niche, or blind shaft, in
which they could be hiding.

Sometimes, when small blasts were set off, the men would
go behind a projecting shoulder of rock to wait until the
charge had been fired, but now none was in such a refuge.

"It is queer," admitted Walter Titus. "Where can the men
have gone?"

"That's what I want to know!" exclaimed Tim.

"Are you sure they didn't come out the mouth of the
tunnel?" asked Job Titus.

"Positive," asserted Tom. I was there all the while,
rigging up the fires."

"We'll call the roll, and check up," decided Job Titus.
"Get Serato to help."

The Indian foreman had not been in the tunnel with the
last shift of men, having left them to Tim Sullivan to get
out in time. The Indian foreman was called from his supper
in the shack where he had his headquarters, and the roll of
workmen was called.

Ten men were missing, and when this fact became known
there were uneasy looks among the others.

"Well," said Mr. Titus, after a pause. "The men are either
in the tunnel or out of it. If they're in we don't dare set
off the blast, and if they're out they'll show up, sooner or
later, for supper. I never knew any of 'em to miss a meal."

"If such a thing were possible," said Walter Titus, "I
would say that our rivals had a hand in this, and had
induced our men to bolt in order to cripple our force. But
we haven't seen any of Blakeson & Grinder's emissaries
about, and, if they were, how could they get the ten men out
of the tunnel without our Seeing them? It's impossible!"

"Well, what did happen then?" asked Tom.

"I'm inclined to think that the men came out and neither
you, nor any one else, saw them. They ran away for reasons
of their own. We'll take another look in the morning, and
then set off the blast."

And this was done. There being no trace of the men in the
tunnel it was deemed safe to explode the charges. This was
done, a great amount of rock being loosened.

The laborers hung back when the orders were given to go in
and clean up. There were mutterings among them.

"What's the matter?" asked Job Titus.

"Them afraid," answered Serato. "Them say devil in tunnel
eat um up! No go in."

"They won't go in, eh?" cried Tim Sullivan. "Well, they
will thot! If there's a divil inside there's a worse one
outside, an' thot's me! Git in there now, ye black-livered
spalapeens!" and catching up a big club the Irishman made a
rush for the hesitating laborers. With a howl they rushed
into the tunnel, and were soon loading rock into the dump
cars.




Chapter XVI

On the Watch



The mystery of the disappearance of the ten men--for
mystery it was--remained, and as no side opening or passage
could be found within the tunnel, it came to be the
generally accepted explanation that the laborers had come
out unobserved, and, for reasons of their own, had run away.

This habit on the part of the Peruvian workers was not
unusual. In fact, the Titus brothers had to maintain a sort
of permanent employment agency in Lima to replace the
deserters. But they were used to this. The difference was
that the Indians used to vanish from camp at night, and
invariably after pay-day.

"And that's the only reason I have a slight doubt that
they walked out of the tunnel," said Job Titus. "There was
money due em."

"They never came out of the front entrance of the tunnel,"
said Tom. "Of that I'm positive."

But there was no way of proving his assertion.

The third blast, while not as successful as the second in
the amount of rock loosened, was better than the first, and
made a big advance in the tunnel progress. Tom was beginning
to understand the nature of the mountain into which the big
shaft was being driven and he learned how better to apply
the force of his explosive.

That was the work which he had charge of--the placing of
the giant powder so it would do the most effective work.
Then, when the fumes from the blast had cleared away, in
would surge the workmen to clear away the debris.

Under the direction of Mr. Swift, left at Shopton to
oversee the manufacture of the explosive, new shipments came
on promptly to Lima, and were brought out to the tunnel on
the backs of mules, or in the case of small quantities, on
the llamas. But the latter brutes will not carry a heavy
load, lying down and refusing to get up if they are
overburdened, whereas one has yet to find a mule's limit.

After his first success in getting the natives to take a
more active interest in the gathering of the cinchona bark,
Mr. Damon found it rather easy, for the story of Tom's
electric rifle and how it had killed the mad dog spread
among the tribes, and Mr. Damon had but to announce that the
"lightning shooter," as Tom was called, was a friend of the
drug concern to bring about the desired results. Mr. Damon,
by paying a sort of bribe, disguised under the name "tax,"
secured the help of Peruvian officials so he had no trouble
on that score.

Koku was in his element. He liked a wild life and Peru was
much more like the country of giants where Tom had found
him, than any place the big man had since visited. Koku had
great strength and wanted to use it, and after a week or so
of idleness he persuaded Tom to let him go in the tunnel to
work.

The giant was made a sort of foreman under Tim, and the
two became great friends. The only trouble with Koku was
that he would do a thing himself instead of letting his men
do it, as, of course, all proper foremen should do. If the
giant saw two or three of the Indians trying to lift a big
rock into the little dump cars, and failing because of its
great weight, he would good-naturedly thrust them aside,
pick up the big stone in his mighty arms, and deposit it in
its place.

And once when an unusually big load had been put in a car,
and the mule attached found it impossible to pull it out to
the tunnel mouth, Koku unhitched the creature and, slipping
the harness around his waist, walked out, dragging the load
as easily as if pulling a child on a sled.

Professor Bumper kept on with his search for the lost city
of Pelone. Back and forth he wandered among the wild Andes
Mountains, now hopeful that he was on the right trail, and
again in despair. Tom and Mr. Damon went with him once more
for a week, and though they enjoyed the trip, for the
professor was a delightful companion, there were no results.
But the scientist would not give up.

Tom Swift was kept busy looking after the shipments of the
explosive, and arranging for the blasts. He had letters from
Ned Newton in which news of Shopton was given, and Mr. Swift
wrote occasionally. But the mails in the wilderness of the
Andes were few and far between.

Tom wrote a letter of explanation to Mr. Nestor, in
addition to the wireless he had sent regarding the box
labeled dynamite, but he got no answer. Nor were his
letters to Mary answered.

"I wonder what's wrong?" Tom mused. "It can't be that they
think I did that on purpose. And even if Mr. Nestor is angry
at me for something that wasn't my fault, Mary ought to
write."

But she did not, and Tom grew a bit despondent as the days
went by and no word came.

"I suppose they might be offended because I left Rad to do
up that package instead of attending to it myself," thought
Tom. "Well, I did make a mistake there, but I didn't mean
to. I never thought about Eradicate's not reading. I'll make
him go to night school as soon as I get back. But maybe I'll
never get another chance to send Mary anything. If I do,
I'll not let Rad deliver it--that's sure."

The feeling of alarm engendered among the Indians by the
disappearance of their ten fellow-workers seemed to have
disappeared. There were rumors that some of the mysterious
ten had been seen in distant villages and settlements, but
the Titus brothers could not confirm this.

"I don't think anything serious happened to them, anyhow,"
said Job Titus one day. "And I should hate to think our work
was responsible for harm to any one."

"Your rivals don't seem to be doing much to hamper you,"
observed Tom. "I guess Waddington gave up.

"I won't be too sure of that," said Mr. Titus.

"Why, what has happened?" Tom asked.

"Well, nothing down here--that is, directly--but we are
meeting with trouble on the financial end. The Peruvian
government is holding back payments."

"Why is that?"

"They claim we are not as far advanced as we ought to be."

"Aren't you?"

"Practically, yes. There was no set limit of work to be
done for the intermediate payments. We bonded ourselves to
have the tunnel done at a certain date.

"If we fail, we lose a large sum, and if we get it done
ahead of time we get a big premium. There was no question as
to completing a certain amount of footage before we received
certain payments. But Senor Belasdo, the government
representative, claims that we will not be done in time, and
therefore he is holding back money due us. I'm sure the
rival contractors have set him up to this, because he was
always decent to us before.

"Another matter, too, makes me suspicious. We have tried
to raise money in New York to tide us over while the
government is holding up our funds here. But our New York
office is meeting with difficulties. They report there is a
story current to the effect that we are going to fail, and
while that isn't so, you know how hard it is to borrow money
in the face of such rumors. We are doing all we can to
fight them, of course, and maybe we'll beat out our rivals
yet.

"But that isn't all. I'm sure some one is on the ground
here trying to make trouble among our workers. I never knew
so many men to leave, one after another. It's keeping the
employment agency in Lima busy supplying us with new
workers. And so many of them are unskilled. They aren't able
to do half the work of the old men, and poor Tim Sullivan is
in despair."

"You think some one here is causing dissensions and
desertions among your men?"

"I'm sure of it! I've tried to ferret out who it is, but
the spy, for such he must be, keeps his identity well
hidden."

Tom thought for a moment. Then he said:

"Mr. Titus, with your permission, I'll see if I can find
out about this for you."

"Find out what, Tom?"

"What is causing the men to leave. I don't believe it's
the scare about the ten missing ones."

"Nor do I. That's past and gone. But how are you going to
get at the bottom of it?"

"By keeping watch. I've got nothing to do now for the next
week. "We've just set off a big blast, and I've got the
powder for the following one all ready. The men will be busy
for some time getting out the broken rock. Now what I
propose to do is to go in the tunnel and work among them
until I can learn something.

"I can understand the language pretty well now, though I
can't speak much of it. I'll go in the tunnel every day and
find out what's going on."

"But you'll be known, and if one of our men, or one who we
suppose is one, turns out to be a spy, he'll be very
cautious while you're in there."

"He won't know me," Tom said. "This is how I'll work it.
I'll go off with Professor Bumper the next time he starts on
one of his weekly expeditions into the woods. But I won't go
far until I turn around and come back. I'll adopt some sort
of disguise, and I'll apply to you for work. You can tell
Tim to put me on. You might let him into the secret, but no
one else."

A few days later Tom was seen departing with Professor
Bumper into the interior, presumably to help look for the
lost city. Mr. Damon was away from camp on business
connected with the drug concern, and Koku, to his delight,
had been given charge of a stationary hoisting engine
outside the tunnel, so he would not come in contact with
Tom. It was not thought wise to take the giant into the
secret.

Then one day, shortly after Professor Bumper and Tom had
disappeared into the forest, a ragged and unkempt white man
applied at the tunnel camp for work. There was just the
barest wink as he accosted Mr. Titus, who winked in turn,
and then the new man was handed over to Tim Sullivan, as a
sort of helper.

And so Tom Swift began his watch.




Chapter XVII

The Condor



Left to himself, with only the rather silent gang of
Peruvian Indians as company, Tom Swift looked about him.
There was not much active work to be done, only to see that
the Indians filled the dump cars evenly full, so none of the
broken rock would spill over the side and litter the
tramway. Then, too, he had to keep the Indians up to the
mark working, for these men were no different from any
other, and they were just as inclined to "loaf on the job"
when the eye of the "boss" was turned away.

They did not talk much, murmuring among themselves now and
then, and little of what they said was intelligible to Tom.
But he knew enough of the language to give them orders, the
main one of which was:

"Hurry up!"

Now, having seen to it that the gang of which he was in
temporary charge was busily engaged, Tom had a chance to
look about him. The tunnel was not new to him. Much of his
time in the past month had been spent in its black depths,
illuminated, more or less, by the string of incandescent
lights.

"What I want to find," mused Tom, as he walked to and fro,
"is the place where those Indians disappeared. For I'm
positive they got away through some hole in this tunnel.
They never came out the main entrance."

Tom held to this view in spite of the fact that nearly
every one else believed the contrary--that the men had left
by the tunnel mouth, near which Tom happened to be alone at
the time.

Now, left to himself, with merely nominal duties, and so
disguised that none of the workmen would know him for the
trim young inventor who oversaw the preparing of the blast
charges, Tom Swift walked to and fro, looking for some
carefully hidden passage or shaft by means of which the men
had got away.

"For it must be well hidden to have escaped observation so
long," Tom decided.  "And it must be a natural shaft, or
hole, for we are boring into native rock, and it isn't
likely that these Indians ever tried to make a tunnel here.
There must be some natural fissure communicating with the
outside of the mountain, in a place where no one would see
the men coming out."

But though Tom believed this it was another matter to
demonstrate his belief. In the intervals of seeing that the
natives properly loaded the dump cars, and removed as much
of the debris as possible, Tom looked carefully along the
walls and roof of the tunnel thus far excavated.

There were cracks and fissures, it is true, but they were
all superficial ones, as Tom ascertained by poking a long
pole up into them.

"No getting out that way," he said, as he met with failure
after failure.

Once, while thus engaged, he saw Serato, the Indian
foreman looking narrowly at him, and Serato said something
in his own language which Tom could not understand. But
just then along came Tim Sullivan, who, grasping the
situation, exclaimed:

"Thot's all roight, now, Serri, me lad!" for thus he
contracted the Indian's name. "Thot's a new helper I have, a
broth of a bye, an' yez kin kape yer hands off him. He's
takin' orders from me!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian. "Wha for he fish
in tunnel roof?" for Tom's pole was one like those
the Indians used when, on off days, they emulated
Izaak Walton.

"Fishin' is it!" exclaimed Tim. "Begorra 'tis flyin' fish
he's after I'm thinkin'. Lave him alone though, Serri! I'm
his boss!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian again, as he moved off into the
farther darkness.

"Be careful, Tom," whispered the Irishman, when the native
had gone. "These black imps is mighty suspicious. Maybe thot
fellah had a hand in th' disappearances hisself."

"Maybe," admitted Tom. "He may get a percentage on all new
hands that are hired."

Tom kept on with his search, always hoping he might find
some hidden means of getting out of the tunnel. But as the
days went by, and he discovered nothing, he began to
despair.

"The queer thing about it," mused Tom, "is what has become
of the ten men. Even if they did find some secret means of
leaving, what has become of them? They couldn't completely
disappear, and they have families and relatives that would
make some sort of fuss if they were out of sight completely
this long. I wonder if any inquiries have been made about
them?"

When Tom came off duty he asked the Titus brothers whether
or not any of the relatives of the missing men had come to
seek news about them. None had.

"Then," said Tom, "you can depend on it the men are all
right, and their relatives know it. I wonder how it would do
to make inquiries at that end? Question some of the
relatives."

"Bless my hat hand!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who was at the
conference. "I never thought of that. I'll do it for you."

The odd man had gotten his quinine gathering business well
under way now, and he had some spare time. So, with an
interpreter who could be trusted, he went to the native
village whence had come nearly all of the ten missing men.
But though Mr. Damon found some of their relatives, the
latter, with shrugs of their shoulders, declared they had
seen nothing of the ones sought.

"And they didn't seem to worry much, either," reported Mr.
Damon.

"Then we can depend on it," remarked Tom, "that the men
are all right and their relatives know it. There's some
conspiracy here."

So it seemed. But who was at the bottom of it?

"I can't figure out where Blakeson & Grinder come in,"
said Job Titus. "They would have an object in crippling us,
but they seem to be working from the financial end, trying
to make us fail there. I haven't seen any of their sneaking
agents around here lately, and as for Waddington he seems to
have stayed up North."

Tom resumed his vigil in the tunnel, poking here and
there, but with little success. His week was about up, and
he would soon have to resume his character as powder expert,
for the debris was nearly all cleaned up, and another blast
would have to be fired shortly.

"Well, I'm stumped!" Tom admitted, the day when he was to
come on duty for the last time as a pretended foreman. "I've
hunted all over, and I can't find any secret passage."

It was warm in the tunnel, and Tom, having seen one train
of the dump cars loaded, sat down to rest on an elevated
ledge of rock, where he had made a sort of easy chair for
himself, with empty cement bags for cushions.

The heat, his weariness and the monotonous clank-clank of
a water pump near by, and the equally monotonous thump of
the lumps of rocks in the cars made Tom drowsy. Almost
before he knew it he was asleep.

What suddenly awakened him he could not tell. Perhaps it
was some influence on the brain cells, as when a vivid dream
causes us to start up from slumber, or it may have been a
voice. For certainly Tom heard a voice, he declared
afterward.

As he roused up he found himself staring at the rocky wall
of the tunnel. And yet the wall seemed to have an opening in
it and in the opening, as if it were in the frame of a
picture, appeared the face Tom had seen at his library the
day Job Titus called on him--the face of Waddington!

Tom sat up so quickly that he hit his head sharply on a
projecting rock spur, and, for the moment he "saw stars."
And with the appearance of these twinkling points of light
the face of Waddington seemed to fade away, as might a
vision in a dream.

"Bless my salt mackerel, as Mr. Damon would say!" cried
Tom. "What have I discovered?"

He rubbed his head where he had struck it, and then passed
his hand before his eyes, to make sure he was awake. But the
vision, if vision it was, had vanished, and he saw only the
bare rock wall. However, the echo of the voice remained in
his ears, and, looking down toward the tunnel floor Tom saw
Serato, the Indian foreman.

"Were you speaking to me?" asked Tom, for the man
understood and spoke English fairly well.

"No, sar. I not know you there!" and the fore man seemed
startled at seeing Tom. Clearly he was in a fright.

"You were speaking!" insisted Tom.

"No, sar!" The man shook his head.

"To some one up there!" went on the young inventor, waving
his hand toward the spot where he had seen the face in the
rock.

"Me speak to roof? No, sar!" Serato laughed.

Tom did not know what to believe.

"You hear me tell um lazy man to much hurry," the Indian
went on. "Me not know you sleep there, sar!"

"Oh, all right," Tom said, recollecting that he must keep
up his disguise. "Maybe I was dreaming."

"Yes, sar," and the foreman hurried on, with a backward
glance over his shoulder.

"Now was I dreaming or not?" thought Tom. "I'm going to
have a look at that place though, where I saw Waddington's
face. Or did I imagine it?"

He got a long pole and a powerful flash lamp, and when he
had a chance, unobserved, he poked around in the vicinity
where he had seen the face.

But there was only solid rock.

"It must have been a dream," Tom concluded. "I've been
thinking too much about this business. I'll have to give up.
I can't solve the mystery of the missing men."

The next day, much disappointed, he resumed his own
character as explosive expert, and prepared for another
blast. The net result of his watch was that he became
suspicious of Serato, and so informed the Titus Brothers.

"Oh, but you're mistaken," said Job  "We have had him for
years, on other contracts in Peru, and we trust him."

"Well, I don't," Tom said, but he had to let it go at
that.

Another blast was set off, but it was not very successful.

"The rock seems to be getting harder the farther in we
go," commented Walter Titus. "We're not up to where we ought
to be."

"I'll have to look into it," answered Tom. "I may have to
change the powder mixture. Guess I'll go up the mountain a
way, and see if there are any outcroppings of rock there
that would give me an idea of what lies underneath."

Accordingly, while the men in the tunnel were clearing
away the rock loosened by the blast, Tom, one day, taking
his electric rifle with him, went up the mountain under
which the big bore ran.

He located, by computation, the spot beneath which the end
of the tunnel then was, and began collecting samples of the
outcropping ledge. He wanted to analyze these pieces of
stone later. Koku was with him, and, giving the giant a bag
of stones to carry, Tom walked on rather idly.

It was a wild and desolate region in which he found
himself on the side of the mountain. Beyond him stretched
towering and snow-clad peaks, and high in the air were small
specks, which he knew to be condors, watching with their
eager eyes for their offal food.

As Tom and Koku made their way along the mountain trail
they came unexpectedly upon an Indian workman who was
gathering herbs and bark, an industry by which many of the
natives added to their scanty livelihood. The woman was
familiar with the appearance of the white men, and nodded in
friendly fashion.

Tom passed on, thinking of many things, when he was
suddenly startled by a scream from the woman. It was a
scream of such terror and agony that, for the moment, Tom
was stunned into inactivity. Then, as he turned, he saw a
great condor sweeping down out of the air, the wind fairly
whistling through the big, outstretched wings.

"Jove!" ejaculated Tom. "Can the bird be going to attack
the woman?"

But this was not the object of the condor. It was aiming
to strike, with its fierce talons, at a point some paces
distant from where the woman stood, and in the intervals
between her screams Tom heard her cry, in her native tongue:

"My baby! My baby! The beast-bird will carry off my baby!"

Then Tom understood. The woman herb-gatherer had brought
her infant with her on her quest, and had laid it down on a
bed of soft grass while she worked. And it was this infant,
wrapped as Tom afterward saw in a piece of deer-skin, at
which the condor was aiming.

"Master shoot!" cried Koku, pointing to the down-sweeping
bird.

"You bet I'll shoot!" cried Tom.

Throwing his electric rifle to his shoulder, Tom pressed
the switch trigger. The unseen but powerful force shot
straight at the condor.

The outstretched wings fell limp, the great body seemed to
shrivel up, and, with a crash, the bird fell into the
underbrush, breaking the twigs and branches with its weight.
The electric rifle, a full account of which was given in the
volume entitled "Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle," had done
its work well.

With a scream, in which was mingled a cry of thanks, the
woman threw himself on the sleeping child. The condor bad
fallen dead not three paces from it.

Tom Swift had shot just in time.




Chapter XVIII

The Indian Strike



Snatching up in her arms the now awakened child, the woman
gazed for a moment into its face, which she covered with
kisses. Then the herb-gatherer looked over to the dead, limp
body of the great condor, and from thence to Tom.

In another moment the woman had rushed forward, and knelt
at the feet of the young inventor. Holding the baby in one
arm, in her other hand the woman seized Toms and kissed it
fervently, at the same time pouring forth a torrent of
impassioned language, of which Tom could only make out a
word now and then. But he gathered that the woman was
thanking him for having saved the child.

"Oh, that's all right," Tom said, rather embarrassed by
the hand-kissing. "It was an easy shot."

An Indian came bursting through the bushes, evidently the
woman's husband by the manner in which she greeted him, and
Tom recognized the newcomer as one of the tunnel workers.
There was some quick conversation between the husband and
wife, in which the latter made all sorts of motions,
including in their scope Tom, his rifle, the dead condor and
the now smiling baby.

The man took off his hat and approached Tom, genuflecting
as he might have done in church.

"She say you save baby from condor," the man said in his
halting English. "She t'ank you--me, I t'ank you. Bird see
babe in deer skin--t'ink um dead animal. Maybe so bird carry
baby off, drop um on sharp stone, baby smile no more. You
have our lives, senor! We do anyt'ing we can for you."

"Thanks," said Tom, easily. "I'm glad I happened to be
around. I supposed condors only went for things dead, but I
reckon, as you say, it mistook the baby in the deer skin for
a dead animal. And I guess it might have carried your little
one off, or at least lifted it up, and then it might have
dropped it far enough to have killed it. It sure is a big
bird," and Tom strolled over to look at what he had bagged.

The condor of the Andes is the largest bird of prey in
existence. One in the Bronx Zoo, in New York, with his wings
spread out, measured a little short of ten feet from tip to
tip. Measure ten feet out on the ground and then imagine a
bird with that wing stretch.

This same condor in the park was made angry by a boy
throwing a feather boa up into the air outside the cage. The
condor raised himself from the ground, and hurled himself
against the heavy wire netting so that the whole, big cage
shook. And the breeze caused by the flapping wings blew off
the hats of several spectators. So powerful was the air
force from the condor's wings that it reminded one of the
current caused when standing behind the propellers of an
aeroplane in motion. The condor rarely attacks living
persons or animals, though it has been known to carry off
big sheep when driven by hunger.

It was one of these animals Tom Swift had shot with his
electric rifle.

"We do anyt'ing you want," the man gratefully repeated.

"Well, I've got about all I want," Tom said. "But if you
could tell me where those ten missing men are, and how they
got out of the tunnel, I'd be obliged to you."

The woman did not seem to comprehend Tom's talk, but the
man did. He started, and fear seemed to come over him.

"Me--I--I can not tell," he murmured.

"No, I don't suppose you can," said Tom, musingly. "Well,"
it doesn't matter, I guess I'll have to cross it off my
books. I'll never find out."

Again the Indian and his wife expressed their gratitude,
and Tom, after letting the little brown baby cling to his
finger, and patting its chubby cheek, went on his way with
Koku.

"Well, that was some excitement," mused Tom, who made
little of the shot itself, for the condor was such a mark
that he would have had to aim very badly indeed to miss it.
And perhaps only the electric rifle could have killed
quickly enough to prevent the baby's being injured in some
way by the big bird, even though it was dying.

"Master heap good shot!" exclaimed Koku, admiringly.

The tunnel work went on, though not so well as when Tom's
explosive was first used. The rock was indeed getting harder
and was not so easily shattered. Tom made tests of the
pieces he had obtained from the outcropping ledge on the
mountain where he had shot the condor, and decided to make a
change in the powder.

Shipments were regularly received from Shop ton, Mr. Swift
keeping things in progress there. Mr. Damon's business was
going on satisfactorily, and he lent what aid he could to
Tom. As for Professor Bumper he kept on with his search for
the lost city of Pelone, but with no success.

The scientist wanted Tom and Mr. Damon to go on another
trip with him, this time to a distant sierra, or fertile
valley, where it was reported a race of Indians lived,
different from others in that region.

"It may be that they are descendants from the Pelonians,"
suggested the professor. Tom was too busy to go, but Mr.
Damon went. The expedition had all sorts of trouble, losing
its way and getting into a swamp from which escape was not
easy. Then, too, the strange Indians proved hostile, and
the professor and his party could not get nearer than the
boundaries of the valley.

"But the difficulties and the hostile attitude of these
natives only makes me surer that I am on the right track,"
said Mr. Bumper. "I shall try again."

Tom was busy over a problem in explosives one day when he
saw Tim Sullivan hurrying into the office of the two
brothers. The Irishman seemed excited.

"I hope there hasn't been another premature blast," mused
Tom. "But if there had been I think I'd have heard it."

He hastened out to see Job and Walter Titus in excited
conversation with Tim.

"They didn't come out, an' thot's all there is to it," the
foreman was saying. "I sint thim in mesilf, and they worked
until it was time t' set off th' blast. I wint t' get th'
fuse, an' I was goin' t' send th' black imps out of danger,
whin--whist--they was gone whin I got back--fifteen of 'ern
this time!"

"Do you mean that fifteen more of our men have vanished as
the first ten did?" asked Job Titus.

"That's what I mean," asserted the Irishman.

"It can't be!" declared Walter.

"Look for yersilf!" returned Tim. "They're not in th'
tunnel!"

"And they didn't come out?"

"Ask th' time-keeper," and Tim motioned to a young
Englishman who, since the other disappearance, had been
stationed at the mouth of the tunnel to keep a record of who
went in and came out.

"No, sir! Nobody kime hout, sir!" the Englishman declared.
"Hi 'aven't been away frim 'ere, sir, not since hi wint on
duty, sir. An' no one kime out, no, sir!"

"We've got to stop this!" declared Job Titus.

"I should say so!" agreed his brother.

With Tom and Tim the Titus brothers went into the tunnel.
It was deserted, and not a trace of the men could be found.
Their tools were where they had been dropped, but of the men
not a sign.

"There must be some secret way out," declared Tom.

"Then we'll find it," asserted the brothers.

Work on the tunnel was stopped for a day, and, keeping out
all natives, the contractors, with Tom and such white men as
they had in their employ, went over every foot of roof,
sides and floor in the big shaft. But not a crack or
fissure, large enough to permit the passage of a child, much
less a man, could be found.

"Well, I give up!" cried Walter Titus in despair. "There
must be witchcraft at work here!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed his brother. "It's more likely the
craft of Blakeson & Grinder, with Waddington helping them."

"Well, if a human agency made these twenty-five men
disappear, prove it!" insisted Walter.

His brother did not know what to say.

"Well, go on with the work," was Job's final conclusion.
"We'll have one of the white men constantly in the tunnel
after this whenever a gang is working. We won't leave the
natives alone even long enough to go to get a fuse. They'll
be under constant supervision."

The tunnel was opened for work, but there were no workers.
The morning after the investigation, when the starting
whistle blew there was no line of Indians ready to file into
the big, black hole. The huts where they slept were
deserted. A strange silence brooded over the tunnel camp.

"Where are the men, Serato?" asked Tom of the Indian
foreman.

"Men um gone. No work any more. What you call a hit."

"You mean a strike?" asked Tom.

"Sure--strike--hit--all um same. No more work--um 'fraid!"




Chapter XIX

A Woman Tells



"Well, if this isn't the limit!" cried Torn Swift. "As if
we didn't have trouble enough without a strike on our
hands!"

"I should say yes!" chimed in Job Titus.

"Do you mean that the men won't work any more?" asked his
brother of the native foreman.

"Sure, no more work--um much 'fraid big devil in tunnel
carry um off an' eat um."

"Well, I don't know that I blame 'em for being a bit
frightened," commented Job. "It is a queer proceeding how
twenty-five men can disappear like that. Where have the men
gone, Serato?"

"Gone home. No more work. Go on hit--strike--same like
white men."

"They waited until pay day to go on strike," commented the
bookkeeper, a youth about Tom's age.

This was true. The men had been paid off the day before,
and usually on such occasions many of them remained away,
celebrating in the nearest village. But this time all had
left, and evidently did not intend to come back.

"We'll have to get a new gang," said Job. "And it's going
to delay us just at the wrong time. Well, there's no help
for it. Get busy, Serato. You and Tim go and see how many
men you can gather. Tell them we'll give them a sol a week
more if they do good work. (A sol is the standard silver
coin of Peru, and is worth in United States gold about fifty
cents.)

"Half a dollar a day more will look mighty big to them,"
went on the contractor. "Get the men, Serato, and we'll
raise your wages two sols a week."

The eyes of the Indian gleamed, and he went off, saying.

"Um try, but men much 'fraid.'

Whether Serato used his best arguments could not, of
course, be learned, but he came back at the close of the
day, unaccompanied by any workers, and he shook his head
despondently.

"Indians no come for one sol, mebby not for two," he said.
"I no can git."

"Then I'll try!" cried Job. "I'll get the workers. I'll
make our old ones come back, for they'll be the best."

Accompanied by his brother and Tom he went to the various
Indian villages, including the one whence most of the men
now on strike had come. The fifteen missing ones were not
found, though, as before, their relatives, and, in some
cases, their families, did not seem alarmed. But the men who
had gone on strike were found lolling about their cabins and
huts, smoking and taking their ease, and no amount of
persuasion could induce them to return.

Some of them said they had worked long enough and were
tired, needing a rest. Others declared they had money enough
and did not want more. Even two more sols a week would not
induce them to return.

And many were frankly afraid. They said so, declaring that
if they went back to the tunnel some unknown devil might
carry them off under the earth.

Job Titus and his brother, who could speak the language
fairly well, tried to argue against this. They declared the
tunnel was perfectly safe. But one native worker, who had
been the best in the gang, asked:

"Where um men go?"

The contractors could not answer.

"It's a trick," declared Walter. "Our rivals have induced
the men to go on strike in order to hamper us with the work
so they'll get the job."

But the closest inquiry failed to prove this statement. If
Blakeson & Grinder, or any of their agents, had a hand in
the strike they covered their operations well. Though
diligent inquiry was made, no trace of Waddington, or any
other tool, could be found.

Tom, who had some sort of suspicion of the bearded man on
the steamer, tried to find him, even taking a trip in to
Lima, but without avail.

The tunnel work was at a standstill, for there
was little use in setting off blasts if there were no men to
remove the resulting piles of debris. So, though Tom was
ready with some specially powerful explosive, he could not
use it.

Efforts were made to get laborers from another section of
the country, but without effect. The contractors heard of a
big force of Italians who had finished work on a railroad
about a hundred miles away, and they were offered places in
the tunnel. But they would not come.

"Well, we may as well give up," said Walter, despondently,
to his brother one day. "We'll never get the tunnel done on
time now."

"We still have a margin of safety," declared job. "If we
could get the men inside of a couple of weeks, and if Tom's
new powder rips out more rock, we'll finish in time."

"Yes, but there are too many ifs. We may as well admit
we've failed."

"I'll never do that!"

"What will you do?"

But Job did not know.

"If we could git a gang of min from the ould sod--th' kind
I used t' work wit in N'Yark," said Tim Sullivan, "I'd show
yez whot could be done! We'd make th' rock fly!"

But that efficient labor was out of the question now. The
tunnel camp was a deserted place.

"Come on, Koku, we'll go hunting," said Tom one day.
"There's no use hanging around here, and some venison
wouldn't go bad on the table."

"I'll come, too," said Mr. Damon. "I haven't anything to
do."

The Titus brothers had gone to a distant village, on the
forlorn hope of getting laborers, so Tom was left to his own
devices, and he decided to go hunting with his electric
rifle.

The taruco, or native deer, had been plentiful in the
vicinity of the tunnel until the presence of so many men and
the frequent blasts had driven them farther off, and it was
not until after a tramp of several miles that Tom saw one.
Then, after stalking it a little way, he managed to kill it
with the electric rifle.

Koku hoisted the animal to his big shoulders, and, as this
would provide meat enough for some time, Tom started back
for camp.

As he and Mr. Damon, with Koku in the rear, passed through
a little clearing, they saw, on the far side, a native hut.
And from it rushed a woman, who approached Tom, casting
herself on her knees, while she pressed his free hand to her
head.

"Bless my scarf pin!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "What does this
mean, Tom?"

"Oh, this is the mother of the child I saved from the
condor," said Tom. "Every time she sees me she thanks me all
over again. How is the baby?" he asked in the Indian tongue,
for he was a fair master of it by now.

"The baby is well. Will the mighty hunter permit himself
to enter my miserable hovel and partake of some milk and
cakes?"

"What do you say, Mr. Damon?" Tom asked. "She's clean and
neat, and she makes a drink of goat's milk that isn't bad.
She bakes some kind of meal cakes that are good, too. I'm
hungry."

"All right, Tom, I'll do as you say."

A little later they were partaking of a rude, but none the
less welcome, lunch in the woman's hut, while the baby whose
life Tom had saved cooed in the rough log cradle.

"Say, Masni," asked Tom, addressing the woman by name,
"don't you know where we can get some men to work the
tunnel?" Of course Tom spoke the Indian language, and he had
to adapt himself to the comprehension of Masni.

"Men no work tunnel?" she inquired.

"No, they've all skipped out--vamoosed. Afraid of some
spirit."

The woman looked around, as though in fear. Then she
approached Tom closely and whispered:

"No spirit in tunnel--bad man!"

"What!" cried Tom, almost jumping off his stool. "What do
you mean, Masni?"

"Me tell mighty hunter," she went on, lowering her voice
still more. "My man he no want to tell, he 'fraid, but I
tell. Mighty hunter save Vashni," and she looked toward the
baby. "Me help friends of mighty hunter. Bad man in tunnel--
no spirit!

"Men go. Spirit no take um--bad man take um."

"Where are they now?" asked Tom. "Jove, if I could find
them the secret would be solved!"

The woman looked fearfully around the hut and then
whispered:

"You come--me show!"

"Bless my toothbrush!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is going to
happen, Tom Swift?"

"I don't know," was the answer, "but something sure is in
the wind. I guess I shot better than I knew when I killed
that condor."




Chapter XX

Despair



Calling to a girl of about thirteen years to look after
her baby, Masni slipped along up a rough mountain trail,
motioning to Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku to follow. Or rather,
the woman gave the sign to Tom, ignoring the others, who,
naturally, would not be left behind. Masni seemed to have
eyes for no one but the young inventor, and the manner in
which she looked at him showed the deep gratitude she felt
toward him for having saved her baby from the great condor.

"Come," she said, in her strange Indian tongue, which Tom
could interpret well enough for himself now.

"But where are we going, Masni?" he asked. "This isn't the
way to the tunnel."

"Me know. Not go to tunnel now," was her answer. "Me show
you men."

"But which men do you mean, Masni?" inquired Tom. "The
lost men, or the bad ones, who are making trouble for us?
Which men do you mean?"

Masni only shook her head, and murmured: "Me show."

Probably Tom's attempt to talk her language was not
sufficiently clear to her.

"My man--he good man," she said, coming to a pause on the
rough trail after a climb which was not easy.

"Yes, I know he is," Tom said. "But he went on a strike
with the others, Masni. He no work. He go on a 'hit,' as
Serato calls it," and Tom laughed.

"My man he good man--but he 'fraid," said the wife. "He
want to tell you of bad mans, but he 'fraid. You save my
baby, I no 'fraid. I tell."

"Oh, I see," said Tom. "Your husband would have given away
the secret, only he's afraid of the bad men. He likes me,
too?"

"Sure!" Masni exclaimed. "He want tell, but 'fraid. He go
'way, I tell."

Tom was not quite sure what it all meant, but it seemed
that after his slaying of the condor both parents were so
filled with gratitude that they wanted to reveal some secret
about the tunnel, only Masni's husband was afraid. She,
however, had been braver.

"Something is going to happen," said Tom Swift. "I feel it
in my bones!"

"Bless my porous plaster!" cried Mr. Damon. "I hope it
isn't anything serious."

"We'll see," Tom went on.

They resumed their journey up the mountain trail. It wound
in and out in a region none of them had before visited.
Though it could not be far from the tunnel, it was almost a
strange country to Tom.

Suddenly Masni stopped in a narrow gorge where the walls
of rock rose high on either hand. She seemed looking for
something. Her sharp, black eyes scanned the cliff and then
with an exclamation of satisfaction she approached a certain
place. With a quick motion she pulled aside a mass of
tangled vines, and disclosed a path leading down through a
V shaped crack in the cliff.

"Mans down there," she said. "You go look."

For a moment Tom hesitated. Was this a trap? If he and his
friends entered this narrow and dark opening might not the
Indian woman roll down some rock back of them, cutting off
forever the way of escape?

Tom turned and looked at Masni. Then he was ashamed of his
suspicion, for the honest black face, smiling at him, showed
no trace of guile.

"You go--you see lost men," the woman urged.

"Come on!" cried Tom. "I believe we're on the track of the
mystery!"

He led the way, followed by Mr. Damon, while Koku came
next and then Masni. It could be no trap since she entered
it herself.

The path widened, but not much. There was only room for
one to walk at a time. The trail twisted and turned, and Tom
was wondering how far it led, when, from behind him, came
the cry of the woman:

"Watch now--no fall down."

Tom halted around a sharp turn, and stood transfixed at
the sight which met his gaze. He found himself looking out
through a crack in the face of a sheer stone cliff that went
straight down for a hundred feet or more to a green-carpeted
valley.

Tom was standing in a narrow cleft of rock--the same rock
through which they had made their way. And at the foot of
the cliff was a little encampment of Indians. There were a
dozen huts, and wandering about them, or sitting in the
shade, were a score or more of Indians.

"There men from tunnel," said Masni, and, as he looked,
wondering, Tom saw some of the workers he knew. One
especially, was a laborer who walked with a peculiar limp.

"The missing men!" gasped the young inventor.

"Bless my almanac!" cried Mr. Damon. "Where?"

"Here," answered Tom. "If you squeeze past me you can see
them."

Mr. Damon did so.

"How did they get here?" asked the odd man, as he looked
down in the little valley where the missing ones were
sequestered.

"That's what we've got to find out," Tom said. "At any
rate here they are, and they seem to be enjoying life while
we've been worrying as to what had become of them. How did
they get here, Masni?"

"Me show you. Come."

"Wait until I take another look," said Tom.

"Be careful they don't see you," cautioned Mr, Damon.

"They can't very well. The cleft is screened by bushes."

Tom looked down once more on the group of men who had so
mysteriously disappeared. The little valley stretched out
away from the face of the cliff, through which, by means of
the crack, or cleft in it, Tom and the others had come. Tom
looked down the wall of rock. It was as smooth as the side
of a building, and offered no means of getting down or up.
Doubtless there was an easier entrance to the valley on the
other side. It was like looking down into some vast hall
through an upper window or from a balcony.

"And those men have been in hiding, or been hidden here,
ever since they disappeared from the tunnel," said Mr.
Damon.

"It doesn't look as though they were detained by force,"
Tom remarked. "I think they are being paid to stay away. How
did they get here, Masni?"

"Me show you. Come!"

They went back along the trail that led through the split
in the rock, until they had come to the place where the
natural curtain of vines concealed the entrance. Tom took
particular notice of this place so he would know it again.

Then Masni led them over the mountain, and this time Tom
saw that they were approaching the tunnel. He recognized
some places where he had taken samples of rock from the
outcropping to test the strength of his explosive.

Reaching a certain wild and desolate place, Masni made a
signal of caution. She seemed to be listening intently.
Then, as if satisfied there was no danger, she parted some
bushes and glided in, motioning the others to follow.

"Now I wonder what's up," Tom mused.

He and the others were soon informed.

Masni stopped in front of a pile of brush. With a few
vigorous motions of her arms she swept it aside and revealed
a smooth slab of rock. In the centre was what seemed to be a
block of metal Masni placed her foot on this and pressed
heavily.

And those watching saw a strange thing.

The slab of rock tilted to one side, as if on a pivot,
revealing a square opening which seemed to lead through
solid stone. And at the far end of the opening Tom Swift saw
a glimmer of light

Stooping down, he looked through the hole thus strangely
opened and what he saw caused him to cry out in wonder.

"It's the tunnel!" he cried. "I can look right clown into
the tunnel. It's the incandescent lights I see. I can look
right at the ledge of rock where I kept watch that day, and
where I saw--where I saw the face of Waddington!" he cried.
"It wasn't a dream after all. This is a shaft connecting
with the tunnel. We didn't discover it because this rock
fits right in the opening in the roof. It must have been
there all the while, and some blast brought it to light. Is
this how the men got out, or were taken out of the tunnel,
Masni?" Tom asked.

"This how," said the Indian woman. "See, here rope!"

She pawed aside a mound of earth, and disclosed a rope
buried there, a rope knotted at intervals. This, let down
through the hole in the roof of the tunnel, provided a means
of escape, and in such a manner that the disappearance of
the men was most mysterious.

"I see how it is!" cried Tom. "Some one interested,
Waddington probably, who knew about this old secret shaft
going down into the earth, used it as soon as our blasting
was opened that far. They got the men out this way, and hid
them in the secret valley."

"But what for?" cried Mr. Damon.

"To cripple us! To cause the strike by making our other
workers afraid of some evil spirit! The men were taken away
secretly, and, doubtless, have been kept in idleness ever
since--paid to stay away so the mystery would be all the
deeper. Our rivals finding they couldn't stop us in any
other way have taken our laborers away from us."

"Bless my meal ticket! It does look like that!" cried Mr.
Damon.

"Of course that's the secret!" cried Tom. "Blakeson &
Grinder, or some of their tools--probably the bearded man or
Waddington--found out about this shaft which led down into
our tunnel. They induced the first ten men to quit, and when
Tim went to get the fuse the rope was let down, and the men
climbed up here, one after the other. Those Indians can
climb like cats. Once the ten were out the shaft was closed
with the rock, and the ten men taken off to the valley to be
secreted there.

"The same was done with the next fifteen, and, I suppose,
if the strike hadn't come, more of our workers would have
been induced to leave in this way. They're probably being
better paid than when earning their wages; and their
relatives must know where they are, and also be given a
bonus to keep still. No wonder they didn't make a fuss.

"And no wonder we couldn't find any opening in the tunnel
roof. This rock must fit in as smoothly as a secret drawer
in the kind of old desk where missing wills are found in
stories."

"You say you saw Waddington, or the bearded man?" asked
Mr. Damon.

"At the time," replied Tom, "I thought it was a dream. Now
I know it wasn't. He must have opened the shaft just as I
awakened from a doze. He saw me and closed it again. He may
have been getting ready then to take off more of our men, so
as to scare the others. Well, we've found out the trick."

"And what are you going to do next?" asked Mr. Dam~n.

"Get those missing men back. That will break the hoodoo,
and the others will come back to work. Then we'll get on the
trail of Wadding ton, or Blakeson & Grinder, and put a stop
to this business. We know their secret now."

"You mean to get the men out of the secret valley, Tom?"

"Yes. There must be some other way into it than down the
rock where we were. How about it, Masni?" and he inquired as
to the valley. The Indian woman gave Tom to understand that
there was another entrance.

"Well, close up this shaft now before some one sees us at
it--the bearded man, for example," Tom suggested. He took
another look down into the tunnel, which was now deserted on
account of the strike, and then Masni pressed on the
mechanism that worked the stone. She showed Tom how to do
it.

"Just a counter-balanced rock operating on the same
principle as does a window," Tom explained, after a brief
examination. "Probably some of the old Indian tribes made
this shaft for ceremonial purposes. They never dreamed we
would drive a tunnel along at the bottom of it. The shaft
probably opened into a cave, and one of our blasts made it
part of the tunnel. Well, this is part of the secret,
anyhow. Much obliged to you, Masni!"

The Indian woman had indeed revealed valuable information.
They covered the secret rock with brush, as it had been, hid
the rope and came away. But Tom knew how to find the place
again.

Events moved rapidly from then on. The Titus brothers were
more than astonished when Tom told them what he had learned.
Masni had told him how to get into the secret valley by a
round about, but easy trail, and thither Tom, the
contractors, Mr. Damon and some of the white tunnel workers
went the next day.

The sequestered men, taken completely by surprise, tried
to bolt when they saw that they were discovered, and then,
shamefacedly enough, admitted their part in the trick.

They would not, however, reveal who had helped them escape
from the tunnel. Threats and promises of rewards were alike
unavailing, but Tom and his employers knew well enough who
it was. The tunnel workers seemed rather tired of living in
comparative luxury and idleness, and agreed to come back to
their labors.

They packed up their few belongings, mostly cooking pots
and pans, and marched out of the valley to the village at
Rimac.

And so the strike was broken.

The reappearance of the missing men, in better health and
spirits than when they went away, acted like magic. The
other men, who had missed their wages, crowded back into the
shaft, and the sounds of picks and shovels were heard again
in the tunnel.

Whether the missing ones told the real story, or whether
they made up some tale to account for their absence, Tom and
his friends could not learn. Nor did the bearded man (if he
it were who had helped in the plot), nor any representative
of Blakeson & Grinder appear. The work on the tunnel was
resumed as if nothing had happened. But Tom arranged a
bright light so it would reflect on the spot in the roof
where the moving rock was, so that if the evil face of the
bearded man, or of Waddington, appeared there again, it
would quickly be seen. A search of the neighborhood, and
diligent inquiries, failed to disclose the presence of any
of the plotters.

And then, as if Fate was not making it hard enough for the
tunnel contractors, they encountered more trouble. It was
after Tom had set off a big blast that Tim Sullivan, after
inspecting what had happened, came out to ask.

"I soy, Mr. Swift, why didn't yez use more powder?"

"More powder!" cried Tom. "Why, this is the most I have
ever set off."

"Then somethin's wrong, sor. Fer there's only a little
rock down. Come an' see fer yersilf."

Tom hastened in. As the foreman had said, the effect of
the blast was small indeed. Only a little rock had been
shaled off. Tom picked up some of this and took it outside
for examination.

"Why, it's harder than the hardest flint we've found yet,"
he said. "The powder didn't make any impression on it at
all. I'll have to use terrific charges."

This was done, but with little better effect. The
explosive, powerful as it was, ate only a little way into
the rock. Blast after blast had the same poor effect.

"This won't do," said Job Titus, despairingly, one day.
"We aren't making any progress at all. There's a half mile
of this rock, according to my calculations, and at this rate
we'll be six months getting through it. By that time our
limit will be up, and we'll be forced to give up the
contract What can we do, Tom Swift?"




Chapter XXI

A New Explosive



The young inventor was idly handling some pieces of the
very hard rock that had cropped out in the tunnel cut Tom
had tested it, he had pulverized it (as well as he was
able), he had examined it under the microscope, and he had
taken great slabs of it and set off under it, or on top of
it, charges of explosive of various power to note the
effect. But the results had not been at all what he had
hoped for.

"What's to be done, Tom?" repeated the contractor.

"Well, Mr. Titus," was the answer, "the only thing I see
to do is to make a new explosive."

"Can you do it, Tom?"

The reply was characteristic.

"I can try."

And in the days that followed, Tom began work on a new
line. He had brought from Shopton with him much of the
needful apparatus, and he found he could obtain in Lima what
he lacked.

A message to his father brought the reply that the new
ingredients Tom needed would be shipped.

"The kind of explosive we need to rend that very hard
rock," the young inventor explained to the Titus brothers,
"is one that works slowly."

"I thought all explosions had to be as quick as a flash,"
said Walter.

"Well, in a sense, they do. Yet we have quick burning and
slow-burning powders, the same as we have fuses. A quick-
burning explosive is all right in soft rock, or in soil with
rock and earth mingled. But in rock that is harder than
flint if you use a quick explosive, only the outer surface
of the rock will be scaled off.

"If you take a hammer and bring it down with all your
force on a hard rock you may chip off a lot of little
pieces, or you may crack the rock, but you won't, under
ordinary circumstances, pulverize it as we want to do in the
tunnel.

"On the other hand, if you take a smaller hammer, and keep
tapping the rock with comparatively gentle blows, you will
set up a series of vibrations, that, in time, will cause the
hard rock to break up into any number of small pieces.

"Now that is the kind of explosive I want one that will
deal a succession of constant blows at the hard rock instead
of one great big blast."

"Can you make it, Tom?"

"Well, I don't know. I'll do the best I can."

From then on Tom was busy with his experiments.

Work on the tunnel did not cease while he was searching
for a new explosive. There was plenty of the old explosive
left and charges of this were set off as fast as holes could
be drilled to receive it. But comparatively little was
accomplished. Sometimes more rock would be loosed than at
others, and the native laborers, now seemingly perfectly
contented, would be kept busy. Again, when a heavy blast
would be set off hardly a dozen dump cars could be filled.

But the work must go on. Already the time limit was
getting perilously close, and the contractors did not doubt
that their rivals were only waiting for a chance to step in
and take their places.

Nothing more had been seen or heard of the bearded man,
Waddington, or Blakeson & Grinder. But that the rival firm
had not given up was evidenced by the efforts made in New
York to cripple, financially, the firm in which Tom was
interested. In fact, at one time the Titus brothers were so
tied up that they could not get money enough to pay their
men. But Tom cabled his father, who was quite wealthy, and
Mr. Swift loaned the contractors enough to proceed with
until they could dispose of some securities.

It might be mentioned that Tom was to get a large sum if
the tunnel were completed on time, so it was to his interest
and his father's, to bring this about if he could.

Tom kept on with his powder experiments. Mr. Damon helped
him, for that gentleman had succeeded in putting the affairs
of the wholesale drug business on a firm foundation, and
there was no more trouble about getting the supplies of
cinchona bark to market. The natives seemed to have taken
kindly to the eccentric man, or perhaps it was the
reputation of Tom Swift and his electric rifle that induced
them to work hard.

It must not be supposed that Professor Bumper was idle all
this while.

He came and went at odd times, accompanied by his little
retinue of Indians, a guide and a native cook. He would come
back to the tunnel camp, where he made his headquarters,
travel stained, worn and weary, with disappointment showing
on his face.

"No luck," he would report. "The hidden city of Pelone is
still lost."

Then he would retire to his tent, to pour over his note-
books, and make a new translation of the inscription on the
golden plates. In a day or so, refreshed and rested, he
would prepare for another start.

"I'll find it this time, surely!" he would exclaim, as he
marched off up the mountain trail. "I have heard of a new
valley, never before visited by a white man, in which there
are some old ruins. I'm sure they must be those of Pelone."

But in a week or so he would come back, worn out and
discouraged again.

"The ruins were only those of a native village," he would
say. "No trace of an ancient civilization there."

The professor took little or no interest in the tunnel,
though he expressed the hope that Tom and his friends would
be successful. But industrial pursuits had no charm for the
scientist. He only lived to find the hidden city which was
to make him famous.

He heard the story of the queer shaft leading down into
the bore under the mountain, and, for a time, hoped that
might be some clue to the lost Pelone. But, after an
examination, he decided it was but the shaft to some ancient
mine which had not panned out, and so had been abandoned
after having been fitted with a balanced rocky door, perhaps
for some heathen religious rite.

There seemed to be no further trouble among the Indian
tunnel workers. Those who had disappeared--who had,
seemingly, gone willingly up the knotted rope to hide
themselves in the valley--kept on with their work. If they
told their fellows why and where they had gone, the others
gave no sign. The evil spirits of the tunnel had been
exorcised, and there was now peace, save for the blasts that
were set off every so often.

Tom tried combination after combination, testing them
inside and outside the tunnel, always seeking for an
explosive that would give a slow, rending effect instead of
a quick blow, the power of which was soon lost. And at last
he announced:

"I think I have it!"

"Have you? Good!" cried Job Titus.

"Yes," Tom went on, "I've got a mixture here that seems to
give just the effect I want. I tried it on some small pieces
of rock, and now I want to test it on some large chunks.
Have you brought any down lately?"

"Yes, we have some big slabs in there."

Some large pieces of the hard rock, which had been brought
down in a recent blast, were taken outside the tunnel, and
in them one afternoon Tom placed, in holes drilled to
receive it, some of his new explosive. The rocks were set
some distance away from the tunnel camp, and Tom attached
the electric wires that were to detonate the charge

"Well, I guess we're ready," announced the young inventor,
as he looked about him.

The tunnel workers had been allowed to go for the day, and
in a log shack, where they would be safe from flying pieces
of rock, were Tom, Mr. Damon and the two Titus brothers.

Tom held the electric switch in his hand, and was about to
press it.

"This explosive works differently from any other," he
explained. "When the charge is fired there is not instantly
a detonation and a bursting. The powder burns slowly and
generates an immense amount of gas. It is this gas,
accumulating in the cracks and crevices of the rock, that I
hope will burst and disintegrate it. Of course, an explosion
eventually follows, as you will see. Here she goes!"

Tom pressed the switch and, as he did so, there was a cry
of alarm from Mr. Damon.

"Bless my safety match, Tom!" cried the old man. "Look!
Koku!"

For, as the charge was fired, the giant emerged from the
woods and calmly took a seat on the rock that was about to
be broken up into fragments by Tom's new explosive.




Chapter XXII

The Fight



"Get off there, Koku!"

"Stand up!"

"Run!"

"Get out uf the way! That's going up!"

Thus cried Tom and his friends to the big, good-natured,
but somewhat stupid, giant who had sat down in the dangerous
spot. Koku looked toward the hut, in front of which the
young inventor and the others stood, waving their hands to
him and shouting.

"Get up! Get up!" cried Tom, frantically. The powder is
going off, Koku!"

"Can't you stop it?" asked Job Titus.

"No!" answered Tom. "The electric current has already
ignited the charge. Only that it's slow-burning it would
have been fired long ago. Get up, Koku!"

But the giant did not seem to understand. He waved his
hand in friendly greeting to Tom and the others, who dared
not approach closer to warn him, for the explosion would
occur any second now.

Then Mr. Damon had an inspiration.

"Call him to come to you, Tom!" shouted the odd man. "He
always comes to you in a hurry, you know. Call him!"

Tom acted on the suggestion at once.

"Here, Koku!" he cried. "Come here, I want you! Kelos!"

This last was a word in the giant's own language, meaning
"hurry." And Koku knew when Tom used that word that there
was need of haste. So, though he had sat down, evidently to
take his ease after a long tramp through the woods, Koku
sprang up to obey his master's bidding.

And, as he did so, something happened. The first spark
from the fuse, ignited by the electric current, had reached
the slow-burning powder. There was a crackle of flame, and a
dull rumble. Koku sprang up from the big stone as though
shot. What he saw and heard must have alarmed him, for he
gave a mighty jump and started to run, at the same time
shouting:

"Me come, Master!"

"You'd better!" cried the young inventor.

Koku got away only just in time, for when he was half way
between the group of his friends and the big rock, the
utmost force of the explosion was felt. It was not so very
loud, but the power of it made the earth tremble.

The rock seemed to heave itself into the air, and when it
settled back it was seen to be broken up into many pieces.
Koku looked back over his shoulder and gave another
tremendous leap, which carried him out of the way of the
flying fragments, some of which rattled on the roof of the
log hut.

"There!" cried Tom. "I guess something happened that time!
The rock is broken up finer than any like it we tried to
shatter before. I think I've got the mixture just right!"

"Bless my handkerchief!" cried Mr. Damon. "Think of what
might have happened to Koku if he had been sitting there."

"Well," said Tom, "he might not have been killed, for he
would probably have been tossed well out of the way at the
first slow explosion, but afterward--well, he might have
been pretty well shaken up. He got away just in time."

The giant looked thoughtfully back toward the place of the
experimental blast.

"Master, him do that?" he asked.

"I did," Tom replied. "But I didn't think you'd walk out
of the woods, just at the wrong time, and sit down on that
rock."

"Um," murmured the giant. "Koku--he--he --Oh, by golly!"
he yelled. And then, as if realizing what he had escaped,
and being incapable of expressing it, the giant with a yell
ran into the tunnel and stayed there for some time.

The experiment was pronounced a great success and, now
that Tom had discovered the right kind of explosive to rend
the very hard rock, he proceeded to have it made in
sufficiently large quantities to be used in the tunnel.

"We'll have to hustle," said Job Titus. "We haven't much
of our contract time left, and I have reason to believe the
Peruvian government will not give any extension. It is to
their interest to have us fail, for they will profit by all
the work we have done, even if they have to pay our rivals a
higher price than we contracted for. It is our firm that
will pocket the loss."

"Well, we'll try not to have that happen," said Tom, with
a smile.

"If you're going to use bigger charges of this new
explosive, Tom, won't more rock be brought down?" asked
Walter Titus.

"That's what I hope."

"Then we'll need more laborers to bring it out of the
tunnel."

"Yes, we could use more I guess. The faster the blasted
rock is removed, the quicker I can put in new charges."

"I'll get more men," decided the contractor. "There won't
be any trouble now that the hoodoo of the missing workers is
solved. I'll tell Serato to scare up all his dusky brethren
he can find, and we'll offer a bonus for good work."

The Indian foreman readily agreed to get more laborers.

"And get some big ones, Serato," urged Job Titus. "Get
some fellows like Koku," for the giant did the work of three
men in the tunnel, not because he was obliged to, but
because his enormous strength must find an outlet in action.

"Um want mans like him?" asked the Indian, nodding toward
the giant. He and Koku were not on good terms, for once,
when Koku was a hurry, he had picked up the Indian (no mean
sized man himself) and had calmly set him to one side.
Serato never forgave that.

"Sure, get all the giants you can," Tom said. "But I guess
there aren't any in Peru."

Where Serato found his man, no one knew, and the foreman
would not tell; but a day or so later he appeared at the
tunnel camp with an Indian so large in size that he made the
others look like pygmies, and many of them were above the
average in height, too.

"Say, he's a whopper all right!" exclaimed Tom. "But he
isn't as big or as strong as Koku."

"He comes pretty near it," said Job Titus. "With a dozen
like him we'd finish the tunnel on time, thanks to your
explosive."

Lamos, the Indian giant, was not quite as large as Koku.
That is, he was not as tall, but he was broader of shoulder.
And as to the strength of the two, well, it was destined to
be tried out in a startling fashion.

In about a week Tom was ready with his first charges of
the new explosive. The extra Indians were on hand, including
Lamos, and great hopes of fast progress were held by the
contractors.

The charge was fired and a great mass of broken rock
brought down inside the tunnel.

"That's tearing it up!" cried Job Titus, when the fumes
had blown away, the secret shaft having been opened to
facilitate this. "A few more shots like that and we'll be
through the strata of hard rock."

The Indians, Koku and Lamos doing their share of the work,
were rushed in to clear away the debris, so another charge
might be fired as soon as possible. This would be in a day
or so. The contract time was getting uncomfortably close.

Blast after blast was set off, and good progress was made.
But instead of half a mile of the extra hard rock the
contractors found it would be nearer three quarters.

"It's going to be touch and go, whether or not we finish
on time," said Mr. Job Titus one afternoon, when a clearance
had been made and the men had filed out to give the drillers
a chance to make holes for a new blast.

Tom was about to make a remark when Tim Sullivan came
running out of the tunnel, his face showing fright and
wonder.

"What's up now, I wonder," said Mr. Titus. "More men
missing?"

"Quick! Come quick!" cried the Irishman. "Thim two giants
is fightin' in there, an' they'll tear th' tunnel apart if
we don't stop 'em. It's an awful fight! Awful!"




Chapter XXIII

A Great Blast



Hardly comprehending what the Irish foreman had said, Tom
Swift, the Titus brothers and Mr. Damon followed Tim
Sullivan back into the tunnel. They had not gone far before
they heard the murmur of many voices, and mingled with that
were roarings like those of wild beasts.

"That's thim!" cried Tim. "They're chawin' each other up!"

"Koku and that Indian giant fighting!" cried Tom. "What's
it all about?"

"Don't ask me!" shouted Tim. "They've been on bad terms
iver since they met." This was true enough, for one giant
was jealous of the other's power, and they were continually
trying feats of strength against one another. Probably this
had culminated in a fight, Tom concluded.

"And it will be some fight!" mused the young inventor.

Hurrying on, Tom and his companions came upon a strange
and not altogether pleasant sight. In an open place in the
tunnel, where the lights were brightest, and in front of the
rocky wall which offered a bar to further progress and which
was soon to be blasted away, struggled the two giants.

With their arms locked about one another, they swayed this
way and that--a struggle between two Titans. Of nearly the
same height and bigness, it was a wrestling match such as
had never been seen before. Had it been merely a friendly
test of strength it would have been good to look upon. But
it needed only a glance into the faces of either giant to
show that it was a struggle in deadly earnest.

Back and forth they reeled over the rocky floor of the
tunnel, bones and sinews cracking. One sought to throw the
other, and first, as Koku would gain a slight advantage, his
friends would call encouragement, while, when Lamos seemed
about to triumph, the Indians favoring him would let out a
yell of triumph.

For a few minutes Tom and his friends watched, fascinated.
Then they saw Koku slip, while Lamos bent him farther toward
the earth. The Indian giant raised his big fist, and Tom saw
in it a rock, which the big man was about to bring down on
Koku's head.

"Look out, Koku!" yelled Tom.

Tom's giant slid to one side only just in time, for the
blow descended, catching him on his muscular shoulder where
it only raised a bruise. And then Koku gathered himself for
a mighty effort. His face flamed with rage at the unfair
trick.

"Bless my bath sponge!" cried Mr. Damon. "This is awful!"

"They must stop!" said Job Titus. "We can't have them
fighting like this. It is bad for the others. If it were in
fun it would be all right, but they are in deadly earnest.
They must stop!"

"Koku, stop!" called Tom. "You must not fight any more!"

"No fight more!" gasped the giant, through his clenched
teeth. "This end fight!"

With a mighty effort he broke the hold of Lamos' arms.
Then stooping suddenly he seized his rival about the middle,
and with a tremendous heave, in which his muscles stood out
in great bunches while his very bones seemed to crack, Koku
raised Lamos high in the air. Up over his head he raised
that mass of muscle, bone and flesh, squirming and
wriggling, trying in vain to save itself.

Up and up Koku raised Lamos as the murmur of those
watching grew to a shout of amazement and terror. Never had
the like been seen in that land for generations. Up and up
one giant raised the other. Then calling out something in
his native tongue Koku hurled the other from him, clear
across the tunnel and up against the opposite rocky wall.
The murmuring died to frightened whispers as Lamos fell in a
shapeless heap on the floor.

"Ah!" breathed Koku, stretching himself, and extending his
brawny arms. "Fight all over, Master."

"Yes, so it seems, Koku," said Tom, solemnly, "but you
have killed him. Shame on you!" and he spoke bitterly.

Job Titus had hurried over to the fallen giant.

"He isn't dead," he called, "but I guess he won't wrestle
or fight any more. He's badly crippled."

"And him no more try to blow up tunnel, either," said Koku
in his hoarse voice. "Me fix: him! No more him take powder,
and make tunnel all bust."

"What do you mean, Koku?" asked Tom. "Is that why you
fought him? Did he try to wreck the tunnel?"

"So him done, Master. But Koku see--Koku stop. Then um
fight."

"Be jabbers an' I wouldn't wonder but what he was right!"
cried Tim Sullivan, excitedly. "I did see that beggar." and
he pointed to Lamos, who was slowly crawling away, "at the
chist where I kape th' powder, but I thought nothin' of it
at th' time. What did he try t' do, Koku?"

Then the giant explained in his own language, Tom Swift
translating, for Koku spoke English but indifferently well.

"Koku says," rendered Torn, "that he saw Lamos trying to
put a big charge of powder up in the place where the
balanced rock fits in the secret opening of the tunnel roof.
The charge was all ready to fire, and if the giant had set
it off he might have brought down the roof of the tunnel and
so choked it up that we'd have been months cleaning it out.
Koku saw him and stopped him, and then the fight began. We
only saw the end."

"Bless my shoe string!" gasped Mr. Damon. "And a terrible
end it was. Will Lamos die?"

"I don't think so," answered Job Titus. "But he will be a
cripple for life. Not only would he have wrecked the tunnel,
but he would have killed many of our men had he set off that
blast. Koku saved them, though it seems too bad he had to
fight to do it."

An investigation showed that Koku spoke truly. The charge,
all ready to set off, was found where he had knocked it from
the hand of Lamos. And so Tom's giant saved the day. Lamos
was sent back to his own village, a broken and humbled
giant. And to this day, in that part of Peru, the great
struggle between Koku and Lamos is spoken of with awe where
Indians gather about their council fires, and they tell
their children of the Titanic fight.

"It was part of the plot," said Job Titus when the usual
blast had been set off that day, with not very good results.
"This giant was sent to us by our rivals. They wanted him to
hamper our work, for they see we have a chance to finish on
time. I think that foreman, Serato, is in the plot. He
brought Lamos here. We'll fire him!"

This was done, though the Indian protested his innocence.
But he could not be trusted.

"We can't take any chances," said Job Titus. "Our time is
too nearly up. In fact I'm afraid we won't finish on time as
it is. There is too much of that hard rock to cut through."

"There's only one thing to do," said Tom, after an
investigation. "As you say, there is more of that hard rock
than we calculated on. To try to blast and take it out in
the ordinary way will be useless. We must try desperate
means."

"What is that?" asked Walter Titus.

"We must set off the biggest blast we can with safety.
We'll bore a lot of extra holes, and put in double charges
of the explosive. I'll add some ingredients to it that will
make it stronger. It's our last chance. Either we'll blow
the tunnel all to pieces, or we'll loosen enough rock to
make sufficient progress so we can finish on time. What do
you say? Shall we take the chance?"

The Titus brothers looked at one another. Failure stared
them in the face. Unless they completed the tunnel very soon
they would lose all the money they had sunk in it.

"Take the chance!" exclaimed Job. "It's sink or swim
anyhow. Set off the big blast, Tom."

"All right. We'll get ready for it as soon as we can."

That day preparations were made for setting off a great
charge of the powerful explosive. The work was hurried as
fast as was consistent with safety, but even then progress
was rather slow. Precautions had to be taken, and the guards
about the tunnel were doubled. For it was feared that some
word of what was about to be done would reach the rival
firm, who might try desperate means to prevent the
completion of the work.

There was plenty of the explosive on hand, for Mr. Swift
had sent Tom a large shipment. All this while no word had
come from Mr. Nestor, and Tom was beginning to think that
his prospective father-in-law was very angry with him. Nor
had Mary written.

Professor Bumper came and went as he pleased, but his
quest was regarded as hopeless now. Tom and his friends had
little time for the bald-headed scientist, for they were too
much interested in the success of the big blast.

"Well, we'll set her off to-morrow," Tom said one night,
after a hard day's work. "The rocky wall is honeycombed with
explosive. If all goes well we ought to bring down enough
rock to keep the gangs busy night and day."

Everything was in readiness. What would the morrow bring--
success or failure?




Chapter XXIV

The Hidden City



Gathered beyond the mouth of the tunnel, far enough away
so that the wind of the great blast would not bowl them over
like ten pins, stood Tom Swift and his friends. In his hand
Tom held the battery box, the setting of the switch in which
would complete the electrical circuit and set off the
hundreds of pounds of explosive buried deep in the hard
rock.

"Are all the men out?" asked the young inventor of Tim
Sullivan, who had charge of this important matter. Tim was
in sole charge as foreman now, having picked up enough of
the Indian language to get along without an interpreter.

"All out, sor," Tim responded. "Yez kin fire whin ready,
Mr. Swift."

It was a portentous moment. No wonder Tom Swift hesitated.
In a sense he and his friends, the contractors, had staked
their all on a single throw. If this blast failed it was not
likely that another would succeed, even if ther should be
time to prepare one.

The time limit had almost expired, and there was still a
half mile of hard rock between the last heading and the
farther end of the big tunnel. If the blast succeeded enough
rock might be brought down to enable the work to go on, by
using a night and day shift of men. Then, too, there was the
chance that the hard strata of rock would come to an end and
softer stone, or easily-dug dirt, be encountered.

"Well, we may as well have it over with," said Tom in a
low voice. Every one was very quiet--tensely quiet.

The young inventor looked up to see Professor Bumper
observing him.

"Why, Professor!" Tom exclaimed, "I thought you had gone
off to the mountains again, looking for the lost city."

"I am going, Tom, very soon. I thought I would stop and
see the effect of your big blast. This is my last trip. If I
do not find the hidden city of Pelone this time, I am going
to give up."

"Give up!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my fountain pen!"

"Oh, not altogether," went on the bald-headed scientist.
"I mean I will give up searching in this part of Peru, and
go elsewhere. But I will never completely give up the
search, for I am sure the hidden city exists somewhere under
these mountains," and he looked off toward the snow-covered
peaks of the Andes.

Tom looked at the battery box. He drew a long breath, and
said:

"Here she goes!"

There was a contraction of his hand as he pressed the
switch over, and then, for perhaps a half second, nothing
happened. Just for an instant Tom feared something had gone
wrong that the electric current had failed, or that the
wires had become disconnected--perhaps through some action
of the plotting rivals.

And then, gently at first, but with increasing intensity,
the solid ground on which they were all standing seemed to
rock and sway, to heave itself up, and then sink down.

"Bless my--" began Mr. Damon, but he got no further, for a
mighty gust of wind swept out of the tunnel, and blew off
his hat. That gust was but a gentle breeze, though, compared
to what followed. For there came such a rush of air that it
almost blew over those standing near the opening of the
great shaft driven under the mountain. There was a roar as
of Niagara, a howling as in the Cave of the Winds, and they
all bent to the blast.

Then followed a dull, rumbling roar, not as loud as might
have been expected, but awful in its intensity. Deep down
under the very foundations of the earth it seemed to rumble.

"Run! Run back!" cried Tom Swift. "There's a back-draft
and the powder gas is poisonous. Stoop down and run back!"

They understood what he meant. The vapor from the powder
was deadly if breathed in a confined space. Even in the open
it gave one a terrible headache. And Tom could see floating
out of the tunnel the first wisps of smoke from the fired
explosive. It was lighter than air, and would rise. Hence
the necessity, as in a smoke-filled room, of keeping low
down where the air is purer.

They all rushed back, stooping low. Mr. Damon stumbled and
fell, but Koku picked him up and, tucking him under one arm,
as he might have done a child, the giant followed Tom to a
place of safety.

"Well, Tom, it went off all right," said Mr. Job Titus, as
they stood among the shacks of the workmen and watched the
smoke pouring out of the tunnel mouth.

"Yes, it went off. But did it do the work? That's what
we've got to find out."

They waited impatiently for the deadly vapor to clear out
of the tunnel. It was more than an hour before they dared
venture in, and then it was with smarting eyes and puckered
throats. But the atmosphere was quickly clearing.

"Switch on the lights," cried Tom to Tim, for the
illuminating current had been cut off when the blast was
fired. "Let's see what we've brought down."

Following the eager young inventor came the contractors,
some of the white workers, Mr. Damon and Professor Bumper.
The little scientist said he would like to see the effect of
the big blast.

Along they stumbled over pieces of rock, large and small.

"Some force to it," observed Job Titus, as he observed
pieces of rock close to the mouth of the tunnel. "If it only
exerted the force the other way, against the face of the
rock, as well as back this way, we'll be all right."

"The greater force was in the opposite direction," Tom
said.

A big search-light had been got ready to flash on the
place where the blast had been set off. This was to enable
them to see how much rock had been torn away. And, as they
reached the place where the flint-like wall had been, they
saw a strange sight.

"Bless my strawberry short-cake!" gasped Mr. Damon. "What
a hole!"

"It is a bole," admitted Tom, in a low voice. "A bigger
hole than I dared hope for."

For a great cave, seemingly, had been blown in the face of
the rock wall that had hindered the progress of the tunnel.
A great black void confronted them.

"Shift the light over this way," called Tom to Walter
Titus, who was operating it. "I can't see anything."

The great beam of light flashed into the void, and then a
murmur of awe came from every throat.

For there, revealed in the powerful electrical rays, was
what seemed to be a long tunnel, high and wide, as smooth as
a paved street. And on either side of it were what appeared
to be buildings, some low, others taller. And, branching off
from the main tunnel, or street, were other passages, also
lined with buildings, some of which had crumbled to ruins.

"Bless my dictionary!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is it?"

Professor Bumper had crawled forward over the mass of
broken rock. He gazed as if fascinated at what the
searchlight showed, and then he cried:

"I have found it! I have found it! The hidden city of Pelone!"




Chapter XXV

Success



Had it not been for Tom Swift, the excited professor would
have rushed pellmell over the jagged pile of rocks into the
great cave which had been opened by the blast, the cave in
which the scientist declared was the lost city for which he
had been searching. But the young inventor grasped Mr.
Bumper by the arm.

"Better wait a bit," Tom suggested. "There may be powder
gas in there. Some of it must have blown forward."

"I don't care!" excitedly cried the professor. "That is
the hidden city! I'm sure of it! I have found it at last! I
must go in and examine it!"

"There'll be plenty of time," said Tom. "It isn't going to
run away. Wait until I make a test Tim, hand me one of those
torches."

Some torches of a very inflammable wood were used to test
for the presence of the deadly smoke-gas. Lighting one of
these, Tom tossed it into the big excavation.

It fell to the stone floor--to the stone street to be more
exact--and, flaring up brightly, further revealed the rows
of houses as they stood, silent and uninhabited.

"It's all right," Tom announced. "There's no danger so
long as the torch burns. You can go on, Professor."

And Professor Bumper rushed forward, scrambling over the
pile of blasted rock, followed by Tom and the others. Some
of the debris from the explosion had fallen into the cave,
and was scattered for some distance along the main street of
what had been Pelone. But beyond that the way was clear.

"Yes, it is Pelone," cried Professor Bumper. "See!"

He pointed to inscriptions in queer characters over the
doorway of some of the houses, but he alone could read them.

"I have found Pelone!" he kept repeating over and over
again.

And that is just what had happened. That last great blast
Tom Swift had set off had broken down the rock wall that hid
the lost city from view. There it was, buried deep down
under the mountain, where it had been covered from sight
ages ago by some mighty earthquake or landslide; perhaps
both. And the earth and rocks had fallen over the main
portion of the city of Pelone in such a way--in such an arch
formation--that the greater part of it was preserved from
the pressure of the mountain above it.

The outlying portions were crushed into dust by the awful
pressure of the mountain--millions of tons of stone--but
where the natural arch had formed the weight was kept off
the buildings, most of which were as perfect as they had
been before the cataclysm came.

The buildings were of stone block construction, mostly
only one story in height, though some were two. They were
simply made, somewhat after the fashion of the Aztecs. A
look into some of them by the light of portable electric
lamps showed that the houses were furnished with some degree
of taste and luxury. There were traces of an ancient
civilization.

But of the inhabitants, there was not a trace. either they
had fled before the earthquake or the volcanic eruption had
engulfed the city, or the countless centuries had turned
their very bones to dust.

"Oh, what a find! What a find!" murmured Professor Bumper.
"I shall be famous! And so will you, Tom Swift. For it was
your blast that revealed the lost city of Pelone. Your name
will be honored by every archeological society in the world,
and all will be eager to make you an honorary member."

"That's all very nice," said Tom, "but what pleases me
better is that this tunnel is a success."

"Success!" cried Mr. Damon. "I should call it a failure,
Tom Swift. Why, you've run smack into an old city, and
you'll have either to curve the tunnel to one side, or start
a new one."

"Nothing of the sort!" laughed Tom. "Don't you see? The
tunnel comes right up to the main street of Pelone. And the
street is as straight as a die, and just the width and
height of the tunnel. All we will have to do will be to keep
on blasting away, where the main street comes to an end, and
our tunnel will be finished.  The street is over half a mile
long, I should judge, and we'll save all that blasting. The
tunnel will be finished in time!"

"So it will!" cried Job Titus. "We can use the main street
of the hidden city as part of the tunnel."

"Use the street all you like," said Mr. Bumper. "but leave
the houses to me. They are a perfect mine of ancient lore
and information. At last I have found it! The ancient,
hidden city of Pelone, spoken of on the Peruvian tablets, of
gold."

The story of the discoveries the scientist made in Pelone
is an enthralling one. But this is a story of Tom Swift and
his big tunnel, and no place for telling of the
archeological discoveries.

Suffice it to say that Professor Bumper, though be found
no gold, for which the contractors hoped, made many curious
finds in the ancient houses. He came upon traces of a
strange civilization, though he could find no record of what
had caused the burial of Pelone beneath the mountains. He
wrote many books about his discovery, giving Tom Swift due
credit for uncovering the place with the mighty blast. Other
scientists came in flocks, and for a time Pelone was almost
as busy a place as it had been originally.

Even when the tunnel was completed and trains ran through
it, the scientists kept on with their work of classifying
what they found. An underground station was built on the
main street of the old city, and visitors often wandered
through the ancient houses, wherein was the bone-dust of the
dead and gone people.

But to go back to the story of Tom Swift. Tom's surmise
was right. He and the contractors were able to use the main
street of Pelone as part of their tunnel, and a good half
mile of blasting through solid rock was saved. The flint
came to an end at the extremity of Pelone, and the last part
of the tunnel had only to be dug through sand-stone and soft
dirt, an easy undertaking.

So the big bore was finished on time--ahead of time in
fact, and Titus Brothers received from Senor Belasdo, the
Peruvian representative, a large bonus of money, in which
Tom Swift shared.

"So our rivals didn't balk us after all," said Walter
Titus, "though they tried mighty hard."

The big tunnel was finished--at least Tom Swift's work on
it. All that remained to do was to clear away the debris and
lay the connecting rails. Tom and Mr. Damon prepared to go
back home. The latter's work was done. As for Professor
Bumper, nothing could take him from Pelone. He said he was
going to live there, and, practically, he did.

Tom, Koku and Mr. Damon returned to Lima, thence to go to
Callao to take the steamer for San Francisco. One day the
manager of the hotel spoke to them.

"You are Americans, are you not?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Tom. "Why?"

"Because there is another American here. He is friendless
and alone, and he is dying. He has no friends, he says.
Perhaps--"

"Of course we'll do what we can for him," said Tom,
impulsively. "Where is he?"

With Mr. Damon he entered the room where the dying man
lay. He had caught a fever, the hotel manager said, and
could not recover. Tom, catching sight of the sufferer,
cried:

"The bearded man! Waddington!"

He had recognized the mysterious person who had been on
the Bellaconda, and the man whose face had stared at him
through the secret shaft of the tunnel.

"Yes, the 'bearded man' now," said the sufferer in a
hoarse voice, "and some one else too. You are right. I am
Waddington!"

And so it proved. He had grown a beard to disguise himself
so he might better follow Tom Swift and Mr. Titus. And he
had followed them, seeking to prevent the completion of the
tunnel. But he had not been successful.

Waddington it was who had thrown the bomb, though he
declared he only hoped to disable Tom and Mr. Titus, and not
to injure them. He was fighting for delay. And it was
Waddington, working in conjunction with the rascally foreman
Serato, who had induced the tunnel workers to desert so
mysteriously, hoping to scare the other Indians away. He
nearly succeeded too, had it not been for the gratitude of
the woman whose baby Tom had saved from the condor.

Waddington had been an actor before he became involved
with the rival contractors. He was smooth shaven when first
he went to Shopton, to spy on Mr. Titus, whose movements he
had been commanded to follow by Blakeson & Grinder. Then he
disappeared after Mr. Titus chased him, only to reappear, in
disguise, on board the Bellaconda, as Senor Pinto.

Waddington, meanwhile, had grown a beard and this, with
his knowledge of theatrical makeup, enabled him to deceive
even Mr. Titus. Of course it was comparatively easy to
deceive Tom, who had not known him. Waddington had really
been ill when he called for help on the ship, and he had not
noticed that it was Tom and Mr. Titus who came into his
stateroom to his aid. When he did recognize them, he relied
on his disguise to screen him from recognition, and he was
successful. He had only pretended to be ill, though, the
time he slipped out and threw the bomb.

Reaching Peru he at once began his plotting. Serato told
him about the secret shaft leading into the tunnel, and with
the knotted rope, and with the aid of the faithless foreman,
the men were got out of the tunnel and paid to hide away.
Waddington was planning further disappearances when Tom saw
him, but thought it a dream.

Masni, the Indian woman, out herb-hunting one day, had
seen Waddington, 'the bearded man' as he then was--working
the secret stone. Hidden, she observed him and told her
husband, who was afraid to reveal what he knew. But when Tom
saved the baby the woman rewarded him in the only way
possible. And it was Serato, who, at Waddington's
suggestion, caused the "hit" among the men by working on
their superstitious fears.

Waddington, knowing that he was dying, confessed
everything, and begged forgiveness from Tom and his friends,
which was granted, in as much as no real harm had been done.
Waddington was but a tool in the hands of the rival
contractors, who deserted him in his hour of need. His last
hours, however, were made as comfortable as possible by the
generosity of Tom and Mr. Damon.

No effort was made to bring Blakeson & Grinder to justice,
as there was no evidence against them after Waddington died.
And, as the tunnel was finished, the Titus brothers had no
further cause for worry.

"But if it had not been for Tom's big blast, and the
discovery of the hidden city of Pelone just in the right
place, we might be digging at that tunnel yet," said Job
Titus.

The day before the steamer was to sail, Tom Swift received
a cable message. Its receipt seemed to fill him with
delight, so that Mr. Damon asked:

"Is it from your father, Tom?"

"No it's from Mary Nestor. She says her father has
forgiven me. They have been away, and Mary has been ill,
which accounts for no letters up to now. But everything is
all right now, and they feel that the dynamite trick wasn't
my fault. But, all the same, I'm going to teach Eradicate to
read," concluded Tom.

"I think it would be a good idea," agreed Mr. Damon.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku, bidding farewell to the friends
they had made in Peru, went. aboard the steamer, Job Titus
and his brother coming to see them off.

"Give us an option on all that explosive you make, Tom Swift!"
begged Walter Titus. "We were so successful with this tunnel,
thanks to you, that the government is going to have us dig another.
Will you come down and help?"

"Maybe," said Tom, with a smile. "But I'm going home first,"
and once more he read the message from Mary Nestor.

And as Tom, on the deck of the steamer, waved his hands to
Professor Bumper and his other friends whom he was leaving
in Peru, we also, will say farewell.





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of Tom Swift And His Big Tunnel

