*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Col. Daniel Boone*
From The Discovery and Settlement of Kentucke [Kentucky]
#1 in our series by John Filson


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boone

by John Filson

May, 1997  [Etext #909


*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Col. Daniel Boone*
*****This file should be named 1boon10.txt or 1boon10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 1boon11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 1boon10a.txt.


Etext created by John M. Krafft
krafftjm@muohio.edu


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*






Etext created by John M. Krafft
krafftjm@muohio.edu



From The Discovery and Settlement of Kentucke
by John Filson



The ADVENTURES of Col. DANIEL BOON;
containing a NARRATIVE of the WARS of Kentucke.


Curiosity is natural to the soul of man, and interesting objects
have a powerful influence on our affections. Let these influencing
powers actuate, by the permission or disposal of Providence, from
selfish or social views, yet in time the mysterious will of Heaven
is unfolded, and we behold our conduct, from whatsoever motives
excited, operating to answer the important designs of heaven. Thus
we behold Kentucke, lately an howling wilderness, the habitation of
savages and wild beasts, become a fruitful field; this region, so
favourably distinguished by nature, now become the habitation of
civilization, at a period unparalleled in history, in the midst of
a raging war, and under all the disadvantages of emigration to a
country so remote from the inhabited parts of the continent. Here,
where the hand of violence shed the blood of the innocent; where
the horrid yells of savages, and the groans of the distressed,
sounded in our ears, we now hear the praises and adoration of our
Creator; where wretched wigwams stood, the miserable abodes of
savages, we behold the foundations of cities laid, that, in all
probability, will rival the glory of the greatest upon earth. And
we view Kentucke situated on the fertile banks of the great Ohio,
rising from obscurity to shine with splendor, equal to any other of
the stars of the American hemisphere.

The settling of this region well deserves a place in history.
Most of the memorable events I have myself been exercised in; and,
for the satisfaction of the public, will briefly relate the
circumstances of my adventures, and scenes of life, from my first
movement to this country until this day.

It was on the first of May, in the year 1769, that I resigned my
domestic happiness for a time, and left my family and peaceable
habitation on the Yadkin River, in North-Carolina, to wander
through the wilderness of America, in quest of the country of
Kentucke, in company with John Finley, John Stewart, Joseph Holden,
James Monay, and William Cool. We proceeded successfully, and after
a long and fatiguing journey through a mountainous wilderness, in
a westward direction, on the seventh day of June following, we
found ourselves on Red-River, where John Finley had formerly been
trading with the Indians, and, from the top of an eminence, saw
with pleasure the beautiful level of Kentucke. Here let me observe,
that for some time we had experienced the most uncomfortable
weather as a prelibation of our future sufferings. At this place we
encamped, and made a shelter to defend us from the inclement
season, and began to hunt and reconnoitre the country. We found
every where abundance of wild beasts of all sorts, through this
vast forest. The buffaloes were more frequent than I have seen
cattle in the settlements, browzing on the leaves of the cane, or
croping the herbage on those extensive plains, fearless, because
ignorant, of the violence of man. Sometimes we saw hundreds in a
drove, and the numbers about the salt springs were amazing. In this
forest, the habitation of beasts of every kind natural to America,
we practised hunting with great success until the twenty-second day
of December following.

This day John Stewart and I had a pleasing ramble, but fortune
changed the scene in the close of it. We had passed through a great
forest on which stood myriads of trees, some gay with blossoms,
others rich with fruits. Nature was here a series of wonders, and
a fund of delight. Here she displayed her ingenuity and industry in
a variety of flowers and fruits, beautifully coloured, elegantly
shaped, and charmingly flavoured; and we were diverted with
innumerable animals presenting themselves perpetually to our
view.--In the decline of the day, near Kentucke river, as we
ascended the brow of a small hill, a number of Indians rushed out
of a thick cane-brake upon us, and made us prisoners. The time of
our sorrow was now arrived, and the scene fully opened. The Indians
plundered us of what we had, and kept us in confinement seven days,
treating us with common savage usage. During this time we
discovered no uneasiness or desire to escape, which made them less
suspicious of us; but in the dead of night, as we lay in a thick
cane-brake by a large fire, when sleep had locked up their senses,
my situation not disposing me for rest, I touched my companion and
gently awoke him. We improved this favourable opportunity, and
departed, leaving them to take their rest, and speedily directed
our course towards our old camp, but found it plundered, and the
company dispersed and gone home. About this time my brother, Squire
Boon, with another adventurer, who came to explore the country
shortly after us, was wandering through the forest, determined to
find me, if possible, and accidentally found our camp.
Notwithstanding the unfortunate circumstances of our company, and
our dangerous situation, as surrounded with hostile savages, our
meeting so fortunately in the wilderness made us reciprocally
sensible of the utmost satisfaction. So much does friendship
triumph over misfortune, that sorrows and sufferings vanish at the
meeting not only of real friends, but of the most distant
acquaintances, and substitutes happiness in their room.

Soon after this, my companion in captivity, John Stewart, was
killed by the savages, and the man that came with my brother
returned home by himself. We were then in a dangerous, helpless
situation, exposed daily to perils and death amongst savages and
wild beasts, not a white man in the country but ourselves.

Thus situated, many hundred miles from our families in the
howling wilderness, I believe few would have equally enjoyed the
happiness we experienced. I often observed to my brother, You see
now how little nature requires to be satisfied. Felicity, the
companion of content, is rather found in our own breasts than in
the enjoyment of external things; And I firmly believe it requires
but a little philosophy to make a man happy in whatsoever state he
is. This consists in a full resignation to the will of Providence;
and a resigned soul finds pleasure in a path strewed with briars
and thorns.

We continued not in a state of indolence, but hunted every day,
and prepared a little cottage to defend us from the Winter storms.
We remained there undisturbed during the Winter; and on the first
day of May, 1770, my brother returned home to the settlement by
himself, for a new recruit of horses and ammunition, leaving me by
myself, without bread, salt or sugar, without company of my fellow
creatures, or even a horse or dog. I confess I never before was
under greater necessity of exercising philosophy and fortitude. A
few days I passed uncomfortably. The idea of a beloved wife and
family, and their anxiety upon the account of my absence and
exposed situation, made sensible impressions on my heart. A
thousand dreadful apprehensions presented themselves to my view,
and had undoubtedly disposed me to melancholy, if further indulged.

One day I undertook a tour through the country, and the diversity
and beauties of nature I met with in this charming season, expelled
every gloomy and vexatious thought. Just at the close of day the
gentle gales retired, and left the place to the disposal of a
profound calm. Not a breeze shook the most tremulous leaf. I had
gained the summit of a commanding ridge, and, looking round with
astonishing delight, beheld the ample plains, the beauteous tracts
below. On the other hand, I surveyed the famous river Ohio that
rolled in silent dignity, marking the western boundary of Kentucke
with inconceivable grandeur. At a vast distance I beheld the
mountains lift their venerable brows, and penetrate the clouds. All
things were still. I kindled a fire near a fountain of sweet water,
and feasted on the loin of a buck, which a few hours before I had
killed. The sullen shades of night soon overspread the whole
hemisphere, and the earth seemed to gasp after the hovering
moisture. My roving excursion this day had fatigued my body, and
diverted my imagination. I laid me down to sleep, and I awoke not
until the sun had chased away the night. I continued this tour, and
in a few days explored a considerable part of the country, each day
equally pleased as the first. I returned again to my old camp,
which was not disturbed in my absence. I did not confine my lodging
to it, but often reposed in thick cane-brakes, to avoid the
savages, who, I believe, often visited my camp, but fortunately for
me, in my absence. In this situation I was constantly exposed to
danger, and death. How unhappy such a situation for a man tormented
with fear, which is vain if no danger comes, and if it does, only
augments the pain. It was my happiness to be destitute of this
afflicting passion, with which I had the greatest reason to be
affected. The prowling wolves diverted my nocturnal hours with
perpetual howlings; and the various species of animals in this vast
forest, in the daytime, were continually in my view.
Thus I was surrounded with plenty in the midst of want. I was
happy in the midst of dangers and inconveniences. In such a
diversity it was impossible I should be disposed to melancholy. No
populous city, with all the varieties of commerce and stately
structures, could afford so much pleasure to my mind, as the
beauties of nature I found here.

Thus, through an uninterrupted scene of sylvan pleasures, I spent
the time until the 27th day of July following, when my brother, to
my great felicity, met me, according to appointment, at our old
camp. Shortly after, we left this place, not thinking it safe to
stay there longer, and proceeded to Cumberland river, reconnoitring
that part of the country until March, 1771, and giving names to the
different waters.

Soon after, I returned home to my family with a determination to
bring them as soon as possible to live in Kentucke, which I
esteemed a second paradise, at the risk of my life and fortune.

I returned safe to my old habitation, and found my family in
happy circumstances. I sold my farm on the Yadkin, and what goods
we could not carry with us; and on the twenty-fifth day of
September, 1773, bade a farewel to our friends, and proceeded on
our journey to Kentucke, in company with five families more, and
forty men that joined us in Powel's Valley, which is one hundred
and fifty miles from the now settled parts of Kentucke. This
promising beginning was soon overcast with a cloud of adversity;
for upon the tenth day of October, the rear of our company was
attacked by a number of Indians, who killed six, and wounded one
man. Of these my eldest son was one that fell in the action. Though
we defended ourselves, and repulsed the enemy, yet this unhappy
affair scattered our cattle, brought us into extreme difficulty,
and so discouraged the whole company, that we retreated forty
miles, to the settlement on Clench river. We had passed over two
mountains, viz. Powel's and Walden's, and were approaching
Cumberland mountain when this adverse fortune overtook us. These
mountains are in the wilderness, as we pass from the old
settlements in Virginia to Kentucke, are ranged in a S. west and N.
east direction, are of a great length and breadth, and not far
distant from each other. Over these, nature hath formed passes,
that are less difficult than might be expected from a view of such
huge piles. The aspect of these cliffs is so wild and horrid, that
it is impossible to behold them without terror. The spectator is
apt to imagine that nature had formerly suffered some violent
convulsion; and that these are the dismembered remains of the
dreadful shock; the ruins, not of Persepolis or Palmyra, but of the
world!

I remained with my family on Clench until the sixth of June,
1774, when I and one Michael Stoner were solicited by Governor
Dunmore, of Virginia, to go to the Falls of the Ohio, to conduct
into the settlement a number of surveyors that had been sent
thither by him some months before; this country having about this
time drawn the attention of many adventurers. We immediately
complied with the Governor's request, and conducted in the
surveyors, compleating a tour of eight hundred miles, through many
difficulties, in sixty-two days.

Soon after I returned home, I was ordered to take the command of
three garrisons during the campaign, which Governor Dunmore carried
on against the Shawanese Indians: After the conclusion of which,
the Militia was discharged from each garrrison, and I being
relieved from my post, was solicited by a number of North-Carolina
gentlemen, that were about purchasing the lands lying on the S.
side of Kentucke River, from the Cherokee Indians, to attend their
treaty at Wataga, in March, 1775, to negotiate with them, and,
mention the boundaries of the purchase. This I accepted, and at the
request of the same gentlemen, undertook to mark out a road in the
best passage from the settlement through the wilderness to
Kentucke, with such assistance as I thought necessary to employ for
such an important undertaking.

I soon began this work, having collected a number of enterprising
men, well armed. We proceeded with all possible expedition until we
came within fifteen miles of where Boonsborough now stands, and
where we were fired upon by a party of Indians that killed two, and
wounded two of our number; yet, although surprised and taken at a
disadvantage, we stood our ground. This was on the twentieth of
March, 1775. Three days after, we were fired upon again, and had two
men killed, and three wounded. Afterwards we proceeded on to
Kentucke river without opposition; and on the first day of April
began to erect the fort of Boonsborough at a salt lick, about sixty
yards from the river, on the S. side.

On the fourth day, the Indians killed one of our men.--We were
busily employed in building this fort, until the fourteenth day of
June following, without any farther opposition from the Indians;
and having finished the works, I returned to my family, on Clench.

In a short time, I proceeded to remove my family from Clench to
this garrison; where we arrived safe without any other difficulties
than such as are common to this passage, my wife and daughter being
the first white women that ever stood on the banks of Kentucke
river.

On the twenty-fourth day of December following we had one man
killed, and one wounded, by the Indians, who seemed determined to
persecute us for erecting this fortification.

On the fourteenth day of July, 1776, two of Col. Calaway's
daughters, and one of mine, were taken prisoners near the fort. I
immediately pursued the Indians, with only eight men, and on the
sixteenth overtook them, killed two of the party, and recovered the
girls. The same day on which this attempt was made, the Indians
divided themselves into different parties, and attacked several
forts, which were shortly before this time erected, doing a great
deal of mischief. This was extremely distressing to the new
settlers. The innocent husbandman was shot down, while busy
cultivating the soil for his family's supply. Most of the cattle
around the stations were destroyed. They continued their
hostilities in this manner until the fifteenth of April, 1777, when
they attacked Boonsborough with a party of above one hundred in
number, killed one man, and wounded four--Their loss in this attack
was not certainly known to us.

On the fourth day of July following, a party of about two hundred
Indians attacked Boonsborough, killed one man, and wounded two.
They besieged us forty-eight hours; during which time seven of them
were killed, and at last, finding themselves not likely to prevail,
they raised the siege, and departed.

The Indians had disposed their warriors in different parties at
this time, and attacked the different garrisons to prevent their
assisting each other, and did much injury to the distressed
inhabitants.

On the nineteenth day of this month, Col. Logan's fort was
besieged by a party of about two hundred Indians. During this
dreadful siege they did a great deal of mischief, distressed the
garrison, in which were only fifteen men, killed two, and wounded
one. The enemies loss was uncertain, from the common practice which
the Indians have of carrying off their dead in time of battle. Col.
Harrod's fort was then defended by only sixty-five men, and
Boonsborough by twenty-two, there being no more forts or white men
in the country, except at the Falls, a considerable distance from
these, and all taken collectively, were but a handful to the
numerous warriors that were every where dispersed through the
country, intent upon doing all the mischief that savage barbarity
could invent. Thus we passed through a scene of sufferings that
exceeds description.

On the twenty-fifth of this month a reinforcement of forty-five
men arrived from North-Carolina, and about the twentieth of August
following, Col. Bowman arrived with one hundred men from Virginia.
Now we began to strengthen, and from hence, for the space of six
weeks, we had skirmishes with Indians, in one quarter or other,
almost every day.

The savages now learned the superiority of the Long Knife, as
they call the Virginians, by experience; being out-generalled in
almost every battle. Our affairs began to wear a new aspect, and
the enemy, not daring to venture on open war, practised secret
mischief at times.

On the first day of January, 1778, I went with a party of thirty
men to the Blue Licks, on Licking River, to make salt for the
different garrisons in the country.

On the seventh day of February, as I was hunting, to procure meat
for the company, I met with a party of one hundred and two Indians,
and two Frenchmen, on their march against Boonsborough, that place
being particularly the object of the enemy.

They pursued, and took me; and brought me on the eighth day to
the Licks, where twenty-seven of my party were, three of them
having previously returned home with the salt. I knowing it was
impossible for them to escape, capitulated with the enemy, and, at
a distance in their view, gave notice to my men of their situation,
with orders not to resist, but surrender themselves captives.

The generous usage the Indians had promised before in my
capitulation, was afterwards fully complied with, and we proceeded
with them as prisoners to old Chelicothe, the principal Indian
town, on Little Miami, where we arrived, after an uncomfortable
journey, in very severe weather, on the eighteenth day of February,
and received as good treatment as prisoners could expect from
savages.--On the tenth day of March following, I, and ten of my
men, were conducted by forty Indians to Detroit, where we arrived
the thirtieth day, and were treated by Governor Hamilton, the
British commander at that post, with great humanity.

During our travels, the Indians entertained me well; and their
affection for me was so great, that they utterly refused to leave
me there with the others, although the Governor offered them one
hundred pounds Sterling for me, on purpose to give me a parole to
go home. Several English gentlemen there, being sensible of my
adverse fortune, and touched with human sympathy, generously
offered a friendly supply for my wants, which I refused, with many
thanks for their kindness; adding, that I never expected it would
be in my power to recompense such unmerited generosity.

The Indians left my men in captivity with the British
at Detroit, and on the tenth day of April brought me towards
Old Chelicothe, where we arrived on the twenty-fifth day of the
same month. This was a long and fatiguing march, through
an exceeding fertile country, remarkable for fine springs and
streams of water. At Chelicothe I spent my time as comfortably as
I could expect; was adopted, accordin to their custom, into a
family where I became a son, and had a great share in the affection
of my new parents, brothers, sisters, and friends. I was
exceedingly familiar and friendly with them, always appearing as
chearful and satisfied as possible, and they put great confidence
in me. I often went a hunting with them, and frequently gained
their applause for my activity at our shooting-matches. I was
careful not to exceed many of them in shooting; for no people are
more envious than they in this sport. I could observe, in their
countenances and gestures, the greatest expressions of joy when
they exceeded me; and, when the reverse happened, of envy. The
Shawanese king took great notice of me, and treated me with
profound respect, and entire friendship, often entrusting me to
hunt at my liberty. I frequently returned with the spoils of the
woods, and as often presented some of what I had taken to him,
expressive of duty to my sovereign. My food and lodging was, in
common, with them, not so good indeed as I could desire, but
necessity made every thing acceptable.

I now began to meditate an escape, and carefully avoided their
suspicions, continuing with them at Old Chelicothe until the first
day of June following, and then was taken by them to the salt
springs on Sciotha, and kept there, making salt, ten days. During
this time I hunted some for them, and found the land, for a great
extent about this river, to exceed the soil of Kentucke, if
possible, and remarkably well watered.
When I returned to Chelicothe, alarmed to see four hundred and
fifty Indians, of their choicest warriors, painted and armed in a
fearful manner, ready to march against Boonsborough, I determined
to escape the first opportunity.

On the sixteenth, before sun-rise, I departed in the most secret
manner, and arrived at Boonsborough on the twentieth, after a
journey of one hundred and sixty miles; during which, I had but one
meal.

I found our fortress in a bad state of defence, but we proceeded
immediately to repair our flanks, strengthen our gates and
posterns, and form double bastions, which we compleated in ten
days. In this time we daily expected the arrival of the Indian
army; and at length, one of my fellow prisoners, escaping from
them, arrived, informing us that the enemy had an account of my
departure, and postponed their expedition three weeks.--The Indians
had spies out viewing our movements, and were greatly alarmed with
our increase in number and fortifications. The Grand Councils of
the nations were held frequently, and with more deliberation than
usual. They evidently saw the approaching hour when the Long Knife
would disposess them of their desirable habitations; and anxiously
concerned for futurity, determined utterly to extirpate the whites
out of Kentucke. We were not intimidated by their movements, but
frequently gave them proofs of our courage.

About the first of August, I made an incursion into the Indian
country, with a party of nineteen men, in order to surprise a small
town up Sciotha, called Paint-Creek-Town. We advanced within four
miles thereof, where we met a party of thirty Indians, on their
march against Boonsborough, intending to join the others
from Chelicothe. A smart fight ensued betwixt us for some time: At
length the savages gave way, and fled. We had no loss on our side:
The enemy had one killed, and two wounded. We took from them three
horses, and all their baggage; and being informed, by two of our
number that went to their town, that the Indians had entirely
evacuated it, we proceeded no further, and returned with all
possible expedition to assist our garrison against the other party.
We passed by them on the sixth day, and on the seventh, we arrived
safe at Boonsborough.

On the eighth, the Indian army arrived, being four hundred and
forty-four in number, commanded by Capt. Duquesne, eleven other
Frenchmen, and some of their own chiefs, and marched up within view
of our fort, with British and French colours flying; and having
sent a summons to me, in his Britannick Majesty's name, to
surrender the fort, I requested two days consideration, which was
granted.

It was now a critical period with us.--We were a small number in
the garrison.--A powerful army before our walls, whose appearance
proclaimed inevitable death, fearfully painted, and marking their
footsteps with desolation. Death was preferable to captivity; and
if taken by storm, we must inevitably be devoted to destruction. In
this situation we concluded to maintain our garrison, if possible.
We immediately proceeded to collect what we could of our horses,
and other cattle, and bring them through the posterns into the
fort: And in the evening of the ninth, I returned answer, that we
were determined to defend our fort while a man was living--Now,
said I to their commander, who stood attentively hearing my
sentiments, We laugh at all your formidable preparations: But thank
you for giving us notice and time to provide for our defence. Your
efforts will not prevail; for our gates shall for ever deny you
admittance.--Whether this answer affected their courage, or not, I
cannot tell; but, contrary to our expectations, they formed a
scheme to deceive us, declaring it was their orders, from Governor
Hamilton, to take us captives, and not to destroy us; but if nine
of us would come out, and treat with them, they would immediatly
withdraw their forces from our walls, and return home peaceably.
This sounded grateful in our ears; and we agreed to the proposal.

We held the treaty within sixty yards of the garrison, on purpose
to divert them from a breach of honour, as we could not avoid
suspicions of the savages. In this situation the articles were
formally agreed to, and signed; and the Indians told us it was
customary with them, on such occasions, for two Indians to shake
hands with every white-man in the treaty, as an evidence of entire
friendship. We agreed to this also, but were soon convinced their
policy was to take us prisoners.--They immediately grappled us;
but, although surrounded by hundreds of savages, we extricated
ourselves from them, and escaped all safe into the garrison, except
one that was wounded, through a heavy fire from their army. They
immediately attacked us on every side, and a constant heavy fire
ensued between us day and night for the space of nine days.

In this time the enemy began to undermine our fort, which was
situated sixty yards from Kentucke river. They began at the water-
mark and proceeded in the bank some distance, which we understood
by their making the water muddy with the clay; and we immediately
proceeded to disappoint their design, by cutting a trench across
their subterranean passage. The enemy discovering our counter-mine,
by the clay we threw out of the fort, desisted from that stratagem:
And experience now fully convincing them that neither their power
nor policy could effect their purpose, on the twentieth day of
August they raised the siege, and departed.

During this dreadful siege, which threatened death in every form,
we had two men killed, and four wounded, besides a number of
cattle. We killed of the enemy thirty-seven, and wounded a great
number. After they were gone, we picked up one hundred and twenty-
five pounds weight of bullets, besides what stuck in the logs of
our fort; which certainly is a great proof of their industry. Soon
after this, I went into the settlement, and nothing worthy of a
place in this account passed in my affairs for some time.

During my absence from Kentucke, Col. Bowman carried on an
expedition against the Shawanese, at Old Chelicothe, with one
hundred and sixty men, in July, 1779. Here they arrived
undiscovered, and a battle ensued, which lasted until ten o'clock,
A. M. when Col. Bowman, finding he could not succeed at this time,
retreated about thirty miles. The Indians, in the meantime,
collecting all their forces, pursued and overtook him, when a smart
fight continued near two hours, not to the advantage of Col.
Bowman's party.

Col. Harrod proposed to mount a number of horse, and furiously
to rush upon the savages, who at this time fought with remarkable
fury. This desperate step had a happy effect, broke their line of
battle, and the savages fled on all sides. In these two battles we
had nine killed, and one wounded. The enemy's loss uncertain, only
two scalps being taken.

On the twenty-second day of June, 1780, a large party of Indians
and Canadians, about six hundred in number, commanded by Col. Bird,
attacked Riddle's and Martin's stations, at the Forks of Licking
River, with six pieces of artillery. They carried this expedition
so secretly, that the unwary inhabitants did not discover them,
until they fired upon the forts; and, not being prepared to oppose
them, were obliged to surrender themselves miserable captives to
barbarous savages, who immediately after tomahawked one man and two
women, and loaded all the others with heavy baggage, forcing them
along toward their towns, able or unable to march. Such as were
weak and faint by the way, they tomahawked. The tender women, and
helpless children, fell victims to their cruelty. This, and the
savage treatment they received afterwards, is shocking to humanity,
and too barbarous to relate.

The hostile disposition of the savages, and their allies, caused
General Clark, the commandant at the Falls of the Ohio, immediately
to begin an expedition with his own regiment, and the armed force
of the country, against Pecaway, the principal town of the
Shawanese, on a branch of Great Miami, which he finished with great
success, took seventeen scalps, and burnt the town to ashes, with
the loss of seventeen men.

About this time I returned to Kentucke with my family; and here,
to avoid an enquiry into my conduct, the reader being before
informed of my bringing my family to Kentucke, I am under the
necessity of informing him that, during my captivity with the
Indians, my wife, who despaired of ever seeing me again, expecting
the Indians had put a period to my life, oppressed with the
distresses of the country, and bereaved of me, her only happiness,
had, before I returned, transported my family and goods, on horses,
through the wilderness, amidst a multitude of dangers, to her
father's house, in North-Carolina.

Shortly after the troubles at Boonsborough, I went to them, and
lived peaceably there until this time. The history of my going
home, and returning with my family, forms a series of difficulties,
an account of which would swell a volume, and being foreign to my
purpose, I shall purposely omit them.

I settled my family in Boonsborough once more; and shortly after,
on the sixth day of October, 1780, I went in company with my
brother to the Blue Licks; and, on our return home, we were fired
upon by a party of Indians. They shot him, and pursued me, by the
scent of their dog, three miles; but I killed the dog, and escaped.
The winter soon came on, and was very severe, which confined the
Indians to their wigwams.

The severity of this Winter caused great difficulties in
Kentucke. The enemy had destroyed most of the corn, the Summer
before. This necessary article was scarce, and dear; and the
inhabitants lived chiefly on the flesh of buffaloes. The
circumstances of many were very lamentable: However, being a hardy
race of people, and accustomed to difficulties and necessities,
they were wonderfully supported through all their sufferings, until
the ensuing Fall, when we received abundance from the fertile soil.

Towards Spring, we were frequently harassed by Indians; and, in
May, 1782, a party assaulted Ashton's station, killed one man, and
took a Negro prisoner. Capt. Ashton, with twenty-five men, pursued,
and overtook the savages, and a smart fight ensued, which lasted
two hours; but they being superior in number, obliged Captain
Ashton's party to retreat, with the loss of eight killed, and four
mortally wounded; their brave commander himself being numbered
among the dead.

The Indians continued their hostilities; and, about the tenth of
August following, two boys were taken from Major Hoy's
station. This party was pursued by Capt. Holder and seventeen men,
who were also defeated, with the loss of four men killed, and one
wounded. Our affairs became more and more alarming. Several
stations which had lately been erected in the country were
continually infested with savages, stealing their horses and
killing the men at every opportunity. In a field, near Lexington,
an Indian shot a man, and running to scalp him, was himself shot
from the fort, and fell dead upon his enemy.

Every day we experienced recent mischiefs. The barbarous savage
nations of Shawanese, Cherokees, Wyandots, Tawas, Delawares, and
several others near Detroit, united in a war against us, and
assembled their choicest warriors at old Chelicothe, to go on the
expedition, in order to destroy us, and entirely depopulate the
country. Their savage minds were inflamed to mischief by two
abandoned men, Captains McKee and Girty. These led them to execute
every diabolical scheme; and, on the fifteenth day of August,
commanded a party of Indians and Canadians, of about five hundred
in number, against Briant's station, five miles from Lexington.
Without demanding a surrender, they furiously assaulted the
garrison, which was happily prepared to oppose them; and, after
they had expended much ammunition in vain, and killed the cattle
round the fort, not being likely to make themselves masters of this
place, they raised the siege, and departed in the morning of the
third day after they came, with the loss of about thirty killed,
and the number of wounded uncertain.--Of the garrison four were
killed, and three wounded.

On the eighteenth day Col. Todd, Col. Trigg, Major Harland, and
myself, speedily collected one hundred and seventy-six men, well
armed, and pursued the savages. They had marched beyond the Blue
Licks to a remarkable bend of the main fork of Licking River, about
forty-three miles from Lexington, as it is particularly represented
in the map, where we overtook them on the nineteenth day. The
savages observing us, gave way; and we, being ignorant of their
numbers, passed the river. When the enemy saw our proceedings,
having greatly the advantage of us in situation, they formed the
line of battle, represented in the map, from one bend of Licking to
the other, about a mile from the Blue Licks. An exceeding fierce
battle immediately began, for about fifteen minutes, when we, being
over-powered by numbers, were obliged to retreat, with the loss of
sixty-seven men; seven of whom were taken prisoners. The brave and
much lamented Colonels Todd and Trigg, Major Harland and my second
son, were among the dead. We were informed that the Indians,
numbering their dead, found they had four killed more than we; and
therefore, four of the prisoners they had taken, were, by general
consent, ordered to be killed, in a most barbarous manner, by the
young warriors, in order to train them up to cruelty; and then they
proceeded to their towns.

On our retreat we were met by Col. Logan, hastening to join us,
with a number of well armed men: This powerful assistance we
unfortunately wanted in the battle; for, notwithstanding the
enemy's superiority of numbers, they acknowledged that, if they had
received one more fire from us, they should undoubtedly have given
way. So valiantly did our small party fight, that, to the memory of
those who unfortunately fell in the battle, enough of honour cannot
be paid. Had Col. Logan and his party been with us, it is highly
probable we should have given the savages a total defeat.

I cannot reflect upon this dreadful scene, but sorrow fills my
heart. A zeal for the defence of their country led these heroes to
the scene of action, though with a few men to attack a powerful
army of experienced warriors. When we gave way, they pursued us
with the utmost eagerness, and in every quarter spread destruction.
The river was difficult to cross, and many were killed in the
flight, some just entering the river, some in the water, others
after crossing in ascending the cliffs. Some escaped on horse-back,
a few on foot; and, being dispersed every where, in a few hours,
brought the melancholy news of this unfortunate battle to
Lexington. Many widows were now made. The reader may guess what
sorrow filled the hearts of the inhabitants, exceeding any thing
that I am able to describe. Being reinforced, we returned to bury
the dead, and found their bodies strewed every where, cut and
mangled in a dreadful manner. This mournful scene exhibited a
horror almost unparalleled: Some torn and eaten by wild beasts;
those in the river eaten by fishes; all in such a putrified
condition, that no one could be distinguished from another.

As soon as General Clark, then at the Falls of the Ohio, who was
ever our ready friend, and merits the love and gratitude of all his
country-men, understood the circumstances of this unfortunate
action, he ordered an expedition, with all possible haste, to
pursue the savages, which was so expeditiously effected, that we
overtook them within two miles of their towns, and probably might
have obtained a great victory, had not two of their number met us
about two hundred poles before we come up. These returned quick as
lightening to their camp with the alarming news of a mighty army in
view. The savages fled in the utmost disorder, evacuated their
towns, and reluctantly left their territory to our mercy. We
immediately took possession of Old Chelicothe without opposition,
being deserted by its inhabitants. We continued our pursuit through
five towns on the Miami rivers, Old Chelicothe, Pecaway, New
Chelicothe, Will's Towns, and Chelicothe, burnt them all to ashes,
entirely destroyed their corn, and other fruits, and every where
spread a scene of desolation in the country. In this expedition we
took seven prisoners and five scalps, with the loss of only four
men, two of whom were accidentally killed by our own army.

This campaign in some measure damped the spirits of the Indians,
and made them sensible of our superiority. Their connections were
dissolved, their armies scattered, and a future invasion put
entirely out of their power; yet they continued to practise
mischief secretly upon the inhabitants, in the exposed parts of the
country.

In October following, a party made an excursion into that
district called the Crab Orchard, and one of them, being advanced
some distance before the others, boldly entered the house of a poor
defenceless family, in which was only a Negro man, a woman and her
children, terrified with the apprehensions of immediate death. The
savage, perceiving their defenceless situation, without offering
violence to the family attempted to captivate the Negro, who,
happily proved an over-match for him, threw him on the ground, and,
in the struggle, the mother of the children drew an ax from a
corner of the cottage, and cut his head off, while her little
daughter shut the door. The savages instantly appeared, and applied
their tomahawks to the door. An old rusty gun-barrel, without a
lock, lay in a corner, which the mother put through a small
crevice, and the savages, perceiving it, fled. In the mean time,
the alarm spread through the neighbourhood; the armed men collected
immediately, and pursued the ravagers into the wilderness. Thus
Providence, by the means of this Negro, saved the whole of the poor
family from destruction. From that time, until the happy return of
peace between the United States and Great-Britain, the Indians did
us no mischief. Finding the great king beyond the water
disappointed in his expectations, and conscious of the importance
of the Long Knife, and their own wretchedness, some of the nations
immediately desired peace; to which, at present, they seem
universally disposed, and are sending ambassadors to General Clark,
at the Falls of the Ohio, with the minutes of their Councils, a
specimen of which, in the minutes of the Piankashaw Council, is
subjoined.

To conclude, I can now say that I have verified the saying of an
old Indian who signed Col. Henderson's deed. Taking me by the hand,
at the delivery thereof, Brother, says he, we have given you a fine
land, but I believe you will have much trouble in settling it.--My
footsteps have often been marked with blood, and therefore I can
truly subscribe to its original name. Two darling sons, and a
brother, have I lost by savage hands, which have also taken from me
forty valuable horses, and abundance of cattle. Many dark and
sleepless nights have I been a companion for owls, separated from
the chearful society of men, scorched by the Summer's sun, and
pinched by the Winter's cold, an instrument ordained to settle the
wilderness. But now the scene is changed: Peace crowns the sylvan
shade.


What thanks, what ardent and ceaseless thanks are due to that
all-superintending Providence which has turned a cruel war into
peace, brought order out of confusion, made the fierce savages
placid, and turned away their hostile weapons from our country! May
the same Almighty Goodness banish the accursed monster, war, from
all lands, with her hated associates, rapine and insatiable
ambition. Let peace, descending from her native heaven, bid her
olives spring amidst the joyful nations; and plenty, in league with
commerce, scatter blessings from her copious hand.

This account of my adventures will inform the reader of the most
remarkable events of this country.--I now live in peace and safety,
enjoying the sweets of liberty, and the bounties of Providence,
with my once fellow-sufferers, in this delightful country, which I
have seen purchased with a vast expence of blood and treasure,
delighting in the prospect of its being, in a short time, one of
the most opulent and powerful states on the continent of North-
America; which, with the love and gratitude of my country-men, I
esteem a sufficient reward for all my toil and dangers.

Fayette county, Kentucke.

DANIEL BOON





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Col. Daniel Boone

