*******The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barlaam and Ioasaph*******
#1 in our series by St. John of Damascus


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barlaam and Ioasaph

by St. John of Damascus

December, 1996  [Etext #749]


*******The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barlaam and Ioasaph*******
*****This file should be named bioas10.txt or bioas10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, bioas11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, bioas10a.txt.


This electronic edition was edited, proofed, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@EnterAct.COM), November, 1996.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*







Barlaam and Ioasaph
by

St. John Damascene (?)
("St. John of Damascus")
c. 676 - 749 A.D.

It is not known where or when this story was written, but it is
believed to have been translated into Greek (possibly from a
Georgian original) sometime in the 11th Century A.D.  Although
the ultimate author is usually referred to as "John the Monk", it
has been traditionally ascribed to St. John of Damascus.

The text of this edition is based on that published as ST. JOHN
DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH (Trans: G.R. Woodward and H.
Mattingly; Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, 1914).  This
text is in the PUBLIC DOMAIN in he United States.

This electronic edition was edited, proofed, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@EnterAct.COM), November, 1996.

PREPARER'S NOTE:
Readers of this work will note some startling similarities
between the story of Ioasaph and the traditional Tale of Buddha. 
The work seems to be a retelling of the Buddha Legend from within
a Christian context, with the singular difference that the
"Buddha" in this tale reaches enlightenment through the love of
Jesus Christ.

The popularity of the Greek version of this story is attested to
by the number of translations made of it throughout the Christian
world, including versions in Latin, Old Slavonic, Armenian,
Christian Arabic, English, Ethiopic, and French.  Such was its
popularity that both Barlaam and Josaphat (Ioasaph) were
eventually recognized by the Roman Catholic Church as Saints, and
churches were dedicated in their honor from Portugal to
Constantinople.  It was only after Europeans began to have
increased contacts with India that scholars began to notice the
similarities between the two sets of stories.  Modern scholars
believe that the Buddha story came to Europe from Arabic,
Caucasus, and/or Persian sources, all of which were active in
trade between the European and Indian worlds.

---DBK

*****************************************************************

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY:

ORIGINAL TEXT --

Woodward, G.R. & H. Mattingly (Ed. & Trans.): "St. John
Damascene: Barlaam and Ioasaph" (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA, 1914).  English translation with side-by-side Greek
text.

RECOMMENDED READING --

Lang, David Marshall (Trans.): "The Balavariani: A Tale from the
Christian East" (California University Press, Los Angeles, 1966).
Translation of the Georgian work that probably served as a basis
for the Greek text.

*****************************************************************

BARLAAM AND IOASAPH

AN EDIFYING STORY FROM THE INNER LAND OF THE ETHIOPIANS, CALLED
THE LAND OF THE INDIANS, THENCE BROUGHT TO THE HOLY CITY, BY JOHN
THE MONK (AN HONOURABLE MAN AND A VIRTUOUS, OF THE MONASTERY OF
SAINT SABAS); WHEREIN ARE THE LIVES OF THE FAMOUS AND BLESSED
BARLAAM AND IOASAPH.

INTRODUCTION 

"As many as are led by the Spirit of God they are sons of God"
saith the inspired Apostle.  Now to have been accounted worthy of
the Holy Spirit and to have become sons of God is of all things
most to be coveted; and, as it is written, "They that have become
his sons find rest from all enquiry."  This marvellous, and above
all else desirable, blessedness have the Saints from the
beginning won by the practice of the virtues, some having striven
as Martyrs, and resisted sin unto blood, and others having
struggled in self-discipline, and having trodden the narrow way,
proving Martyrs in will.  Now, that one should hand down to
memory the prowess and virtuous deeds of these, both of them that
were made perfect by blood, and of them that by self-denial did
emulate the conversation of Angels, and should deliver to the
generations that follow a pattern of virtue, this hath the Church
of Christ received as a tradition from the inspired Apostles, and
the blessed Fathers, who did thus enact for the salvation of our
race.  For the pathway to virtue is rough and steep, especially
for such as have not yet wholly turned unto the Lord, but are
still at warfare, through the tyranny of their passions.  For
this reason also we need many encouragements thereto, whether it
be exhortations, or the record of the lives of them that have
travelled on the road before us; which latter draweth us towards
it the less painfully, and doth accustom us not to despair on
account of the difficulty of the journey.  For even as with a man
that would tread a hard and difficult path; by exhortation and
encouragement one may scarce win him to essay it, but rather by
pointing to the many who have already completed the course, and
at the last have arrived safely.  So I too, "walking by this
rule," and heedful of the danger hanging over that servant who,
having received of his lord the talent, buried it in the earth,
and hid out of use that which was given him to trade withal, will
in no wise pass over in silence the edifying story that hath come
to me, the which devout men from the inner land Of the
Ethiopians, whom our tale calleth Indians, delivered unto me,
translated from trustworthy records.  It readeth thus.


I.

The country of the Indians, as it is called, is vast and
populous, lying far beyond Egypt.  On the side of Egypt it is
washed by seas and navigable gulphs, but on the mainland it
marcheth with the borders of Persia, a land formerly darkened
with the gloom of idolatry, barbarous to the last degree, and
wholly given up to unlawful practices.  But when "the only-
begotten Son of God, which is in the bosom of the Father," being
grieved to see his own handiwork in bondage unto sin, was moved
with compassion for the same, and shewed himself amongst us
without sin, and, without leaving his Father's throne, dwelt for
a season in the Virgin's womb for our sakes, that we might dwell
in heaven, and be re-claimed from the ancient fall, and freed
from sin by receiving again the adoption of sons; when he had
fulfilled every stage of his life in the flesh for our sake, and
endured the death of the Cross, and marvellously united earth and
heaven; when he had risen again from the dead, and had been
received up into heaven, and was seated at the right hand of the
majesty of the Father, whence, according to his promise, he sent
down the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, unto his eyewitnesses and
disciples, in the shape of fiery tongues, and despatched them
unto all nations, for to give light to them that sat in the
darkness of ignorance, and to baptize them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, whereby it fell to
the lot of some of the Apostles to travel to the far-off East and
to some to journey to the West-ward, while others traversed the
regions North and South, fulfilling their appointed tasks then it
was, I say, that one of the company of Christ's Twelve Apostles,
most holy Thomas, was sent out to the land of the Indians,
preaching the Gospel of Salvation.  "The Lord working with him
and confirming the word with signs following," the darkness of
superstition was banished; and men were delivered from idolatrous
sacrifices and abominations, and added to the true Faith, and
being thus transformed by the hands of the Apostle, were made
members of Christ's household by Baptism, and, waxing ever with
fresh increase, made advancement in the blameless Faith and built
churches in all their lands. 

Now when monasteries began to be formed in Egypt, and numbers of
monks banded themselves together, and when the fame of their
virtues and Angelic conversation "was gone out into all the ends
of the world" and came to the Indians, it stirred them up also to
the like zeal, insomuch that many of them forsook everything and
withdrew to the deserts; and, though but men in mortal bodies,
adopted the spiritual life of Angels.  While matters were thus
prospering and many were soaring upward to heaven on wings of
gold, as the saying is, there arose in that country a king named
Abenner, mighty in riches and power, and in victory over his
enemies, brave in warfare, vain of his splendid stature and
comeliness of face, and boastful of all worldly honours, that
pass so soon away.  But his soul was utterly crushed by poverty,
and choked with many vices, for he was of the Greek way, and sore
distraught by the superstitious error of his idol-worship.  But,
although he lived in luxury, and in the enjoyment of the sweet
and pleasant things of life, and was never baulked of any of his
wishes and desires, yet one thing there was that marred his
happiness, and pierced his soul with care, the curse of
childlessness.  For being without issue, he took ceaseless
thought how he might be rid of this hobble, and be called the
father of children, a name greatly coveted by most people.  Such
was the king, and such his mind.

Meanwhile the glorious band of Christians and the companies of
monks, paying no regard to the king's majesty, and in no wise
terrified by his threats, advanced in the grace of Christ, and
grew in number beyond measure, making short account of the king's
words, but cleaving closely to everything that led to the service
of God.  For this reason many, who had adopted the monastic rule,
abhorred alike all the sweets of this world, and were enamoured
of one thing only, namely godliness, thirsting to lay down their
lives for Christ his sake, and yearning for the happiness beyond.
Wherefore they preached, not with fear and trembling, but rather
even with excess of boldness, the saving Name of God, and naught
but Christ was on their lips, as they plainly proclaimed to all
men the transitory and fading nature of this present time, and
the fixedness and incorruptibility of the life to come, and sowed
in men the first seeds, as it were, towards their becoming of the
household of God, and winning that life which is hid in Christ.
Wherefore many, profiting by this most pleasant teaching, turned
away from the bitter darkness of error, and approached the sweet
light of Truth; insomuch that certain of their noblemen and
senators laid aside all the burthens of life, and thenceforth
became monks.

But when the king heard thereof, he was filled with wrath, and,
boiling over with indignation, passed a decree forthwith,
compelling all Christians to renounce their religion.  Thereupon
he planned and practised new kinds of torture against them, and
threatened new forms of death.  So throughout all his dominions
he sent letters to his rulers and governors ordering penalties
against the righteous, and unlawful massacres.  But chiefly was
his displeasure turned against the ranks of the monastic orders,
and against them he waged a truceless and unrelenting warfare.
Hence, of a truth, many of the Faithful were shaken in spirit,
and others, unable to endure torture, yielded to his ungodly
decrees.  But of the chiefs and rulers of the monastic order some
in rebuking his wickedness ended their lives by suffering
martyrdom, and thus attained to everlasting felicity; while
others hid themselves in deserts and mountains, not from dread of
the threatened tortures, but by a more divine dispensation.


II.

Now while the land of the Indians lay under the shroud of this
moonless night, and while the Faithful were harried on every
side, and the champions of ungodliness prospered, the very air
reeking with the smell of bloody sacrifices, a certain mall of
the royal household, chief satrap in rank, in courage, stature,
comeliness, and in all those qualities which mark beauty of body
and nobility of soul, far above all his Fellows, hearing of this
iniquitous decree, bade farewell to all the grovelling pomps and
vanities of the world, joined the ranks of the monks, and retired
across the border into the desert.  There, by fastings and
vigils, and by diligent study of the divine oracles, he throughly
purged his senses, and illumined a soul, set free from every
passion, with the glorious light of a perfect calm.

But when the king, who loved and esteemed him highly, heard
thereof, he was grieved in spirit at the loss of his friend, but
his anger was the more hotly kindled against the monks.  And so
he sent everywhere in search of him, leaving "no stone unturned,"
as the saying is, to find him.  After a long while, they that
were sent in quest of him, having learnt that he abode in the
desert, after diligent search, apprehended him and brought him
before the king's judgement seat.  When the king saw him in such
vile and coarse raiment who before had been clad in rich apparel,
-- saw him, who had lived in the lap of luxury, shrunken and
wasted by the severe practice of discipline, and bearing about in
his body outward and visible signs of his hermit-life, he was
filled with mingled grief and fury, and, in speech blended of
these two passions, he spake unto him thus:

"O thou dullard and mad man, wherefore hast thou exchanged thine
honour for shame, and thy glorious estate for this unseemly show?
To what end hath the president of my kingdom, and chief commander
of my realm made himself the laughingstock of boys, and not only
forgotten utterly our friendship and fellowship, but revolted
against nature herself, and had no pity on his own children, and
cared naught for riches and all the splendour of the world, and
chosen ignominy such as this rather than the glory that men
covet?  And what shall it profit thee to have chosen above all
gods and men him whom they call Jesus, and to have preferred this
rough life of sackcloth to the pleasures and delights of a life
of bliss."

When the man of God heard these words, he made reply, at once
courteous and unruffled: "If it be thy pleasure, O king, to
converse with me, remove thine enemies out of mid court; which
done, I will answer thee concerning whatsoever thou mayest desire
to learn; for while these are here, I cannot speak with thee.
But, without speech, torment me, kill me, do as thou wilt, for
"the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world,' as saith
my divine teacher."  The king said, "And who are these enemies
whom thou biddest me turn out of court?"  The saintly man
answered and said, "Anger and Desire.  For at the beginning these
twain were brought into being by the Creator to be fellow-workers
with nature; and such they still are to those `who walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit.'  But in you who are altogether
carnal, having nothing of the Spirit, they are adversaries, and
play the part of enemies and foemen.  For Desire, working in you,
stirreth up pleasure, but, when made of none effect, Anger. To-
day therefore let these be banished from thee, and let Wisdom and
Righteousness sit to hear and judge that which we say.  For if
thou put Anger and Desire out of court, and in their room bring
in Wisdom and Righteousness, I will truthfully tell thee all."
Then spake the king, "Lo I yield to thy request, and will banish
out of the assembly both Desire and Anger, and make Wisdom and
Righteousness to sit between us.  So now, tell me without fear,
how wast thou so greatly taken with this error, to prefer the
bird in the bush to the bird already in the hand?"

The hermit answered and said, "O king, if thou askest the cause
how I came to despise things temporal, and to devote my whole
self to the hope of things eternal, hearken unto me.  In former
days, when I was still but a stripling, I heard a certain good
and wholesome saying, which, by its three took my soul by storm;
and the remembrance of it, like some divine seed, being planted
in my heart, unmoved, was preserved ever until it took root,
blossomed, and bare that fruit which thou seest in me.  Now the
meaning of that sentence was this: `It seemed good to the foolish
to despise the things that are, as though they were not, and to
cleave and cling to the things that are not, as though they were.
So he, that hath never tasted the sweetness of the things that
are, will not be able to understand the nature of the things that
are not.  And never having understood them, how shall he despise
them?'  Now that saying meant by `things that are' the things
eternal and fixed, but by `things that are not' earthly life,
luxury, the prosperity that deceives, whereon, O king, thine
heart alas!  is fixed amiss.  Time was when I also clung thereto
myself.  But the force of that sentence continually goading my
heart, stirred my governing power, my mind, to make the better
choice.  But `the law of sin, warring against the law of my
mind,' and binding me, as with iron chains, held me captive to
the love of things present.

"But `after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour' was
pleased to deliver me from that harsh captivity, he enabled my
mind to overcome the law of sin, and opened mine eyes to discern
good from evil.  Thereupon I perceived and looked, and behold!
all things present are vanity and vexation of spirit, as
somewhere in his writings saith Solomon the wise.  Then was the
veil of sin lifted from mine heart, and the dullness, proceeding
from the grossness of my body, which pressed upon my soul, was
scattered, and I perceived the end for which I was created, and
how that it behoved me to move upward to my Creator by the
keeping of his Commandments.  Wherefore I left all and followed
him, and I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord that he
delivered me out of the mire, and from the making of bricks, and
from the harsh and deadly ruler of the darkness of this world,
and that he showed me the short and easy road whereby I shall be
able, in this earthen body, eagerly to embrace the Angelic life.
Seeking to attain to it the sooner, I chose to walk the strait
and narrow way, renouncing the vanity of things present and the
unstable changes and chances thereof, and refusing to call
anything good except the true good, from which thou, O king, art
miserably sundered and alienated.  Wherefore also we ourselves
were alienated and separated from thee, because thou wert falling
into plain and manifest destruction, and wouldst constrain us
also to descend into like peril.  But as long as we were tried in
the warfare of this world, we failed in no point of duty.  Thou
thyself will bear me witness that we were never charged with
sloth or heedlessness.

"But when thou hast endeavoured to rob us of the chiefest of all
blessings, our religion, and to deprive us of God, the worst of
deprivations, and, in this intent, dost remind us of past honours
and preferments, how should I not rightly tax thee with ignorance
of good, seeing that thou dost at all compare these two things,
righteousness toward God, and human friendship, and glory, that
runneth away like water?  And how, in such ease, may we have
fellowship with thee, and not the rather deny ourselves
friendship and honours and love of children, and if there be any
other tie greater than these?  When we see thee, O king, the
rather forgetting thy reverence toward that God, who giveth thee
the power to live and breathe, Christ Jesus, the Lord of all;
who, being alike without beginning, and coeternal with the
Father, and having created the heavens and the earth by his word,
made man with his own hands and endowed him with immortality, and
set him king of all on earth and assigned him Paradise, the
fairest place of all, as his royal dwelling.  But man, beguiled
by envy, and (wo is me!) caught by the bait of pleasure,
miserably fell from all these blessings.  So he that once was
enviable became a piteous spectacle, and by his misfortune
deserving of tears.  Wherefore he, that had made and fashioned
us, looked again with eyes of compassion upon the work of his own
hands.  He, not laying aside his God-head, which he had from the
beginning, was made man for our sakes, like ourselves, but
without sin, and was content to suffer death upon the Cross.  He
overthrew the foeman that from the beginning had looked with
malice on our race; he rescued us from that bitter captivity; he,
of his goodness, restored to us our former freedom, and, of his
tender love towards mankind, raised us up again to that place
from whence by our disobedience we had fallen, granting us even
greater honour than at the first.

"Him therefore, who endured such sufferings for our sakes, and
again bestowed such blessings upon us, him dost thou reject and
scoff at his Cross?  And, thyself wholly riveted to carnal
delights and deadly passions, dost thou proclaim the idols of
shame and dishonour gods?  Not only hast thou alienated thyself
from the commonwealth of heavenly felicity but thou hast also
severed from the same all others who obey thy commands, to the
peril of their souls.  Know therefore that I will not obey thee,
nor join thee in such ingratitude to God-ward; neither will I
deny my benefactor and Saviour, though thou slay me by wild
beasts, or give me to the fire and sword, as thou hast the power.
For I neither fear death, nor desire the present world, having
passed judgement on the frailty and vanity thereof.  For what is
there profitable, abiding or stable therein?  Nay, in very
existence, great is the misery, great the pain, great and
ceaseless the attendant care.  Of its gladness and enjoyment the
yoke-fellows are dejection and pain.  Its riches is poverty; its
loftiness die lowest humiliation; and who shall tell the full
tale of its miseries, which Saint John the Divine hath shown me
in few words?  For he saith, `The whole world lieth in
wickedness'; and, `Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world.  For all that is in the world is the lust of
the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.  And
the world passeth away, and the lust thereof, but he that doeth
the will of God abideth for ever.'  Seeking, then, this good will
of God, I have forsaken everything, and joined myself to those
who possess the same desire, and seek after the same God. 
Amongst these there is no strife or envy, sorrow or care, but all
run the like race that they may obtain those everlasting
habitations which the Father of lights hath prepared for them
that love him.  Them have I gained for my fathers, my brothers,
my friends and mine acquaintances.  But from my former friends
and brethren `I have got me away far off, and lodged in the
wilderness' waiting for the God, who saveth me from faintness of
spirit, and from the stormy tempest."

When the man of God had made answer thus gently and in good
reason, the king was stirred by anger, and was minded cruelly to
torment the saint; but again he hesitated and delayed, regarding
his venerable and noble mien.  So he answered and said:

"Unhappy man, that hast contrived thine own utter ruin, driven
thereto, I ween, by fate, surely thou hast made thy tongue as
sharp as thy wits.  Hence thou hast uttered these vain and
ambiguous babblings.  Had I not promised, at the beginning of our
converse, to banish Anger from mid court, I had now given thy
body to be burned.  But since thou hast prevented and tied me
down fast by my words, I bear with thine effrontery, by reason of
my former friendship with thee.  Now, arise, and flee for ever
from my sight, lest I see thee again and miserably destroy thee."

So the man of God went out and withdrew to the desert, grieved to
have lost the crown of martyrdom, but daily a martyr in his
conscience, and `wrestling against principalities and powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness'; as saith Blessed Paul.  But after his
departure, the king waxed yet more wroth, and devised a yet
fiercer persecution of the monastic order, while treating with
greater honour the ministers and temple-keepers of his idols.

While the king was under this terrible delusion and error, there
was born unto him a son, a right goodly child, whose beauty from
his very birth was prophetic of his future fortunes.  Nowhere in
that land, they said, had there ever been seen so charming and
lovely a babe.  Full of the keenest joy at the birth of the
child, the king called him Ioasaph, and in his folly went in
person to the temples of his idols, for to do sacrifice and offer
hymns of praise to his still more foolish gods, unaware of the
real giver of all good things, to whom he should have offered the
spiritual sacrifice.  He then, ascribing the cause Of his son's
birth to things lifeless and dumb, sent out into all quarters to
gather the people together to celebrate his son's birth-day: and
thou mightest have seen all the folk running together for fear of
the king, and bringing their offerings ready for the sacrifice,
according to the store at each man's hand, and his favour toward
his lord.  But chiefly the king stirred them up to emulation.  He
brought full many oxen, of goodly size, for sacrifice, and thus,
making a feast for all his people, he bestowed largesses on all
his counsellors and officers, and on all his soldiers, and all
the poor, and men of low degree.


III.

Now on his son's birth-day feast there came unto the king some
five and fifty chosen men, schooled in the star-lore of the
Chaldaeans.  These the king called into his presence, and asked
them, severally, to tell him the future of the new-born babe.
After long counsel held, they said that he should be mighty in
riches and power, and should surpass all that had reigned before
him.  But one of the astrologers, the most learned of all his
fellows, spake thus: "From that which I learn from the courses of
the stars, O king, the advancement of the child, now born unto
thee, will not be in thy kingdom, but in another, a better and a
greater one beyond compare.  Methinketh also that he will embrace
the Christian religion, which thou persecutest, and I trow that
he will not be disappointed of his aim and hope."  Thus spake the
astrologer, like Balaam of old, not that his star-lore told him
true, but because God signifieth the truth by the mouth of his
enemies, that all excuse may be taken from the ungodly.

But when the king heard thereof, he received the tidings with a
heavy heart, and sorrow cut short his joy.  Howsoever he built,
in a city set apart, an exceeding beautiful palace, with
cunningly devised gorgeous chambers, and there set his son to
dwell, after he had ended his first infancy; and he forbade any
to approach him, appointing, for instructors and servants, youths
right seemly to behold.  These he charged to reveal to him none
of the annoys of life, neither death, nor old age, nor disease,
nor poverty, nor anything else grievous that might break his
happiness: but to place before him everything pleasant and
enjoyable, that his heart, revelling in these delights, might not
gain strength to consider the future, nor ever hear the bare
mention of the tale of Christ and his doctrines.  For he was
heedful of the astrologer's warning, and it was this most that he
was minded to conceal from his son.  And if any of the attendants
chanced to fall sick, he commanded to have him speedily removed,
and put another plump and well-favoured servant in his place,
that the boy's eyes might never once behold anything to disquiet
them.  Such then was the intent and doing of the king, for,
'seeing, he did not see, and hearing, he did not understand.'

But, learning that some monks still remained, of whom he fondly
imagined that not a trace was left, he became angry above
measure, and his fury was hotly kindled against them.  And he
commanded heralds to scour all the city and all the country,
proclaiming that after three days no monk whatsoever should be
found therein.  But and if any were discovered after the set
time, they should be delivered to destruction by fire and sword.
"For," said he, "these be they that persuade the people to
worship the Crucified as God."  Meanwhile a thing befell, that
made the king still more angry and bitter against the monks.


IV.

There was at court a man pre-eminent among the rulers, of
virtuous life and devout in religion.  But while working out his
own salvation, as best he might, he kept it secret for fear of
the king.  Wherefore certain men, looking enviously on his free
converse with the king, studied how they might slander him; and
this was all their thought.  On a day, when the king went forth
a-hunting with his bodyguard, as was his wont, this good man was
of the hunting party.  While he was walking alone, by divine
providence, as I believe, he found a man in a covert, cast to the
ground, his foot grievously crushed by a wild-beast.  Seeing him
passing by, the wounded man importuned him not to go his way, but
to pity his misfortune, and take him to his own home, adding
thereto: "I hope that I shall not be found unprofitable, nor
altogether useless unto thee."  Our nobleman said unto him, "For
very charity I will take thee up, and render thee such service as
I may.  But what is this profit which thou saidest that I should
receive of thee?"  The poor sick man answered,"I am a physician
of words.  If ever in speech or converse any wound or damage be
found, I will heal it with befitting medicines, that so the evil
spread no further."  The devout man gave no heed to his word, but
on account of the commandment, ordered him to be carried home,
and grudged him not that tending which he required.  But the
aforesaid envious and malignant persons, bringing forth to light
that ungodliness with which they had long been in travail,
slandered this good man to the king; that not only did he forget
his friendship with the king, and neglect the worship of the
gods, and incline to Christianity, but more, that he was
grievously intriguing against the kingly power, and was turning
aside the common people, and stealing all hearts for himself.
"But," said they, "if thou wilt prove that our charge is not
ungrounded, call him to thee privately; and, to try him, say that
thou desirest to leave thy fathers' religion, and the glory of
thy kingship, and to become a Christian, and to put on the
monkish habit which formerly thou didst persecute, having, thou
shalt tell him, found thine old course evil."  The authors of
this villainous charge against the Christian knew the tenderness
of his heart, how that, if he heard such speech from the king, he
would advise him, who had made this better choice, not to put off
his good determinations, and so they would be found just
accusers.

But the king, not forgetful of his friend's great kindness toward
him, thought these accusations incredible and false; and because
he might not accept them without proof, he resolved to try the
fact and the charge. So he called the man apart and said, to
prove him, "Friend, thou knowest of all my past dealings with
them that are called monks and with all the Christians.  But now,
I have repented in this matter, and, lightly esteeming the
present world, would fain become partaker of those hopes whereof
I have heard them speak, of some immortal kingdom in the life to
come; for the present is of a surety cut short by death.  And in
none other way, methinks, can I succeed herein and not miss the
mark except I become a Christian, and, bidding farewell to the
glory of my kingdom and all the pleasures and joys of life, go
seek those hermits and monks, wheresoever they be, whom I have
banished, and join myself to their number.  Now what sayest thou
thereto, and what is thine advice?  Say on; I adjure thee in the
name of truth; for I know thee to be true and wise above all
men."

The worthy man, hearing this, but never guessing the hidden
pitfall, was pricked in spirit, and, melting into tears, answered
in his simplicity, "O king, live for ever!  Good and sound is the
determination that thou hast determined; for though the kingdom
of heaven be difficult to find, yet must a man seek it with all
his might, for it is written, `He that seeketh shall find it.'
The enjoyment of the present life, though in seeming it give
delight and sweetness, is well thrust from us.  At the very
moment of its being it ceaseth to be, and for our joy repayeth us
with sorrow sevenfold.  Its happiness and its sorrow are more
frail than a shadow, and, like the traces of a ship passing over
the sea, or of a bird flying through the air, quickly disappear.
But the hope of the life to come which the Christians preach is
certain, and as surety sure; howbeit in this world it hath
tribulation, whereas our pleasures now are short-lived, and in
the beyond they only win us correction and everlasting punishment
without release.  For the pleasures of such life are temporary,
but its pains eternal; while the Christians' labours are
temporary, but their pleasure and gain immortal.  Therefore well
befall this good determination of the king!  for right good it is
to exchange the corruptible for the eternal."

The king heard these words and waxed exceeding wroth:
nevertheless he restrained his anger, and for the season let no
word fall.  But the other, being shrewd and quick of wit,
perceived that the king took his word ill, and was craftily
sounding him.  So, on his coming home, he fell into much grief
and distress in his perplexity how to conciliate the king and to
escape the peril hanging over his own head.  But as he lay awake
all the night long, there came to his remembrance the man with
the crushed foot; so he had him brought before him, and said, "I
remember thy saying that thou weft an healer of injured speech."
"Yea," quoth he, "and if thou wilt I will give thee proof of my
skill."  The senator answered and told him of his aforetime
friendship with the king, and of the confidence which he had
enjoyed, and of the snare laid for him in his late converse with
the king; how he had given a good answer, but the king had taken
his words amiss, and by his change of countenance betrayed the
anger lurking within his heart.

The sick beggar-man considered and said, "Be it known unto thee,
most noble sir, that the king harboureth against thee the
suspicion, that thou wouldest usurp his kingdom, and he spake, as
he spake, to sound thee.  Arise therefore, and crop thy hair.
Doff these thy fine garments, and don an hair-shirt, and at
daybreak present thyself before the king.  And when he asketh
thee, `What meaneth this apparel?' answer him, `It hath to do
with thy communing with me yesterday, O king.  Behold, I am ready
to follow thee along the road that thou art eager to travel; for
though luxury be desirable and passing sweet, God forbid that I
embrace it after thou art gone!  Though the path of virtue, which
thou art about to tread, be difficult and rough, yet in thy
company I shall find it easy and pleasant, for as I have shared
with thee this thy prosperity so now will I share thy distresses,
that in the future, as in the past, I may be thy fellow.'"  Our
nobleman, approving of the sick man's saying, did as he said.
When the king saw and heard him, he was delighted, and beyond
measure gratified by his devotion towards him.  He saw that the
accusations against his senator were false, and promoted him to
more honour and to a greater enjoyment of his confidence.  But
against the monks he again raged above measure, declaring that
this was of their teaching, that men should abstain from the
pleasures of life, and rock themselves in visionary hopes.

Another day, when he was gone a-hunting, he espied two monks
crossing the desert.  These he ordered to be apprehended and
brought to his chariot.  Looking angrily upon them, and breathing
fire, as they say, "Ye vagabonds and deceivers," he cried, "have
ye not heard the plain proclamation of the heralds, that if any
of your execrable religion were found, after three days, in any
city or country within my realm, he should be burned with fire?"
The monks answered, "Lo! obedient to thine order, we be coming
out of thy cities and coasts.  But as the journey before us is
long, to get us away to our brethren, being in want of victuals,
we were making provision for the way, that we perish not with
hunger."  Said the king, "He that dreadeth menace of death
busieth not himself with the purveyante of victuals."  "Well
spoken, O king," cried the monks.  "They that dread death have
concern how to escape it.  And who are these but such as cling to
things temporary and are enamoured of them, who, having no good
hopes yonder, find it hard to be wrenched from this present
world, and therefore dread death?  But we, who have long since
hated the world and the things of the world, and are walking
along the narrow and strait road, for Christ his sake, neither
dread death, nor desire the present world, but only long for the
world to come.  Therefore, forasmuch the death that thou art
bringing upon us proveth but the passage to that everlasting and
better life, it is rather to be desired of us than feared."

Hereupon the king, wishing to entrap the monks, as I ween,
shrewdly said, "How now?  Said ye not but this instant, that ye
were withdrawing even as I commanded you?  And, if ye fear not
death, how came ye to be fleeing?  Lo!  this is but another of
your idle boasts and lies."  The monks answered, "Tis not because
we dread the death wherewith thou dost threaten us that we flee,
but because we pity thee. `Twas in order that we might not bring
on thee greater condemnation, that we were eager to escape.  Else
for ourselves we are never a whit terrified by thy threats."  At
this the king waxed wroth and bade burn them with fire.  So by
fire were these servants of God made perfect, and received the
Martyr's crown.  And the king published a decree that, should any
be found leading a monk's life, he should be put to death without
trial.  Thus was there left in that country none of the monastic
order, save those that had hid them in mountains and caverns and
holes of the earth.  So much then concerning this matter.


V.

But meanwhile, the king's son, of whom our tale began to tell,
never departing from the palace prepared for him, attained to the
age of manhood.  He had pursued all the learning of the
Ethiopians and Persians, and was as fair and well favoured in
mind as in body, intelligent and prudent, and shining in all
excellencies.  To his teachers he would propound such questions
of natural history that even they marvelled at the boy's
quickness and understanding, while the king was astounded at the
charm of his countenance and the disposition of his soul.  He
charged the attendants of the young prince on no account to make
known unto him any of the annoys of life, least of all to tell
him that death ensueth on the pleasures of this world.  But vain
was the hope whereon he stayed, and he was like the archer in the
tale that would shoot at the sky.  For how could death have
remained unknown to any human creature?  Nor did it to this boy;
for his mind was fertile of wit, and he would reason within
himself, why his father had condemned him never to go abroad, and
had forbidden access to all.  He knew, without hearing it, that
this was his father's express command.  Nevertheless he feared to
ask him; it was not to be believed that his father intended aught
but his good; and again, if it were so by his father's will, his
father would not reveal the true reason, for all his asking.
Wherefore he determined to learn the secret from some other
source.  There was one of his tutors nearer and dearer to him
than the rest, whose devotion he won even further by handsome
gifts.  To him he put the question what his father might mean by
thus enclosing him within those walls, adding, "If thou wilt
plainly tell me this, of all thou shalt stand first in my favour,
and I will make with thee a covenant of everlasting friendship."
The tutor, himself a prudent man, knowing how bright and mature
was the boy's wit and that he would not betray him, to his peril,
discovered to him the whole matter the persecution of the
Christians and especially of the anchorets decreed by the king,
and how they were driven forth and banished from the country
round about; also the prophecies of the astrologers at his birth.
"'Twas in order," said he, "that thou mightest never hear of
their teaching, and choose it before our religion, that the king
hath thus devised that none but a small company should dwell with
thee, and hath commanded us to acquaint thee with none of the
woes of life."  When the young prince heard this he said never a
word more, but the word of salvation took hold of his heart, and
the grace of the Comforter began to open wide the eyes of his
understanding, leading him by the hand to the true God, as our
tale in its course shall tell.

Now the king his father came oftentimes to see his boy, for he
loved him passing well.  On a day his son said unto him, "There
is something that I long to learn from thee, my lord the king, by
reason of which continual grief and unceasing care consumeth my
soul."  His father was grieved at heart at the very word, and
said, "Tell me, darling child, what is the sadness that
constraineth thee, and straightway I will do my diligence to turn
it into gladness."  The boy said, "What is the reason of mine
imprisonment here?  Wily hast thou barred me within walls and
doors, never going forth and seen of none?"  His father replied,
"Because I will not, my son, that thou shouldest behold anything
to embitter thy heart or mar thy happiness.  I intend that thou
shalt spend all thy days in luxury unbroken, and in all manner
joy and pleasaunce."  "But," said the son unto his father, "know
well, Sir, that thus I live not in joy and pleasaunce, but rather
in affliction and great straits, so that my very meat and drink
seem distasteful unto me and bitter.  I yearn to see all that
lieth without these gates.  If then thou wouldest not have me
live in anguish of mind, bid me go abroad as I desire, and let me
rejoice my soul with sights hitherto unseen by mine eyes."

Grieved was the king to hear these words, but, perceiving that to
deny this request would but increase his boy's pain and grief, he
answered, "My son, I will grant thee thy heart's desire."  And
immediately he ordered that choice steeds, and an escort fit  for
a king, be made ready, and gave him license to go abroad
whensoever he would, charging his companions to suffer nothing
unpleasant to come in his way, but to show him all that was
beautiful and gladsome.  He bade them muster in the way troops of
folk intuning melodies in every mode, and presenting divers mimic
shows, that these might occupy and delight his mind.

So thus it came to pass that the king's son often went abroad.
One day, through the negligence of his attendants, he descried
two men, the one maimed, and the other blind.  In abhorrence of
the sight, he cried to his esquires, "Who are these, and what is
this distressing spectacle?"  They, unable to conceal what he had
with his own eyes seen, answered, "These be human sufferings,
which spring from corrupt matter, and from a body full of evil
humours."  The young prince asked, "Are these the fortune of all
men?"  They answered, "Not of all, but of those in whom the
principle of health is turned away by the badness of the
humours."  Again the youth asked, "If then this is wont to happen
not to all, but only to some, can they be known on whom this
terrible calamity shall fall?  or is it undefined and
unforeseeable?"  "What man," said they, "can discern the future,
and accurately ascertain it?  This is beyond human nature, and is
reserved for the immortal gods alone."  The young prince ceased
from his questioning, but his heart was grieved at the sight that
he had witnessed, and the form of his visage was changed by the
strangeness of the matter.

Not many days after, as he was again taking his walks abroad, he
happened with an old man, well stricken in years, shrivelled in
countenance, feeble-kneed, bent double, grey-haired, toothless,
and with broken utterance.  The prince was seized with
astonishment, and, calling the old man near, desired to know the
meaning of this strange sight.  His companions answered, "This
man is now well advanced in years, and his gradual decrease of
strength, with increase of weakness, hath brought him to the
misery that thou seest."  "And," said he, "what will be his end?"
They answered, "Naught but death will relieve him."  "But," said
he, "is this the appointed doom of all mankind?  Or doth it
happen only to some?"  They answered, "Unless death come before
hand to remove him, no dweller on earth, but, as life advanceth,
must make trial of this lot."  Then the young prince asked in how
many years this overtook a man, and whether the doom of death was
without reprieve, and whether there was no way to escape it, and
avoid coming to such misery.  They answered him, "In eighty or an
hundred years men arrive at this old age, and then they die,
since there is none other way; for death is a debt due to nature,
laid on man from the beginning, and its approach is inexorable."

When our wise and sagacious young prince saw and heard all this,
he sighed from the bottom of his heart.  "Bitter is this life,"
cried he, "and fulfilled of all pain and anguish, if this be so.
And how can a body be careless in the expectation of an unknown
death, whose approach (ye say) is as uncertain as it is
inexorable?"  So he went away, restlessly turning over all these
things in his mind, pondering without end, and ever calling up
remembrances of death.  Wherefore trouble and despondency were
his companions, and his grief knew no ease; for he said to
himself, "And is it true that death shall one day overtake me?
And who is he that shall make mention of me after death, when
time delivereth all things to forgetfulness?  When dead, shall I
dissolve into nothingness?  Or is there life beyond, and another
world?"  Ever fretting over these and the like considerations, he
waxed pale and wasted away, but in the presence of his father,
whenever he chanced to come to him, he made as though he were
cheerful and without trouble, unwilling that his cares should
come to his father's knowledge.  But he longed with an
unrestrainable yearning, to meet with the man that might
accomplish his heart's desire, and fill his ears with the sound
of good tidings.

Again he enquired of the tutor of whom we have spoken, whether he
knew of anybody able to help him towards his desire, and to
establish a mind, dazed and shuddering at its cogitations, and
unable to throw off its burden.  He, recollecting their former
communications, said, "I have told thee already how thy father
hath dealt with the wise men and anchorets who spend their lives
in such philosophies.  Some hath he slain, and others he hath
wrathfully persecuted, and I wot not whether any of this sort be
in this country side."  Thereat the prince was overwhelmed with
woe, and grievously wounded in spirit.  He was like unto a man
that hath lost a great treasure, whose whole heart is occupied in
seeking after it.  Thenceforth he lived in perpetual conflict and
distress of mind, and all the pleasures and delights of this
world were in his eyes an abomination and a curse.  While the
youth was in this way, and his soul was crying out to discover
that which is good, the eye that beholdeth all things looked upon
him, and he that willeth that `all men should be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the truth,' passed him not by, but showed
this man also the tender love that he hath toward mankind, and
made known upon him the path whereon he needs must go.  Befel it
thus.


VI.

There was at that time a certain monk, learned in heavenly
things, graced in word and deed, a model follower of every
monastic rule.  Whence he sprang, and what his race, I cannot
say, but he dwelt in a waste howling wilderness in the land of
Senaar, and had been perfected through the grace of the
priesthood.  Barlaam was this elder's name.  He, learning by
divine revelation the state of the king's son, left the desert
and returned to the world.  Changing his habit, he put on lay
attire, and, embarking on ship board, arrived at the seat of the
empire of the Indians.  Disguised as a merchant man, he entered
the city, where was the palace of the king's son.  There he
tarried many days, and enquired diligently concerning the
prince's affairs, and those that had access to him.  Learning
that the tutor, of whom we have spoken, was the prince's most
familiar friend, he privily approached him, saying,

"I would have thee understand, my lord, that I am a merchant man,
come from a far country; and I possess a precious gem, the like
of which was never yet found, and hitherto I have shewed it to no
man.  But now I reveal the secret to thee, seeing thee to be wise
and prudent, that thou mayest bring me before the king's son, and
I will present it to him.  Beyond compare, it surpasseth all
beautiful things; for on the blind in heart it hath virtue to
bestow the light of wisdom, to open the ears of the deaf, to give
speech to the dumb and strength to the ailing.  It maketh the
foolish wise and driveth away devils, and without stint
furnisheth its possessor with everything that is lovely and
desirable."  The tutor said, "Though, to all seeming, thou art a
man of staid and steadfast judgment, yet thy words prove thee to
be boastful beyond measure.  Time would fail me to tell thee the
full tale of the costly and precious gems and pearls that I have
seen.  But gems, with such power as thou tellest of, I never saw
nor heard of yet.  Nevertheless shew me the stone; and if it be
as thou affirmest, I immediately bear it to the king's son, from
whom thou shalt receive most high honours and rewards.  But,
before I be assured by the certain witness of mine own eyes, I
may not carry to my lord and master so swollen a tale about so
doubtful a thing."  Quoth Barlaam, "Well hast thou said that thou
hast never seen or heard of such powers and virtues; for my
speech to thee is on no ordinary matter, but on a wondrous and a
great.  But, as thou desiredst to behold it, listen to my words.

"This exceeding precious gem, amongst these its powers and
virtues, possesseth this property besides.  It cannot be seen out
of hand, save by one whose eyesight is strong and sound, and his
body pure and thoroughly undefiled.  If any man, lacking in these
two good qualities, do rashly gaze upon this precious stone, he
shall, I suppose lose even the eyesight that he hath, and his
wits as well.  Now I, that am initiated in the physician's art,
observe that thine eyes are not healthy, and I fear lest I may
cause thee to lose even the eyesight that thou hast.  But of the
king's son, I have heard that he leadeth a sober life, and that
his eyes are young and fair, and healthy.  Wherefore to him I
make bold to display this treasure.  Be not thou then negligent
herein, nor rob thy master of so wondrous a boon."  The other
answered, "If this be so, in no wise show me the gem; for my life
hath been polluted by many sins, and also, as thou sayest, I am
not possest of good eyesight.  But I am won by thy words, and
will not hesitate to make known these things unto my lord the
prince."  So saying, he went in, and, word by word, reported
everything to the king's son.  He, hearing his tutor's words,
felt a strange joy and spiritual gladness breathing into his
heart, and, like one inspired, bade bring in the man forthwith.

So when Barlaam was come in, and had in due order wished him
Peace!, the prince bade him be seated.  Then his tutor withdrew,
and Ioasaph said unto the elder, "Shew me the precious gem,
concerning which, as my tutor hath narrated, thou tellest such
great and marvellous tales."  Then began Barlaam to discourse
with him thus: "It is not fitting, O prince, that I should say
anything falsely or unadvisedly to thine excellent majesty.  All
that hath been signified to thee from me is true and may not be
gainsaid.  But, except I first make trial of thy mind, it is not
lawful to declare to thee this mystery; for my master saith,
'There went out a sower to sow his seed: and, as he sowed, some
seeds fell by the wayside, and the fowls of the air came and
devoured them up: some fell upon stony places, where they had not
much earth: and forthwith they sprang up, because they had no
deepness of earth: and when the sun was up, they were scorched:
and because they had no root, they withered away.  And some fell
among thorns; and the thorns sprung up and choked them: but
others fell upon good ground, and brought forth fruit an
hundredfold.'  Now, if I find in thine heart fruit-bearing
ground, and good, I shall not be slow to plant therein the
heavenly seed, and manifest to thee the mighty mystery.  But and
if the ground be stony and thorny, and the wayside trodden down
by all who will, it were better never to let fall this seed of
salvation, nor to cast it for a prey to fowls and beasts, before
which I have been charged not to cast pearls.  But I am
'persuaded better things of thee, and things that accompany
salvation,' -- how that thou shalt see the priceless stone, and
it shall be given thee in the light of that stone to become
light, and bring forth fruit an hundredfold.  Aye, for thy sake I
gave diligence and accomplished a long journey, to shew thee
things which thou hast never seen, and teach thee things which
thou hast never heard."

Ioasaph said unto him, "For myself, reverend elder, I have a
longing, all irresistible passion to hear some new and goodly
word, and in mine heart there is kindled fire, cruelly burning
and urging me to learn the answer to some questions that will not
rest.  But until now I never happened on one that could satisfy
me as touching them.  But if I meet with some wise and
understanding man, and hear the word of salvation, I shall not
deliver it to the fowls of the air, I trow, nor yet to the beasts
of the field; nor shall I be found either stony or thorny-
hearted, as thou saidest, but I shall receive the word kindly,
and guard it wisely.  So if thou knowest any such like thing,
conceal it not from me, but declare it.  When I heard that thou
were come from a far country, my spirit rejoiced, and I had good
hope of obtaining through thee that which I desire.  Wherefore I
called thee straightway into my presence, and received thee in
friendly wise as one of my companions and peers, if so be that I
may not be disappointed of my hope."  Barlaam answered, "Fair are
thy deeds, and worthy of thy royal majesty; seeing that thou hast
paid no heed to my mean show, but hast devoted thyself to the
hope that lieth within.

"There was once a great and famous king: and it came to pass,
when he was riding on a day in his golden chariot, with his royal
guard, that there met him two men, clad in filthy rags, with
fallen-in faces, and pale as death.  Now the king knew that it
was by buffetings of the body and by the sweats of the monastic
life that they had thus wasted their miserable flesh.  So, seeing
them, he leapt anon from his chariot, fell on the ground, and did
obeisance.  Then rising, he embraced and greeted them tenderly.
But his noblemen and counsellors took offence thereat, deeming
that their sovran had disgraced his kingly honour.  But not
daring to reprove him to the face, they bade the king's own
brother tell the king not thus to insult the majesty of his
crown.  When he had told the king thereof, and had upbraided him
for his untimely humility, the king gave his brother an answer
which he failed to understand.

"It was the custom of that king, whenever he sentenced anyone to
death, to send a herald to his door, with a trumpet reserved for
that purpose, and at the sound of this trumpet all understood
that that man was liable to the penalty of death.  So when
evening was come, the king sent the death-trumpet to sound at his
brother's door; who, when he heard its blast, despaired of his
life, and all night long set his house in order.  At day-break,
robed in black and garments of mourning, with wife and children,
he went to the palace gate, weeping and lamenting.  The king
fetched him in, and seeing him in tears, said, `O fool, and slow
of understanding, how didst thou, who hast had such dread of the
herald of thy peer and brother (against whom thy conscience doth
not accuse thee of having committed any trespass) blame me for my
humility in greeting the heralds of my God, when they warned me,
in gentler tones than those of the trumpet, of my death and
fearful meeting with that Master against whom I know that I have
often grievously offended?  Lo!  then, it was in reproof of thy
folly that I played thee this turn, even as I will shortly
convict of vanity those that prompted thy reproof.'  Thus he
comforted his brother and sent him home with a gift.

"Then he ordered four wooden caskets to be made.  Two of these he
covered over all with gold, and, placing dead men's mouldering
bones therein, secured them with golden clasps.  The other two he
smeared over with pitch and tar, but filled them with costly
stones and precious pearls, and all manner of aromatic sweet
perfume.  He bound them fast with cords of hair, and called for
the noblemen who had blamed him for his manner of accosting the
men by the wayside.  Before them he set the four caskets, that
they might appraise the value of these and those.  They decided
that the golden ones were of greatest value, for, peradventure,
they contained kingly diadems and girdles.  But those, that were
be-smeared with pitch and tar, were cheap and of paltry worth,
said they.  Then said the king to them, `I know that such is your
answer, for with the eyes of sense ye judge the objects of sense,
but so ought ye not to do, but ye should rather see with the
inner eye the hidden worthlessness or value.'  Whereupon he
ordered the golden chests to be opened.  And when they were
thrown open, they gave out a loathsome smell and presented a
hideous sight.

"Said the king, `Here is a figure of those who are clothed in
glory and honour, and make great display of power and glory, but
within is the stink of dead men's bones and works of iniquity.'
Next, he commanded the pitched and tarred caskets also to be
opened, and delighted the company with the beauty and sweet
savour of their stores.  And he said unto them, `Know ye to whom
these are like?  They are like those lowly men, clad in vile
apparel, whose outward form alone ye beheld, and deemed it
outrageous that I bowed down to do them obeisance.  But through
the eyes of my mind I perceived the value and exceeding beauty of
their souls, and was glorified by their touch, and I counted them
more honourable than any chaplet or royal purple.'  Thus he
shamed his courtiers, and taught them not to be deceived by
outward appearances, but to give heed to the things of the soul.
After the example of that devout and wise king hast thou also
done, in that thou hast received me in good hope, wherein, as I
ween, thou shalt not be disappointed."  Ioasaph said unto him,
"Fair and fitting hath been all thy speech; but now I fain would
learn who is thy Master, who, as thou saidest at the first, spake
concerning the Sower."


VII.

Again therefore Barlaam took up his parable and said, "If thou
wilt learn who is my Master, it is Jesus Christ the Lord, the
only-begotten Son of God, `the blessed and only potentate, the
King of kings, and Lords of lords; who only hath immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto'; who with
the Father and the Holy Ghost is glorified.  I am not one of
those who proclaim from the house-top their wild rout of gods,
and worship lifeless and dumb idols, but one God do I acknowledge
and confess, in three persons glorified, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, but in one nature and substance, in one glory and
kingdom undivided.  He then is in three persons one God, without
beginning, and without end, eternal and everlasting, increate,
immutable and incorporeal, invisible, infinite, incomprehensible,
alone good and righteous, who created all things out of nothing,
whether visible or invisible.  First, he made the heavenly and
invisible powers, countless multitudes, immaterial and bodiless,
ministering spirits of the majesty of God.  Afterward he created
this visible world, heaven and earth and sea, which also he made
glorious with light and richly adorned it; the heavens with the
sun, moon and stars, and the earth with all manner of herbs and
divers living beasts, and the sea in turn with all kinds of
fishes.  `He spake the word and these all were made; he commanded
and they were created.'  Then with his own hands he created man,
taking dust of the ground for the fashioning of his body, but by
his own in-breathing giving him a reasonable and intelligent
soul, which, as it is written, was made after the image and
likeness of God: after his image, because of reason and free
will; after his likeness, because of the likeness of virtue, in
its degree, to God.  Him he endowed with free will and
immortality and appointed sovran over everything upon earth; and
from man he made woman, to be an helpmeet of like nature for him.

"And he planted a garden eastward in Eden, full of delight and
all heart's ease, and set thereto the man whom he had formed, and
commanded him freely to eat of all the heavenly trees therein,
but forbade him wholly the taste of a certain one which was
called the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thus saying,
'In the day that ye eat thereof ye shall surely die.'  But one of
the aforesaid angel powers, the marshall of one host, though he
bore in himself no trace of natural evil from his Maker's hand
but had been created for good, yet by his own free and deliberate
choice turned aside from good to evil, and was stirred up by
madness to the desire to take up arms against his Lord God.
Wherefore he was cast out of his rank and dignity, and in the
stead of his former blissful glory and angelick name received the
name of the `Devil' and `Satan' for his title.  God banished him
as unworthy of the glory above.  And together with him there was
drawn away and hurled forth a great multitude of the company of
angels under him, who were evil of choice, and chose in place of
good, to follow in the rebellion of their leader.  These were
called Devils, as being deluders and deceivers.

"Thus then did the devil utterly renounce the good, and assume an
evil nature; and he conceived spite against man, seeing himself
hurled from such glory, and man raised to such honour; and he
schemed to oust him from that blissful state.  So he took the
serpent for the workshop of his own guile.  Through him he
conversed with the woman, and persuaded her to eat of that
forbidden tree in the hope of being as God, and through her he
deceived Adam also, for that was the first man's name.  So Adam
ate of the tree of disobedience, and was banished by his maker
from that paradise of delight, and, in lieu of those happy days
and that immortal life, fell alas!  into this life of misery and
woe, and at the last received sentence of death.  Thenceforth the
devil waxed strong and boastful through his victory; and, as the
race of man multiplied, he prompted them in all manner of
wickedness.  So, wishing to cut short the growth of sin, God
brought a deluge on the earth, and destroyed every living soul.
But one single righteous man did God find in that generation; and
him, with wife and children, he saved alive in an Ark, and set
him utterly desolate on earth.  But, when the human race again
began to multiply, they forgat God, and ran into worse excess of
wickedness, being in subjection to divers sins and ruined in
strange delusions, and wandering apart into many branches of
error.

"Some deemed that everything moved by mere chance, and taught
that there was no Providence, since there was no master to
govern.  Others brought in fate, and committed everything to the
stars at birth.  Others worshipped many evil deities subject to
many passions, to the end that they might have them to advocate
their own passions and shameful deeds, whose forms they moulded,
and whose dumb figures and senseless idols they set up, and
enclosed them in temples, and did homage to them, `serving the
creature more than the Creator.'  Some worshipped the sun, moon
and stars which God fixed, for to give light to our earthly
sphere; things without soul or sense, enlightened and sustained
by the providence of God, but unable to accomplish anything of
themselves.  Others again worshipped fire and water, and the
other elements, things without soul or sense; and men, possest of
soul and reason, were not ashamed to worship the like of these.
Others assigned worship to beasts, creeping and four-footed
things, proving themselves more beastly than the things that they
worshipped.  Others made them images of vile and worthless men,
and named them gods, some of whom they called males, and some
females, and they themselves set them forth as adulterers,
murderers, victims of anger, jealousy, wrath, slayers of fathers,
slayers of brothers, thieves and robbers, lame and maim,
sorcerers and madmen.  Others they showed dead, struck by
thunderbolts, or beating their breasts, or being mourned over, or
in enslavement to mankind, or exiled, or, for foul and shameful
unions, taking the forms of animals.  Whence men, taking occasion
by the gods themselves, took heart to pollute themselves in all
manner of uncleanness.  So an horrible darkness overspread our
race in those times, and `there was none that did understand and
seek after God.'

"Now in that generation one Abraham alone was found strong in his
spiritual senses; and by contemplation of Creation he recognized
the Creator.  When he considered heaven, earth and sea, the sun,
moon and the like, he marvelled at their harmonious ordering.
Seeing the world, and all that therein is, he could not believe
that it had been created, and was upheld, by its own power, nor
did he ascribe such a fair ordering to earthly elements or
lifeless idols.  But therein he recognized the true God, and
understood him to be the maker and sustainer of the whole.  And
God, approving his fair wisdom and right judgement, manifested
himself unto him, not as he essentially is (for it is impossible
for a created being to see God), but by certain manifestations in
material forms, as he alone can, and he planted in Abraham more
perfect knowledge; he magnified him and made him his own servant.
Which Abraham in turn handed down to his children his own
righteousness, and taught them to know the true God.  Wherefore
also the Lord was pleased to multiply his seed beyond measure,
and called them `a peculiar people,' and brought them forth out
of bondage to the Egyptian nation, and to one Pharaoh a tyrant,
by strange and terrible signs and wonders wrought by the hand of
Moses and Aaron, holy men, honoured with the gift of prophecy; by
whom also he punished the Egyptians in fashion worthy of their
wickedness, and led the Israelites (for thus the people descended
from Abraham were called) through the Red Sea upon dry land, the
waters dividing and making a wall on the right hand and a wall on
the left.  But when Pharaoh and the Egyptians pursued and went in
after them, the waters returned and utterly destroyed them.  Then
with exceeding mighty miracles and divine manifestations by the
space of forty years he led the people in the wilderness, and fed
them with bread from heaven, and gave the Law divinely written on
tables of stone, which he delivered unto Moses on the mount, `a
type and shadow of things to come' leading men away from idols
and all manner of wickedness, and teaching them to worship only
the one true God, and to cleave to good works.  By such wondrous
deeds, he brought them into a certain goodly land, the which he
had promised aforetime to Abraham the patriarch, that he would
give it unto his seed.  And the task were long, to tell of all
the mighty and marvellous works full of glory and wonder, without
number, which he shewed unto them, by which it was his purpose to
pluck the human race from all unlawful worship and practice, and
to bring men back to their first estate.  But even so our nature
was in bondage by its freedom to err, and death had dominion over
mankind, delivering all to the tyranny of the devil, and to the
damnation of hell.

"So when we had sunk to this depth of misfortune and misery, we
were not forgotten by him that formed and brought us out of
nothing into being, nor did he suffer his own handiwork utterly
to perish.  By the good pleasure of our God and Father, and the
co-operation of the Holy Ghost, the only-begotten Son, even the
Word of God, which is in the bosom of the Father, being of one
substance with the Father and with the Holy Ghost, he that was
before all worlds, without beginning, who was in the beginning,
and was with God even the Father, and was God, he, I say,
condescended toward his servants with an unspeakable and
incomprehensible condescension; and, being perfect God, was made
perfect man, of the Holy Ghost, and of Mary the Holy Virgin and
Mother of God, not of the seed of man, nor of the will of man,
nor by carnal union, being conceived in the Virgin's undefiled
womb, of the Holy Ghost; as also, before his conception, one of
the Archangels was sent to announce to the Virgin that miraculous
conception and ineffable birth.  For without seed was the Son of
God conceived of the Holy Ghost, and in the Virgin's womb he
formed for himself a fleshy body, animate with a reasonable and
intelligent soul, and thence came forth in one substance, but in
two natures, perfect God and perfect man, and preserved
undefiled, even after birth, the virginity of her that bore him.
He, being made of like passions with ourselves in all things, yet
without sin, took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.  For,
since by sin death entered into the world, need was that he, that
should redeem the world, should be without sin, and not by sin
subject unto death.

"When he had lived thirty years among men, he was baptized in the
river Jordan by John, an holy man, and great above all the
prophets.  And when he was baptized there came a voice from
heaven, from God, even the Father, saying, `This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased,' and the Holy Ghost descended
upon him in likeness of a dove.  From that time forth he began to
do great signs and wonders, raising the dead, giving sight to the
blind, casting out devils, healing the lame and maim, cleansing
lepers, and everywhere renewing our out-worn nature, instructing
men both by word and deed, and teaching the way of virtue,
turning men from destruction and guiding their feet toward life
eternal.  Wherefore also he chose twelve disciples, whom he
called Apostles, and commanded them to preach the kingdom of
heaven which he came upon earth to declare, and to make heavenly
us who are low and earthly, by virtue of his Incarnation.

"But, through envy of his marvellous and divine conversation and
endless miracles, the chief priests and rulers of the Jews
(amongst whom also he dwelt, on whom he had wrought his aforesaid
signs and miracles), in their madness forgetting all, condemned
him to death, having seized one of the Twelve to betray him. 
And, when they had taken him, they delivered him to the Gentiles,
him that was the life of the world, he of his free will
consenting thereto; for he came for our sakes to suffer all
things, that he might free us from sufferings.  But when they had
done him much despite, at the last they condemned him to the
Cross.  All this he endured in the nature of that flesh which he
took from us, his divine nature remaining free of suffering: for,
being of two natures, both the divine and that which he took from
us, his human nature suffered, while his Godhead continued free
from suffering and death.  So our Lord Jesus Christ, being
without sin, was crucified in the flesh, for he did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth; and he was not subject unto
death, for by sin, as I have said before, came death into the
world; but for our sakes he suffered death in the flesh, that he
might redeem us from the tyranny of death.  He descended into
hell, and having harrowed it, he delivered thence souls that had
been imprisoned therein for ages long.  He was buried, and on the
third day he rose again, vanquishing death and granting us the
victory over death: and he, the giver of immortality, having made
flesh immortal, was seen of his disciples, and bestowed upon them
peace, and, through them, peace on the whole human race.

"After forty days he ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the
right hand of the Father.  And he shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead, and to reward every man according to his
works.  After his glorious Ascension into heaven he sent forth
upon his disciples the Holy Ghost in likeness of fire, and they
began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them
utterance.  From thence by his grace they were scattered abroad
among all nations, and preached the true Catholic Faith,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, and teaching them to observe all the commandments
of the Saviour.  So they gave light to the people that wandered
in darkness, and abolished the superstitious error of idolatry.
Though the enemy chafeth under his defeat, and even now stirreth
up war against us, the faithful, persuading the fools and unwise
to cling to the worship of idols, yet is his power grown feeble,
and his swords have at last failed him by the power of Christ.
Lo, in few words I have made known unto thee my Master, my God,
and my Saviour; but thou shalt know him more perfectly, if thou
wilt receive his grace into thy soul, and gain the blessing to
become his servant."


VIII.

When the king's son had heard these words, there flashed a light
upon his soul.  Rising from his seat in the fulness of his joy,
he embraced Barlaam, saying: "Most honoured sir, methinks this
might be that priceless stone which thou dost rightly keep
secret, not displaying it to all that would see it, but only to
these whose spiritual sense is strong.  For lo, as these words
dropped upon mine ear, sweetest light entered into my heart, and
the heavy veil of sorrow, that hath now this long time enveloped
my heart, was in an instant removed.  Tell me if my guess be
true: or if thou knowest aught better than that which thou hast
spoken, delay not to declare it to me."

Again, therefore, Barlaam answered, "Yea, my lord and prince,
this is the mighty mystery which hath been hid from ages and
generations, but in these last days hath been made known unto
mankind; the manifestation whereof, by the grace of the Holy
Ghost, was foretold by many prophets and righteous men,
instructed at sundry times and in divers manners.  In trumpet
tones they proclaimed it, and all looked forward to the salvation
that should be: this they desired to see, but saw it not.  But
this latest generation was counted worthy to receive salvation.
Wherefore he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but
he that believeth not shall be damned."

Said Ioasaph, "All that thou hast told me I believe without
question, and him whom thou declarest I glorify as God.  Only
make all plain to me, and teach me clearly what I must do.  But
especially go on to tell me what is that Baptism which thou
sayest that the Faithful receive."

The other answered him thus, "The root mid sure foundation of
this holy and perfect Christian Faith is the grace of heavenly
Baptism, fraught with the cleansing from all original sins, and
complete purification of all defilements of evil that come after.
For thus the Saviour commanded a man to be born again of water
and of the spirit, and be restored to his first dignity, to wit,
by supplication and by calling on the Saving Name, the Holy
Spirit brooding on the water.  We are baptized, then, according
to the word of the Lord, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and thus the grace of the Holy Ghost
dwelleth in the soul of the baptized, illuminating and making it
God-like and renewing that which was made after his own image and
likeness.  And for the time to come we cast away all the old
works of wickedness, and we make covenant with God of a second
life and begin a purer conversation, that we may also become
fellow-heirs with them that are born again to incorruption and
lay hold of everlasting salvation.  But without Baptism it is
impossible to attain to that good hope, even though a man be more
pious than piety itself.  For thus spake God, the Word, who was
incarnate for the salvation of our race, `Verily I say unto you,
except ye be born of water and of the Spirit, ye shall in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.'  Wherefore before all things I
require thee to receive faith within thy soul, and to draw near
to Baptism anon with hearty desire, and on no account to delay
herein, for delay is parlous, because of the uncertainty of the
appointed day of death."

Ioasaph said unto him, "And what is this good hope whereto thou
sayest it is impossible without baptism to attain?  And what this
kingdom which thou callest the kingdom of Heaven?  And how cometh
it that thou hast heard the words of God incarnate?  And what is
the uncertain day of death?  For on this account much anxiety
hath fallen on my heart, and consumeth my flesh in pain and
grief, and fasteneth on my very bones.  And shall we men,
appointed to die, return to nothing, or is there some other life
after our departure hence?  These and kindred questions I have
been longing to resolve."

Thus questioned he; and Barlaam answered thus: "The good hope,
whereof I spake, is that of the kingdom of Heaven.  But that
kingdom is far beyond the utterance of mortal tongue; for the
Scripture saith, `Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared
for them that love him.'  But when we have shuffled off this
gross flesh, and attained to that blessedness, then will that
Master, which hath granted to us not to fail of this hope, teach
and make known unto us the glory of those good things, whose
glory passeth all understanding: -- that light ineffable, that
life that hath no ending, that converse with Angels.  For if it
be granted us to hold communion with God, so far as is attainable
to human nature, then shall we know all things from his lips
which now we know not.  This doth my initiation into the teaching
of the divine Scriptures teach me to be the real meaning of the
kingdom of Heaven; to approach the vision of the blessed and
life-giving Trinity, and to be illumined with his unapproachable
light, and with clearer and purer sight, and with unveiled face,
to behold as in a glass his unspeakable glory.  But, if it be
impossible to express in language that glory, that light, and
those mysterious blessings, what marvel?  For they had not been
mighty and singular, if they had been comprehended by reason and
expressed in words by us who are earthly, and corruptible, and
clothed in this heavy garment of sinful flesh.  Holding then such
knowledge in simple faith, believe thou undoubtingly, that these
are no fictions; but by good works be urgent to lay hold on that
immortal kingdom, to which when thou hast attained, thou shalt
have perfect knowledge.

"As touching thy question, How it is that we have heard the words
of the Incarnate God, know thou that we have been taught all that
appertaineth to the divine Incarnation by the Holy Gospels, for
thus that holy book is called, because it telleth us, who are
corruptible and earthly, the `good spell' of immortality and
incorruption, of life eternal, of the remission of sins, and of
the kingdom of heaven.  This book was written by the eyewitnesses
and ministers of the Word, and of these I have already said that
our Lord Jesus Christ chose them for disciples and apostles; and
they delivered it unto us in writing, after the glorious
Ascension of our Master into Heaven, a record of his life on
earth, his teachings and miracles, so far as it was possible to
commit them to writing.  For thus, toward the end of his volume,
saith he that is the flower of the holy Evangelists, `And there
are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself
could not contain the books that should be written.'

"So in this heavenly Gospel, written by the Spirit of God, is
recorded the history of his Incarnation, his manifestation, his
miracles and acts.  Afterward, it telleth of the innocent
suffering which the Lord endured for our sake, of his holy
Resurrection on the third day, his Ascent into the heavens, and
of his glorious and dreadful second coming; for the Son of God
shall come again on earth, with unspeakable glory, and with a
multitude of the heavenly host to judge our race, and to reward
every man according to his works.  For, at the beginning, God
created man out of earth, as I have already told thee, and
breathed into him breath, which is called a reasonable and
understanding soul.  But since we were sentenced to death, we die
all: and it is not possible for this cup to pass any man by.  Now
death is the separation of the soul from the body.  And that body
which was formed out of earth, when severed from the soul,
returneth to earth from whence also it was taken, and, decaying,
perisheth; but the soul, being immortal, fareth whither her Maker
calleth, or rather to the place where she, while still in the
body, hath prepared for herself lodgement.  For as a man hath
lived here, so shall he receive reward there.

"Then, after long seasons, Christ our God shall come to judge the
world in awful glory, beyond words to tell; and for fear of him
the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and all the angel hosts
stand beside him in dread.  Then, at the voice of the archangel,
and at the trump of God, shall the dead arise and stand before
his awful throne.  Now the Resurrection is the re-uniting of soul
and body.  So that very body, which decayeth and perisheth, shall
arise incorruptible.  And concerning this, beware lest the
reasoning of unbelief overtake thee; for it is not impossible for
him, who at the beginning formed the body out of earth, when
according to its Maker's doom it hath returned to earth whence it
was taken, to raise the same again.  If thou wilt but consider
how many things God hath made out of nothing, this proof shall
suffice thee.  He took earth and made man, though earth was not
man before.  How then did earth become man?  And how was earth,
that did not exist, produced?  And what foundation hath it?  And
how were countless kind of things without reason, of seeds and
plants, produced out of it!  Nay, now also consider the manner of
our birth.  Is not a little seed thrown into the womb that
receiveth it?  Whence then cometh such a marvellous fashioning of
a living creature?

"So for him, who hath made everything out of nothing, and still
doth make, it is not impossible to raise deadened and corrupt
bodies from the earth, that every man may be rewarded according
to his works; for he saith, `The present is the time for work,
the future for recompense.'  Else, where were the justice of God,
if there were no Resurrection?  Many righteous men in this
present life have suffered much ill-usage and torment, and have
died violent deaths; and the impious and the law-breaker hath
spent his days here in luxury and prosperity.  But God, who is
good and just, hath appointed a day of resurrection and
inquisition, that each soul may receive her own body, and that
the wicked, who received his good things here, may there be
punished for his misdeeds, and that the good, who was here
chastised for his misdeeds, may there inherit his bliss.  For,
saith the Lord, `They that are in the graves shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and shall come forth; they that have done good
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto
the resurrection of doom.'  Then also shall thrones be set, and
the Ancient of days and Maker of all things shall sit as Judge,
and there shall be opened books with records of the deeds and
words and thoughts of all of us, and a fiery stream shall issue,
and all hidden things shall be revealed.  There can no advocate,
no persuasive words, no false excuse, no mightiness of riches, no
pomp of rank, no lavishment of bribes, avail to pervert righteous
judgement.  For he, the uncorrupt and truthful Judge, shall weigh
everything in the balance of justice, every act, word and
thought.  And they that have done good shall go into life
everlasting, into light unspeakable, rejoicing in the fellowship
of the Angels, to enjoy bliss ineffable, standing in purity
before the Holy Trinity.  But they that have done evil, and all
the ungodly and sinners, shall go into everlasting punishment,
which is called Gehenna, and outer darkness, and the worm that
dieth not, and the gnashing of teeth, and a thousand other names
of punishment; which meaneth rather -- bitterest of all, --
alienation from God, the being cast away from the sweetness of
his presence, the being deprived of that glory which baffleth
description, the being made a spectacle unto the whole creation,
and the being put to shame, and shame that hath no ending.  For,
after the passing of that terrible sentence, all things shall
abide immutable and unchangeable.  The blissful life of the
righteous shall have no close, neither shall the misery and
punishment of sinners find an end: because, after him, there is
no higher Judge, and no defence by after-works, no time for
amendment, no other way for them that are punished, their
vengeance being co-eternal with them.

"Seeing that this is so, what manner of persons ought we to be in
all holy conversation and godliness, that we may be counted
worthy to escape the wrath to come, and to be ranged on the right
hand of the Son of God?  For this is the station of the
righteous: but to sinners is allotted the station of misery on
the left.  Then shall the Lord call the righteous `Blessed,' and
shall lead them into his everlasting kingdom.  But, as for
sinners, with anger and curse he will banish them from his serene
and gentle countenance the bitterest and hardest lot of all and
will send them away into everlasting punishment."


IX.

Ioasaph said unto him, "Great and marvellous, sir, are the things
whereof thou tellest me, fearful and terrible, if indeed these
things be so, and, if there be after death and dissolution into
dust and ashes, a resurrection and re-birth, and rewards and
punishments for the deeds done during life.  But what is the
proof thereof?  And how have ye come to learn that which ye have
not seen, that ye have so steadfastly and undoubtingly believed
it?  As for things that have already been done and made manifest
in deed, though ye saw them not, yet have ye heard them from the
writers of history.  But, when it is of the future that ye preach
tidings of such vast import, how have ye made your conviction on
these matters sure?"

Quoth Barlaam, "From the past I gain certainty about the future;
for they that preached the Gospel, without erring from the truth,
but establishing their sayings by signs and wonders and divers
miracles, themselves also spake of the future.  So, as in the one
case they taught us nothing amiss or false, but made all that
they said and did to shine clearer than the sun, so also in the
other matter they gave us true doctrine, even that which our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ himself confirmed both by word and deed.
'Verily,' he spake, `I say unto you, the hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son
of God and they that hear shall live:' and again, `The hour
cometh when the dead shall hear his voice, and shall come forth,
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.'  And
again he said concerning the resurrection of the dead, `Have ye
not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.  God
is not the God of the dead but of the living.'  `For as the tares
are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of
this age.  The Son of God shall send forth his Angels, and they
shall gather all things that offend, and them which do iniquity,
and shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.  Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their father.'  Thus spake he
and added this thereto, `Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.'

"In such words and many more did the Lord make manifest the
resurrection of our bodies, and confirm his words in deed, by
raising many that were dead.  And, toward the end of his life
upon earth, he called from the grave one Lazarus his friend, that
had already been four days dead and stank, and thus he restored
the lifeless to life.  Moreover, the Lord himself became the
first-fruits of that resurrection which is final and no longer
subject unto death, after he had in the flesh tasted of death;
and on the third day he rose again, and became the first-born
from the dead.  For other men also were raised from the dead, but
died once more, and might not yet attain to the likeness of the
future true resurrection.  But he alone was the leader of that
resurrection, the first to be raised to the resurrection
immortal.

"This was the preaching also of them that from the beginning were
eye-witnesses and ministers of the word; for thus saith blessed
Paul, whose calling was not of men, but from heaven, `Brethren, I
declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you.  For I
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.  Now
if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?  For if the
dead rise not, then is not Christ raised.  And if Christ be not
raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins.  If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable.  But now is Christ risen from the dead and become the
first-fruits of them that slept.  For since by man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of the dead.  For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.'  And after a
little while, `For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality.  So when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory.  O death where is thy
sting?  O grave, where is thy victory?'  For then the power of
death is utterly annulled and destroyed, no longer working in us,
but for the future there is given unto men immortality and
incorruption for evermore.

"Beyond all question, therefore, there shall be a resurrection of
the dead, and this we believe undoubtingly.  Moreover we know
that there shall be rewards and punishments for the deeds done in
our life-time, on the dreadful day of Christ's coming, `wherein
the heavens shall be dissolved in fire and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat,' as saith one of the inspired clerks of
God; `nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
heavens and a new earth.'  For that there shall be rewards and
punishments for men's works, and that absolutely nothing, good or
bad, shall be overlooked, but that there is reserved a requital
for words, deeds and thoughts, is plain.  The Lord saith,
'Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a
cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, he shall in no
wise lose his reward.'  And again he saith, `When the Son of man
shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then
before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the
goats.  And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left.  Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, `Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world.  For I was an
hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed
me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came
unto me.'  Wherefore saith he this, except he count the kind acts
we do unto the needy as done unto himself?  And in another place
he saith, `Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also
confess before my Father which is in heaven.'

"Lo, by all these examples and many more he proveth that the
rewards of good works are certain and sure.  Further, that
punishments are in store for the bad, he foretold by parables
strange and wonderful, which he, the Well of Wisdom most wisely
put forth.  At one time he brought into his tale a certain rich
man which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day, but who was so niggardly and pitiless
toward the destitute as to overlook a certain beggar named
Lazarus laid at his gate, and not even to give him of the crumbs
from his table.  So when one and other were dead, the poor man,
full of sores, was carried away, he saith, into Abraham's bosom,
for thus he describeth the habitation of the righteous -- but the
rich man was delivered to the fire of bitter torment in hell.  To
him said Abraham, `Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus his evil things, but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented."

"And otherwhere he likeneth the kingdom of heaven to a certain
king which made a marriage-feast for his son and thereby he
declared future happiness and splendour.  For as he was wont to
speak to humble and earthly minded men, he would draw his
parables from homely and familiar things.  Not that he meant that
marriages and feasts exist in that world; but in condescension to
men's grossness, he employed these names when he would make known
to them the future.  So, as he telleth, the king with high
proclamation called all to come to the marriage to take their
fill of his wondrous store of good things.  But many of them that
were bidden made light of it and came not, and busied themselves:
some went to their farms, some to their merchandize, and others
to their newly wedded wives, and thus deprived themselves of the
splendour of the bride chamber.  Now when these had, of their own
choice, absented themselves from this joyous merriment, others
were bidden thereto, and the wedding was furnished with guests.
And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man
which had not on a wedding garment, and he said unto him,
"Friend, how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding
garment?"  And he was speechless.  Then Said the king to the
servants, "Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast
him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.'  Now they who made excuses and paid no heed to the call
are they that hasten not to the faith of Christ, but continue in
idolatry or heresy.  But he that had no wedding garment is he
that believeth, but hath soiled his spiritual garment with
unclean acts, and was rightly cast forth from the joy of the
bride chamber.

"And he put forth yet another parable, in harmony with this, in
his picture of the Ten Virgins, `five of whom were wise, and five
were foolish.  They that were foolish took their lamps and took
no oil with them, but the wise took oil.'  By the oil he
signifieth the acquiring of good works.  `And at midnight,' he
saith, `there was a cry made, "Behold the bridegroom cometh, go
ye out to meet him."'  By midnight he denoteth the uncertainty of
that time.  Then all those virgins arose.  `They that were ready
went forth to meet the bridegroom and went in with him to the
marriage, and the door was shut.'  But they that were un-ready
(whom rightly he calleth foolish), seeing that their lamps were
going out, went forth to buy oil.  Afterward they drew nigh, the
door being now shut, and cried, saying, `Lord, Lord, open to us.'
But he answered and said, `Verily I say unto you, I know you
not.'  Wherefore from all this it is manifest that there is a
requital not only for overt acts, but also for words and even
secret thoughts; for the Saviour said, `I say unto you, that for
every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgement.'  And again he saith, `But the
very hairs of your head are numbered,' by the hairs meaning the
smallest and slightest phantasy or thought.  And in harmony
herewith is the teaching of blessed Paul, `For the word of God,'
saith he, `is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, and piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart.  Neither is there any creature
that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and
laid bare unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do."

"These things also were proclaimed with wondrous clearness by the
prophets of old time, illumined by the grace of the Spirit.  For
Esay saith, `I know their works and their thoughts,' and will
repay them.  `Behold, I come to gather all nations and all
tongues; and they shall come and see my glory.  And the heaven
shall be new, and the earth, which I make before me.  And all
flesh shall come to worship before me, saith the Lord.  And they
shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be a spectacle unto
all flesh."  And again he saith concerning that day, "And the
heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all the stars
shall fall down as leaves from the vine.  For behold, the day of
the Lord cometh, cruel with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the
whole world desolate and to destroy the sinners out of it.  For
the stars of heaven and Orion and all the constellations of
heaven shall not give their light, and there shall be darkness at
the sun's rising, and the moon shall not give her light.  And I
will cause the arrogancy of the sinners to cease, and will lay
low the haughtiness of the proud.'  And again he saith, `Wo unto
them that draw their iniquities as with a long cord, and their
sins as with an heifer's cart-rope!  Wo unto them that call evil
good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!  Wo
unto those of you that are mighty, that are princes, that mingle
strong drink, which justify the wicked for reward, and take
justice from the just, and turn aside the judgement from the
needy, and take away the right from the poor, that the widow may
be their spoil and the fatherless their prey!  And what will they
do in the day of visitation, and to whom will they flee for help?
And where will they leave their glory, that they fall not into
arrest?  Like as stubble shall be burnt by live coal of fire, and
consumed by kindled flame, so their root shall be as foam, and
their blossom shall go up as dust, for they would not the law of
the Lord of hosts, and provoked the oracle of the Holy One of
Israel."

"In tune therewith saith also another prophet, `The great day of
the Lord is near, and hasteth greatly.  The bitter and austere
voice of the day of the Lord hath been appointed.  A mighty day
of wrath is that day, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wasteness and desolation, a day of blackness and gloominess, a
day of clouds and thick darkness, a day of the trumpet and alarm.
And I will bring distress upon the wicked, and they shall walk
like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord.
Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them
in the day of the Lord's wrath; for the whole land shall be
devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall make a
riddance of all them that dwell in the land.'  Moreover David,
the king and prophet, crieth thus, `God shall come visibly, even
our God, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall be kindled
before him, and a mighty tempest round about him.  He shall call
the heaven from above, and the earth, that he may judge his
people.'  And again he saith, `Arise, O God, judge thou the
earth, because "the fierceness of man shall turn to thy praise."
And thou shalt "reward every man according to his works."'  And
many other such things have been spoken by the Psalmist, and all
the Prophets inspired by the Holy Ghost, concerning the judgement
and the recompense to come.  Their words also have been most
surely confirmed by the Saviour who hath taught us to believe the
resurrection of the dead, and the recompense of the deeds done in
the flesh, and the unending life of the world to come."

X

But Ioasaph was filled hereby with deep compunction, and was
melted into tears; and he said to the elder, "Thou hast told me
everything plainly, and hast completed unerringly thy terrible
and marvellous tale.  With such truths set before us, what must
we do to escape the punishments in store for sinners, and to gain
the joy of the righteous?"

Barlaam answered: "It is written of Peter, who was also called
chief of the Apostles, that once when he was preaching the people
were pricked in their heart, like thyself to-day: and when they
asked, `What shall we do?', Peter said unto them, `Repent, and be
baptized every one of you for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.  For to you is the promise,
and to your children, and to all that are afar off even as many
as the Lord our God shall call.'  Behold therefore upon thee also
hath he poured forth the riches of his mercy, and hath called
thee that wert afar off from him in heart, and didst serve
others, not Gods, but pernicious devils and dumb and senseless
wooden images.  Wherefore before all things approach thou him who
hath called thee, and from him shalt thou receive the true
knowledge of things visible and invisible.  But if, after thy
calling, thou be loth or slack, thou shalt be disherited by the
just judgement of God, and by thy rejection of him thou shalt be
rejected.  For thus too spake the same Apostle Peter to a certain
disciple.  But I believe that thou hast heard the call, and that,
when thou hast heard it more plainly, thou wilt take up thy
Cross, and follow that God and Master that calleth thee, calleth
thee to himself from death unto life, and from darkness unto
light.  For, soothly, ignorance of God is darkness and death of
the soul; and to serve idols, to the destruction of all nature,
is to my thinking the extreme of all senselessness.

"But idolaters -- to whom shall I compare them, and to what
likeness shall I liken their silliness?  Well, I will set before
thee an example which I heard from the lips of one most wise.

"'Idol worshippers,' said he, `are like a fowler who caught a
tiny bird, called nightingale.  He took a knife, for to kill and
eat her; but the nightingale, being given the power of articulate
speech, said to the fowler, `Man, what advantageth it thee to
slay me?  for thou shalt not be able by my means to fill thy
belly.  Now free me of my fetters, and I will give thee three
precepts, by the keeping of which thou shalt be greatly benefited
all thy life long.'  He, astonied at her speech, promised that,
if he heard anything new from her, he would quickly free her from
her captivity.  The nightingale turned towards our friend and
said, `Never try to attain to the unattainable: never regret the
thing past and gone: and never believe the word that passeth
belief.  Keep these three precepts, and may it be well with
thee.'  The man, admiring the lucidity and sense of her words,
freed the bird from her captivity, and sent her forth aloft. 
She, therefore, desirous to know whether the man had understood
the force of her words, and whether he had gleaned any profit
therefrom, said, as she flew aloft, `Shame, sir, on thy
fecklessness!  What a treasure that hast lost to-day!  For I have
inside me a pearl larger than an ostrich-egg.'  When the fowler
heard thereof, he was distraught with grief, regretting that the
bird had escaped out of his hands.  And he would fain have taken
her again.  `Come hither,' said he, `into my house: I will make
thee right welcome, and send thee forth with honour.'  But the
nightingale said unto him, `Now I know thee to be a mighty fool.
Though thou didst receive my words readily and gladly, thou hast
gained no profit thereby.  I bade thee never regret the thing
past and gone; and behold thou art distraught with grief because
I have escaped out of thy hands there thou regrettest a thing
past and gone.  I charged thee not to try to attain to the
unattainable, and thou triest to catch me, though thou canst not
attain to my path.  Besides which, I bade thee never believe a
word past belief, and behold thou hast believed that I had inside
me a pearl exceeding the measure of my size, and hadst not the
sense to see that my whole body doth not attain to the bulk of
ostrich eggs.  How then could I contain such a pearl?"'

"Thus senseless, then, are also they that trust in idols: for
these be their handiwork, and they worship that which their
fingers made, saying, `These be our creators.'  How then deem
they their creators those which have been formed and fashioned by
themselves?  Nay more, they safeguard their gods, lest they be
stolen by thieves, and yet they call them guardians of their
safety.  And yet what folly not to know that they, which be
unable to guard and aid themselves, can in no wise guard and save
others!  `For' saith he, `why, on behalf of the living, should
they seek unto the dead?'  They expend wealth, for to raise
statues and images to devils, and vainly boast that these give
them good gifts, and crave to receive of their hands things which
those idols never possessed, nor ever shall possess.  Wherefore
it is written, `May they that make them be like unto them, and so
be all such as put their trust in them, who,' he saith, `hire a
goldsmith, and make them gods, and they fall down, yea, they
worship them.  They bear them upon the shoulders, and go forward.
And if they set them in their place, they stand therein: they
shall not remove.  Yea, one shall cry unto them, yet call they
not answer him, nor save him out of his trouble.'  `Wherefore be
ye ashamed with everlasting shame, ye that trust in graven
images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.'  `For
they sacrificed,' he saith, `unto devils, and not to God; to gods
whom their fathers knew not.  There came new and fresh gods;
because it is a froward generation, and there is no faith in
them.'

"Wherefore out of this wicked and faithless generation the Lord
calleth thee to him, saying, `Come out from among them, and be
thou separate, and touch no unclean thing,' but `save thyself
from this untoward generation.'  `Arise thou, and depart, for
this is not thy rest;' for that divided lordship, which your gods
hold, is a thing of confusion and strife and hath no real being
whatsoever.  But with us it is not so, neither have we many gods
and lords, but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
we unto him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things
and we by him, `who is the image of the invisible God, the first
born of every creature' and of all ages, `for in him were all
things created that are in the heavens and that are upon the
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers.'  `All things were made
by him, and without him was not anything made that was made:' and
one Holy Ghost, in whom are all things, `the Lord and Giver of
life,' God and making God, the good Spirit, the right Spirit,
'the Spirit the Comforter,' `the Spirit of adoption.'  Of these
each person, severally, is God.  As the Father is, so also is the
Son, and as the Son, so also the Holy Ghost.  And there is one
God in three, one nature, one kingdom, one power, one glory, one
substance, distinct in persons, and so only distinct.  One is the
Father, whose property it is not to have been begotten; one is
the only-begotten Son, and his property it is to have been
begotten; and one is the Holy Ghost, and his property it is that
he proceedeth.  Thus illuminated by that light, which is the
Father, with that light, which is the Son, in that light, which
is the Holy Ghost, we glorify one Godhead in three persons.  And
he is one very and only God, known in the Trinity: for of him and
through him, and unto him are all things.

"By his grace also, I came to know thy ease, and was sent to
teach thee the lessons that I have learned and observed from my
youth even to these grey hairs.  If then thou shalt believe and
be baptized, thou shalt be saved; but if thou believe not, thou
shalt be damned.  All the things that thou seest to-day, wherein
thou gloriest, -- pomp, luxury, riches, and all the deceitfulness
of life, -- quickly pass away; and they shall cast thee hence
whether thou wilt or no.  And thy body will be imprisoned in a
tiny grave, left in utter loneliness, and bereft of all company
of kith and kin.  And all the pleasant things of the world shall
perish; and instead of the beauty and fragrance of to-day, thou
shalt be encompassed with horror and the stink of corruption. 
But thy soul shall they hurl into the nether-regions of the
earth, into the condemnation of Hades, until the final
resurrection, when re-united to her body, she shall be cast forth
from the presence of the Lord and be delivered to hell fire,
which burneth everlastingly.  These, and far worse haps than
these, shall be thy destiny, if thou continue in unbelief.

"But and if thou readily obey him that calleth thee to salvation,
and if thou run unto him with desire and joy, and be signed with
his light, and follow him without turn, renouncing every thing,
and cleaving only unto him, hear what manner of security and
happiness shall be thine.  `When thou sittest down, thou shall
not be afraid of sudden fear.  When thou liest down, sweet shall
be thy sleep.'  And thou shalt not be afraid of terror coming or
the assaults of evil spirits, but shalt go thy way bold as any
lion, and shalt live in bliss and everlasting joyaunce.  For joy
and praise shall crown thy head, and gladness shall befall thee
there, where pain and sorrow and wailing shall flee away.'  `Then
shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall rise speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee,
and the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward.'  Then shalt thou
call, and the Lord shall answer; while thou art yet speaking, he
shall say, `Here am I.'  `I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions, and will not remember them.  Put me in
remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou thy sins that
thou mayst be justified.'  `Though thy sins be as scarlet, I will
make them white as snow: though they be red as crimson I will
make them white as wool, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
it.'"


XI.

Ioasaph said unto him, "All thy words are fair and wonderful,
and, while thou spakest, I believed them and still believe them;
and I hate all idolatry with all my heart.  And indeed, even
before thy coming hither, my soul was, in uncertain fashion,
doubtful of it.  But now I hate it with a perfect hatred, since I
have learned from thy lips the vanity thereof, and the folly of
those who worship idols; and I yearn to become the servant of the
true God, if haply he will not refuse me, that am unworthy by
reason of my sins, and I trust that he will forgive me
everything, because he is a lover of men, and compassionate, as
thou tellest me, and will count me worthy to become his servant.
So I am ready anon to receive baptism, and to observe all thy
sayings.  But what must I do after baptism?  And is this alone
sufficient for salvation, to believe and be baptized, or must one
add other services thereto?"

Barlaam answered him, "Hear what thou must do after baptism. 
Thou must abstain from all sin, and every evil affection, and
build upon the foundation of the Catholick Faith the practice of
the virtues; for faith without works is dead, as also are works
without faith.  For, saith the Apostle, `Walk in the Spirit, and
ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.'  Now the works of the
flesh are manifest, which are these: Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, love of money, railing, love of pleasure,
drunkenness, revelling, arrogance, and such like, of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.  But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, sanctification
of soul and body, lowliness of heart and contrition, almsgiving,
forgiveness of injuries, loving-kindness, watchings, perfect
repentance of all past offences, tears of compunction, sorrow for
our own sins and those of our neighbours, and the like.  These,
even as steps and ladders that support one another and are
clinched together, conduct the soul to heaven.  Lo, to these we
are commanded to cleave after baptism, and to abstain from their
contraries.

"But if, after receiving the knowledge of the truth, we again lay
hold on dead works, and, like a dog, return to our vomit, it
shall happen unto us according to the word of the Lord; `for,'
saith he, `when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man' (to wit,
by the grace of baptism) `he walketh through dry places, seeking
rest, and finding none.'  But enduring not for long to wander
homeless and hearthless, he saith, `I will return to my house
whence I came out.'  And, when he cometh, he findeth it swept and
garnished, but empty and unoccupied, not having received the
operation of grace, nor having filled itself with the riches of
the virtues.  Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other
spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in and dwell
there: and the last state of that man becometh worse than the
first.'  For baptism burieth in the water and completely blotteth
out the hand-writing of all former sins, and is to us for the
future a sure fortress and tower of defence, and a strong weapon
against the marshalled host of the enemy; but it taketh not away
free will, nor alloweth the forgiving of sins after baptism, or
immersion in the font a second time.  For it is one baptism that
we confess, and need is that we keep ourselves with all
watchfulness that so we fall not into defilement a second time,
but hold fast to the commandments of the Lord.  For when he said
to the Apostles, `Go make disciples of all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost,' he did not stop there, but added, `teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.'

"Now he commanded men to be poor in spirit, and such he calleth
blessed and worthy of the kingdom of heaven.  Again he chargeth
us to mourn in the present life, that we may obtain comfort
hereafter, and to be meek, and to be ever hungering and thirsting
after righteousness: to be merciful, and ready to distribute,
pitiful and compassionate, pure in heart, abstaining from all
defilement of flesh and spirit, peacemakers with our neighbours
and with our own souls, by bringing the worse into subjection to
the better, and thus by a just decision making peace in that
continual warfare betwixt the twain; also to endure all
persecution and tribulation and reviling, inflicted upon us for
righteousness' sake in defence of his name, that we may obtain
everlasting felicity in the glorious distribution of his rewards.
Ay, and in this world he exhorteth us to let our `light so shine
before men, that they may see,' he saith, `your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.'

"For the law of Moses, formerly given to the Israelites, saith,
'Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt
not steal; thou shalt not bear false witness:' but Christ saith
'Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in
danger of the judgement; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire:' and, `if thou bring thy gift to
the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught
against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy
way and first be reconciled to thy brother.'  And he also saith,
'Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed
adultery with her in his heart.'  And hereby he calleth the
defilement and consent of the affection adultery.  Furthermore,
where the law forbade a man to forswear himself, Christ commanded
him to swear not at all beyond Yea and Nay.  There we read, `Eye
for eye and tooth for tooth': here, `Whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.  And if any man
will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloke also.  And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go
with him twain.  Give to him that asketh time, and from him that
would borrow of thee turn not thou away.  Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you; that
ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust.  Judge not, that ye be not
judged.  Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.  Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:
for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.  Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: for your
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.'
He therefore that gave life and body will assuredly give food and
raiment: he that feedeth the fowls of the air and arrayeth with
such beauty the lilies of the field.  `But, seek ye first,' saith
Christ, `the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.  Take therefore no thought for
the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of
itself.  Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them.  Enter ye in at the strait
gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.  Strait and
narrow is the way which leadeth unto life and few there be that
find it.  Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of
my Father which is in heaven.  He that 1oveth father or mother
more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son and
daughter more than me is not worthy of me.  And he that taketh
not up his cross and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.' 
Lo these and the like of these be the things which the Saviour
commanded his Apostles to teach the Faithful: and all these
things we are bound to observe, if we desire to attain to
perfection and receive the incorruptible crowns of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give at that day unto
all them that have loved his appearing."

Ioasaph said unto the elder, "Well then, as the strictness of
these doctrines demandeth such chaste conversation, if, after
baptism, I chance to fail in one or two of these commandments,
shall I therefore utterly miss the goal, and shall all my hope be
vain?"

Barlaam answered, "Deem not so.  God, the Word, made man for the
salvation of our race, aware of the exceeding frailty and misery
of our nature, hath not even here suffered our sickness to be
without remedy.  But, like a skilful leech, he hath mixed for our
unsteady and sin-loving heart the potion of repentance,
prescribing this for the remission of sins.  For after that we
have received the knowledge of the truth, and have been
sanctified by water and the Spirit, and cleansed without effort
from all sin and all defilement, if we should fortune to fall
into any transgression, there is, it is true, no second
regeneration made within us by the spirit through baptism in the
water of the font, and wholly re-creating us (that gift is given
once for all); but, by means of painful repentance, hot tears,
toils and sweats, there is a purifying and pardoning of our
offences through the tender mercy of our God.  For the fount of
tears is also called baptism, according to the grace of the
Master, but it needeth labour and time; and many hath it saved
after many a fall; because there is no sin too great for the
clemency of God, if we be quick to repent, and purge the shame of
our offences, and death overtake us not, and depart us not from
this life still defiled; for in the grave there is no confession
nor repentance.  But as long as we are `among the living, while
the foundation of our true faith continueth unshattered, even if
somewhat of the outer roof-work or inner building be disabled, it
is allowed to renew by repentance the part rotted by sins.  It is
impossible to count the multitude of the mercies of God, or
measure the greatness of his compassion: whereas sins and
offences, of whatever kind, are subject to measure and may be
numbered.  So our offences, being subject to measure and number,
cannot overcome the immeasurable compassion, and innumerable
mercies of God.

"Wherefore we are commanded not to despair for our trespasses,
but to acknowledge the goodness of God, and condemn the sins
whereof forgiveness is offered us by reason of the loving-
kindness of Christ, who for our sins shed his precious blood.  In
many places of Scripture we are taught the power of repentance,
and especially by the precepts and parables of our Lord Jesus
Christ.  For it saith, `From that time began Jesus to preach and
to say, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."'
Moreover he setteth before us, in a parable, a certain son that
had received his father's substance, and taken his journey into a
far country, and there spent all in riotous living.  Then, when
there arose a famine in that land, he went and joined himself to
one of the citizens of that land of iniquity, who sent him into
his fields to feed swine, -- thus doth he designate the most
coarse and loathsome sin.  When, after much labour, he had come
to the utmost misery, and might not even fill his belly with the
husks that the swine did eat, at last he came to perceive his
shameful plight, and, bemoaning himself, said, `How many hired
servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I
perish with hunger!  I will arise and go to my father, and will
say unto him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one
of thy hired servants."'  And he arose, and came to his father.
But, when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran, and embraced him, and kissed him tenderly,
and, restoring him to his former rank, made a feast of joyaunce
because his son was found again, and killed the fatted calf.  Lo,
this parable, that Jesus spake to us, concerneth such as turn
again from sin, and fall at his feet in repentance.  Again, he
representeth a certain good shepherd that had an hundred sheep,
and, when one was lost, left the ninety and nine, and went forth
to seek that which was gone astray, until he found it: and he
laid it on his shoulders, and folded it with those that had not
gone astray, and called together his friends and neighbours to a
banquet, because that it was found.  `Likewise,' saith the
Saviour, `joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
more than over ninety and nine just persons which need no
repentance.'

"And, in sooth, even the chief of the disciples, Peter, the Rock
of the Faith, in the very season of the Saviour's Passion,
failing for a little while in his stewardship, that he might
understand the worthlessness and misery of human frailty, fell
under the guilt of denial.  Then he straightway remembered the
Lord's words, and went out and wept bitterly, and with those hot
tears made good his defeat, and transferred the victory to his
own side.  Like a skilful man of war, though fallen, he was not
undone, nor did he despair, but, springing to his feet, he
brought up, as a reserve, bitter tears from the agony of his
soul; and straightway, when the enemy saw that sight, like a man
whose eyes are scorched with a fierce flame, he leaped off and
fled afar, howling horribly.  So the chief became chief again, as
he had before been chosen teacher of the whole world, being now
become its pattern of penitence.  And after his holy resurrection
Christ made good this three-fold denial with the three-fold
question, `Peter, lovest thou me?', the Apostle answering, `Yea,
Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.'

"So from all these and many other examples beyond count we learn
the virtue of tears and repentance.  Only the manner thereof must
be noted it must arise from a heart that abominateth sin and
weepeth, as saith the prophet David, `I am weary of my groaning:
every night will I wash my bed and water my couch with my tears.'
Again the cleansing of sins will be wrought by the blood of
Christ, in the greatness of his compassion and the multitude of
the mercies of that God who saith, `Though your sins be as
scarlet, I will make them white as snow,' and so forth.

"Thus therefore it is, and thus we believe.  But after receiving
the knowledge of the truth and winning regeneration and adoption
as sons, and tasting of the divine mysteries, we must strive hard
to keep our feet lest we fall.  For to fall becometh not the
athlete, since many have fallen and been unable to rise.  Some,
opening a door to sinful lusts, and clinging obstinately to them,
have no more had strength to hasten back to repentance; and
others, being untimely snatched by death, and having not made
speed enough to wash them from the pollution of their sin, have
been damned.  And for this cause it is parlous to fall into any
kind of sinful affection whatsoever.  But if any man fall, he
must at once leap up, and stand again to fight the good fight:
and, as often as there cometh a fall, so often must there at once
ensue this rising and standing, unto the end.  For, `Turn ye unto
me, and I will turn unto you,' saith the Lord God."


XII.

To this said Ioasaph, "But how, after baptism, shall a man keep
himself clear from all sin?  For even if there be, as thou
sayest, repentance for them that stumble, yet it is attended with
toil and trouble, with weeping and mourning; things which,
methinks, are not easy for the many to accomplish.  But I desired
rather to find a way to keep strictly the commandments of God,
and not swerve from them, and, after his pardoning of my past
misdeeds, never again to provoke that most sweet God and Master."

Barlaam answered, "Well said, my lord and king.  That also is my
desire; but it is hard, nay quite impossible, for a man living
with fire not to be blackened with smoke: for it is an uphill
task, and one not easy of accomplishment, for a man that is tied
to the matters of this life and busied with its cares and
troubles, and liveth in riches and luxury, to walk unswervingly
in the way of the commandments of the Lord, and to preserve his
life pure of these evils.   `For,' saith the Lord, `no man can
serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one and despise the other.  Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon.'  So also writeth the beloved
Evangelist and Divine in his Epistle, thus saying, `Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world.  If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him.  For all that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof; but he that
doeth the will of God abideth for ever.'

"These things were well understood by our holy and inspired
fathers; and mindful of the Apostle's word that we must through
much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, they strove,
after holy baptism, to keep their garment of immortality spotless
and undefiled.  Whence some of them also thought fit to receive
yet another baptism; I mean that which is by blood and martyrdom.
For this too is called baptism, the most honourable, and reverend
of all, inasmuch as its waters are not polluted by fresh sin;
which also our Lord underwent for our sakes, and rightly called
it baptism.  So as imitators and followers of him, first his
eyewitness, disciples, and Apostles, and then the whole band of
holy martyrs yielded themselves, for the name of Christ, to kings
and tyrants that worshipped idols, and endured every form of
torment, being exposed to wild beasts, fire and sword, confessing
the good confession, running the course and keeping the faith.
Thus they gained the prizes of righteousness, and became the
companions of Angels, and fellow-heirs with Christ.  Their virtue
shone so bright that their sound went out into all lands, and the
splendour of their good deeds flashed like lightning into the
ends of the earth.  Of these men, not only the words and works,
but even the very blood and bones are full of all sanctity,
mightily casting out devils, and giving to such as touch them in
faith the healing of incurable diseases: yea, and even their
garments, and anything else that hath been brought near their
honoured bodies, are always worthy of the reverence of all
creation.  And it were a long tale to tell one by one their deeds
of prowess.

"But when those cruel and brutal tyrants brought their miserable
lives to a miserable end, and persecution ceased, and Christian
kings ruled throughout the world, then others too in succession
emulated the Martyrs' zeal and divine desire, and, wounded at
heart with the same love, considered well how they might present
soul and body without blemish unto God, by cutting off all the
workings of sinful lusts and purifying themselves of every
defilement of flesh and spirit.  But, as they perceived that this
could only be accomplished by the keeping of the commandments of
Christ, and that the keeping of his commandments and the practice
of the virtues was difficult to attain in the midst of the
turmoils of the world, they adopted for themselves a strange and
changed manner of life, and, obedient to the voice divine,
forsook all, parents, children, friends, kinsfolk, riches and
luxury, and, hating everything in the world, withdrew, as exiles,
into the deserts, being destitute, afflicted, evil entreated,
wandering in wildernesses and mountains, and in dens and caves of
the earth, self-banished from all the pleasures and delights upon
earth, and standing in sore need even of bread and shelter.  This
they did for two causes: firstly, that never seeing the objects
of sinful lust, they might pluck such desires by the root out of
their soul, and blot out the memory thereof, and plant within
themselves the love and desire of divine and heavenly things: and
secondly, that, by exhausting the flesh by austerities, and
becoming Martyrs in will, they might not miss the glory of them
that were made perfect by blood, but might be themselves, in
their degree, imitators of the sufferings of Christ, and become
partakers of the kingdom that hath no end.  Having then come to
this wise resolve, they adopted the quiet of monastic life, some
facing the rigours of the open air, and braving the blaze of the
scorching heat and fierce frosts and rain-storms and tempestuous
winds, others spending their lives in the hovels which they had
builded them, or in the hiding of holes and caverns.  Thus, in
pursuit of virtue, they utterly denied themselves all fleshly
comfort and repose, submitting to a diet of uncooked herbs and
worts, or acorns, or hard dry bread, not merely saying good-bye
to delights in their quality, but, in very excess of temperance,
extending their zeal to limit even the quantity of enjoyment. 
For even of those common and necessary meats they took only so
much as was sufficient to sustain life.  Some of them continued
fasting the whole week, and partook of victuals only of a Sunday:
others thought of food twice only in the week: others ate every
other day, or daily at eventide, that is, took but a taste of
food.  In prayers and watchings they almost rivalled the life of
Angels, bidding a long farewell to the possession of gold and
silver, and quite forgetting that buyings and sellings are
concerns of men.

"But envy and pride, the evils most prone to follow good works,
had no place amongst them.  He that was weaker in ascetic
exercises entertained no thought of malice against him of
brighter example.  Nor again was he, that had accomplished great
feats, deceived and puffed up by arrogance to despise his weaker
brethren, or set at nought his neighbour, or boast of his
rigours, or glory in his achievements.  He that excelled in
virtue ascribed nothing to his own labours, but all to the power
of God, in humility of mind persuading himself that his labours
were nought and that he was debtor even for more, as saith the
Lord, `When ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, "We are unprofitable servants: we have done
that which was our duty to do."'  Others again persuaded
themselves that they had not done even the things which they were
commanded to do, but that the things left undone outnumbered the
things already well done.  Again, he that was far behind in
austerity, perchance through bodily weakness, would disparage and
blame himself, attributing his failure to slothfulness of mind
rather than to natural frailty.  So each excelled each, and all
excelled all in this sweet reasonableness.  But the spirit of
vain glory and pleasing of men -- what place had it among them?
For they had fled from the world, and were dwelling in the
desert, to the end that they might show their virtues not to men,
but to God, from whom also they hope to receive the rewards of
their good deeds, well aware that religious exercises performed
for vain glory go without recompense; for these are done for the
praise of men and not for God.  Whence all that do thus are
doubly defrauded: they waste their body, and receive no reward.
But they who yearn for glory above, and strive thereafter,
despise all earthly and human glory.

"As to their dwellings, some monks finish the contest in utter
retirement and solitude, having removed themselves far from the
haunts of men throughout the whole of their earthly life-time,
and having drawn nigh to God.  Others build their homes at a
distance one from another, but meet on the Lord's Day at one
Church, and communicate of the Holy Mysteries, I mean the
unbloody Sacrifice of the undefiled Body and precious Blood of
Christ, which the Lord gave to the Faithful for the remission of
sins, for the enlightenment and sanctification of soul and body.
They entertain one another with the exercises of the divine
Oracles and moral exhortations, and make public the secret wiles
of their adversaries, that none, through ignorance of the manner
of wrestling, may be caught thus.  Then turn they again, each to
his own home, eagerly storing the honey of virtue in the cells of
their hearts, and husbanding sweet fruits worthy of the heavenly
board.

"Others again spend their life in monasteries.  These gather in
multitudes in one spot, and range themselves under one superior
and president, the best of their number, slaying all self-will
with the sword of obedience.  Of their own free choice they
consider themselves as slaves bought at a price, and no longer
live for themselves, but for him, to whom, for Christ his sake,
they have become obedient; or rather, to speak more properly,
they live no more for themselves, but Christ liveth in them, whom
to follow, they renounce all.  This is retirement, a voluntary
hatred of the world, and denial of nature by desire of things
above nature.  These men therefore live the lives of Angels on
earth, chanting psalms and hymns with one consent unto the Lord,
and purchasing for themselves the title of Confessors by labours
of obedience.  And in them is fulfilled the word of the Lord,
when he saith, `Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them.'  By this number he
limiteth not the gathering together in his name, but by `two or
three' signifieth that the number is indefinite.  For, whether
there be many, or few, gathered together because of his holy
name, serving him with fervent zeal, there we believe him to be
present in the midst of his servants.

"By these ensamples and such like assemblies men of earth and
clay imitate the life of heavenly beings, in fastings and prayers
and watchings, in hot tears and sober sorrow, as soldiers in the
field with death before their eyes, in meekness and gentleness,
in silence of the lips, in poverty and want, in chastity and
temperance, in humbleness and quietude of mind, in perfect
charity toward God and their neighbour, carrying their present
life down to the grave, and becoming Angels in their ways.
Wherefore God hath graced them with miracles, signs and various
virtues and made the voice of their marvellous life to be sounded
forth to the ends of the world.  If I open my mouth to declare in
every point the life of one of them who is said to have been the
founder of the monastic life, Antony by name, by this one tree
thou shalt assuredly know the sweet fruits of other trees of the
like kind and form, and shalt know what a foundation of religious
life that great man laid, and what a roof he built, and what
gifts he merited to receive from the Saviour.  After him many
fought the like fight and won like crowns and guerdons.

"Blessed, yea, thrice blessed, are they that have loved God, and,
for his love's sake, have counted every thing as nothing worth.
For they wept and mourned, day and night, that they might gain
everlasting comfort: they humbled themselves willingly, that
there they might be exalted: they afflicted the flesh with hunger
and thirst and vigil, that there they might come to the pleasures
and joys of Paradise.  By their purity of heart they became a
tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, as it is written, `I will dwell in
them and walk in them.'  They crucified themselves unto the
world, that they might stand at the right hand of the Crucified:
they girt their loins with truth, and alway had their lamps
ready, looking for the coming of the immortal bridegroom.  The
eye of their mind being enlightened, they continually looked
forward to that awful hour, and kept the contemplation of future
happiness and everlasting punishment immovable from their hearts,
and pained themselves to labour, that they might not lose eternal
glory.  They became passionless as the Angels, and now they weave
the dance in their fellowship, whose lives also they imitated. 
Blessed, yea, thrice blessed are they, because with sure
spiritual vision they discerned the vanity of this present world
and the uncertainty and inconstancy of mortal fortune, and cast
it aside, and laid up for themselves everlasting blessings, and
laid hold of that life which never faileth, nor is broken by
death.

"These then are the marvellous holy men whose examples we, that
are poor and vile, strive to imitate, but cannot attain to the
high level of the life of these heavenly citizens.  Nevertheless,
so far as is possible for our weakness and feeble power, we take
the stamp of their lives, and wear their habit: even though we
fail to equal their works; for we are assured that this holy
profession is a means to perfection and an aid to the
incorruption given us by holy baptism.  So, following the
teachings of these blessed Saints, we utterly renounce these
corruptible and perishable things of life, wherein may be found
nothing stable or constant, or that continueth in one stay; but
all things are vanity and vexation of spirit, and many are the
changes that they bring in a moment; for they are slighter than
dreams and a shadow, or the breeze that bloweth the air.  Small
and short-lived is their charm, that is after all no charm, but
illusion and deception of the wickedness of the world; which
world we have been taught to love not at all, but rather to hate
with all our heart.  Yea, and verily it is worthy of hatred and
abhorrence; for whatsoever gifts it giveth to its friends, these
in turn in passion it taketh away, and shall hand over its
victims, stripped of all good things, clad in the garment of
shame, and bound under heavy burdens, to eternal tribulation. 
And those again whom it exalteth, it quickly abaseth to the
utmost wretchedness, making them a foot-stool and a laughing
stock for their enemies.  Such are its charms, such its bounties.
For it is an enemy of its friends, and traitor to such as carry
out its wishes: dasheth to dire destruction all them that lean
upon it, and enervateth those that put their trust therein.  It
maketh covenants with fools and fair false promises, only that it
may allure them to itself.  But, as they have dealt
treacherously, it proveth itself treacherous and false in
fulfilling none of its pledges.  To-day it tickleth their gullet
with pleasant dainties; to-morrow it maketh them nought but a
gobbet for their enemies.  To-day it maketh a man a king:
to-morrow it delivereth him into bitter servitude.  To-day its
thrall is fattening on a thousand good things; to-morrow he is a
beggar, and drudge of drudges.  To-day it placeth on his head a
crown of glory; to-morrow it dasheth his face upon the ground.
To-day it adorneth his neck with brilliant badges of dignity;
to-morrow it humbleth him with a collar of iron.  For a little
while it causeth him to be the desire of all men; but after a
time it maketh him their hate and abomination.  To-day it
gladdeneth him: but to-morrow it weareth him to a shadow with
lamentations and wailings.  What is the end thereof, thou shalt
hear.  Ruthlessly it bringeth its former lovers to dwell in hell.
Such is ever its mind, such its purposes.  It lamenteth not its
departed, nor pitieth the survivor.  For after that it hath
cruelly duped and entangled in its meshes the one party, it
immediately transferreth the resources of its ingenuity against
the other, not willing that any should escape its cruel snares,

"These men that have foolishly alienated themselves from a good
and kind master, to seek the service of so harsh and savage a
lord, that are all agog for present joys and are glued thereto,
that take never a thought for the future, that always grasp after
bodily enjoyments, but suffer their souls to waste with hunger,
and to be worn with myriad ills, these I consider to be like a
man flying before the face of a rampant unicorn, who, unable to
endure the sound of the beast's cry, and its terrible bellowing,
to avoid being devoured, ran away at full speed.  But while he
ran hastily, he fell into a great pit; and as he fell, he
stretched forth his hands, and laid hold on a tree, to which he
held tightly.  There he established some sort of foot-hold and
thought himself from that moment in peace and safety.  But he
looked and descried two mice, the one white, the other black,
that never ceased to gnaw the root of the tree whereon he hung,
and were all but on the point of severing it.  Then he looked
down to the bottom of the pit and espied below a dragon,
breathing fire, fearful for eye to see, exceeding fierce and
grim, with terrible wide jaws, all agape to swallow him.  Again
looking closely at the ledge whereon his feet rested, he
discerned four heads of asps projecting from the wall whereon he
was perched.  Then he lift up his eyes and saw that from the
branches of the tree there dropped a little honey.  And thereat
he ceased to think of the troubles whereby he was surrounded;
how, outside, the unicorn was madly raging to devour him: how,
below, the fierce dragon was yawning to swallow him: how the
tree, which he had clutched, was all but severed; and how his
feet rested on slippery, treacherous ground.  Yea, he forgat,
without care, all those sights of awe and terror, and his whole
mind hung on the sweetness of that tiny drop of honey.

"This is the likeness of those who cleave to the deceitfulness of
this present life, -- the interpretation whereof I will declare
to thee anon.  The unicorn is the type of death, ever in eager
pursuit to overtake the race of Adam.  The pit is the world, full
of all manner of ills and deadly snares.  The tree, which was
being continually fretted by the two mice, to which the man
clung, is the course of every man's life, that spendeth and
consuming itself hour by hour, day and night, and gradually
draweth nigh its severance.  The fourfold asps signify the
structure of man's body upon four treacherous and unstable
elements which, being disordered and disturbed, bring that body
to destruction.  Furthermore, the fiery cruel dragon betokeneth
the maw of hell that is hungry to receive those who choose
present pleasures rather than future blessings.  The dropping of
honey denoteth the sweetness of the delights of the world,
whereby it deceiveth its own friends, nor suffereth them to take
timely thought for their salvation."


XIII.

Ioasaph received this parable with great joy and said, "How true
this story is, and most apt!  Grudge not, then, to shew me other
such like figures, that I may know for certain what the manner of
our life is, and what it hath in store for its friends."

The elder answered, "Again, those who are enamoured of the
pleasures of life, and glamoured by the sweetness thereof, who
prefer fleeting and paltry objects to those which are future and
stable, are like a certain man who had three friends.  On the
first two of these he was extravagantly lavish of his honours,
and clave passionately to their love, fighting to the death and
deliberately hazarding his life for their sakes.  But to the
third he bore himself right arrogantly, never once granting him
the honour nor the love that was his due, but only making show of
some slight and inconsiderable regard for him.  Now one day he
was apprehended by certain dread and strange soldiers, that made
speed to hale him to the king, there to render account for a debt
of ten thousand talents.  Being in a great strait, this debtor
sought for a helper, able to take his part in this terrible
reckoning with the king.  So he ran to his first and truest
friend of all, and said, `Thou wottest, friend, that I ever
jeopardied my life for thy sake.  Now to-day I require help in a
necessity that presseth me sore.  In how many talents wilt thou
undertake to assist me now?  What is the hope that I may count
upon at thy hands, O my dearest friend?'  The other answered and
said unto him, `Man, I am not thy friend: I know not who thou
art.  Other friends I have, with whom I must needs make merry
to-day, and so win their friendship for the time to come.  But,
see, I present thee with two ragged garments, that thou mayest
have them on the way whereon thou goest, though they will do thee
no manner of good.  Further help from me thou mayest expect
none.'  The other, hearing this, despaired of the succour whereon
he had reckoned, and went to his second friend, saying, `Friend,
thou rememberest how much honour and kindness thou hast enjoyed
at my hands.  To-day I have fallen into tribulation and sorrow,
and need a helping hand.  To what extent then canst thou share my
labour?  Tell me at once.'  Said he, `I have on leisure today to
share thy troubles.  I too have fallen among cares and perils,
and am myself in tribulation.  Howbeit, I will go a little way
with thee, even if I shall fail to be of service to thee.  Then
will I turn quickly homeward, and busy myself with mine own
anxieties.'  So the man returned from him too empty-handed and
baulked at every turn; and he cried misery on himself for his
vain hope in those ungrateful friends, and the unavailing
hardships that he had endured through love of them.  At the last
he went away to the third friend, whom he had never courted, nor
invited to share his happiness.  With countenance ashamed and
downcast, he said unto him, `I can scarce open my lips to speak
with thee, knowing full well that I have never done thee service,
or shown thee any kindness that thou mightest now remember.  But
seeing that a heavy misfortune hath overtaken me, and that I have
found nowhere among my friends any hope of deliverance, I address
myself to thee, praying thee, if it lie in thy power, to afford
me some little aid.  Bear no grudge for my past unkindness, and
refuse me not.'  The other with a smiling and gracious
countenance answered, `Assuredly I own thee my very true friend.
I have not forgotten those slight services of thine: and I will
repay them to-day with interest.  Fear not therefore, neither be
afraid.  I will go before thee and entreat the king for thee, and
will by no means deliver thee into the hands of thine enemies.
Wherefore be of good courage, dear friend, and fret not thyself.'
Then, pricked at heart, the other said with tears, `Wo is me!
Which shall I first lament, or which first deplore?  Condemn my
vain preference for my forgetful, thankless and false friends, or
blame the mad ingratitude that I have shown to thee, the sincere
and true?'"

Ioasaph heard this tale also with amazement and asked the
interpretation thereof.  Then said Barlaam, "The first friend is
the abundance of riches, and love of money, by reason of which a
man falleth into the midst of ten thousand perils, and endureth
many miseries: but when at last the appointed day of death is
come, of all these things he carrieth away nothing but the
useless burial cloths.  By the second friend is signified our
wife and children and the remnant of kinsfolk and acquaintance,
to whom we are passionately attached, and from whom with
difficulty we tear ourselves away, neglecting our very soul and
body for the love of them.  But no help did man ever derive from
these in the hour of death, save only that they will accompany
and follow him to the sepulchre, and then straightway turning
them homeward again they are occupied with their own cares and
matters, and bury his memory in oblivion as they have buried his
body in the grave.  But the third friend, that was altogether
neglected and held cheap, whom the man never approached, but
rather shunned and fled in horror, is the company of good deeds,
-- faith, hope, charity, alms, kindliness, and the whole band of
virtues, that can go before us, when we quit the body, and may
plead with the Lord on our behalf, and deliver us from our
enemies and dread creditors, who urge that strict rendering of
account in the air, and try bitterly to get the mastery of us.
This is the grateful and true friend, who beareth in mind those
small kindnesses that we have shown him and repayeth the whole
with interest."


XIV.

Again said Ioasaph, "The Lord God prosper thee, O thou Wisest of
men!  For thou hast gladdened my soul with thine apt and
excellent sayings.  Wherefore sketch me yet another picture of
the vanity of the world, and how a man may pass through it in
peace and safety."

Barlaam took up his parable and said, "Hear then a similitude of
this matter too.  I once heard tell of a great city whose
citizens had, from old time, the custom of taking some foreigner
and stranger, who knew nothing of their laws and traditions, and
of making him their king, to enjoy absolute power, and follow his
own will and pleasure without hindrance, until the completion of
a year.  Then suddenly, while he was living with never a care in
rioting and wantonness, without fear, and alway supposing that
his reign would only terminate with his life, they would rise up
against him, strip him bare of his royal robes, lead him in
triumph up and down the city, and thence dispatch him beyond
their borders into a distant great island; there, for lack of
food and raiment, in hunger and nakedness he would waste
miserably away, the luxury and pleasure so unexpectedly showered
upon him changed as unexpectedly into woe.  In accordance
therefore with the unbroken custom of these citizens, a certain
man was ordained to the kingship.  But his mind was fertile of
understanding, and he was not carried away by this sudden access
of prosperity, nor did he emulate the heedlessness of the kings
that had gone before him, and had been miserably expelled, but
his soul was plunged in care and trouble how he might order his
affairs well.  After long and careful search, he learned from a
wise counsellor the custom of the citizens, and the place of
perpetual banishment, and was taught of him without guile how to
ensure himself against this fate.  So with this knowledge that
within a very little while he must reach that island and leave to
strangers this chance kingdom among strangers, he opened the
treasures whereof he had awhile absolute and unforbidden use, and
took a great store of money and huge masses of gold and silver
and precious stones and delivered the same to trusty servants and
sent them before him to the island whither he was bound.  When
the appointed year came to an end, the citizens rose against him,
and sent him naked into banishment like those that went before
him.  But while the rest of these foolish kings, kings only for a
season, were sore anhungred, he, that had timely deposited his
wealth, passed his time in continual plenty mid dainties free of
expense, and, rid of all fear of those mutinous and evil
citizens, could count himself happy on his wise forethought.

"Understand thou, therefore, that the city is this vain and
deceitful world; that the citizens are the principalities and
powers of the devils, the rulers of the darkness of this world,
who entice us by the soft bait of pleasure, and counsel us to
consider corruptible and perishable things as incorruptible, as
though the enjoyment that cometh from them were co-existent with
us, and immortal as we.  Thus then are we deceived; we have taken
no thought concerning the things which are abiding and eternal,
and have laid up in store for ourselves no treasure for that life
beyond, when of a sudden there standeth over us the doom of
death.  Then, then at last do those evil and cruel citizens of
darkness, that received us, dispatch us stript of all worldly 
goods, -- for all our time has been wasted on their service --
and carry us off `to a dark land and a gloomy, to a land of
eternal darkness, where there is no light, nor can one behold the
life of men.'  As for that good counsellor, who made known all
the truth and taught that sagacious and wise king the way of
salvation, understand thou that I, thy poor and humble servant,
am he, who am come hither for to shew thee the good and
infallible way to lead thee to things eternal and unending, and
to counsel thee to lay up all thy treasure there; and I am come
to lead thee away from the error of this world, which, to my woe,
I also loved, and clave to its pleasures and delights.  But, when
I perceived, with the unerring eyes of my mind how all human life
is wasted in these things that come and go; when I saw that no
man hath aught that is stable and steadfast, neither the rich in
his wealth, nor the mighty in his strength, nor the wise in his
wisdom, nor the prosperous in his prosperity, nor the luxurious
in his wantonness, nor he that dreameth of security of life in
that vain and feeble security of his dreams, nor any man in any
of those things that men on earth commend ('tis like the
boundless rush of torrents that discharge themselves into the
deep sea, thus fleeting and temporary are all present things);
then, I say, I understood that all such things are vanity, and
that their enjoyment is naught; and, that even as the past is all
buried in oblivion, be it past glory, or past kingship, or the
splendour of rank, or amplitude of power, or arrogance of
tyranny, or aught else like them, so also present things will
vanish in the darkness of the days to come.  And, as I am myself
of the present, I also shall doubtless be subject to its
accustomed change; and, even as my fathers before me were not
allowed to take delight for ever in the present world, so also
shall it be with me.  For I have observed how this tyrannical and
troublesome world treateth mankind, shifting men hither and
thither, from wealth to poverty, and from poverty to honour,
carrying some out of life and bringing others in, rejecting some
that are wise and understanding, making the honourable and
illustrious dishonoured and despised, but seating others who are
unwise and of no understanding upon a throne of honour, and
making the dishonoured and obscure to be honoured of all.

"One may see how the race of mankind may never abide before the
face of the cruel tyranny of the world.  But, as when a dove
fleeing from an eagle or a hawk flitteth from place to place, now
beating against this tree, now against that bush, and then anon
against the clefts of the rocks and all manner of bramble-thorns,
and, nowhere finding any safe place of refuge, is wearied with
continual tossing and crossing to and fro, so are they which are
flustered by the present world.  They labour painfully under
unreasoning impulse, on no sure or firm bases: they know not to
what goal they are driving, nor whither this vain life leadeth
them this vain life, whereto they have in miserable folly
subjected themselves, choosing evil instead of good, and pursuing
vice instead of goodness; and they know not who shall inherit the
cold fruits of their many heavy labours, whether it be a kinsman
or a stranger, and, as oft times it haps, not even a friend or
acquaintance at all, but an enemy and foeman.

"On all these things, and others akin to them, I held judgement
in the tribunal of my soul, and I came to hate my whole life that
had been wasted in these vanities, while I still lived engrossed
in earthly things.  But when I had put off from my soul the lust
thereof, and cast it from me, then was there revealed unto me the
true good, to fear God and do his will; for this I saw to be the
sum of all good.  This also is called the beginning of wisdom,
and perfect wisdom.  For life is without pain and reproach to
those that hold by her, and safe to those who lean upon her as
upon the Lord.  So, when I had set my reason on the unerring way
of the commandments of the Lord, and had surely learned that
there is nothing froward or perverse therein, and that it is not
full of chasms and rocks, nor of thorns and thistles, but lieth
altogether smooth and even, rejoicing the eyes of the traveller
with the brightest sights, making beautiful his feet, and shoeing
them with `the preparation of the Gospel of peace,' that he may
walk safely and without delay, this way, then, I rightly chose
above all others, and began to rebuild my soul's habitation,
which had fallen into ruin and decay.

"In such wise was I devising mine estate, and establishing mine
unstable mind, when I heard the words of a wise teacher calling
loudly to me thus, `Come ye out,' said he, `all ye that will to
be saved.  Be ye separate from the vanity of the world, for the
fashion thereof quickly passeth away, and behold it shall not be.
Come ye out, without turning back, not for nothing and without
reward, but winning supplies for travelling to life eternal, for
ye are like to journey a long road, needing much supplies from
hence, and ye shall arrive at the place eternal that hath two
regions, wherein are many mansions; one of which places God hath
prepared for them that love him and keep his commandments, full
of all manner of good things; and they that attain thereto shall
live for ever in incorruption, enjoying immortality without
death, where pain and sorrow and sighing are fled away.  But the
other place is full of darkness and tribulation and pain,
prepared for the devil and his angels, wherein also shall be cast
they who by evil deeds have deserved it, who have bartered the
incorruptible and eternal for the present world, and have made
themselves fuel for eternal fire.'

"When I heard this voice, and recognized the truth, I did my
diligence to attain to that abode, that is free from all pain and
sorrow, and full of security and all good things, whereof I have
knowledge now only in part, being but a babe in my spiritual
life, and seeing the sights yonder as through mirrors and
riddles; but when that which is perfect is come, and I shall see
face to face, then that which is in part shall be done away.
Wherefore I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; for the law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the
law of sin and of death, and hath opened mine eyes to see clearly
that the will of the flesh is death, but the will of the Spirit
is life and peace.  And even as I did discern the vanity of
present things and hate them with a perfect hatred, so likewise I
counsel thee to decide thereon, that thou mayest treat them as
something alien and quickly passing away, and mayest remove all
thy store from earth and lay up for thyself in the incorruptible
world a treasure that can not be stolen, wealth inexhaustible, in
that place whither thou must shortly fare, that when thou comest
thither thou mayest not be destitute, but be laden with riches,
after the manner of that aptest of parables that I lately showed
thee."


XV.

Said Ioasaph unto the elder, "How then shall I be able to send
before me thither treasures of money and riches, that, when I
depart hence, I may find these unharmed and unwasted for my
enjoyment?  How must I show my hatred for things present and lay
hold on things eternal?  This make thou right plain unto me."
Quoth Barlaam, "The sending before thee of money to that eternal
home is wrought by the hands of the poor.  For thus saith one of
the prophets, Daniel the wise, unto the king of Babylon,
'Wherefore, O Prince, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and
redeem thy sins by almsgiving, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor.'  The Saviour also saith, `Make to yourselves
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations.'  And, in
divers places, the Master maketh much mention of almsgiving and
liberality to the poor, as we learn in the Gospel.  Thus shalt
thou most surely send all thy treasure before thee by the hands
of the needy, for whatsoever thou shalt do unto these the Master
counteth done unto himself, and will reward thee manifold; for,
in the recompense of benefits, he ever surpasseth them that love
him.  So in this manner by seizing for awhile the treasures of
the darkness of this world, in whose slavery for a long time past
thou hast been miserable, thou shalt by these means make good
provision for thy journey, and by plundering another's goods thou
shalt store all up for thyself, with things fleeting and
transient purchasing for thyself things that are stable and
enduring.  Afterwards, God working with thee, thou shalt perceive
the uncertainty and inconstancy of the world, and saying farewell
to all, shalt remove thy barque to anchor in the future, and,
passing by the things that pass away, thou shalt hold to the
things that we look for, the things that abide.  Thou shalt
depart from darkness and the shadow of death, and hate the world
and the ruler of the world; and, counting thy perishable flesh
thine enemy, thou shalt run toward the light that is
unapproachable, and taking the Cross on thy shoulders, shalt
follow Christ without looking back, that thou mayest also be
glorified with him, and be made inheritor of the life that never
changeth nor deceiveth."

Ioasaph said, "When thou spakest a minute past of despising all
things, and taking up such a life of toil, was that an old
tradition handed down from the teaching of the Apostles, or is
this a late invention of your wits, which ye have chosen for
yourselves as a more excellent way?"

The elder answered and said, "I teach thee no law introduced but
yesterday, God forbid!  but one given unto us of old.  For when a
certain rich young man asked the Lord, `What shall I do to
inherit eternal life?' and boasted that he had observed all that
was written in the Law, Jesus said unto him, `One thing thou
lackest yet.  Go sell all that thou hast and distribute unto the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, take up
thy cross and follow me.  But when the young man heard this he
was very sorrowful, for he was very rich.  And when Jesus saw
that he was very sorrowful, he said, `How hardly shall they which
have riches enter into the kingdom of God!  For it is easier for
a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God!'  So, when all the Saints heard
this command, they thought fit by all means to withdraw from this
hardness of riches.  They parted with all their goods, and by
this distribution of their riches to the poor laid up for
themselves eternal riches; and they took up their Cross and
followed Christ, some being made perfect by martyrdom, even as I
have already told thee; and some by the practice of self-denial
falling not a whit short of those others in the life of the true
philosophy.  Know thou, then, that this is a command of Christ
our King and God, which leadeth us from things corruptible and
maketh us partakers of things everlasting."

Said Ioasaph, "If, then, this kind of philosophy be so ancient
and so salutary, how cometh it that so few folk now-a-days follow
it?"

The elder answered, "Many have followed, and do follow it; but
the greatest part hesitate and draw back.  For few, saith the
Lord, are the travellers along the strait and narrow way, but
along the wide and broad way many.  For they that have once been
taken prisoners by the love of money, and the evils that come
from the love of pleasure, and are given up to idle and vain
glory, are hardly to be torn therefrom, seeing that they have of
their own free will sold themselves as slaves to a strange
master, and setting themselves on the opposite side to God, who
gave these commands, are held in bondage to that other.  For the
soul that hath once rejected her own salvation, and given the
reins to unreasonable lusts, is carried about hither and thither.
Therefore saith the prophet, mourning the folly that encompasseth
such souls, and lamenting the thick darkness that lieth on them,
'O ye sons of men, how long will ye be of heavy heart?  Why love
ye vanity, and seek after leasing?'  And in the same tone as he,
but adding thereto some thing of his own, one of our wise
teachers, a most excellent divine, crieth aloud to all, as from
some exceeding high place of vantage, `O ye sons of men, how long
will ye be of heavy heart?  Why love ye vanity and seek after
leasing?  Trow ye that this present life, and luxury, and these
shreds of glory, and petty lordship and false prosperity are any
great thing?' -- things which no more belong to those that
possess them than to them that hope for them, nor to these latter
any more than to those who never thought of them: things like the
dust carried and whirled about to and fro by the tempest, or
vanishing as the smoke, or delusive as a dream, or intangible as
a shadow; which, when absent, need not be despaired of by them
that have them not, and, when present, cannot be trusted by their
owners.

"This then was the commandment of the Saviour; this the preaching
of the Prophets and Apostles; in such wise do all the Saints, by
word and deed, constrain us to enter the unerring road of virtue.
And though few walk therein and more choose the broad way that
leadeth to destruction, yet not for this shall the life of this
divine philosophy be minished in fame.  But as the sun, rising to
shine on all, doth bounteously send forth his beams, inviting all
to enjoy his light, even so doth our true philosophy, like the
sun, lead with her light those that are her lovers, and warmeth
and brighteneth them.  But if any shut their eyes, and will not
behold the light thereof, not for that must the sun be blamed, or
scorned by others: still less shall the glory of his brightness
be dishonoured through their silliness.  But while they, self-
deprived of light, grope like blind men along a wall, and fall
into many a ditch, and scratch out their eyes on many a bramble
bush, the sun, firmly established on his own glory, shall
illuminate them that gaze upon his beams with unveiled face. 
Even so shineth the light of Christ on all men abundantly,
imparting to us of his lustre.  But every man shareth thereof in
proportion to his desire and zeal.  For the Sun of righteousness
disappointeth none of them that would fix their gaze on him, yet
doth he not compel those who willingly choose darkness; but every
man, so long as he is in this present life, is committed to his
own free will and choice."

Ioasaph asked, "What is free will and what is choice?"  The elder
answered, "Free will is the willing of a reasonable soul, moving
without hindrance toward whatever it wisheth, whether to virtue
or to vice, the soul being thus constituted by the Creator.  Free
will again is the sovran motion of an intelligent soul.  Choice
is desire accompanied by deliberation, or deliberation
accompanied by desire for things that lie in our power; for in
choosing we desire that which we have deliberately preferred.
Deliberation is a motion towards enquiry about actions possible
to us; a man deliberateth whether he ought to pursue an object or
no.  Then he judgeth which is the better, and so ariseth
judgement.  Then he is inclined towards it, and loveth that which
was so judged by the deliberative faculty, and this is called
resolve; for, if he judge a thing, and yet be not inclined toward
the thing that he hath judged, and love it not, it is not called
resolve.  Then, after inclination toward it, there ariseth choice
or rather selection.  For choice is to choose one or other of two
things in view, and to select this rather than that.  And it is
manifest that choice is deliberation plus discrimination, and
this from the very etymology.  For that which is the `object of
choice' is the thing chosen before the other thing.  And no man
preferreth a thing without deliberation, nor makeeth a choice
without having conceived a preference.  For, since we are not
zealous to carry into action all that seemeth good to us, choice
only ariseth and the deliberately preferred only becometh the
chosen, when desire is added thereto.  Thus we conclude that
choice is desire accompanied by deliberation for things that lie
in our power; in choosing we desire that which we have
deliberately preferred.  All deliberation aimeth at action and
dependeth on action; and thus deliberation goeth before all
choice, and choice before all action.  For this reason not only
our actions, but also our thoughts, inasmuch as they give
occasion for choice, bring in their train crowns or punishments.
For the beginning of sin and righteous dealing is choice,
exercised in action possible to us.  Where the power of activity
is ours, there too are the actions that follow that activity in
our power.  Virtuous activities are in our power, therefore in
our power are virtues also; for we are absolute masters over all
our souls' affairs and all our deliberations.  Since then it is
of free will that men deliberate, and of free will that men
choose, a man partaketh of the light divine, and advanceth in the
practice of this philosophy in exact measure of his choice, for
there are differences of choice.  And even as water-springs,
issuing from the hollows of the earth, sometimes gush forth from
the surface soil, and sometimes from a lower source, and at other
times from a great depth, and even as some of these waters bubble
forth continuously, and their taste is sweet, while others that
come from deep wells are brackish or sulphurous, even as some
pour forth in abundance while others flow drop by drop, thus,
understand thou, is it also with our choices.  Some choices are
swift and exceeding fervent, others languid and cold: some have a
bias entirely toward virtue, while others incline with all their
force to its opposite.  And like in nature to these choices are
the ensuing impulses to action."


XVI.

Ioasaph said unto the elder, "Are there now others, too, who
preach the same doctrines as thou?  Or art thou to-day the only
one that teacheth this hatred of the present world?"

The other answered and said, "In this your most unhappy country I
know of none: the tyranny of thy father hath netted all such in a
thousand forms of death; and he hath made it his aim that the
preaching of the knowledge of God be not once heard in your
midst.  But in all other tongues these doctrines are sung and
glorified, by some in perfect truth, but by others perversely;
for the enemy of our souls hath made them decline from the
straight road, and divided them by strange teachings, and taught
them to interpret certain sayings of the Scriptures falsely, and
not after the sense contained therein.  But the truth is one,
even that which was preached by the glorious Apostles and
inspired Fathers, and shineth in the Catholick Church above the
brightness of the sun from the one end of the world unto the
other; and as an herald and teacher of that truth have I been
sent to thee."

Ioasaph said unto him, "Hath my father then, learned naught of
these things?"

The elder answered, "Clearly and duly he hath learned naught; for
he stoppeth up his senses, and will not admit that which is good,
being of his own free choice inclined to evil."

"Would God," said Ioasaph, "that he too were instructed in these
mysteries?"  The elder answered, "The things that are impossible
with men are possible with God.  For how knowest thou whether
thou shalt save thy sire, and in wondrous fashion be styled the
spiritual father of thy father?

"I have heard that, once upon a time, there was a king who
governed his kingdom right well, and dealt kindly and gently with
his subjects, only failing in this point, that he was not rich in
the light of the knowledge of God, but held fast to the errors of
idolatry.  Now he had a counsellor, which was a good man and
endued with righteousness toward God and with all other virtuous
wisdom.  Grieved and vexed though he was at the error of the
king, and willing to convince him thereof, he nevertheless drew
back from the attempt, for fear that he might earn trouble for
himself and his friends, and cut short those services which he
rendered to others.  Yet sought he a convenient season to draw
his sovereign toward that which was good.  One night the king
said unto him, "Come now, let us go forth and walk about the
city, if haply we may see something to edify us."  Now while they
were walking about the city, they saw a ray of light shining
through an aperture.  Fixing their eyes thereon, they descried an
underground cavernous chamber, in the forefront of which there
sat a man, plunged in poverty, and clad in rags and tatters.
Beside him stood his wife, mixing wine.  When the man took the
cup in his hands, she sung a clear sweet melody, and delighted
him by dancing and cozening him with flatteries.  The king's
companions observed this for a time, and marvelled that people,
pinched by such poverty as not to afford house and raiment, yet
passed their lives in such good cheer.  The king said to his
chief counsellor, `Friend, how marvellous a thing it is, that our
life, though bright with such honour and luxury, hath never
pleased us so well as this poor and miserable life doth delight
and rejoice these fools: and that this life, which appeareth to
us so cruel and abominable, is to them sweet and alluring!'  The
chief counsellor seized the happy moment and said, `But to thee,
O king, how seemeth their life?'  `Of all that I have ever seen,'
quoth the king, `the most hateful and wretched, the most
loathsome and abhorrent.'  Then spake the chief counsellor unto
him, "Such, know thou well, O king, and even more unendurable is
our life reckoned by those who are initiated into the sight of
the mysteries of yonder everlasting glory, and the blessings that
pass all understanding.  Your palaces glittering with gold, and
these splendid garments, and all the delights of this life are
more loathsome than dung and filth in the eyes of those that know
the unspeakable beauties of the tabernacles in heaven made
without hands, and the apparel woven by God, and the
incorruptible diadems which God, the Creator and Lord of all,
hath prepared for them that love him.  For like as this couple
were accounted fools by us, so much the more are we, who go
astray in this world and please ourselves in this false glory and
senseless pleasure, worthy of lamentation and tears in the eyes
of those who have tasted of the sweets of the bliss beyond.'

"When the king heard this, he became as one dumb.  He said, `Who
then are these men that live a life better than ours?'  `All,'
said the chief-counsellor `who prefer the eternal to the
temporal.'  Again, when the king desired to know what the eternal
might be the other replied, `A kingdom that knoweth no
succession, a life that is not subject unto death, riches that
dread no poverty: joy and gladness that have no share of grief
and vexation; perpetual peace free from all hatred and love of
strife.  Blessed, thrice blessed are they that are found worthy
of these enjoyments!  Free from pain and free from toil is the
life that they shall live for ever, enjoying without labour all
the sweets and pleasaunee of the kingdom of God, and reigning
with Christ world without end.'

"'And who is worthy to obtain this?' asked the king.  The other
answered, `All they that hold on the road that leadeth thither;
for none forbiddeth entrance, if a man but will.'

"Said the king, `And what is the way that beareth thither?'  That
bright spirit answered, `To know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, his only-begotten Son, and the Holy and quickening
Spirit.'

"The king, endowed with understanding worthy of the purple, said
unto him, `What hath hindered thee until now from doing me to wit
of these things?  For they appear to me too good to be put off or
passed over, if they indeed be true; and, if they be doubtful, I
must search diligently, until I find the truth without shadow of
doubt.'

"The chief counsellor said, `It was not from negligence or
indifference that I delayed to make this known unto thee, for it
is true and beyond question, but `twas because I reverenced the
excellency of thy majesty, lest thou mightest think me a meddler.
If therefore thou bid thy servant put thee in mind of these
things for the future, I shall obey thy behest.'  `Yea,' said the
king, `not every day only, but every hour, renew in me the
remembrance thereof: for it behoveth us not to turn our mind
inattentively to these things, but with very fervent zeal.'

"We have heard," said Barlaam, "that this king lived, for the
time to come, a godly life, and, having brought his days without
tempest to an end, failed not to gain the felicity of the world
to come.  If then at a convenient season one shall call these
things to thy father's mind also, peradventure he shall
understand and know the dire evil in which he is held, and turn
therefrom and choose the good; since, for the present at least,
'he is blind and cannot see afar off,' having deprived himself of
the true light and being a deserter of his own accord to the
darkness of ungodliness."

Ioasaph said unto him, "The Lord undertake my father's matters,
as he ordereth!  For, even as thou sayest, the things that are
impossible with men, are possible with him.  But for myself,
thanks to thine unsurpassable speech, I renounce the vanity of
things present, and am resolved to withdraw from them altogether,
and to spend the rest of my life with thee, lest, by means of
these transitory and fleeting things, I lose the enjoyment of the
eternal and incorruptible."

The elder answered him, "This do, and thou shalt be like unto a
youth of great understanding of whom I have heard tell, that was
born of rich and distinguished parents.  For him his father
sought in marriage the exceeding fair young daughter of a man of
high rank and wealth.  But when he communed with his son
concerning the espousals, and informed him of his plans, the son
thought it strange and ill-sounding, and cast it off, and left
his father and went into exile.  On his journey he found
entertainment in the house of a poor old man, where he rested
awhile during the heat of the day.

"Now this poor man's daughter, his only child, a virgin, was
sitting before the door, and, while she wrought with her hands,
with her lips she loudly sang the praises of God with
thanksgiving from the ground of her heart.  The young man heard
her hymn of praise and said, `Damsel, what is thine employment?
and wherefore, poor and needy as thou art, givest thou thanks as
though for great blessings, singing praise to the Giver?'  She
answered, `Knowest thou not that, as a little medicine often
times delivereth a man from great ailments, even so the giving of
thanks to God for small mercies winneth great ones?  Therefore I,
the daughter of a poor old man, thank and bless God for these
small mercies, knowing that the Giver thereof is able to give
even greater gifts.  And this applieth but to those external
things that are not our own from whence there accrueth no gain to
those who possess much (not to mention the loss that often
ariseth), nor cometh there harm to those who have less; for both
sorts journey along the same road, and hasten to the same end.
But, in things most necessary and vital, many and great the
blessings I have enjoyed of my Lord, though indeed they are
without number and beyond compare.  I have been made in the image
of God, and have gained the knowledge of him, and have been
endowed with reason beyond all the beasts, and have been called
again from death unto life, through the tender mercy of our God,
and have received power to share in his mysteries; and the gate
of Paradise hath been opened to me, allowing me to enter without
hindrance, if I will.  Wherefore for gifts so many and so fine,
shared alike by rich and poor, I can indeed in no wise praise him
as I ought, yet if I fail to render to the Giver this little hymn
of praise, what excuse shall I have?'

"The youth, astonished at her wit, called to her father, and said
unto him, `Give me thy daughter: for I love her wisdom and
piety.'  But the elder said, `It is not possible for thee, the
son of wealthy parents, to take this a beggar's daughter.'  Again
the young man said, `Yea, but I will take her, unless thou
forbid: for a daughter of noble and wealthy family hath been
betrothed unto me in marriage, and her I have cast off and taken
to flight.  But I have fallen in love with thy daughter because
of her righteousness to God-ward, and her discreet wisdom, and I
heartily desire to wed-her.'  But the old man said unto him, `I
cannot give her unto thee, to carry away to thy father's house,
and depart her from mine arms, for she is mine only child.'
'But,' said the youth, `I will abide here with your folk and
adopt your manner of life.'  Thereupon he stripped him of his own
goodly raiment, and asked for the old man's clothes and put them
on.  When the father had much tried his purpose, and proved him
in manifold ways, and knew that his intent was fixed, and that it
was no light passion that led him to ask for his daughter, but
love of godliness that constrained him to embrace a life of
poverty, preferring it to his own glory and noble birth, he took
him by the hand, and brought him into his treasure-house, where
he showed him much riches laid up, and a vast heap of money, such
as the young man had never beheld.  And he said unto him, `Son,
all these things give I unto thee, forasmuch as thou hast chosen
to become the husband to my daughter, and also thereby the heir
of all my substance.'  So the young man acquired the inheritance,
and surpassed all the famous and wealthy men of the land."


XVII.

Said Ioasaph unto Barlaam, "This story also fitly setteth forth
mine own estate.  Whence also me thinketh that thou hadst me in
mind when thou spakest it.  But what is the proof whereby thou
seekest to know the steadfastness of my purpose?"

Said the elder, "I have already proved thee, and know how wise
and steadfast is thy purpose, and how truly upright is thine
heart.  But the end of thy fortune shall confirm it.  For this
cause I bow my knees unto our God glorified in Three Persons, the
Maker of all things visible and invisible, who verily is, and is
for ever, that never had beginning of his glorious being, nor
hath end, the terrible and almighty, the good and pitiful, that
he may enlighten the eyes of thine heart, and give thee the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, that
thou mayest know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is
the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe; that
thou mayest be no more a stranger and sojourner, but a fellow-
citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God, being built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
our Lord himself being the chief corner-stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the
Lord."

Ioasaph, keenly pricked at the heart, said, "All this I too long
to learn: and I beseech thee make known to me the riches of the
glory of God, and the exceeding greatness of his power."

Barlaam said unto him, "I pray God to teach thee this, and to
plant in thy soul the knowledge of the same; since with men it is
impossible that his glory and power be told, yea, even if the
tongues of all men that now are and have ever been were combined
in one.  For, as saith the Evangelist and Divine, `No man hath
seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.'  But the glory and
majesty of the invisible and infinite God, what son of earth
shall skill to comprehend it, save he to whom he himself shall
reveal it, in so far as he will, as he hath revealed it, to his
Prophets and Apostles?  But we learn it, so far as in us lieth,
by their teaching, and from the very nature of the world.  For
the Scripture saith, `The heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament sheweth his handiwork;' and, `The invisible things
of him from the creation Of the world are clearly understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.'

"Even as a man, beholding an house splendidly and skilfully
builded, or a vessel fairly framed, taketh note of the builder or
workman and marvelleth thereat, even so I that was fashioned out
of nothing and brought into being, though I cannot see the maker
and provider, yet from his harmonious and marvellous fashioning
of me have come to the knowledge of his wisdom, not to the full
measure of that wisdom, but to the full compass of my powers; yea
I have seen that I was not brought forth by chance, nor made of
myself, but that he fashioned me, as it pleased him, and set me
to have dominion over his creatures, howbeit making me lower than
some; that, when I was broken, he re-created me with a better
renewal; and that he shall draw me by his divine will from this
world and place me in that other life that is endless and
eternal; and that in nothing I could withstand the might of his
providence, nor add anything to myself nor take anything away,
whether in stature or bodily form, and that I am not able to
renew for myself that which is waxen old, nor raise that which
hath been destroyed.  For never was man able to accomplish aught
of these things, neither king, nor wise man, nor rich man, nor
ruler, nor any other that pursueth the tasks of men.  For he
saith, `There is no king, or mighty man, that had any other
beginning of birth.  For all men have one entrance into life, and
the like going out.'

"So from mine own nature, I am led by the hand to the knowledge
of the mighty working of the Creator; and at the same time I
think upon the well-ordered structure and preservation of the
whole creation, how that in itself it is subject everywhere to
variableness and change, in the world of thought by choice,
whether by advance in the good, or departure from it, in the
world of sense by birth and decay, increase and decrease, and
change in quality and motion in space.  And thus all things
proclaim, by voices that cannot be heard, that they were created,
and are held together, and preserved, and ever watched over by
the providence of the uncreate, unturning and unchanging God.
Else how could diverse elements have met, for the consummation of
a single world, one with another, and remained inseparable,
unless some almighty power had knit them together, and still were
keeping them from dissolution?  `For how could anything have
endured, if it had not been his will?  or been preserved, if not
called by him?' as saith the Scripture.

"A ship holdeth not together without a steersman, but easily
foundereth; and a small house shall not stand without a
protector.  How then could the world have subsisted for long
ages, a work so great, and so fair and wondrous, -- without some
glorious mighty and marvellous steersmanship and all-wise
providence?  Behold the heavens, how long they have stood, and
have not been darkened: and the earth hath not been exhausted,
though she hath been bearing offspring so long.  The water-
springs have not failed to gush out since they were made.  The
sea, that receiveth so many rivers, hath not exceeded her
measure.  The courses of Sun and Moon have not varied: the order
of day and night hath not changed.  From all these objects is
declared unto us the unspeakable power and magnificence of God,
witnessed by Prophets and Apostles.  But no man can fitly
conceive or sound forth his glory.  For the holy Apostle, that
had Christ speaking within him, after perceiving all objects of
thought and sense, still said, `We know in part, and we prophesy
in part.  But when that which is perfect is come, then that which
is in part shall be done away.'  Wherefore also, astonied at the
infinite riches of his wisdom and knowledge, he cried for all to
understand, `O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God!  how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out!'

"Now, if he, that attained unto the third heaven and heard such
unspeakable words, uttered such sentences, what man of my sort
shall have strength to look eye to eye upon the abysses of such
mysteries, or speak rightly thereof, or think meetly of the
things whereof we speak, unless the very giver of wisdom, and the
amender of the unwise, vouchsafe that power?  For in his hand are
we and our words, and all prudence and knowledge of wisdom is
with him.  And he himself hath given us the true understanding of
the things that are; to know the structure of the world, the
working of the elements, the beginning, end and middle of times,
the changes of the solstices, the succession of seasons, and how
he hath ordered all things by measure and weight.  For he can
shew his great strength at all times, and who may withstand the
power of his arm?  For the whole world before him is as a little
grain of the balance, yea, as a drop of the morning dew that
falleth down upon the earth.  But he hath mercy upon all; for he
can do all things, and winketh at the sins of men, because they
should amend.  For he abhorreth nothing, nor turneth away from
them that run unto him, he, the only good Lord and lover of
souls.  Blessed be the holy name of his glory, praised and
exalted above all for ever!  Amen."


XVIII.

Ioasaph said unto him, "If thou hadst for a long time considered,
most wise Sir, how thou mightest best declare to me the
explanation of the questions that I propounded, methinks thou
couldest not have done it better than by uttering such words as
thou hast now spoken unto me.  Thou hast taught me that God is
the Maker and preserver of all things; and in unanswerable
language thou hast shown me that the glory of his majesty is
incomprehensible to human reasonings, and that no man is able to
attain thereto, except those to whom, by his behest, he revealeth
it.  Wherefore am I lost in amaze at thine eloquent wisdom.

"But tell me, good Sir, of what age thou art, and in what manner
of place is thy dwelling, and who are thy fellow philosophers;
for my soul hangeth fast on thine, and fain would I never be
parted from thee all the days of my life."

The elder said, "Mine age is, as I reckon, forty and five years,
and in the deserts of the land of Senaar do I dwell.  For my
fellow combatants I have those who labour and contend together
with me on the course of the heavenly journey."

"What sayest thou?" quoth Ioasaph.  "Thou seemest to me upwards
of seventy years old.  How speakest thou of forty and five?
Herein methinks thou tellest not the truth."

Barlaam said unto him, "If it be the number of years from my
birth that thou askest, thou hast well reckoned them at upwards
of seventy.  But, for myself, I count not amongst the number of
my days the years that I wasted in the vanity of the world.  When
I lived to the flesh in the bondage of sin, I was dead in the
inner man; and those years of deadness I can never call years of
life.  But now the world hath been crucified to me, and I to the
world, and I have put off the old man, which is corrupt according
to the deceitful lusts, and live no longer to the flesh, but
Christ liveth in me; and the life that I live, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
And the years, that have passed since then, I may rightly call
years of life, and days of salvation.  And in numbering these at
about forty and five, I reckoned by the true tale, and not off
the mark.  So do thou also alway hold by this reckoning; and be
sure that there is no true life for them that are dead to all
good works, and live in sin, and serve the world-ruler of them
that are dragged downward, and waste their time in pleasures and
lusts: but rather be well assured that these are dead and defunct
in the activity of life.  For a wise man hath fitly called sin
the death of the immortal soul.  And the Apostle also saith,
'When ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness.  What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye
are now ashamed?  for the end of those things is death.  But now
being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.  For the
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.'"

Ioasaph said unto him, "Since thou reckonest not the life in the
flesh in the measure of life, neither canst thou reckon that
death, which all men undergo, as death."

The elder answered, "Without doubt thus think I of these matters
also, and fear this temporal death never a whit, nor do I call it
death at all, if only it overtake me walking in the way of the
commandments of God, but rather a passage from death to the
better and more perfect life, which is hid in Christ, in desire
to obtain which the Saints were impatient of the present.
Wherefore saith the Apostle, `We know that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, a
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.  For in this
we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven: if so be that being clothed we shall not be
found naked.  For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being
burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon,
that mortality might be swallowed up of life.'  And again, `O
wretched man that I am!  who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?'  And once more, `I desire to depart and be with
Christ.'  And the prophet saith, `When shall I come and appear
before the presence of God?'  Now that I the least of all men,
choose not to fear bodily death, thou mayest learn by this, that
I have set at nought thy father's threat, and come boldly unto
thee, and have preached to thee the tidings of salvation, though
I knew for sure that, if this came to his knowledge, he would,
were that possible, put me to a thousand deaths.  But I,
honouring the word of God afore all things, and longing to win
it, dread not temporal death, nor reek on it at all worthy of
such an appellation, in obedience to my Lord's command, which
saith, `Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell.'"

"These then," said Ioasaph, "are the good deeds of that true
philosophy, that far surpass the nature of these earthly men who
cleave fast to the present life.  Blessed are ye that hold to so
noble a purpose!  But tell me truly what is thy manner of life
and that of thy companions in the desert, and from whence cometh
your raiment and of what sort may it be?  Tell me as thou lovest
truth."

Said Barlaam, "Our sustenance consisteth of acorns and herbs that
we find in the desert, watered by the dew of heaven, and in
obedience to the Creator's command; and for this there is none to
fight and quarrel with us, seeking by the rule and law of
covetousness to snatch more than his share, but in abundance for
all is food provided from unploughed lands, and a ready table
spread.  But, should any of the faithful brethren in the
neighbourhood bring a blessed dole of bread, we receive it as
sent by providence, and bless the faith that brought it.  Our
raiment is of hair, sheepskins or shirts of palm fibre, all
thread-bare and much patched, to mortify the frailty of the
flesh.  We wear the same clothing winter and summer, which, once
put on, we may on no account put off until it be old and quite
outworn.  For by thus afflicting our bodies with the constraints
of cold and heat we purvey for ourselves the vesture of our
future robes of immortality."

Ioasaph said, "But whence cometh this garment that thou wearest?"
The elder answered,"I received it as a loan from one of our
faithful brethren, when about to make my journey unto thee; for
it behoved me not to arrive in mine ordinary dress.  If one had a
beloved kinsman carried captive into a foreign land, and wished
to recover him thence, one would lay aside one's own clothing,
and put on the guise of the enemy, and pass into their country
and by divers crafts deliver one's friend from that cruel
tyranny.  Even so I also, having been made aware of thine estate,
clad myself in this dress, and came to sow the seed of the divine
message in thine heart, and ransom thee from the slavery of the
dread ruler of this world.  And now behold by the power of God,
as far as in me lay, I have accomplished my ministry, announcing
to thee the knowledge of him, and making known unto thee the
preaching of the Prophets and Apostles, and teaching thee
unerringly and soothly the vanity of the present life, and the
evils with which this world teems, which cruelly deceiveth them
that trust therein, and taketh them in many a gin.  Now must I
return thither whence I came, and thereupon doff this robe
belonging to another, and don mine own again."

Ioasaph therefore begged the elder to shew himself in his wonted
apparel.  Then did Barlaam strip off the mantle that he wore, and
lo, a terrible sight met Ioasaph's eyes: for all the fashion of
his flesh was wasted away, and his skin blackened by the
scorching sun, and drawn tight over his bones like an hide
stretched over thin canes.  And he wore an hair shirt, stiff and
rough, from his loins to his knees, and over his shoulders there
hung a coat of like sort.

But Ioasaph, being sore amazed at the hardship of his austere
life, and astonished at his excess of endurance, burst into
tears, and said to the elder, "Since thou art come to deliver me
from the slavery of the devil, crown thy good service to me, and
'bring my soul out of prison,' and take me with thee, and let us
go hence, that I may be fully ransomed from this deceitful world
and then receive the seal of saving Baptism, and share with thee
this thy marvellous philosophy, and this more than human
discipline"

But Barlaam said unto him, "A certain rich man once reared the
fawn of a gazelle; which, when grown up, was impelled by natural
desire to long for the desert.  So on a day she went out and
found an herd of gazelles browsing; and, joining them, she would
roam through the glades of the forest, returning at evenfall, but
issuing forth at dawn, through the heedlessness of her keepers,
to herd with her wild companions.  When these removed, to graze
further afield, she followed them.  But the rich man's servants,
when they learned thereof, mounted on horseback, and gave chase,
and caught the pet fawn, and brought her home again, and set her
in captivity for the time to come.  But of the residue of the
herd, some they killed, and roughly handled others.  Even so I
fear that it may happen unto us also if thou follow me; that I
may be deprived of thy fellowship, and bring many ills to my
comrades, and everlasting damnation to thy father.  But this is
the will of the Lord concerning time; thou now indeed must be
signed with the seal of holy Baptism, and abide in this country,
cleaving to all righteousness, and the fulfilling of the
commandments of Christ; but when the Giver of all good things
shall give thee opportunity, then shalt thou come to us, and for
the remainder of this present life we shall dwell together; and I
trust in the Lord also that in the world to come we shall not be
parted asunder."

Again Ioasaph, in tears, said unto him, "If this be the Lord's
pleasure, his will be done!  For the rest, perfect me in holy
Baptism.  Then receive at my hands money and garments for the
support and clothing both of thyself and thy companions, and
depart to the place of thy monastic life, and the peace of God be
thy guard!  But cease not to make supplications on my behalf,
that I may not fall away from my hope, but may soon be able to
reach thee, and in peace profound may enjoy thy ministration."

Barlaam answered, "Nought forbiddeth thee to receive the seal of
Christ.  Make thee ready now; and, the Lord working with thee,
thou shalt be perfected.  But as concerning the money that thou
didst promise to bestow on my companions, how shall this be, that
thou, a poor man, shouldest give alms to the rich?  The rich
always help the poor, not the needy the wealthy.  And the least
of all my comrades is incomparably richer than thou.  But I trust
in the mercies of God that thou too shalt soon be passing rich as
never afore: and then thou wilt not be ready to distribute."

Ioasaph said unto him, "Make plain to me this saying; how the
least of all thy companions surpasseth me in riches -- thou
saidest but now that they lived in utter penury, and were pinched
by extreme poverty and why thou callest me a poor man, but sayest
that, when I shall be passing rich, I, who am ready to
distribute, shall be ready to distribute no more."

Barlaam answered, "I said not that these men were pinched by
poverty, but that they plume themselves on their inexhaustible
wealth.  For to be ever adding money to money, and never to curb
the passion for it, but insatiably to covet more and more,
betokeneth the extreme of poverty.  But those who despise the
present for love of the eternal and count it but dung, if only
they win Christ, who have laid aside all care for meat and
raiment and cast that care on the Lord, and rejoice in penury as
no lover of the world could rejoice, were he rolling in riches,
who have laid up for themselves plenteously the riches of virtue,
and are fed by the hope of good things without end, may more
fitly be termed rich than thou, or any other earthly kingdom.
But, God working with thee, thou shalt lay hold on such spiritual
abundance that, if thou keep it in safety and ever rightfully
desire more, thou shalt never wish to dispend any part of it.
This is true abundance: but the mass of material riches will
damage rather than benefit its friends.  Meetly therefore called
I it the extreme of poverty, which the lovers of heavenly
blessings utterly renounce and eschew, and flee from it, as a man
fleeth from an adder.  But if I take from thee and so bring back
to life that foe, whom my comrades in discipline and battle have
slain and trampled under foot, and carry him back to them, and so
be the occasion of wars and lusts, then shall I verily be unto
them an evil angel, which heaven forfend!

"Let the same, I pray thee, be thy thoughts about raiment.  As
for them that have put off the corruption of the old man, and, as
far as possible, cast away the robe of disobedience, and put on
Christ as a coat of salvation and garment of gladness, how shall
I again clothe these in their coats of hide, and gird them about
with the covering of shame?  But be assured that my companions
have no need of such things, but are content with their hard life
in the desert, and reckon it the truest luxury; and bestow thou
on the poor the money and garments which thou promisedst to give
unto our monks, and lay up for thyself, for the time to come,
treasure that cannot be stolen, and by the orisons of these poor
folk make God thine ally; for thus shalt thou employ thy riches
as an help toward noble things.  Then also put on the whole
armour of the Spirit, having thy loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breast-plate of righteousness, and wearing the
helmet of salvation, and having thy feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace, and taking in thine hands the
shield of faith, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God.  And, being thus excellently armed and guarded on every
side, in this confidence go forth to the warfare against
ungodliness, until, this put to flight, and its prince, the
devil, dashed headlong to the earth, thou be adorned with the
crowns of victory from the right hand of thy master, the Lord of
life."


XIX.

With such like doctrines and saving words did Barlaam instruct
the king's son, and fit him for holy Baptism, charging him to
fast and pray, according to custom, several days: and he ceased
not to resort unto him, teaching him every article of the
Catholick Faith and expounding him the holy Gospel.  Moreover he
interpreted the Apostolick exhortations and the sayings of the
Prophets: for, taught of God, Barlaam had alway ready on his lips
the Old and New Scripture; and, being stirred by the Spirit, he
enlightened his young disciple to see the true knowledge of God.
But on the day, whereon the prince should be baptized, he taught
him, saying, "Behold thou art moved to receive the seal of
Christ, and be signed with the light of the countenance of the
Lord: and thou becomest a son of God, and temple of the Holy
Ghost, the giver of life.  Believe thou therefore in the Father,
and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, the holy and life-giving
Trinity, glorified in three persons and one Godhead, different
indeed in persons and personal properties, but united in
substance; acknowledging one God unbegotten, the Father; and one
begotten Lord, the Son, light of light, very God of very God,
begotten before all worlds; for of the good Father is begotten
the good Son, and of the unbegotten light shone forth the
everlasting light; and from very life came forth the life-giving
spring, and from original might shone forth the might of the Son,
who is the brightness of his glory and the Word in personality,
who was in the beginning with God, and God without beginning and
without end, by whom all things, visible and invisible, were
made: knowing also one Holy Ghost, which proceedeth from the
Father, perfect, life-giving and sanctifying God, with the same
will, the same power, coeternal and impersonate.  Thus therefore
worship thou the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in
three persons or properties and one Godhead.  For the Godhead is
common of the three, and one is their nature, one their
substance, one their glory, one their kingdom, one their might,
one their authority; but it is common of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost that they are of the Father; and it is proper of the Father
that he is unbegotten, and of the Son that he is begotten, and of
the Holy Ghost that he proceedeth.

"This therefore be thy belief; but seek not to understand the
manner of the generation or procession, for it is
incomprehensible.  In uprightness of heart and without question
accept the truth that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, are in all points one except in the being unbegotten, and
begotten, and proceeding; and that the only begotten Son, the
Word of God, and God, for our salvation came down upon earth, by
the good pleasure of the Father, and, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, was conceived without seed in the womb of Mary the
holy Virgin and Mother of God, by the Holy Ghost, and was born of
her without defilement and was made perfect man and that he is
perfect God and perfect man, being of two natures, the Godhead
and the manhood, and in two natures, endowed with reason, will,
activity, and free will, and in all points perfect according to
the proper rule and law in either case, that is in the Godhead
and the manhood, and in one united person.  And do thou receive
these things without question, never seeking to know the manner,
how the Son of God emptied himself, and was made man of the blood
of the Virgin, without seed and without defilement; or what is
this meeting in one person of two natures.  For by faith we are
taught to hold fast those things that have been divinely taught
us out of Holy Scripture; but of the manner we are ignorant, and
cannot declare it.

"Believe thou that the Son of God, who, of his tender mercy was
made man, took upon him all the affections that are natural to
man, and are blameless (he hungered and thirsted and slept and
was weary and endured agony in his human nature, and for our
transgressions was led to death, was crucified and was buried,
and tasted of death, his Godhead continuing without suffering and
without change; for we attach no sufferings whatsoever to that
nature which is free from suffering, but we recognize him as
suffering and buried in that nature which he assumed, and in his
heavenly glory rising again from the dead, and in immortality
ascending into heaven); and believe that he shall come again,
with glory, to judge quick and dead, and by the words which
himself knoweth, of that diviner body, and to reward every man by
his own just standards.  For the dead shall rise again, and they
that are in their graves shall awake: and they that have kept the
commandments of Christ, and have departed this life in the true
faith shall inherit eternal life, and they, that have died in
their sins, and have turned aside from the right faith, shall go
away into eternal punishment.  Believe not that there is any true
being or kingdom of evil, nor suppose that it is without
beginning, or self-originate, or born of God: out on such an
absurdity!  but believe rather that it is `the work of us and the
devil, come upon us through our heedlessness, because we were
endowed with free-will, and we make our choice, of deliberate
purpose, whether it be good or evil.  Beside this, acknowledge
one Baptism, by water and the Spirit, for the remission of sins.

"Receive also the Communion of the spotless Mysteries of Christ,
believing in truth that they are the Body and Blood of Christ our
God, which he hath given unto the faithful for the remission of
sins.  For in the same night in which he was betrayed he ordained
a new testament with his holy disciples and Apostles, and through
them for all that should believe on him, saying, `Take, eat: this
is my Body, which is broken for you, for the remission of sins.'
After the same manner also he took the cup, and gave unto them
saying, `Drink ye all of this: this is my Blood, of the new
testament, which is shed for you for the remission of sins: this
do in remembrance of me.'  He then, the Word of God, being quick
and powerful, and, working all things by his might, maketh and
transformeth, through his divine operation, the bread and wine of
the oblation into his own Body and Blood, by the visitation of
the Holy Ghost, for the sanctification and enlightenment of them
that with desire partake thereof.

"Faithfully worship, with honour and reverence, the venerable
likeness of the features of the Lord, the Word of God, who for
our sake was made man, thinking to behold in the Image thy
Creator himself.  `For the honour of the Image, saith one of the
Saints, passeth over to the original.'  The original is the thing
imaged, and from it cometh the derivation.  For when we see the
drawing in the Image, in our mind's eye we pass over to the true
form of which it is an Image, and devoutly worship the form of
him who for our sake was made flesh, not making a god of it, but
saluting it as an image of God made flesh, with desire and love
of him who for us men emptied himself, and even took the form of
a servant.  Likewise also for this reason we salute the pictures
of his undefiled Mother, and of all the Saints.  In the same
spirit also faithfully worship and salute the emblem of the life-
giving and venerable Cross, for the sake of him that hung thereon
in the flesh, for the salvation of our race, Christ the God and
Saviour of the world, who gave it to us as the sign of victory
over the devil; for the devil trembleth and quaketh at the virtue
thereof, and endureth not to behold it.  In such doctrines and in
such faith shalt thou be baptized, keeping thy faith unwavering
and pure of all heresy until thy latest breath.  But all teaching
and every speech of doctrine contrary to this blameless faith
abhor, and consider it an alienation from God.  For, as saith the
Apostle, `Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed.'  For there is none other Gospel or none other
Faith than that which hath been preached by the Apostles, and
established by the inspired Fathers at divers Councils, and
delivered to the Catholick Church."

When Barlaam had thus spoken, and taught the king's son the Creed
which was set forth at the Council of Nicaea, he baptized him in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in
the pool of water which was in his garden.  And there came upon
him the grace of the Holy Spirit.  Then did Barlaam come back to
his chamber, and offer the holy Mysteries of the unbloody 
Sacrifice, and communicate him with the undefiled Mysteries of
Christ: and Ioasaph rejoiced in spirit, giving thanks to Christ
his God.

Then said Barlaam unto him, "Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath
begotten thee again unto a lively hope, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fadeth not away, reserved in
heaven in Christ Jesus our Lord by the Holy Ghost; for to-day
thou hast been made free from sin, and hast become the servant of
God, and hast received the earnest of everlasting life: thou hast
left darkness and put on light, being enrolled in the glorious
liberty of the children of God.  For he saith, `As many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name.'  Wherefore thou art no
more a servant, but a son and an heir of God through Jesus Christ
in the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, beloved, give diligence that thou
mayest be found of him without spot and blameless, working that
which is good upon the foundation of faith: for faith without
works is dead, as also are works without faith; even as I
remember to have told thee afore.  Put off therefore now all
malice, and hate all the works of the old man, which are corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts; and, as new-born babe, desire
to drink the reasonable and sincere milk of the virtues, that
thou mayest grow thereby, and attain unto the knowledge of the
commandments of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that thou mayest
henceforth be no more a child in mind, tossed to and fro, and
carried about on the wild and raging waves of thy passions: or
rather in malice be a child, but have thy mind settled and made
steadfast toward that which is good, and walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith thou wast called, in the keeping of the
commandments of the Lord, casting off and putting far from thee
the vanity of thy former conversation, henceforth walking not as
the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, alienated from the glory of God, in
subjection to their lusts and unreasonable affections.  But as
for thee, even as thou hast approached the living and true God,
so walk thou as a child of light; for the fruit of the Spirit is
in all goodness and righteousness and truth; and no longer
destroy by the works of the old man the new man, which thou hast
to-day put on.  But day by day renew thyself in righteousness and
holiness and truth: for this is possible with every man that
willeth, as thou hearest that unto them that believe on his name
he hath given power to become the sons of God; so that we can no
longer say that the acquiring of virtues is impossible for us,
for the road is plain and easy.  For, though with respect to the
buffeting of the body, it hath been called a strait and narrow
way, yet through the hope of future blessings is it desirable and
divine for such as walk, not as fools but circumspectly,
understanding what the will of God is, clad in the whole armour
of God to stand in battle against the wiles of the adversary, and
with all prayer and supplication watching thereunto, in all
patience and hope.  Therefore, even as thou hast heard from me,
and been instructed, and hast laid a sure foundation, do thou
abound therein, increasing and advancing, and warring the good
warfare, holding faith and a good conscience, witnessed by good
works, following after righteousness, godliness, faith, charity,
patience, meekness, laying hold on eternal life whereunto thou
wast called.  But remove far from thee all pleasure and lust of
the affections, not only in act and operation, but even in the
thoughts of thine heart, that thou mayest present thy soul
without blemish to God.  For not our actions only, but our
thoughts also are recorded, and procure us crowns or punishments:
and we know that Christ, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
dwelleth in pure hearts.  But, just as smoke driveth away bees,
so, we learn, do evil imaginations drive out of us the Holy
Spirit's grace.  Wherefore take good heed hereto, that thou blot
out every imagination of sinful passion from thy soul, and plant
good thoughts therein, making thyself a temple of the Holy Ghost.
For from imaginations we come also to actual deeds, and every
work, advancing from thought and reflection, catcheth at small
beginnings, and then, by small increases, arriveth at great
endings.

"Wherefore on no account suffer any evil habit to master thee;
but, while it is yet young, pluck the evil root out of thine
heart, lest it fasten on and strike root so deep that time and
labour be required to uproot it.  And the reason that greater
sins assault us and get the mastery of our souls is that those
which appear to be less, such as wicked thoughts, unseemly words
and evil communications, fail to receive proper correction.  For
as in the case of the body, they that neglect small wounds often
bring mortification and death upon themselves, so too with the 
soul: thus they that overlook little passions and sins bring on
greater ones.  And the more those greater sins grow on them, the
more cloth the soul become accustomed therto and think light of
them.  For he saith, `When the wicked cometh to the depth of evil
things, he thinketh light of them': and finally, like the hog,
that delighteth to wallow in mire, the soul, that hath been
buried in evil habits, doth not even perceive the stink of her
sin, but rather delighteth and rejoiceth therein, cleaving to
wickedness as it were good.  And even if at last she issue from
the mire and come to herself again, she is delivered only by much
labour and sweat from the bondage of those sins, to which she
hath by evil custom enslaved herself.

"Wherefore with all thy might remove thyself far from every evil
thought and fancy, and every sinful custom; and school thyself
the rather in virtuous deeds, and form the habit of practising
them.  For if thou labour but a little therein, and have strength
to form the habit, at the last, God helping thee, thou shalt
advance without labour.  For the habit of virtue, taking its
quality from the soul, seeing that it hath some natural kinship
therewith and claimeth God for an help-mate, becometh hard to
alter and exceeding strong; as thou seest, courage and prudence,
temperance and righteousness are hard to alter, being deeply
seated habits, qualities and activities of the soul.  For if the
evil affections, not being natural to us, but attacking us from
without, be hard to alter when they become habits, how much
harder shall it be to shift virtue, which hath been by nature
planted in us by our Maker, and hath him for an help-mate, if so
be, through our brief endeavour, it shall have been rooted in
habit in the soul?"


XX.

"Wherefore a practician of virtue once spake to me on this wise:
'After I had made divine meditation my constant habit, and
through the practice of it my soul had received her right
quality, I once resolved to make trial of her, and put a check
upon her, not allowing her to devote herself to her wonted
exercises.  I felt that she was chafing and fretting, and
yearning for meditation with an ungovernable desire, and was
utterly unable to incline to any contrary thought.  No sooner had
I given her the reins than immediately she ran in hot haste to
her own task, as saith the Prophet, `Like as the hart desireth
the water brooks, so longeth my soul after the strong, the living
God.'  Wherefore from all these proofs it is evident that the
acquirement of virtue is within our reach, and that we are lords
over it, whether we will embrace or else the rather choose sin.
They then, that are in the thraldom of wickedness, can hardly be
torn away therefrom, as I have already said.

"But thou, who hast been delivered therefrom, through the tender
mercy of our God, and hast put on Christ by the grace of the Holy
Ghost, now transfer thyself wholly to the Lord's side, and never
open a door to thy passions, but adorn thy soul with the sweet
savour and splendour of virtue, and make her a temple of the Holy
Trinity, and to his contemplation see thou devote all the powers
of thy mind.  He that liveth and converseth with an earthly king
is pointed out by all as a right happy man: what happiness then
must be his who is privileged to converse and be in spirit with
God!  Behold thou then his likeness alway, and converse with him.
How shalt thou converse with God?  By drawing near him in prayer
and supplication.  He that prayeth with exceeding fervent desire
and pure heart, his mind estranged from all that is earthly and
grovelling, and standeth before God, eye to eye, and presenteth
his prayers to him in fear and trembling, such an one hath
converse and speaketh with him face to face.

"Our good Master is present everywhere, hearkening to them that
approach him in purity and truth, as saith the Prophet, `The eyes
of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry.'  For this reason the Fathers define Prayer as `the
union of man with God,' and call it `Angels' work,' and `the
prelude of gladness to come.'  For since they lay down before all
things that `the kingdom of heaven' consisteth in nearness to and
contemplation of the Holy Trinity, and since all the importunity
of prayer leadeth the mind thither, prayer is rightly called `the
prelude' and, as it were, the `fore-glimpse' of that blessedness.
But not all prayer is of this nature, but only such prayer as is
worthy of the name, which hath God for its teacher, who giveth
prayer to him that prayeth; prayer which soareth above all things
on earth and entreateth directly with God.

"This acquire thou for thyself, and strive to advance thereto,
for it is able to exalt thee from earth to heaven.  But without
preparation and at hap-hazard thou shalt not advance therein. 
But first purify thy soul from all passion, and cleanse it like a
bright and newly cleansed mirrour from every evil thought, and
banish far all remembrance of injury and anger, which most of all
hindereth our prayers from ascending to God-ward: and from the
heart forgive all those that have trespassed against thee, and
with alms and charities to the poor lend wings to thy prayer, and
so bring it before God with fervent tears.  Thus praying thou
shalt be able to say with blessed David, who, for all that he was
king, and distraught with ten thousand cares, yet cleansed his
soul from all passions, and could say unto God, `As for iniquity,
I hate and abhor it, but thy law do I love.  Seven times a day do
I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgements.  My soul hath
kept thy testimonies, and loved them exceedingly.  Let my
complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding
according to thy word.'

"While thou art calling thus, the Lord hear thee: while thou art
yet speaking, he shall say, `Behold I am here.'  If then thou
attain to such prayer, blessed shalt thou be; for it is
impossible for a man praying and calling upon God with such
purpose not to advance daily in that which is good, and soar over
all the snares of the enemy.  For, as saith one of the Saints,
'He that hath made fervent his understanding, and hath lift up
his soul and migrated to heaven, and hath thus called upon his
Master, and remembered his own sins, and spoken concerning the
forgiveness of the same, and with hot tears hath besought the
Lover of mankind to be merciful to him: such an one, I say, by
his continuance in such words and considerations, layeth aside
every care of this life, and waxeth superior to human passions,
and meriteth to be called an associate of God.'  Than which state
what can be more blessed and higher?  May the Lord vouchsafe thee
to attain to this blessedness!

"Lo I have shown thee the way of the commandments of the Lord,
and have not shunned to declare unto thee all the counsel of God.
And now I, have fulfilled my ministry unto thee.  It remaineth
that thou gird up the loins of thy mind, obedient to the Holy One
that hath called thee, and be thou thyself holy in all manner of
conversation: for, `Be ye holy: for I am holy,' saith the Lord.
And the chief prince of the Apostles also writeth, saying, `If ye
call on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth
according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning
here in fear; knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received
by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.'

"All these things therefore store thou up in thine heart, and
remember them unceasingly, ever keeping before thine eyes the
fear of God, and his terrible judgement seat, and the splendour
of the righteous which they shall receive in the world to come,
and the shame of sinners in the depths of darkness, and the
frailty and vanity of things present, and the eternity of things
hereafter; for, `All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as
the flower of grass.  The grass withereth, and the flower thereof
falleth away: but the word of the Lord endureth for ever.' 
Meditate upon these things alway and the peace of God be with
thee, enlightening and informing thee, and leading thee into the
way of salvation, chasing afar out of thy mind every evil wish,
and sealing thy soul with the sign of the Cross, that no
stumbling block of the evil one come nigh thee, but that thou
mayest merit, in all fulness of virtue, to obtain the kingdom
that is to come, without end or successor, and be illumined with
the light of the blessed life-giving Trinity, which, in the
Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, is glorified."


XXI.

With such moral words did the reverend elder exhort the king's
son, and then withdrew to his own hospice.  But the young
prince's servants and tutors marvelled to see the frequency of
Barlaam's visits to the palace; and one of the chiefest among
them, whom, for his fidelity and prudence, the king had set over
his son's palace, named Zardan, said to the prince, "Thou knowest
well, sir, how much I dread thy father, and how great is my faith
toward him: wherefore he ordered me, for my faithfulness, to wait
upon thee.  Now, when I see this stranger constantly conversing
with thee, I fear he may be of the Christian religion, toward
which thy father hath a deadly hate; and I shall be found subject
to the penalty of death.  Either then make known to thy father
this man's business, or in future cease to converse with him.
Else cast me forth from thy presence, that I be not blameable,
and ask thy father to appoint another in my room.

The king's son said unto him, "This do, Zardan, first of all. 
Sit thou down behind the curtain, and hear his communication with
me: and then thus will I tell thee what thou oughtest to do."

So when Barlaam was about to enter into his presence, Ioasaph hid
Zardan within the curtain, and said to the elder, "Sum me up the
matter of thy divine teaching, that it may the more firmly be
implanted in my heart."  Barlaam took up his parable and uttered
many sayings touching God, and righteousness toward him, and how
we must love him alone with all our heart, and with all our soul,
and with all our mind, and keep his commandments with fear and
love-and how he is the Maker of all things visible and invisible.
Thereon he called to remembrance the creation of the first man,
the command given unto him, and his transgression thereof, and
the sentence pronounced by the Creator for this transgression.
Then he reckoned up in order the good things wherefrom we
excluded ourselves by the disannulling of his commandment.  Again
he made mention of the many grievous misfortunes that unhappily
overtook man, after the loss of the blessings.  Besides this he
brought forward God's love toward mankind; how our Maker, heedful
of our salvation, sent forth teachers and prophets proclaiming
the Incarnation of the Only-begotten.  Then he spake of the Son,
his dwelling among men, his deeds of kindness, his miracles, his
sufferings for us thankless creatures, his Cross, his spear, his
voluntary death; finally, of our recovery and recall, our return
to our first good estate; after this, of the kingdom of heaven
awaiting such as are worthy thereof; of the torment in store for
the wicked; the fire that is not quenched, the never ending
darkness, the undying worm, and all the other tortures which the
slaves of sin have laid up in store for themselves.  When he had
fully related these matters, he ended his speech with moral
instruction, and dwelt much upon purity of life, and utterly
condemned the vanity of things present, and proved the utter
misery of such as cleave thereto, and finally made an end with
prayer.  And therewith he prayed for the prince, that he might
hold fast the profession of the Catholick Faith without turning
and without wavering, and keep his life blameless and his
conversation pure, and so ending with prayer again withdrew to
his hospice.

But the king's son called Zardan forth, and, to try his
disposition, said unto him, "Thou hast heard what sort of
discourses this babbler maketh me, endeavouring to be-jape me
with his specious follies, and rob me of this pleasing happiness
and enjoyment, to worship a strange God." Zardan answered, "Why
hath it pleased thee, O prince, to prove me that am thy servant?
I wot that the words of that man have sunk deep into thine heart;
for, otherwise, thou hadst not listened gladly and unceasingly to
his words.  Yea, and we also are not ignorant of this preaching.
But from the time when thy father stirred up truceless warfare
against the Christians, the men have been banished hence, and
their teaching is silenced.  But if now their doctrine commend
itself unto thee, and if thou have the strength to accept its
austerity, may thy wishes be guided straight toward the good! 
But for myself, what shall I do, that am unable to bear the very
sight of such austerity, and through fear of the King am divided
in soul with pain and anguish?  What excuse shall I make, for
neglecting his orders, and giving this fellow access unto thee?"

The King's son said unto him, "I knew full well that in none
other wise could I requite thee worthily for thy much kindness,
and therefore have I tasked myself to make known unto thee this
more than human good, which doth even exceed the worth of thy
good service, that thou mightest know to what end thou wast born,
and acknowledge thy Creator, and, leaving darkness, run to the
light.  And I hoped that when thou heardest thereof thou wouldst
follow it with irresistible desire.  But, as I perceive, I am
disappointed of my hope, seeing that thou art listless to that
which hath been spoken.  But if thou reveal these secrets to the
king my father, thou shalt but distress his mind with sorrows and
griefs.  If thou be well disposed to him, on no account reveal
this matter to him until a convenient season."  Speaking thus, he
seemed to be only casting seed upon the water; for wisdom shall
not enter into a soul void of understanding.

Upon the morrow came Barlaam and spake of his departure: but
Ioasaph, unable to bear the separation, was distressed at heart,
and his eyes filled with tears.  The elder made a long discourse,
and adjured him to continue unshaken in good works, and with
words of exhortation established his heart, and begged him to
send him cheerfully on his way; and at the same time he foretold
that they should shortly be at one, never to be parted more.  But
Ioasaph, unable to impose fresh labours on the elder, and to
restrain his desire to be on his way, and suspecting moreover
that the man Zardan might make known his case to the King and
subject him to punishment, said unto Barlaam, "Since it seemeth
thee good, my spiritual father, best of teachers and minister of
all good to me, to leave me to live in the vanity of the world,
while thou journeyest to thy place of spiritual rest, I dare no
longer let and hinder thee.  Depart therefore, with the peace of
God for thy guardian, and ever in thy worthy prayers, for the
Lord's sake, think upon my misery, that I may be enabled to
overtake thee, and behold thine honoured face for ever.  But
fulfil this my one request; since thou couldest not receive aught
for thy fellow monks, yet for thyself accept a little money for
sustenance, and a cloak to cover thee."  But Barlaam answered and
said unto him, "Seeing that I would not receive aught for my
brethren (for they need not grasp at the world's chattels which
they have chosen to forsake), how shall I acquire for myself that
which I have denied them?  If the possession of money were a good
thing, I should have let them share it before me.  But, as I
understand that the possession thereof is deadly, I will hazard
neither them nor myself in such snares."

But when Ioasaph had failed once again to persuade Barlaam, `twas
but a sign for a second petition, and he made yet another
request, that Barlaam should not altogether overlook his prayer,
nor plunge him in utter despair, but should leave him that stiff
shirt and rough mantle, both to remind him of his teacher's
austerities and to safe-guard him from all the workings of Satan,
and should take from him another cloak instead, in order that
"When thou seest my gift," said he, "thou mayest bear my
lowliness in remembrance."

But the elder said, "It is not lawful for me to give thee my old
and worn out vestment, and take one that is new, lest I be
condemned to receive here the recompense of my slight labour.
But, not to thwart thy willing mind, let the garments given me by
thee be old ones, nothing different from mine own."  So the
king's son sought for old shirts of hair, which he gave the aged
man, rejoicing to receive his in exchange, deeming them beyond
compare more precious than any regal purple.

Now saintly Barlaam, all but ready for to start, spake concerning
his journey, and delivered Ioasaph his last lesson, saying,
"Brother beloved, and dearest son, whom I have begotten through
the Gospel, thou knowest of what King thou art the soldier, and
with whom thou hast made thy covenant.  This thou must keep
steadfastly, and readily perform the duties of thy service, even
as thou didst promise the Lord of all in the script of thy
covenant, with the whole heavenly host present to attest it, and
record the terms; which if thou keep, thou shalt be blessed.
Esteem therefore nought in the present world above God and his
blessings.  For what terror of this life can be so terrible as
the Gehenna of eternal fire, that burneth and yet hath no light,
that punisheth and never ceaseth?  And which of the goodly things
of this world can give such gladness as that which the great God
giveth to those that love him?  Whose beauty is unspeakable, and
power invincible, and glory everlasting; whose good things,
prepared for his friends, exceed beyond comparison all that is
seen; which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man: whereof mayest thou be shown an
inheritor, preserved by the mighty hand of God!"

Here the king's son burst into tears of pain and vexation, unable
to bear the parting from a loving father and excellent teacher.
"And who," quoth he, "shall fill thy place, O my father?  And
whom like unto thee shall I find to be shepherd and guide of my
soul's salvation?  What consolation may I find in my loss of
thee?  Behold thou hast brought me, the wicked and rebellious
servant, back to God, and set me in the place of son and heir!
Thou hast sought me that was lost and astray on the mountain, a
prey for every evil beast, and folded me amongst the sheep that
had never wandered.  Thou hast shown me the direct road to truth,
bringing me out of darkness and the shadow of death, and,
changing the course of my feet from the slippery, deadly, crooked
and winding pathway, hast ministered to me great and marvellous
blessings, whereof speech would fail to recount the exceeding
excellence.  Great be the gifts that thou receivest at God's
hand, on account of me who am small!  And may the Lord, who in
the rewards of his gifts alone overpasseth them that love him,
supply that which is lacking to my gratitude!"

Here Barlaam cut short his lamentation, and rose and stood up to
pray, lifting up his either hand, and saying, "O God and Father
of our Lord Jesu Christ, which didst illuminate the things that
once were darkened, and bring this visible and invisible creation
out of nothing, and didst turn again this thine handiwork, and
sufferedst us not to walk after our foolishness, we give thanks
to thee and to thy Wisdom and Might, our Lord Jesu Christ, by
whom thou didst make the worlds, didst raise us from our fall,
didst forgive us our trespasses, didst restore us from wandering,
didst ransom us from captivity, didst quicken us from death by
the precious blood of thy Son our Lord.  Upon thee I call, and
upon thine only begotten Son, and upon the Holy Ghost.  Look upon
this thy spiritual sheep that hath come to be a sacrifice unto
thee through me thine unworthy servant, and do thou sanctify his
soul with thy might and grace.  Visit this vine, which was
planted by thy Holy Spirit, and grant it to bear fruit, the fruit
of righteousness.  Strengthen him, and confirm in him thy
covenant, and rescue him from the deceit of the devil.  With the
wisdom of thy good Spirit teach him to do thy will, and take not
thy succour from him, but grant unto him, with me thine
unprofitable servant, to become an inheritor of thine everlasting
bliss, because thou art blessed and glorified for ever, Amen."

When that he had ended his prayer, he turned him round and
embraced Ioasaph, now a son of his heavenly father, wishing him
eternal peace and salvation, and he departed out of the palace,
and went his way, rejoicing and giving thanks to God, who had
well ordered his steps for good.


XXII.

After Barlaam was gone forth, Ioasaph gave himself unto prayer
and bitter tears, and said, "O God, haste thee to help me: O
Lord, make speed to help me, because the poor hath committed
himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the orphan.  Look upon
me, and have mercy upon me; thou who willest have all men to be
saved and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, save me, and
strengthen me, unworthy though I be, to walk the way of thy holy
commandments, for I am weak and miserable, and not able to do the
thing that is good.  But thou art mighty to save me, who
sustainest and holdest together all things visible and invisible.
Suffer me not to walk after the evil will of the flesh, but teach
me to do thy will, and preserve me unto thine eternal and
blissful life.  O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the consubstantial
and undivided Godhead, I call upon thee and glorify thee.  Thou
art praised by all creation; thou art glorified by the
intelligent powers of the Angels for ever and ever.  Amen."

From that time forth he kept himself with all vigilance, seeking
to attain purity of soul and body, and living in continency and
prayers and intercessions all night long.  In the day-time he was
often interrupted by the company of his fellows, and at times by
a visit from the king, or a call to the king's presence, but the
night would then make good the shortcomings of the day, whilst he
stood, in prayer and weeping until daybreak, calling upon God.
Whence in him was fulfilled the saying of the prophet, "In nights
raise your hands unto holy things; and bless ye the Lord."

But Zardan observed Ioasaph's way of life, and was full of
sorrow, and his soul was pierced with grievous anxieties; and he
knew not what to do.  At the last, worn down with pain, he
withdrew to his own home, feigning sickness.  When this had come
to the knowledge of the king he appointed in his place another of
his trusty men to minister unto his son, while he himself, being
concerned for Zardan's health, sent a physician of reputation,
and took great pains that he should be healed.

The physician, seeing that Zardan was in favour with the king,
attended him diligently, and, having right well judged his ease,
soon made this report to the king; "I have been unable to
discover any root of disease in the man: wherefore I suppose that
this weakness is to be ascribed to distress of spirit."  But, on
hearing his words, the king suspected that his son had been wroth
with Zardan, and that this slight had caused his retirement.  So,
wishing to search the matter, he sent Zardan word, saying
"To-morrow I shall come to see thee, and judge of the malady that
hath befallen thee."

But Zardan, on hearing this message, at daybreak wrapt his cloak
around him and went to the king, and entered and fell in
obeisance on the ground.  The king spake unto him, "Why hast thou
forced thyself to appear?  I was minded to visit thee myself, and
so make known to all my friendship for thee."  He answered, "My
sickness, O king, is no malady common to man; but pain of heart,
arising from an anxious and careful mind, hath caused my body to
suffer in sympathy.  It had been folly in me, being as I am, not
to attend as a slave before thy might, but to wait for thy
Majesty to be troubled to come to me thy servant."  Then the king
enquired after the cause of his despondency; Zardan answered and
said, "Mighty is my peril, and mighty are the penalties that I
deserve, and many deaths do I merit, for that I have been guilty
of neglect of thy behests, and have brought on thee such sorrow
as never before."

Again said the king, "And of what neglect hast thou been guilty?
And what is the dread that encompasseth thee?"  "I have been
guilty," said he, "of negligence in my close care of my lord thy
son.  There came an evil man and a sorcerer, and communicated to
him the precepts of the Christian religion."  Then he related to
the king, point by point, the words which the old man spake with
his son, and how gladly Ioasaph received his word, and how he had
altogether become Christ's.  Moreover he gave the old man's name,
saying that it was Barlaam.  Even before then the king had heard
tell of Barlaam's ways and his extreme severity of life; but,
when this came to the ears of the king, he was straightway
astonied by the dismay that fell on him, and was filled with
anger, and his blood well-nigh curdled at the tidings.
Immediately he bade call one Araches, who held the second rank
after the king, and was the chief in all his private councils:
besides which the man was learned in star-lore.  When he was
come, with much despondency and dejection the king told him of
that which had happened.  He, seeing the king's trouble and
confusion of mind, said, "O king, trouble and distress thyself no
more.  We are not without hope that the prince will yet change
for the better: nay, I know for very certain that he will
speedily renounce the teaching of this deceiver, and conform to
thy will."

By these words then did Araches set the king in happier frame of
mind; and they turned their thoughts to the thorough sifting of
the matter.  "This, O king," said Araches, "do we first of all.
Make we haste to apprehend that infamous Barlaam.  If we take
him, I am assured that we shall not miss the mark, nor be cheated
of our hope. Barlaam himself shall be persuaded, either by
persuasion or by divers engines of torture, against his will to
confess that he hath been talking falsely and at random, and
shall persuade my lord, thy son, to cleave to his father's creed.
But if we fail to take Barlaam, I know of an eremite, Nachor by
name, in every way like unto him: it is impossible to distinguish
the one from the other.  He is of our opinion, and was my teacher
in studies.  I will give him the hint, and go by night, and tell
him the full tale.  Then will we blazon it abroad that Barlaam
hath been caught; but we shall exhibit Nachor, who, calling
himself Barlaam, shall feign that he is pleading the cause of the
Christians and standing forth as their champion.  Then, after
much disputation, he shall be worsted and utterly discomfited.
The prince, seeing Barlaam worsted, and our side victorious, will
doubtless join the victors; the more so that he counteth it a
great duty to reverence thy majesty, and do thy pleasure.  Also
the man who hath played the part of Barlaam shall be converted,
and stoutly proclaim that he hath been in error."

Tim king was delighted with his words, and rocked himself on idle
hopes, and thought it excellent counsel.  Thereupon, learning
that Barlaam was but lately departed, he was zealous to take him
prisoner.  He therefore occupied most of the passes with troops
and captains, and, himself, mounting his chariot, gave furious
chase along the one road of which he was especially suspicious,
being minded to surprise Barlaam at all costs.  But though he
toiled by the space of six full days, his labour was but spent in
vain.  Then he himself remained behind in one of his palaces
situate in the country, but sent forward Araches, with horsemen
not a few, as far as the wilderness of Senaar, in quest of
Barlaam.  When Araches arrived in that place, he threw all the
neighbour folk into commotion: and when they constantly affirmed
that they had never seen the man, he went forth into the desert
places, for to hunt out the Faithful.  When he had gone through a
great tract of desert, and made the circuit of the fells around,
and journeyed a-foot over untrodden and pathless ravines, he and
his hosts arrived at a plateau.  Standing thereon, he descried at
the foot of the mountain a company of hermits a-walking.
Straightway at their governor's word of command all his men ran
upon them in breathless haste, vying one with another, who should
arrive first.  When they arrived, they came about the monks like
so many dogs, or evil beasts that plague mankind.  And they
seized these men of reverend mien and mind, that bore on their
faces the hall-mark of their hermit life, and haled them before
the governor; but the monks showed no sign of alarm, no sign of
meanness or sullenness, and spake never a word.  Their leader and
captain bore a wallet of hair, charged with the relics of some
holy Fathers departed this life.

When Araches beheld them, but saw no Barlaam -- for he knew him
by sight -- he was overwhelmed with grief, and said unto them,
"Where is that deceiver who hath led the king's son astray?"  The
bearer of the wallet answered, "He is not amongst us, God forbid!
For, driven forth by the grace of Christ, he avoideth us; but
amongst you he hath his dwelling."  The governor said, "Thou
knowest him then?"  "Yea," said the hermit, "I know him that is
called the deceiver, which is the devil, who dwelleth in your
midst and is worshipped and served by you."  The governor said,
"It is for Barlaam that I make search, and I asked thee of him,
to learn where he is."  The monk answered, "And wherefore then
spakest thou in this ambiguous manner, asking about him that had
deceived the king's son?  If thou wast seeking Barlaam, thou
shouldest certainly have said, `Where is he that hath turned from
error and saved the king's son?'  Barlaam is our brother and
fellow-monk.  But now for many days past we have not seen his
face."  Said Araches, "Show me his abode."  The monk answered,
"Had he wished to see you, he would have come forth to meet you.
As for us, it is not lawful to make known to you his hermitage."

Thereupon the governor waxed full of indignation, and, casting a
haughty and savage glance upon him, said, "Ye shall die no
ordinary death, except ye immediately bring Barlaam before me."
"What," said the monk, "seest thou in our case that should by its
attractions cause us to cling to life, and be afraid of death at
thy hands?  Whereas we should the rather feel grateful to thee
for removing us from life in the close adherence to virtue.  For
we dread, not a little, the uncertainty of the end, knowing not
in what state death shall overtake us, lest perchance a slip of
the inclination, or some despiteful dealing of the devil, may
alter the constancy of our choice, and mis-persuade us to think
or do contrary to our covenants with God.  Wherefore abandon all
hope of gaining the knowledge that ye desire, and shrink not to
work your will.  We shall neither reveal the dwelling-place of
our brother, whom God loveth, although we know it, nor shall we
betray any other monasteries unbeknown to ye.  We will not endure
to escape death by such cowardice.  Nay, liefer would we die
honourably, and offer unto God, after the sweats of virtue, the
life-blood of courage."

That man of sin could not brook this boldness of speech, and was
moved to the keenest passion against this high and noble spirit,
and afflicted the monks with many stripes and tortures.  Their
courage and nobility won admiration even from that tyrant.  But,
when after many punishments he failed to persuade them, and none
of them consented to discover Barlaam, he took and ordered them
to be led to the king, bearing with them the wallet with the
relics, and to be beaten and shamefully entreated as they went.


XXIII.

After many days Araches brought them to the king, and declared
their case.  Then he set them before the bitterly incensed king:
and he, when he saw them, boiled over with fury and was like to
one mad.  He ordered them to be beaten without mercy, and, when
he saw them cruelly mangled with scourges, could scarcely
restrain his madness, and order the tormentors to cease.  Then
said he unto them, "Why bear ye about these dead men's bones? If
ye carry these bones through affection for those men to whom they
belong, this very hour I will set you in their company, that ye
may meet your lost friends and be duly grateful to me."  The
captain and leader of that godly band, setting at naught the
king's threats, showing no sign of the torment that he had
undergone, with free voice and radiant countenance that signified
the grace that dwelt in his soul, cried out, "We carry about
these clean and holy bones, O king, because we attest in due form
our love of those marvellous men to whom they belong: and because
we would bring ourselves to remember their wrestlings and lovely
conversation, to rouse up ourselves to the like zeal; and because
we would catch some vision of the rest and felicity wherein they
now live, and thus, as we call them blessed, and provoke one
another to emulate them, strive to follow in their footsteps:
because moreover, we find thereby that the thought of death,
which is right profitable, lendeth wings of zeal to our religious
exercises; and lastly, because we derive sanctification from
their touch."

Again said the king, "If the thought of death be profitable, as
ye say, why should ye not reach that thought of death by the
bones of the bodies that are now your own, and are soon to
perish, rather than by the bones of other men which have already
perished?"

The monk said, "Five reasons I gave thee, why we carry about
these relics; and thou, making answer to one only, art like to be
mocking us.  But know thou well that the bones of them, that have
already departed this life, bring the thought of death more
vividly before us than do the bones of the living.  But since
thou judgest otherwise, and since the bones of thine own body are
to thee a type of death, why dost thou not recollect thy latter 
end so shortly to come, and set thine house in order, instead of
giving up thy soul to all kinds of iniquities, and violently and
unmercifully murdering the servants of God and lovers of
righteousness, who have done thee no wrong, and seek not to share
with thee in present goods, nor are ambitious to rob thee of
them?"

Said the king, "I do well to punish you, ye clever misleaders of
the folk, because ye deceive all men, counselling them to abstain
from the enjoyments of life; and because, instead of the sweets
of life and the allures of appetite and pleasure, ye constrain
them to choose the rough, filthy and squalid way, and preach that
they should render to Jesus the honour due unto the gods.
Accordingly, in order that the people may not follow your deceits
and leave the land desolate, and, forsaking the gods of their
fathers, serve another, I think it just to subject you to
punishment and death."

The monk answered, "If thou art eager that all should partake of
the good things of life, why dost thou not distribute dainties
and riches equally amongst all?  And why is it that the common
herd are pinched with poverty, while thou addest ever to thy
store by seizing for thyself the goods of others?  Nay, thou
carest not for the weal of the many, but fattenest thine own
flesh, to be meat for the worms to feed on.  Wherefore also thou
hast denied the God of all, and called them gods that are not,
the inventors of all wickedness, in order that, by wantonness and
wickedness after their example, thou mayest gain the title of
imitator of the gods.  For, as your gods have done, why should
not also the men that follow them do?  Great then is the error
that thou hast erred, O king.  Thou fearest that we should
persuade certain of the people to join with us, and revolt from
thy hand, and place themselves in that hand that holdeth all
things, for thou willest the ministers of thy covetousness to be
many, that they may be miserable while thou reapest profit from
their toil; just as a man, who keepeth hounds or falcons tamed
for hunting, before the hunt may be seen to pet them, but, when
they have once seized the quarry, taketh the game with violence
out of their mouths.  So also thou, willing that there should be
many to pay thee tribute and toll from land and water, pretendest
to care for their welfare, but in truth bringest on them and
above all on thyself eternal ruin; and simply to pile up gold,
more worthless than dung or rottenness, thou hast been deluded
into taking darkness for light.  But recover thy wits from this
earthly sleep: open thy sealed eyes, and behold the glory of God
that shineth round about us all; and come at length to thyself.
For saith the prophet, `Take heed, ye unwise among the people,
and, O ye fools, understand at last.'  Understand thou that there
is no God except our God, and no salvation except in him."

But the king said, "Cease this foolish babbling, and anon
discover to me Barlaam: else shalt thou taste instruments of
torture such as thou hast never tasted before."  That noble-
minded, great-hearted monk, that lover of the heavenly
philosophy, was not moved by the king's threats, but stood
unflinching, and said, "We are not commanded to fulfil thy hest,
O king, but the orders of our Lord and God who teacheth us
temperance, that we should be lords over all pleasures and
passions, and practise fortitude, so as to endure all toil and
all ill-treatment for righteousness' sake.  The more perils that
thou subjectest us to for the sake of our religion, the more
shalt thou be our benefactor.  Do therefore as thou wilt: for we
shall not consent to do aught outside our duty, nor shall we
surrender ourselves to sin.  Deem not that it is a slight sin to
betray a fellow-combatant and fellow-soldier into thy hands. 
Nay, but thou shalt not have that scoff to make at us; no, not if
thou put us to ten thousand deaths.  We be not such cowards as to
betray our religion through dread of thy torments, or to disgrace
the law divine.  So then, if such be thy purpose, make ready
every weapon to defend thy claim; for to us to live is Christ,
and to die for him is the best gain."

Incensed with anger thereat, the monarch ordered the tongues of
these Confessors to be rooted out, and their eyes digged out, and
likewise their hands and feet lopped off.  Sentence passed, the
henchmen and guards surrounded and mutilated them, without pity
and without ruth.  And they plucked out their tongues from their
mouths with prongs, and severed them with brutal severity, and
they digged out their eyes with iron claws, and stretched their
arms and legs on the rack, and lopped them off.  But those
blessed, shamefast, noble-hearted men went bravely to torture
like guests to a banquet, exhorting one another to meet death for
Christ his sake undaunted.

In such divers tortures did these holy monks lay down their lives
for the Lord.  They were in all seventeen.  By common consent,
the pious mind is superior to sufferings, as hath been said by
one, but not of us, when narrating the martydom of the aged
priest, and of the seven sons with their equally brave mother
when contending for the law of their fathers: whose bravery and
lofty spirit, however, was equalled by these marvellous fathers
and citizens and heirs of Hierusalem that is above.


XXIV.

After the monks had made this godly end, the king bade Araches,
his chief councillor, now that they had failed of their first
plan, to look to the second and summon the man Nachor.  At dead
of night Araches repaired to his cave (he dwelt in the desert
practising the arts of divination), and told him of their plans,
and returned to the king at day-break.  Again he demanded
horsemen, and made as though he went in quest of Barlaam.  When
he was gone forth, and was walking the desert, a man was seen to
issue from a ravine.  Araches gave command to his men to pursue
him.  They took and brought him before their master.  When asked
who he was, what his religion and what his name, the man declared
himself a Christian and gave his name as Barlaam, even as he had
been instructed.  Araches made great show of joy, apprehended him
and returned quickly to the king, and told his tale and produced
his man.  Then said the king in the hearing of all present, "Art
thou the devil's workman, Barlaam?"  But he denied it, saying, "I
am God's workman, not the devil's.  Revile me not; for I am thy
debtor to render me much thanks, because I have taught thy son to
serve God, and have turned him from error to the true God, and
have schooled him in all manner of virtue."  Feigning anger,
again spake the king, "Though I ought to allow thee never a word,
and give thee no room for defence, but rather do thee to death
without question, yet such is my humanity that I will bear with
thine effrontery until on a set day I try thy cause.  If thou be
persuaded by me, thou shalt receive pardon: if not, thou shalt
die the death."  With these words he delivered him to Araches,
commanding that he should be most strictly guarded.

On the morrow the king removed thence, and came back to his own
palace, and it was blazoned abroad that Barlaam was captured, so
that the king's son heard thereof and was exceeding sad at heart,
and could in no wise refrain from weeping.  With groans and
lamentations he importuned God, and called upon him to succour
the aged man.  Nor did the good God despise his complaint, for he
is loving with them that abide him in the day of trouble, and
knoweth them that fear him.  Wherefore in a night-vision he made
known the whole plot to the young prince, and strengthened and
cheered him for the trial of his righteousness.  So, when the
prince awoke from sleep, he found that his heart, erstwhile so
sore and heavy, was now full of joyaunce, courage and pleasant
light.  But the king rejoiced at that which he had done and
planned, imagining that he was well advised, and showering thanks
on Araches.  But wickedness lied to itself, to use the words of
holy David, and righteousness overcame iniquity, completely
overthrowing it, and causing the memorial thereof to perish with
sound, as our tale in its sequel shall show.

After two days the king visited his son's palace.  When his son
came forth for to meet him, instead of kissing him, as was his
wont, the father put on a show of distress and anger, and entered
the royal chamber, and there sat down frowning.  Then calling to
his son, he said, "Child, what is this report that soundeth in
mine ears, and weareth away my soul with despondency?  Never, I
ween, was man more filled with gladness of heart at the birth of
a son than was I at thine; and, I trow, never was man so
distressed and cruelly treated by child as I have now been by
thee.  Thou hast dishonoured my grey hairs, and taken away the
light of mine eyes, and loosed the strength of my sinews; `for
the thing which I greatly feared concerning thee is come upon me,
and that which I was afraid of hath come unto me.'  Thou art
become a joy to mine enemies, and a laughing~stock to mine
adversaries.  With untutored mind and childish judgement thou
hast followed the teaching of the deceivers and esteemed the
counsel of the malicious above mine; thou hast forsaken the
worship of our gods and become the servant of a strange God.
Child, wherefore hast thou done this?  I hoped to bring thee up
in all safety, and have thee for the staff and support of mine
old age, and leave thee, as is most meet, to succeed me in my
kingdom, but thou wast not ashamed to play against me the part of
a relentless foe.  And shouldst thou not rather have listened to
me, and followed my injunctions, than have obeyed the idle and
foolish pratings of that crafty old knave, who taught thee to
choose a sour life instead of a sweet, and abandon the charms of
dalliance, to tread the hard and rough road, which the Son of
Mary ordereth men to go?  Dost thou not fear the displeasure of
the most puissant gods, lest they strike thee with lightning, or
quell thee with thunderbolt, or overwhelm thee in the yawning
earth, because thou hast rejected and scorned those deities that
have so richly blessed us, and adorned our brow with the kingly
diadem, and made populous nations to be our servants, that,
beyond my hope, in answer to my prayer and supplication, allowed
thee to be born, and see the sweet life of day, and hast joined
thyself unto the Crucified, duped by the hopes of his servants
who tell thee fables of worlds to come, and drivel about the
resurrection of dead bodies, and bring in a thousand more
absurdities to catch fools?  But now, dearest son, if thou hast
any regard for me thy father, bid a long farewell to these
longwinded follies, and come sacrifice to the gracious gods, and
let us propitiate them with hecatombs and drink-offerings, that
they may grant thee pardon for thy fall; for they be able and
strong to bless and to punish.  And wouldst thou have an example
of that which I say?  Behold us, who by them have been advanced
to this honour, repaying them for their kindness by honouring
their worshippers and chastising the runagates."

Now when the king had ended all this idle parleying, gainsaying
and slandering of our religion, and belauding and praising of his
idolatry, the saintly young prince saw that the matter needed no
further to be hid in a corner, but to be lighted and made plain
to the eyes of all; and, full of boldness and courage, he said:

"That which I have done, sir, I will not deny.  I have fled from
darkness and run to the light: I have left error and joined the
household of truth: I have deserted the service of devils, and
joined the service of Christ, the Son and Word of God the Father,
at whose decree the world was brought out of nothing; who, after
forming man out of clay, breathed into him the breath of life,
and set him to live in a paradise of delight, and, when he had
broken his commandment and was become subject unto death, and had
fallen into the power of the dread ruler of this world, did not
fail him, but wrought diligently to bring him back to his former
honour.  Wherefore he, the framer of all Creation and maker of
our race, became man for our sake, and, coming from a holy
Virgin's womb; on earth conversed with men: for us ungrateful
servants did the master endure death, even the death of the
Cross, that the tyranny of sin might be destroyed, that the
former condemnation might be abolished, that the gates of heaven
might be open to us again.  Thither he hath exalted our nature,
and set it on the throne of glory, and granted to them that love
him an everlasting kingdom and joys beyond all that tongue can
tell, or ear can hear.  He is the mighty and only potentate, King
of kings and Lord of lords, whose might is invincible, and whose
lordship is beyond compare, who only is holy and dwelleth in
holiness, who with the Father and with the Holy Ghost is
glorified; into this faith I have been baptized.  And I
acknowledge and glorify and worship One God in Three persons, of
one substance, and not to be confounded, increate and immortal,
eternal, infinite, boundless, without body, without passions,
immutable, unchangeable, undefinable, the fountain of goodness,
righteousness and everlasting light, maker of all things visible
and invisible, containing and sustaining all things, provident
for all, ruler and King of all.  Without him was there nothing
made, nor without his providence can aught subsist.  He is the
life of all, the support of all, the light of all, being wholly
sweetness and insatiable desire, the summit of aspiration.  To
leave God, then, who is so good, so wise, so mighty, and to serve
impure devils, makers of all sinful lusts, and to assign worship
to deaf and dumb images, that are not, and never shall be, were
not that the extreme of folly and madness?  When was there ever
heard utterance or language from their lips?  When have they
given even the smallest answer to their bedesmen?  When have they
walked, or received any impression of sense?  Those of them that
stand have never thought of sitting down; and those that sit have
never been seen to rise.  From an holy man have I learned the
ugliness, ill savour and insensibility of these idols, and,
moreover, the rottenness and weakness of the devils that operate
in them and by them deceive you; and I loathe their wickednesses
and, hating them with a perfect hatred, have joined myself to the
living and true God, and him will I serve until my latest breath,
that my spirit also may return into his hands.  When these
unspeakable blessings came in my path I rejoiced to be freed from
the bondage of evil devils, and to be reclaimed from dire
captivity and to be illumined with the light of the countenance
of the Lord.  But my soul was distressed and divided asunder,
that thou, my lord and father, didst not share in my blessings.
Yet I feared the stubbornness of thy mind, and kept my grief to
myself, not wishing to anger thee; but, without ceasing, I prayed
God to draw thee to himself, and call thee back from the long
exile that thou hast imposed upon thyself, a runagate alas!  from
righteousness, and a servant of all sin and wickedness.  But sith
thou thyself, O my father, hast brought mine affairs to light,
hear the sum of my resolve: I will not be false to my covenant
with Christ; no, I swear it by him that bought me out of slavery
with his own precious blood; even if I must needs die a thousand
deaths for his sake, die I will.  Knowing then how matters now
stand with me, prithee, no longer trouble thyself in endeavouring
to persuade me to change my good confession.  For as it were a
thankless and never ending task for thee to try to grasp the
heavens with thy hand, or to dry up the waters of the sea, so
hard were it for thee to change me.  Either then now listen to my
counsel, and join the household of Christ, and so thou shalt gain
blessings past man's understanding, and we shall be fellows with
one another by faith, even as by nature; or else, be well
assured, I shall depart thy sonship, and serve my God with a
clear conscience."

Now when the king heard all these words, he was furiously
enraged: and, seized with ungovernable anger, he cried out
wrathfully against him, and gnashed his teeth fiercely, like any
madman.  "And who," said he, "is blameable for all my misfortunes
but myself, who have dealt with thee so kindly, and cared for
thee as no father before?  Hence the perversity and contrariness
of thy mind, gathering strength by the licence that I gave thee,
hath made thy madness to fall upon mine own pate.  Rightly
prophesied the astrologers in thy nativity that thou shouldest
prove a knave and villain, an impostor and rebellious son.  But
now, if thou wilt make void my counsel, and cease to be my son, I
will become thine enemy, and entreat thee worse than ever man yet
entreated his foes."

Again said Ioasaph, "Why, O king, hast thou been kindled to
wrath?  Art thou grieved that I have gained such bliss?  Why,
what father was ever seen to be sorrowful in the prosperity of
his son?  Would not such an one be called an enemy rather than a
father?  Therefore will I no more call thee my father, but will
withdraw from thee, as a man fleeth from a snake, if I know that
thou grudgest me my salvation, and with violent hand forcest me
to destruction.  If thou wilt force me, and play the tyrant, as
thou hast threatened, be assured that thou shalt gain nought
thereby save to exchange the name of father for that of tyrant
and murderer.  It were easier for thee to attain to the ways Of
the eagle, and, like him, cleave the air, than to alter my
loyalty to Christ, and that good confession that I have confessed
in him.  But be wise, O my father, and shake off the rheum and
mist from the eyes of thy mind, lift them aloft and look upward
to view the light of my God that enlighteneth all around, and be
thyself, at last, enlightened with this light most sweet.  Why
art thou wholly given up to the passions and desires of the
flesh, and why is there no looking upward?  Know thou that all
flesh is grass and all the glory of man as the flower of grass.
The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away; but the
word of my Lord, which by the gospel is preached unto all, shall
endure for ever.  Why then dost thou thus madly cling to and
embrace that glory, which, like spring flowers, fadeth and
perisheth, and to beastly unsavoury wantonness, and to the
abominable passions of the belly and the members thereunder,
which for a season please the senses of fools, but afterwards
make returns more bitter than gall, when the shadows and dreams
of this vain life are passed away, and the lovers thereof, and
workers of iniquity are imprisoned in the perpetual pain of dark
and unquenchable fire, where the worm that sleepeth not gnaweth
for ever, and where the fire burneth without ceasing and without
quenching through endless ages?  And with these sinners alas!
thou too shalt be imprisoned and grievously tormented, and shalt
bitterly rue thy wicked counsels, and bitterly regret thy days
that now are, and think upon my words, but there shall be no
advantage in repentance; for in death there is no confession and
repentance.  But the present is the set time for work: the future
for reward.  Even if the pleasures of the present world were not
evanescent and fleeting, but were to endure for ever with their
owners, not even thus should any man choose them before the gifts
of Christ, and the good things that pass man's understanding.
Soothly, as the sun surpasseth in radiance and brightness the
dead of night, even so, and much more so, doth the happiness
promised to those that love God excel in glory and magnificence
all earthly kinship and glory; and there is utter need for a man
to choose the more excellent before the more worthless.  And
forasmuch as everything here is fleeting and subject to decay,
and passeth and vanisheth as a dream, and as a shadow and vision
of sleep; and as one may sooner trust the unstable breezes, or
the tracks of a ship passing over the waves, than the prosperity
of men, what simplicity, nay, what folly and madness it is to
choose the corruptible and perishable, the weak things of no
worth, rather than the incorruptible and everlasting, the
imperishable and endless, and, by the temporal enjoyment of these
things, to forfeit the eternal fruition of the happiness to come!
Wilt thou not understand this, my father?  Wilt thou not haste
past the things which haste pass thee, and attach thyself to that
which endureth?  Wilt thou not prefer a home land to a foreign
land, light to darkness, the spirit to the flesh, eternal life to
the shadow of death, the indestructible to the fleeting?  Wilt
thou not escape from the grievous bondage of the cruel prince of
this world, I mean the evil one, the devil, and become the
servant of the good, tenderhearted, and all merciful Lord?  Wilt
thou not break away from serving thy many gods, falsely so
called, and serve the one, true and living God?  Though thou hast
sinned against him often times by blaspheming him, and often
times by slaying his servants with dread torments, yet, I know
well, that if thou turn again, he shall in his kindness receive
thee, and no more remember thine offences: because he willeth not
the death of a sinner but rather that he may turn and live -- he,
who came down from the unspeakable heights, to seek us that had 
gone astray: who endured for us Cross, scourge and death: who
bought with his precious blood us who had been sold in bondage
under sin.  Unto him be glory and praise for ever and ever!
Amen."

The king was overwhelmed with astonishment and anger; with
astonishment, at his son's wisdom and unanswerable words; with
anger, at the persistence with which he denounced his father's
gods, and mocked and ridiculed the whole tenour of his life.  He
could not admit the glory of his discourse because of the
grossness of the darkness within, but natural affection forbad
him to punish his son, or evilly to entreat him, and he utterly
despaired of moving him by threats.  Fearing then that, if he
argued further with him, his son's boldness and bitter satire of
the gods might kindle him to hotter anger, and lead him to do him
a mischief, he arose in wrath and withdrew.  "Would that thou
hadst never been born," he cried, "nor hadst come to the light of
day, destined as thou weft to be such an one, a blasphemer of the
gods, and a renegade from thy father's love and admonition"  But
thou shalt not alway mock the invincible gods, nor shall their
enemies rejoice for long, nor shall these knavish sorceries
prevail.  For except thou become obedient unto me, and right-
minded toward the gods, I will first deliver time to sundry
tortures, and then put thee to the cruellest death, dealing with
thee not as with a son, but as with an enemy and rebel."


XXV.

In such wise did the father threaten and wrathfully retire.  But
the son entered his own bedchamber, and lifted up his eyes to the
proper judge of his cause, and cried out of the depth of his
heart, "O Lord my God, my sweet hope and unerring promise, the
sure refuge of them that are wholly given up to thee, with
gracious and kindly eye look upon the contrition of my heart, and
leave me not, neither forsake me.  But, according to thine
unerring pledge, be thou with me, thine unworthy and sorry
servant.  Thee I acknowledge and confess, the maker and provider
of all creation.  Therefore do thou thyself enable me to continue
in this good confession, until my dying breath: look upon me, and
pity me; and stand by and keep me unhurt by any working of Satan.
Look upon me, O King: for my heart is enkindled with longing
after thee, and is parched as with burning thirst in the desert,
desiring thee, the well of immortality.  Deliver not to the wild
beasts my soul that confesseth thee: forget not the soul of the
poor for ever; but grant me that am a sinner throughout my length
of days to suffer all things for thy name's sake and in the
confession of thee, and to sacrifice my whole self unto thee. 
For, with thy might working in them, even the feeble shall wax
exceeding strong; for thou only art the unconquerable ally and
merciful God, whom all creation blesseth, glorified for ever and
ever.  Amen."

When he had thus prayed, he felt divine comfort stealing over his
heart, and, fulfilled with courage, he spent the whole night in
prayer.  Meanwhile the king communed with Araches, his friend, as
touching his son's matters, and signified to him his son's sheer
audacity and unchangeable resolution.  Araches gave counsel that
he should, in his dealings with him, show the utmost kindness and
courtesy, in the hope, perchance, of alluring him by flattering
attentions.  The day following, the king came to his son, and sat
down, and called him to his side.  He embraced and kissed him
affectionately, coaxing him gently and tenderly, and said, "O my
darling and well-beloved son, honour thou thy father's grey
hairs: listen to my entreaty, and come, do sacrifice to the gods;
thus shalt thou win their favour, and receive at their hands
length of days, and the enjoyment of all glory and of an
undisputed kingdom, and happiness of every sort.  Thus shalt thou
be well pleasing to me thy father throughout life and be honoured
and lauded of all men.  It is a great count in the score of
praise to be obedient to thy father, especially in a good cause,
and to gain the goodwill of the gods.  What thinkest thou, my
son?  Is it that I have willingly declined from the right, and
chosen to travel on the wrong road: or that, from ignorance and
inexperience of the good, I have given myself to destruction?
Well, if thou thinkest that I willingly prefer the evil to the
profitable, and choose death before life, thou seemest to me,
son, completely to have missed the goal in judging.  Dost thou
not see to what discomfort and trouble I often expose myself in
mine expeditions against my foes, or when I am engaged in divers
other business for the public good, not sparing myself even
hunger and thirst, if need be, the march on foot, or the couch on
the ground?  As for riches and money, such is my contempt and
scorn thereof, that I have at times ungrudgingly lavished all the
stores of my palace, to build mighty temples for the gods, and to
adorn them with all manner of splendour, or else to distribute
liberal largess to my soldiers.  Possessing then, as I also do,
this contempt of pleasure and this courage in danger, what zeal
would I not have devoted to contemning all else, and winning my
salvation, had I only found that the religion of the Galileans
were better than mine own?  But, if thou condemnest me for
ignorance and inexperience of the good, consider how many
sleepless nights I have spent, with some problem before me, oft-
times no very important one, giving myself no rest until I had
found the clear and most apt solution.

Seeing then that I reckon that not even the least of these
temporal concerns is unworthy of thought until all be fitly
completed for the advantage of all and seeing that all (I ween)
bear me witness that no man under the sun can search out secrets
with more diligence than I, how then could I have considered
divine things, that call for worship and serious consideration,
unworthy of thought, and not rather have devoted all my zeal and
might, all my mind and soul to the investigation thereof, to find
out the right and the true?  Aye, and I have laboriously sought
thereafter.  Many nights and days have I spent thus: many wise
and learned men have I called to my council; and with many of
them that are called Christians have I conversed.  By untiring
enquiry and ardent search I have discovered the pathway of truth,
witnessed by wise men honoured for their intelligence and wit, --
that there is none other faith than ours.  This is the path that
we tread to-day, worshipping the most puissant gods, and holding
fast to that sweet and delightsome life, given by them to all
men, fulfilled with all manner of pleasure and gladness of heart,
which the leaders and priests of the Galileans have in their
folly rejected; so that, in hope of some other uncertain life,
they have readily cast away this sweet light, and all those
pleasures which the gods have bestowed on us for enjoyment, and
all the while know not what they say, nor whereof they
confidently affirm.

"But thou, dearest son, obey thy father, who, by diligent and
honest search, hath found the real good.  Lo, I have shown thee
that, neither willingly, I no, nor by way of ignorance, have I
failed of the good, but rather that I have found and laid hold
thereon.  And I earnestly desire that thou too shouldest not
wander as a fool, but shouldest follow me.  Have respect then
unto thy father.  Dost thou not know how lovely a thing it is to
obey one's father, and please him in all ways?  Contrariwise, how
deadly and cursed a thing it is to provoke a father and despise
his commands?  As many as have done so, have come to a miserable
end.  But be not thou, my son, one of their number.  Rather do
that which is well pleasing to thy sire, and so mayest thou
obtain all happiness and inherit my blessing and my kingdom!"

The high-minded and noble youth listened to his father's windy
discourse and foolish opposition, and recognized therein the
devices of the crooked serpent, and how standing at his right
hand he had prepared a snare for his feet, and was scheming how
to overthrow his righteous soul, and hinder him of the prize laid
up in store.  Therefore the prince set before his eyes the
commandment of the Lord, which saith, "I came not to send peace,
but strife and a sword.  For I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and so
forth; and "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not
worthy of me"; and "Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my Father which is in heaven."  When he had
considered these things, and fettered his soul with divine fear,
and strengthened it with longing desire and love, right
opportunely he remembered the saying of Solomon, "There is a time
to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace."
First of all he prayed in silence, and said, "Have mercy of me,
Lord God, have mercy of me; for my soul trusteth in thee; and
under the shadow of thy wings I shall hope till wickedness
overpass.  I shall cry to the highest God; to God that did well
to me," and the rest of the psalm.

Then said Ioasaph to the king, "To honour one's father, and to
obey his commands, and to serve him with good will and affection
is taught us by the Lord of us all, who hath implanted in our
hearts this natural affection.  But, when loving devotion to our
parents bringeth our soul into peril, and separateth her from her
Maker, then we are commanded, at all costs, to cut it out, and,
on no account, to yield to them that would depart us from God,
but to hate and avoid them, even if it be our father that issueth
the abominable command, or our mother, or our king, or the master
of our very life.  Wherefore it is impossible for me, out of
devotion to my father, to forfeit God.  So, prithee, trouble not
thyself, nor me: but be persuaded, and let us both serve the true
and living God, for the objects of thy present worship are idols,
the works of men's hands, devoid of breath, and deaf, and give
nought but destruction and eternal punishment to their
worshippers.

"But if this be not thy pleasure, deal with me even as thou wilt:
for I am a servant of Christ, and neither flatteries nor torments
shall separate me from his love, as I told thee yesterday,
swearing it by my Master's name, and confirming the word with
surest oath.  But, whereas thou saidest that thou didst neither
wilfully do wrong, nor didst fail of the mark through ignorance,
but after much laborious enquiry hadst ascertained that it was
truly a good thing to worship idols and to be riveted to the
pleasures of the passions -- that thou art wilfully a wrong doer,
I may not say.  But this I know full well, and would have thee
know, O my father, that thou art surrounded with a dense mist of
ignorance, and, walking in darkness that may be felt, seest not
even one small glimmer of light.  Wherefore thou hast lost the
right pathway, and wanderest over terrible cliffs and chasms.
Holding darkness for light, and clinging to death as it were
life, thou deemest that thou art well advised, and hast reflected
to good effect: but it is not so, not so.  The objects of thy
veneration are not gods but statues of devils, charged with all
their filthy power; nor is the life, which thou pronouncest sweet
and pleasant, and thinkest to be full of delight and gladness of
heart, such in kind: but the same is abominable, according to the
word of truth, and to be abhorred.  For for a time it sweeteneth
and tickleth the gullet, but afterwards it maketh the risings
more bitter than gall (as said my teacher), and is sharper than
any two-edged sword.

"How shall I describe to thee the evils of this life?  I will
tell them, and they shall be more in number than the sand.  For
such life is the fishhook of the devil, baited with beastly
pleasure, whereby he deceiveth and draggeth his prey into the
depth of hell.  Whereas the good things, promised by my Master, 
which thou callest `the hope of some other uncertain life,' are
true and unchangeable; they know no end, and are not subject to
decay.  There is no language that can declare the greatness of
yonder glory and delight, of the joy unspeakable, and the
everlasting gladness.  As thou thyself seest, we all die; and
there is no man that shall live and not see death.  But one day
we shall all rise again, when our Lord Jesus Christ shall come,
the Son of God, in unspeakable glory and dread power, the only
King of kings, and Lord of lords; to whom every knee shall bow,
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth.  Such terror shall he then inspire that the very powers of
heaven shall be shaken: and before him there shall stand in fear
thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand of Angels
and Archangels, and the whole world shall be full of fear and
terror.  For one of the Archangels shall sound with the trump of
God, and immediately the heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll; and the earth shall be rent, and shall give up the dead
bodies of all men that ever were since the first man Adam until
that day.  And then shall all men that have died since the
beginning of the world in the twinkling of an eye stand alive
before the judgement seat of the immortal Lord, and every man
shall give account of his deeds.  Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun; they that believed in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and ended this present life in good works.  And how can I
describe to thee the glory that shall receive them at that day?
For though I compare their brightness and beauty to the light of
the sun or to the brightest lightning flash, yet should I fail to
do justice to their brightness.  Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God hath prepared for them that love him, in the kingdom of
heaven, in the light which no man can approach unto, in his
unspeakable and unending glory.

"Such joys and such bliss shall the righteous obtain, but they
that have denied the only true God and not known their Maker and
Creator, but have worshipped foul devils, and rendered homage to
dumb idols, and loved the pleasures of this vain world, and, like
swine, wallowed in the mire of sinful lusts, and made their lives
a headquarters for all wickedness, shall stand naked and laid
bare, downright ashamed and downcast, pitiable in appearance and
in fact, set forth for a reproach to all creation.  All their
life in word, deed and thought shall come before their faces.
Then, after this bitter disgrace and unbearable reproach, shall
they be sentenced to the unquenchable and light-less fire of
Gehenna, unto the outer darkness, the gnashing of teeth and the
venomous worm.  This is their portion, this their lot, in the
which they shall dwell together in punishment for endless ages,
because they rejected the good things offered them in promise,
and, for the sake of the pleasure of sin for a season, made
choice of eternal punishment.  For these reasons -- to obtain
that unspeakable bliss, to enjoy that ineffable glory, to equal
the Angels in splendour, and to stand with boldness before the
good and most sweetest Lord, to escape those bitter and unending
punishments and that galling shame -- time after time, were it
not worth men's while to sacrifice their riches and bodies, nay,
even their very lives?  Who is so cowardly, who so foolish, as
not to endure a thousand temporal deaths, to escape eternal and
everlasting death, and to inherit life, blissful and
imperishable, and to shine in the light of the blessed and life-
giving Trinity?"


XXVI.

When the king heard these words, and saw the steadfastness, and
unbuxomness of his son, who yielded neither to flattery, nor
persuasion, nor threat, he marvelled indeed at the persuasiveness
of his speech and his irrefutable answers, and was convicted by
his own conscience secretly assuring him that Ioasaph spake truly
and aright.  But he was dragged back by his evil habit and
passions, which, from long use, had taken firm grip on him, and
held him in as with bit and bridle, and suffered him not to
behold the light of truth.  So he left no stone unturned, as the
saying is, and adhered to his old purpose, determining to put
into action the plot which he and Araches had between them
devised.  Said he to his son, "Although, child, thou oughtest in
all points simply to give in to my commands, yet, because thou
art stubborn and disobedient, and hast thus stiffly opposed me,
insisting that thine own opinion should prevail over all, bid we
now farewell to vain insistance, and let persuasion be now our
policy.  And, forasmuch as Barlaam, thy deceiver, is here, my
prisoner in iron chains, I will make a great assembly, and summon
all our people and your Galileans, to one place; and I will
charge heralds to proclaim expressly that none of the Christians
shall fear, but that all shall muster without dread; and we will
hold debate together.  If your side win, then shall ye and your
Barlaam gain your desires; but if ye lose, then shall ye with
right good will yield yourselves to my commands."

But this truly wise and prudent youth, forewarned, by the
heavenly vision sent him, of his father's mischief, replied, "The
Lord's will be done!  Be it according to thy command!  May our
good God and Lord himself vouchsafe that we wander not from the
right way, for my soul trusteth in him, and he shall be merciful
unto me."  There and then did the king command all, whether
idolaters or Christians, to assemble.  Letters were despatched in
all quarters: heralds proclaimed it in every village town that no
Christian need fear any secret surprise, but all might come
together without fear, as friends and kindred, for the honest and
unrestrained enquiry that should be held with their chief and
captain, Barlaam.  In like manner also he summoned the initiate
and the temple-keepers of his idols, and wise men of the
Chaldeans and Indians that were in all his kingdom, beside
certain augurs, sorcerers and seers, that they might get the
better of the Christians.

Then were there gathered together multitudes that held his
loathly religion; but of the Christians was there found one only
that came to the help of the supposed Barlaam.  His name was
Barachias.  For of the Faithful, some were dead, having fallen
victims to the fury of the governors of the cities; and some were
hiding in mountains and dens, in dread of the terrors hanging
over them; while others had feared the threats of the king, and
durst not adventure themselves into the light of day, but were
worshippers by night, serving Christ in secret, and in no wise
boldly confessing him.  So noble-hearted Barachias came alone to
the contest, to help and champion the truth.

The king sat down before all on a doom-stool high and exalted,
and bade his son sit beside him.  He, in reverence and awe of his
father, consented not thereto, but sat near him on the ground.
There stood the learned in the wisdom which God hath made
foolish, whose unwise hearts had gone astray, as saith the
Apostle; for, "professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an
image made like to corruptible man, and four-footed beasts, and
creeping things."  These were assembled for to join argument with
the king's son and his fellows, and on them was fulfilled the
proverb, "Gazelle against lion."  The one made the most High his
house of defence, and his hope was under the shadow of his wings;
while the others trusted in the princes of this world, who are
made of none effect, and in the ruler of the darkness of this
world, to whom they have subjected themselves miserably and
wretchedly.

Now came on Nachor, in the disguise of Barlaam; and the king's
side were like to reach their goal; but, once again, very
different was the ordering of the wise providence of God.  When
all the company was come, thus spake the king to his orators and
philosophers, or rather to the deceivers of his people, and fools
at heart, "Behold now, there lieth before you a contest, even the
mightiest of contests; for one of two things shall befall you. 
If ye establish our cause, and prove Barlaam and his friends to
be in error, ye shall have your fill of glory and honour from us
and all the senate, and shall be crowned with crowns of victory.
But if ye be worsted, in all ignominy ye shall pitiably perish,
and all your goods shall be given to the people, that your
memorial may be clean blotted out from off the earth.  Your
bodies will I give to be devoured by wild beasts and your
children will I deliver to perpetual slavery."

When the king had thus spoken, his son said, "A righteous doom
hast thou judged this day, O king.  The Lord establish this thy
mind!  I too have the same bidding for my teacher."  And, turning
round to Nachor, who was supposed to be Barlaam, he said, "Thou
knowest, Barlaam, in what splendour and luxury thou foundest me.
With many a speech thou persuadedst me to leave my father's laws
and customs, and to serve an unknown God, drawn by the promise of
some unspeakable and eternal blessings, to follow thy doctrines
and to provoke to anger my father and lord.  Now therefore
consider that thou art weighed in the balance.  If thou overcome
in the wrestling, and prove that the doctrines, which thou hast
taught me, be true, and show that they, that try a fall with us,
be in error, thou shalt be magnified as no man heretofore, and
shalt be entitled `herald of truth'; and I will abide in thy
doctrine and serve Christ, even as thou didst preach, until my
dying breath.  But if thou be worsted, by foul play or fair, and
thus bring shame on me to-day, speedily will I avenge me of mine
injury; with mine own hands will I quickly tear out thy heart and
thy tongue, and throw them with the residue of thy carcase to be
meat for the dogs, that others may be lessoned by thee not to
cozen the sons of kings."

When Nachor heard these words, he was exceeding sorrowful and
downcast, seeing himself falling into the destruction that he had
made for other, and being drawn into the net that he had laid
privily, and feeling the sword entering into his own soul.  So he
took counsel with himself, and determined rather to take the side
of the king's son, and make it to prevail, that he might avoid
the danger hanging over him, because the prince was doubtless
able to requite him, should he be found to provoke him.  But this
was all the work of divine providence that was wisely
establishing our cause by the mouth of our adversaries.  For when
these idol-priests and Nachor crossed words, like another
Barlaam, who, of old in the time of Balak, when purposing to
curse Israel, loaded him with manifold blessings, so did Nachor
mightily resist these unwise and unlearned wise men.

There sat the king upon his throne, his son beside him, as we
have said.  There beside him stood these unwise orators who had
whetted their tongues like a sharp sword, to destroy truth, and
who (as saith Esay) conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity.
There were gathered innumerable multitudes, come to view the
contest and see which side should carry oft the victory.  Then
one of the orators, the most eminent of all his fellows, said
unto Nachor, "Art thou that Barlaam which hath so shamelessly
and audaciously blasphemed our gods, and hath enmeshed our king's
well beloved son in the net of error, and taught him to serve the
Crucified?"  Nachor answered, "I am he, I am Barlaam, that, as
thou sayest, doth set your gods at nought: but the king's son
have I not enmeshed in error; but rather from error have I
delivered him, and brought him to the true God."  The orator
replied, "When the great and marvellous men, who have discovered
all knowledge of wisdom, do call them high and immortal gods, and
when all the kings and honourable men upon earth do worship and
adore them, how waggest thou tongue against them, and, in brief,
how durst thou be so mighty brazen-faced?  What is the manner of
thy proof that the Crucified is God, and these be none?"  Then
replied Nachor, disdaining even to answer the speaker.  He
beckoned with his hand to the multitude to keep silence, and
opening his mouth, like Balaam's ass, spake that which he had not
purposed to say, and thus addressed the king.


XXVII.

"By the providence of God, O king, came I into the world; and
when I contemplated heaven and earth and sea, the sun and moon,
and the other heavenly bodies, I was led to marvel at their fair
order.  And, when I beheld the world and all that therein is, how
it is moved by law, I understood that he who moveth and
sustaineth it is God.  That which moveth is ever stronger than
that which is moved, and that which sustaineth is stronger than
that which is sustained.  Him therefore I call God, who
constructed all things and sustaineth them, without beginning,
without end, immortal, without want, above all passions, and
failings, such as anger, forgetfulness, ignorance, and the like.
By him all things consist.  He hath no need of sacrifice, or
drink-offering, or of any of the things that we see, but all men
have need of him.

"Now that I have said thus much concerning God, according as he
hath granted me to speak concerning himself, come we now to the
human race, that we may know which of them partake of truth, and
which of error.  It is manifiest to us, O king, that there are
three races of men in this world: those that are worshippers of
them whom ye call gods, and Jews, and Christians.  And again
those who serve many gods are divided into three races,
Chaldeans, Greeks and Egyptians, for these are to the other
nations the leaders and teachers of the service and worship of
the gods whose name is legion.  Let us therefore see which of
these hold the truth, and which error.

"The Chaldeans, which knew not God, went astray after the
elements and began to worship the creature rather than their
Creator, and they made figures of these creatures and called them
likenesses of heaven, and earth and sea, of sun and moon, and of
the other elements or luminaries.  And they enclose them in
temples, and worship them under the title of gods, and guard them
in safety lest they be stolen by robbers.  They have not
understood how that which guardeth is ever greater than that
which is guarded, and that the maker is greater than the thing
that is made; for, if the gods be unable to take care of
themselves, how can they take care of others?  Great then is the
error that the Chaldeans have erred in worshipping lifeless and
useless images.  And I am moved to wonder, O king, how they, who
are called philosophers among them, fail to understand that even
the very elements are corruptible.  But if the elements are
corruptible and subject to necessity, how are they gods?  And if
the elements are not gods, how are the images, created to their
honour, gods?

"Come we then, O king, to the elements themselves, that we may
prove concerning them, that they are not gods, but corruptible
and changeable things, brought out of non-existence by the
command of him who is God indeed, who is incorruptible, and
unchangeable, and invisible, but yet himself seeth all things,
and, as he willeth, changeth and altereth the same.  What then
must I say about the elements?

"They, who ween that the Heaven is a god, are in error.  For we
see it turning and mowing by law, and consisting of many parts,
whence also it is called Cosmos!  Now a `Cosmos' is the handiwork
of some artificer; and that which is wrought by handiwork hath
beginning and end.  And the firmament is moved by law together
with its luminaries.  The stars are borne from Sign to Sign, each
in his order and place: some rise, while others set: and they run
their journey according to fixed seasons, to fulfil summer and
winter, as it hath been ordained for them by God, nor do they
transgress their proper bounds, according to the inexorable law
of nature, in common with the heavenly firmament.  Whence it is
evident that the heaven is not a god, but only a work of God.

"They again that think that the Earth is a goddess have gone
astray.  We behold it dishonoured, mastered, defiled and rendered
useless by mankind.  If it be baked by the sun, it becometh dead,
for nothing groweth from a potsherd.  And again, if it be soaked
overmuch, it rotteth, fruit and all.  It is trodden under foot of
men and the residue of the beasts: it is polluted with the blood
of the murdered, it is digged and made a grave for dead bodies.
This being so, Earth can in no wise be a goddess, but only the
work of God for the use of men.

"They that think that Water is a god have gone astray.  It also
hath been made for the use of men.  It is under their lordship:
it is polluted, and perisheth: it is altered by boiling, by
dyeing, by congealment, or by being brought to the cleansing of
all defilements.  Wherefore Water cannot be a god, but only the
work of God.

"They that think that Fire is a god are in error.  It too was
made for the use of men.  It is subject to their lordship, being
carried about from place to place, for the seething and roasting
of all manner of meats, yea, and for the burning of dead corpses.
Moreover, it perisheth in divers ways, when it is quenched by
mankind.  Wherefore Fire cannot be a god, but only the work of
God.

"They that think that the breath of the Winds is a goddess are in
error.  This, as is evident, is subject to another, and hath been
prepared by God, for the sake of mankind, for the carriage of
ships, and the conveyance of victuals, and for other uses of men,
it riseth and falleth according to the ordinance of God.
Wherefore it is not to be supposed that the breath of the Winds
is a goddess, but only the work of God.

"They that think that the Sun is a god are in error.  We see him
moving and turning by law, and passing from Sign to Sign, setting
and rising, to warm herbs and trees for the use of men, sharing
power with the other stars, being much less than the heaven, and
falling into eclipse and possessed of no sovranty of his own.
Wherefore we may not consider that the Sun is a god, but only the
work of God.

"They that think that the Moon is a goddess are in error.  We
behold her moving and turning by law, and passing from Sign to
Sign, setting and rising for the use of men, lesser than the sun,
waxing and waning, suffering eclipse.  Wherefore we do not
consider that the Moon is a goddess, but only the work of God.

"They that think that Man is a god are in error.  We see man
moving by law, growing up, and waxing old, even against his will.
Now he rejoiceth, now he grieveth, requiring meat and drink and
raiment.  Besides he is passionate, envious, lustful, fickle, and
full of failings: and he perisheth in many a way, by the
elements, by wild beasts, and by the death that ever awaiteth
him.  So Man cannot be a god, but only the work of God.  Great
then is the error that the Chaldeans have erred in following
their own lusts; for they worship corruptible elements and dead
images, neither do they perceive that they are making gods of
these.

"Now come we to the Greeks that we may see whether they have any
understanding concerning God.  The Greeks, then, professing
themselves to be wise, fell into greater folly than the
Chaldeans, alleging the existence of many gods, some male, others
female, creators of all passions and sins of every kind.
Wherefore the Greeks, O king, introduced an absurd, foolish and
ungodly fashion of talk, calling them gods that were not,
according to their own evil passions; that, having these gods for
advocates of their wickedness, they might commit adultery, theft,
murder and all manner of iniquity.  For if their gods did so, how
should they not themselves do the like?  Therefore from these
practices of error it came to pass that men suffered frequent
wars and slaughters and cruel captivities.  But if now we choose
to pass in review each one of these gods, what a strange sight
shalt thou see!

"First and foremost they introduce the god whom they call Kronos,
and to him they sacrifice their own children, to him who had many
sons by Rhea, and in a fit of madness ate his own children.  And
they say that Zeus cut off his privy parts, and cast them into
the sea, whence, as fable telleth, was born Aphrodite.  So Zeus
bound his own father, and cast him into Tartarus.  Dost thou mark
the delusion and lasciviousness that they allege against their
gods?  Is it possible then that one who was prisoner and
mutilated should be a god?  What folly?  What man in his senses
could admit it?

"Next they introduce Zeus, who, they say, became king of the
gods, and would take the shape of animals, that he might defile
mortal women.  They show him transformed into a bull, for Europa;
into gold, for Danae; into a swan, for Leda; into a satyr, for
Antiope; and into a thunder-bolt, for Semele.  Then of these were
born many children, Dionysus, Zethus, Amphion, Herakles, Apollo,
Artemis, Perseus, Castor, Helen, Polydeukes, Minos, Rhadamanthos,
Sarpedon, and the nine daughters whom they call the Muses.

"In like manner they introduce the story of Ganymede.  And so
befel it, O king, that men imitated all these things, and became
adulterers, and defilers of themselves with mankind, and doers of
other monstrous deeds, in imitation of their god.  How then can
an adulterer, one that defileth himself by unnatural lust, a
slayer of his father be a god?

"With Zeus also they represent one Hephaestus as a god, and him
lame, holding hammer and fire-tongs, and working as a copper-
smith for hire.  So it appeareth that he is needy.  But it is
impossible for one who is lame and wanteth men's aid to be a God.

"After him, they represent as a god Hermes, a lusty fellow, a
thief, and a covetous, a sorcerer, bowlegged, and an interpreter
of speech.  It is impossible for such an one to be a God.

"They also exhibit Asklepius as god, a physician, a maker of
medicines, a compounder of plasters for his livelihood (for he is
a needy wight), and in the end, they say that he was struck by
Zeus with a thunder-bolt, because of Tyndareus, son of
Lakedaemon, and thus perished.  Now if Asklepius, though a god,
when struck by a thunder-bolt, could not help himself, how can he
help others?

"Ares is represented as a warlike god, emulous, and covetous of
sheep and other things.  But in the end they say he was taken in
adultery with Aphrodite by the child Eros and Hephaestus and was
bound by them.  How then can the covetous, the warrior, the
bondman and adulterer be a god?

"Dionysus they show as a god, who leadeth nightly orgies, and
teacheth drunkenness, and carrieth off his neighbours' wives, a
madman and an exile, finally slain by the Titans.  If then
Dionysus was slain and unable to help himself, nay, further was a
madman, a drunkard, and vagabond, how could he be a god?

"Herakles, too, is represented as drunken and mad, as slaying his
own children, then consuming with fire and thus dying.  How then
could a drunkard and slayer of his own children, burnt to death
by fire, be a god?  Or how can he help others who could not help
himself?

"Apollo they represent as an emulous god, holding bow and quiver,
and, at times, harp and flute, and prophesying to men for pay.
Soothly he is needy: but one that is needy and emulous and a
minstrel cannot be a god.

"Artemis, his sister, they represent as an huntress, with bow and
quiver, ranging the mountains alone, with her hounds, in chase of
stag or boar.  How can such an one, that is an huntress and a
ranger with hounds, be a goddess?

"Of Aphrodite, adulteress though she be, they say that she is
herself a goddess.  Once she had for leman Ares, once Anchises,
once Adonis, whose death she lamenteth, seeking her lost lover.
They say that she even descended into Hades to ransom Adonis from
Persephone.  Didst thou, O king, ever see madness greater than
this?  They represent this weeping and wailing adulteress as a
goddess.

"Adonis they show as an hunter-god, violently killed by a boar-
tusk, and unable to help his own distress.  How then shall he
take thought for mankind, he the adulterer, the hunter who died a
violent death?

"All such tales, and many like them, and many wicked tales more
shameful still, have the Greeks introduced, O king, concerning
their gods; tales, whereof it is unlawful to speak, or even to
have them in remembrance.  Hence men, taking occasion from their
gods, wrought all lawlessness, lasciviousness and ungodliness,
polluting earth and air with their horrible deeds.

"But the Egyptians, more fatuous and foolish than they, have
erred worse than any other nation.  They were not satisfied with
the idols worshipped by the Chaldeans and Greeks, but further
introduced as gods brute beasts of land and water, and herbs
and trees, and were defiled in all madness and lasciviousness
worse than all people upon earth.  From the beginning they
worshipped Isis, which had for her brother and husband that
Osiris which was slain by his brother Typhon.  And for this
reason Isis fled with Horus her son to Byblos in Syria, seeking
Osiris and bitterly wailing, until Horus was grown up and killed
Typhon.  Isis then was not able to help her own brother and
husband; nor had Osiris, who was slain by Typhon, power to
succour himself; nor had Typhon, who killed his brother and was
himself destroyed by Horus and Isis, any resource to save himself
from death.  And yet, although famous for all these
misadventures, these be they that were considered gods by the
senseless Egyptians.

"The same people, not content therewith, nor with the rest of
the idols of the heathen, also introduced brute beasts as gods.
Some of them worshipped the sheep, some the goat, and others the
calf and the hog; while certain of them worshipped the raven, the
kite, the vulture, and the eagle.  Others again worshipped the
crocodile, and some the cat and dog, the wolf and ape, the dragon
and serpent, and others the onion, garlic and thorns, and every
other creature.  And the poor fools do not perceive, concerning
these things, that they have no power at all.  Though they see
their gods being devoured, burnt and killed by other men, and
rotting away, they cannot grasp the fact that they are no gods.

"Great, then, is the error that the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, and
the Greeks have erred in introducing such gods as these, and
making images thereof, and deifying dumb and senseless idols.  I
marvel how, when they behold their gods being sawn and chiselled
by workmen's axes, growing old and dissolving through lapse of
time, and molten in the pot, they never reflected concerning them
that they are no gods.  For when these skill not to work their
own salvation, how can they take care of mankind?  Nay, even the
poets and philosophers among the Chaldeans, Greeks and Egyptians,
although by their poems and histories they desired to glorify
their people's gods, yet they rather revealed and exposed their
shame before all men.  If the body of a man, consisting of many
parts, loseth not any of its proper members, but, having an
unbroken union with all its members, is in harmony with itself,
how in the nature of God shall there be such warfare and discord?
For if the nature of the gods were one, then ought not one god to
persecute, slay or injure another.  But if the gods were
persecuted by other gods, and slain and plundered and killed with
thunder-stones, then is their nature no longer one, but their
wills are divided, and are all mischievous, so that not one among
them is God.  So it is manifest, O king, that all this history of
the nature of the gods is error.

"Furthermore, how do the wise and eloquent among the Greeks fail
to perceive that law-givers themselves are judged by their own
laws?  For if their laws are just, then are their gods assuredly
unjust, in that they have offended against law by murders,
sorceries, adulteries, thefts and unnatural crimes.  But, if they
did well in so doing, then are their laws unjust, seeing that
they have been framed in condemnation of the gods.  But now the
laws are good and just, because they encourage good and forbid
evil; whereas the deeds of their gods offend against law.  Their
gods then are offenders against law; and all that introduce such
gods as these are worthy of death and are ungodly.  If the
stories of the gods be myths, then are the gods mere words: but
if the stories be natural, then are they that wrought or endured
such things no longer gods: if the stories be allegorical, then
are the gods myths and nothing else.  Therefore it hath been
proven, O king, that all these idols, belonging to many gods, are
works of error and destruction.  So it is not meet to call those
gods that are seen, but cannot see: but it is right to worship as
God him who is unseen and is the Maker of all mankind.

"Come we now, O king, to the Jews, that we may see what they also
think concerning God.  The Jews are the descendants of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and went once to sojourn in Egypt.  From thence
God brought them out with a mighty hand and stretched out arm by
Moses their lawgiver; and with many miracles and signs made he
known unto them his power.  But, like the rest, these proved
ungrateful and unprofitable, and often worshipped images of the
heathen, and killed the prophets and righteous men that were sent
unto them.  Then, when it pleased the Son of God to come on
earth, they did shamefully entreat him and deliver him to Pilate
the Roman governor, and condemn him to the Cross, regardless of
his benefits and the countless miracles that he had worked
amongst them.  Wherefore by their own lawlessness they perished.
For though to this day they worship the One Omnipotent God, yet
it is not according unto knowledge; for they deny Christ the Son
of God, and are like the heathen, although they seem to approach
the truth from which they have estranged themselves.  So much for
the Jews.

"As for the Christians, they trace their line from the Lord Jesus
Christ.  He is confessed to be the Son of the most high God, who
came down from heaven, by the Holy Ghost, for the salvation of
mankind, and was born of a pure Virgin, without seed of man, and
without defilement, and took flesh, and appeared among men, that
he might recall them from the error of worshipping many gods.
When he had accomplished his marvellous dispensation, of his own
free will by a mighty dispensation he tasted of death upon the
Cross.  But after three days he came to life again, and ascended
into the heavens, the glory of whose coming thou mayest learn, O
king, by the reading of the holy Scripture, which the Christians
call the Gospel, shouldst thou meet therewith.  This Jesus had
twelve disciples, who, after his ascent into the heavens, went
out into all the kingdoms of the world, telling of his greatness.
Even so one of them visited our coasts, preaching the doctrine of
truth; whence they who still serve the righteousness of his
preaching are called Christians.  And these are they who, above
all the nations of the earth, have found the truth: for they
acknowledge God the Creator and Maker of all things in the only
begotten Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and other God than him they
worship none.  They have the commandments of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself engraven on their hearts, and these they observe,
looking for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the
world to come.  They neither commit adultery nor fornication; nor
do they bear false witness, nor covet other men's goods: they
honour father and mother, and love their neighbours: they give
right judgement.  They do not unto other that which they would
not have done unto themselves.  They comfort such as wrong them,
and make friends of them: they labour to do good to their
enemies: they are meek and gentle.  They refrain themselves from
all unlawful intercourse and all uncleanness.  They despise not
the widow, and grieve not the orphan.  He that hath distributeth
liberally to him that hath not.  If they see a stranger, they
bring him under their roof, and rejoice over him, as it were
their own brother: for they call themselves brethren, not after
the flesh, but after the spirit.  For Christ his sake they are
ready to lay down their lives: they keep his commandments
faithfully, living righteous and holy lives, as the Lord their
God commanded them, giving him thanks every hour, for meat and
drink and every blessing.  Verily, then, this is the way of truth
which leadeth its wayfarers unto the eternal kingdom promised by
Christ in the life to come.

"And that thou mayest know, O king, that I speak nought of
myself, look thou into the writings of the Christians, and thou
shalt find that I speak nothing but the truth.  Well, therefore,
hath thy son understood it, and rightly hath he been taught to
serve the living God, and to be saved for the world to come.
Great and marvellous are the things spoken and wrought by the
Christians, because they speak not the words of men but the words
of God.  But all other nations are deceived, and deceive
themselves.  Walking in darkness they stagger one against another
like drunken men.  This is the end of my speech spoken unto thee,
O king, prompted by the truth that is in my mind.  Wherefore let
thy foolish wise-acres refrain from babbling idly against the
Lord; for it is profitable to you to worship God the Creator, and
hearken to his incorruptible sayings, in order that ye may escape
judgement and punishment, and be found partakers of deathless
life."


XXVIII.

When Nachor had fully delivered this oration, the king changed
countenance for very anger, but his orators and temple-keepers
stood speechless, having nothing but a few weak and rotten shreds
of argument in reply.  But the king's son rejoiced in spirit and
with glad countenance magnified the Lord, who had made a path,
where no path was, for them tat trusted in him, who by the mouth
of a foeman and enemy was establishing the truth; and the leader
of error had proved a defender of the right cause.

But the king, although furiously enraged with Nachor, was
nevertheless unable to do him any mischief, because of the
proclamation already read before all, wherein he urged him to
plead without fear in behalf of the Christians.  So he himself
made answer in many words, and by dark speeches hinted that
Nachor should relax his resistance, and be worsted by the
argument of the orators.  But Nachor the more mightily prevailed,
tearing to pieces all their propositions and conclusions and
exposing the fallacy of their error.  After the debate had been
prolonged till well-nigh eventide, the king dismissed the
assembly, making as though he would renew the discussion on the
morrow.

Then said Ioasaph to the king his father, "As at the beginning,
Sir, thou commandedst that the trial should be just, so too crown
the end thereof with justice, by doing one or other of these two
things.  Either allow my teacher to tarry with me to-night, that
we may take counsel together as touching those things which we
must say unto our adversaries tomorrow: and do thou in turn take
thine advisers unto thee, and duly practise yourselves as ye
will.  Or else deliver thy counsellors to me this night, and take
mine to thyself.  But if both sides be with thee, mine advocate
in tribulation and fear, but thine in joy and refreshment, me
thinketh it is not a fair trial, but a tyrannical misuse of
power, and a breaking of the covenants."  The king, compelled to
yield by the gracefulness of this speech took his wise men and
priests to himself, and delivered Nachor to his son, still having
hopes of him and thinking fit to keep his agreement.

The king's son, therefore, departed unto his own palace, like a
conqueror in the Olympic games, and with him went Nachor.  When
alone, the prince called him and said, "Think not that I am
ignorant of thy tale, for I wot, of a surety, that thou art not
saintly Barlaam, but Nachor the astrologer; and I marvel how it
seemed thee good to act this play, and to think that thou couldst
so dull my sight at mid-day, that I should mistake a wolf for a
sheep.  But well sung is the proverb, `The heart of a fool will
conceive folly.'  So this your device and counsel was stale and
utterly senseless; but the work that thou hast accomplished is
full of wisdom.  Wherefore, rejoice, Nachor, and be exceeding
glad.  I render thee many thanks, that thou hast been to-day
advocate of the truth, and hast not polluted thy lips with foul
words and crafty simulation, but hast rather cleansed them from
many defilements, and thoroughly proven the error of the gods, as
they be wrongly called, and hast established the truth of the
Christian faith.  I have been zealous to bring thee hither with
me for two reasons; that the king might not privily seize and
punish thee, because thou spakest not after his heart, and next
that I might recompense thee for the favour that thou hast done
me to-day.  And what is my recompense for thee?  To show thee how
to turn from the evil and slippery road which thou hast trodden
until now, and to journey along the straight and saving pathway
which thou hast avoided, not in ignorance, but by wilful
wrongdoing, throwing thyself into depths and precipices of
iniquity.  Understand then, Nachor, man of understanding as thou
art, and be thou zealous to gain Christ only, and the life that
is hid with him, and despise this fleeting and corruptible world.
Thou shalt not live for ever, but, being mortal, shalt depart
hence ere long, even as all that have been before thee.  And wo
betide thee, if, with the heavy load of sin on thy shoulders,
thou depart thither where there is righteous judgement and
recompense for thy works, and cast it not off, while it is easy
to rid thyself thereof!"

Pricked at heart by these words, spake Nachor, "Well said!  Sir
prince, well said!  I do know the true and very God, by whom all
things were made, and I wot of the judgement to come, having
heard thereof from many texts of the Scriptures.  But evil habit
and the insolence of the ancient supplanter hath blinded the eyes
of my heart, and shed a thick darkness over my reason.  But now,
at thy word, I will cast away the veil of gloom, and run unto the
light of the countenance of the Lord.  May be, he will have mercy
on me, and will open a door of repentance to his wicked and
rebellious servant, even if it seem impossible to me that my
sins, which are heavier than the sand, be forgiven; sins, which,
wittingly or unwittingly, I have sinned from childhood upwards to
this my hoary age."

When the king's son heard these words, immediately he arose, and
his heart waxed warm, and he began to try to raise Nachor's
courage which was drooping to despair, and to confirm it in the
faith of Christ, saying, "Let no doubt about this, Nachor, find
place in thy mind.  For it is written, God is able of these very
stones to raise up children unto Abraham.  What meaneth this (as
father Barlaam said) except that men beyond hope, stained with
all manner of wickedness, can be saved, and become servants of
Christ, who, in the exceeding greatness of his love toward
mankind, hath opened the gates of heaven to all that turn,
barring the way of salvation to none, and receiving with
compassion them that repent?  Wherefore to all that have entered
the vineyard at the first, third, sixth, ninth or eleventh hour
there is apportioned equal pay, as saith the holy Gospel: so that
even if, until this present time, thou hast waxen old in thy
sins, yet if thou draw nigh with a fervent heart, thou shalt gain
the same rewards as they who have laboured from their youth
upwards."

With these and many other words did that saintly youth speak of
repentance to that aged sinner Nachor, promising him that Christ
was merciful, and pledging him forgiveness, and satisfying him
that the good God is alway ready to receive the penitent, and
with these words, as it were with ointments, did he mollify that
ailing soul and give it perfect health.  Nachor at once said unto
him, "O prince, more noble in soul even than in outward show,
well instructed in these marvellous mysteries, mayst thou
continue in thy good confession until the end, and may neither
time nor tide ever pluck it out of thine heart!  For myself, I
will depart straightway in search of my salvation, and will by
penance pacify that God whom I have angered: for, except thou
will it, I shall see the king's face no more."  Then was the
prince exceeding glad, and joyfully heard his saying.  And he
embraced and kissed him affectionately; and, when he had prayed
earnestly to God, he sent him forth from the palace.

So Nachor stepped forth with a contrite heart, and went bounding
into the depths of the desert, like as doth an hart, and came to
a den belonging to a monk that had attained to the dignity of the
priesthood, and was hiding there for fear of the pressing danger.
With a right warm heart knelt Nachor down before him, and washed
his feet with his tears, like the harlot of old, and craved holy
Baptism.  The priest, full of heavenly grace, was passing glad,
and did at once begin to instruct him, as the custom is, and
after many days, perfected him with baptism in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  And Nachor abode
with him, always repentant of his sins, and blessing that God who
never willeth that ally should perish, but receiveth all that
turn again unto him, and lovingly accepteth the penitent.

Now on the morrow when the king heard what had befallen Nachor,
he despaired of the hopes that he once had in him: and, seeing
those wise and foolish orators of his mightily discomfited, he
was at his wits' end.  Them he visited with terrible outrage and
dishonour, scourging some severely with whips of oxhide,
besmearing their eyes with soot, and casting them away from his
presence.  He himself began to condemn the impotence of the gods
falsely so called, although as yet he refused to look fully at
the light of Christ, for the dense cloud of darkness, that
enveloped him, still bound the eyes of his heart.  Howbeit he no
longer honoured his temple-keepers, nor would he keep feasts, nor
make drink offerings to his idols, but his mind was tossed
between two opinions.  On the one hand, he poured scorn on the
impotence of his gods; on the other, he dreaded the strictness of
the profession of the Gospel, and was hardly to be torn from his
evil ways, being completely in slavery to the pleasures of the
body, and like a captive drawn towards sinful lusts, and being
drunken, as saith Esay, but not with wine, and led as it were
with the bridle of evil habit.

While the king was thus wrestling with two opinions, his noble
and truly royal-hearted son dwelt at peace in his palace, proving
to all men by his deeds the nobility, order and steadfastness of
his nature.  Theatres, horse-races, riding to hounds, and all the
vain pleasures of youth, the baits that take foolish souls, were
reckoned by him as nothing worth.  But he hung wholly on the
commands of Christ for whom he yearned, his heart being wounded
with love divine.  For him he longed, who alone is to be longed
for, who is all sweetness and desire and aspiration insatiable.

Now, when he came to think upon his teacher Barlaam, and as in a
mirror saw his life, his soul was enchanted with love, and he
much occupied himself a-thinking how he might see him; and ever
carrying his sayings in his heart, he was like the tree in the
Psalms planted by the river side, unceasingly watered, and
bringing forth unto the Lords his fruits in due season.  Many
were the souls that he delivered from the snares of the devil,
and brought safely unto Christ; for many resorted unto him, and
profited by his wholesome words.  And not a few left the way of
error, and ran toward the word of salvation; while others bade a
long farewell to the concerns of the world, and came to the
wrestling-school of the monastic life.  He himself spent his time
in prayers and fastings, and would often offer up this prayer, "O
Lord, my Lord and King, in whom I have trusted, to whom I have
fled and been delivered from my error, render thou due recompense
to Barlaam thy servant, because when I was in error he pointed
thee to me, who art the way of truth and life.  Forbid me not to
behold once more that angel in bodily shape, of whom the world is
not worthy, but grant me in his company to finish the residue of
my life, that, treading in the footsteps of his conversation, I
may be well-pleasing to thee my God and Lord."


XXIX.

Now about the same time there was in that city a public assembly
in honour of the false gods, and the king must needs be present
at the feast, and grace it with lavish sacrifices.  But the
temple-keepers, seeing that he was careless and lukewarm with
regard to their worship, feared that he might neglect to be
present in their temple, and that they might lose the royal
largess, and the rest of their revenues.  So they arose, and
withdrew to a cavern situate in the depth of the desert, where
dwelt a man who busied himself with magical arts, and was a
fervent champion of the error of idolatry.  Theudas was his name.
Him the king honoured exceedingly, and counted him his friend and
teacher, because, he said, it was by the guidance of his
prophecies that his kingdom ever prospered.  So these idol-
priests, that were no priests, came to him, and appealed to him
for help, and made known to him the evil opinion of their gods
which was growing on their king, and all that the king's son had
done, and all the eloquent discourse that Nachor had held against
them.  And they said, "Except thou come thyself to our succour,
gone is all hope!  and lost is all the reverence of the gods.
Thou only art left to be our comfort in this misfortune, and upon
thee we fix our hopes."

So forth marched Theudas, in company with his Satanic host; and
he armed himself against the truth, invoking many of his evil
spirits, who knew how to lend ready aid for evil ends, and whom
he alway used for his ministers; and with these allies he came to
the king.  When his arrival had been announced to the king, and
he had entered in, with a palm-staff in his hand and a sheep-skin
girt about his loins, the king arose from his throne, and met and
welcomed him; and, fetching a seat, he made him to sit down
beside him.  Then spake Theudas unto the king, "O king, live for
ever under the shelter of the favour of the most puissant gods! 
I have heard that thou hast foughten a mighty fight with the
Galileans, and hast been crowned with right glorious diadems of
victory.  Wherefore I am come, that we may celebrate together a
feast of thanksgiving, and sacrifice to the immortal gods young
men in the bloom of youth and well-favoured damsels, and eke
offer them an hecatomb of bullocks and herds of beasts, that we
may have them from henceforth for our allies invincible, making
plain our path of life before us."

Hereto the king made answer, "We have not conquered, aged sir, we
have not conquered: nay, rather have we been defeated in open
fight.  They that were for us turned suddenly against us.  They
found our host a wild, half-drunken, feeble folk, and utterly
overthrew it.  But now, if there be with thee any power and
strength to help our fallen religion and set it up again, declare
it."

Theudas replied in this wise, "Dread not, O king, the oppositions
and vain babblings of the Galileans: for of what worth against
reasonable and sensible men are the arguments that they use?
These methinks shall be more easily overthrown than a leaf shaken
with the wind.  They shall not endure to face me, far less join
argument, or come to propositions and oppositions with me.  But,
in order that the coming contest and all our wishes may prosper,
and that our matters may run smoothly with the stream, adorn thou
with thy presence this public festival, and gird on for thy
strong sword the favour of the gods, and well befall thee!"

When the mighty in wickedness had thus boasted himself and
thought of mischief all the day long (let David bear his part in
our chorus), and when, as saith Esay, he had given his neighbour
a drink of turbid dregs, by the help of the evil spirits his
comrades he made the king utterly to forget the thoughts that
inclined him to salvation, and caused him again to cleave to his
wonted ways.  Then the king despatched letters hither and
thither, that all men should gather together to this loathsome
assembly.  Then mightest thou have seen multitudes streaming in,
and bringing with them sheep and oxen and divers kinds of beasts.

So when all were assembled, the king arose, with that deceiver
Theudas, and proceeded to the temple, bringing one hundred and
twenty bullocks and many animals for sacrifice.  And they
celebrated their accursed feast till the city resounded with the
cry of the brute beasts and the very air was polluted with the
reek of sacrifice.  This done, when the spirits of wickedness had
greatly vaunted them over Theudas' victory, and when the temple-
keepers had rendered him thanks, the king went up again unto his
palace, and said milo Theudas, "Behold now, as thou badest us, we
have spared no pains over the splendour of this gathering and the
lavishness of the sacrifice.  Now, therefore, it is time for thee
to fulfil thy promises, and to deliver from the error of the
Christians my son that hath rebelled against our religion, and to
reconcile him to our gracious gods.  For, though I have left no
device and deed untried, yet have I found no remedy for the
mischief, but I perceive that his will is stronger than all. 
When I have dealt gently and kindly with him, I have found that
he payeth me no regard whatsoever.  When I have treated him
harshly and severely, I have seen him driven the quicker to
desperation.  To thy wisdom for the future I leave the care of
this calamity that hath befallen me.  If then I be delivered from
this trouble by thy means, and once more behold my son
worshipping my gods with me, and enjoying the gratification of
this life of pleasure, and this royal estate, I will set up unto
thee a golden statue, and make thee to receive divine honours
from all men for all time to come."

Hereupon Theudas, bowing an attentive ear to the evil one, and
learning from him the secret of his evil and deadly counsel,
became himself the devil's tongue and mouthpiece, and spake unto
the king, "If thou wilt get the better of thy son, and make his
opposition vain, I have discovered a plan, which he shall in no
wise be able to resist, but his hard and obdurate mind shall melt
quicker than wax before the hottest fire."  The king, seeing this
foolish fellow swelling with empty pride, immediately grew merry
and joyful, hoping that the unbridled and boastful tongue would
get the mastery of that divinely instructed and philosophic soul.
"And what is the plan?" he asked.  Then began Theudas to weave
his web.  He made his villainy sharp as any razor and did
cunningly prepare his drugs.  Now behold this malicious device
and suggestion of the evil one. "Remove, O king," said he, "all
thy son's waiting men and servants far from him, and order that
comely damsels, of exceeding beauty, and bedizened to be the more
winsome, be continually with him and minister to him, and be his
companions day and night.  For myself, I will send him one of the
spirits told off for such duties, and I will thus kindle all the
more fiercely the coals of sensual desire.  After that he hath
once only had intercourse with but one of these women, if all go
not as thou wilt, then disdain me for ever, as unprofitable, and
worthy not of honour but of dire punishment.  For there is
nothing like the sight of women to allure and enchant the minds
of men.  Listen to a story that beareth witness to my word."


XXX.

"A certain king was grieved and exceeding sad at heart, because
that he had no male issue, deeming this no small misfortune.
While he was in this condition, there was born to him a son, and
the king's soul was filled with joy thereat.  Then they that were
learned amongst his physicians told him that, if for the first
twelve years the boy saw the sun or fire, he should entirely lose
his sight, for this was proved by the condition of his eyes.
Hearing this, the king, they say, caused a little house, full of
dark chambers, to be hewn out of the rock, and therein enclosed
his child together with the men that nursed him, and, until the
twelve years were past, never suffered him to see the least ray
of light.  After the fulfilment of the twelve years, the king
brought forth from his little house his son that had never seen
a single object, and ordered his waiting men to show the boy
everything after his kind; men in one place, women in another;
elsewhere gold and silver; in another place, pearls and precious
stones, fine and ornamental vestments, splendid chariots with
horses from the royal stables, with golden bridles and purple
caparisons, mounted by armed soldiers; also droves of oxen and
flocks of sheep.  In brief, row after row, they showed the boy
everything.  Now, as he asked what each ox these was called, the
king's esquires and guards made known unto him each by name: but,
when he desired to learn what women were called, the king's
spearman, they say, wittily replied that they were called,
"Devils that deceive men."  But the boy's heart was smitten with
the love of these above all the rest.  So, when they had gone
round everywhere and brought him again unto the king, the king
asked, which of all these sights had pleased him most.  "What,"
answered the boy, "but the Devils that deceive men?  Nothing that
I have seen to-day hath fired my heart with such love as these."
The king was astonished at the saying of the boy, to think how
masterful a thing the love of women is.  Therefore think not to
subdue thy son in any other way than this."

The king heard this tale gladly; and there were brought before
him some chosen damsels, young and exceeding beautiful.  These he
bedizened with dazzling ornaments and trained in all winsome
ways: and then he turned out of the palace all his son's squires
and serving men, and set these women in their stead.  These
flocked around the prince, embraced him, and provoked him to
filthy wantonness, by their walk and talk inviting him to
dalliaunce.  Besides these, he had no man at whom to look, or
with whom to converse or break his fast, for these damsels were
his all.  Thus did the king.  But Theudas went home to his evil
den, and, dipping into his books that had virtue to work such
magic, he called up one of his wicked spirits and sent him forth,
for to battle with the soldier of the army of Christ.  But the
wretch little knew what laughter he should create against
himself, and to what shame he should be put, with the whole
devilish troop under him.  So the evil spirit, taking to him
other spirits more wicked than himself, entered the bed-chamber
of this noble youth, and attacked him by kindling right furiously
the furnace of his flesh.  The evil one plied the bellows from
within, while the damsels, fair of face, but uncomely of soul,
supplied the evil fuel from without.

But Ioasaph's pure soul was disturbed to feel the touch of evil,
and to see the warlike host of strange thoughts that was charging
down upon him.  And he sought to find deliverance from this great
mischief, and to present himself pure unto Christ, and not defile
in the mire of sinful lust that holy apparel, wherein the grace
of holy Baptism had clothed him.  Immediately he set love against
love, the divine against the lascivious; and he called to
remembrance the beauty and unspeakable glory of Christ, the
immortal bridegroom of virgin souls, and of that bride chamber
and marriage, from whence they that have stained their wedding-
garment are piteously cast out, bound hand and foot, into outer
darkness.  When he had thought thereon, and shed bitter tears, he
smote upon his breast, driving out evil thoughts, as good-for-
nothing drones from the hive.  When he rose, and spread out his
hands unto heaven, with fervent tears and groans calling upon God
to help him, and he said, "Lord Almighty, who alone art powerful
and merciful, the hope of the hopeless, and the help of the
helpless, remember me thine unprofitable servant at this hour,
and look upon me with a gracious countenance, and deliver my soul
from the sword of the devil, and my darling from the paw of the
dog: suffer me not to fall into the hands of mine enemies, and
let not them that hate me triumph over me.  Leave me not to be
destroyed in iniquities, and to dishonour my body which I swore
to present unto thee chaste.  For for thee I yearn; thee I
worship, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and for
evermore, and world without end."  When he had added the Amen, he
felt heavenly comfort stealing over him from above, and the evil
thoughts withdrew, and he continued in prayer until early morn.
Being ware of the devices of the crafty foe, he began more and
more to afflict his body by abstinence from meat and drink, and
by other severities, standing in prayer all the night long, and
reminding himself of his covenants made with God, and picturing
in his mind the glory of the righteous yonder, and recounting to
himself the full terrors of the Gehenna wherewith the wicked are
threatened; all this, that the enemy might not find his soul
lying fallow and untilled, and thus easily sow therein the seeds
of evil thoughts, and befoul the cleanness of his mind.  So, when
the enemy was in great straits on every side, and altogether in
despair of taking this noble youth, like a cunning knave, he
proceeded to another more subtil device, he that is for ever
wicked, and never stinteth to contrive mischief and hurt.  For he
made furious endeavour to carry out the orders that Theudas had
given him, and once more prepared his drugs, and on this wise. 

The devil entered into the heart of one of the young damsels.  Of
all she was the most seemly, a king's daughter, carried away
captive from her own country, given to king Abenner as a great
prize, and sent by him, being of ripe beauty, to his own son, for
to cause him to slip or to trip.  Of her the deceiver took
possession, and whispered in her ear suggestions that plainly
showed the wisdom and understanding of her mind; for the evil one
easily pursueth all devices that make for wickedness.  Then the
evil spirit attacked the king's son on the right hand, and gave
him a potion to make him love the maiden, by reason -- so he
pretended -- of her prudence and discretion and of her nobility
and royal blood that yet had not saved her from banishment and
loss of glory.  Moreover the devil secretly sowed in Ioasaph's
heart thoughts that he might recover her from idolatry, and make
her a Christian.

But these were all stratagems of the wily serpent.  For the
king's son, being in this frame of mind, could see in himself no
unclean thought or passionate affection for the damsel, but only
sympathy and pity for her misfortune, and the ruin of her soul,
and knew not that this matter was a device of the devil; for
verily he is darkness, and feigneth to be light.  So he began to
commune with the damsel, and talk with her over the oracles of
the knowledge of God, and said, "Lady, be thou acquainted with
the ever-living God, and perish not in the error of these idols;
but know thy Lord, and the Maker of all this world, and thou
shalt be happy, the bride of the immortal bridegroom."  While he
exhorted her with many such-like words, immediately the evil
spirit whispered to the girl that she should spread under his
feet the nets of deceit to drag his blessed soul into the pit of
lust, as he once did to our first parent by means of Eve, thus
miserably banishing him, alas! from Paradise and God, and making
him to become subject to death in lieu of bliss and everlasting
life.

When the damsel heard Ioasaph's words fulfilled with all wisdom,
being without understanding, she understood them not, but made
answer thus, becoming the tongue and mouth-piece of the evil one:
"If, sir, thou takest thought for my salvation, and desirest to
bring me to thy God, and to save my poor soul, do thou also
thyself grant me one request, and straightway I will bid good-bye
to my fathers' gods, and join thy God, serving him until my last
breath; and thou shalt receive recompense for my salvation, and
for my turning to God-ward."

"Lady, and what is thy request?" said he.  But she, setting her
whole self, figure, look and voice in a fashion to charm him,
answered, "Be thou joined with me in the bonds of wedlock, and I
will joyfully follow out thy behests."

"In vain, O Lady," said he, "hast thou made this hard request.
For though I earnestly care for thy salvation, and long to heave
thee from the depth of perdition, yet to pollute my body through
unclean union is grievous for me, and utterly impossible."

She, seeking to make the way straight and smooth for him, cried,
"Why dost thou, who are so wise, talk thus?  Wherefore speakest
thou of it as of defilement and shameful intercourse?  I am not
unacquainted with the Christian books: nay, I have met with many
volumes in mine own country, and have heard the discourses of
many Christians.  What, is it not written in one of your books,
`Marriage is honourable, and the bed undefiled'?  and, `It is
better to marry than to burn'? and again, `What God hath joined
together, let not man put asunder'?  Do not your Scriptures teach
that all the righteous men of old, patriarchs and prophets, were
wedded?  Is it not written that the mighty Peter, whom ye call
Prince of the Apostles, was a married man?  Who, then, hath
persuaded thee to call this defilement?  Methink, sir, thou
strayest utterly away from the truth of your doctrines."

"Yea, Lady," said he, "all this is even as thou sayest.  It is
permitted to all who will to live in wedlock, but not to them
that have once made promise to Christ to be virgins.  For myself,
ever since I was cleansed in the laver of Holy Baptism from the
sins of my youth and ignorance, I have resolved to present myself
pure to Christ, and how shall I dare break my covenants with
God?"

Again quoth the damsel, "Let this also be thy pleasure, as thou
wilt.  But fulfil me one other small and trivial desire of mine,
if thou art in very truth minded for to save my soul.  Keep
company with me this one night only, and grant me to revel in thy
beauty, and do thou in turn take thy fill of my comeliness.  And
I give thee my word, that, with daybreak, I will become a
Christian, and forsake all the worship of my gods.  Not only
shalt thou be pardoned for this dealing, but thou shalt receive
recompense from thy God because of my salvation, for thy
Scripture saith, `There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth.'  If, therefore, there is joy in heaven over the
conversion of a sinner, shall not great recompense be due to the
causer of that conversion?  Yea, so it is: and dispute it not.
Did not even the Apostles, the leaders of your religion, do many
a thing by dispensation, at times transgressing a commandment on
account of a greater one?  Is not Paul said to have circumcised
Timothy on account of a greater dispensation?  And yet
circumcision hath been reckoned by Christians as unlawful, but
yet he did not decline so to do.  And many other such things
shalt thou find in thy Scriptures.  If then in very sooth, as
thou sayest, thou seekest to save my soul, fulfil me this my
small desire.  And although I seek to be joined with thee in the
full estate of matrimony, yet, sith this is contrary to thy mind,
I will never constrain thee again, but will do everything that
liketh thee.  For the rest, do not thou utterly abhor me; but
hearken to me for the nonce, and thou shalt deliver me from
superstitious error, and thou shalt do whatever seemeth thee good
hereafter all the days of thy life."

Thus spake she; for indeed she had, for her adviser, one to whom
she lent a privy ear, and the pirate was well versed in
Scripture, being verily the creator and teacher of iniquity. 
Thus then she spake with fawning words entangling him, right and
left, around with her toils and meshes, and she began to shake
the citadel of his soul, and to slacken his tension of purpose,
and to soften the temper of his mind.  Then the sower of these
evil tares, and enemy of the righteous, when he saw the young
man's heart wavering, was full of joy, and straightway called to
the evil spirits that were with him, crying, "Look you how yond
damsel hasteth to bring to pass all that we were unable to
accomplish!  Hither!  fall we now furiously upon him: for we
shall find none other season so favourable to perform the will of
him that sent us."  Thus spake this crafty spirit to his hounds:
and straightway they lept on that soldier of Christ, disquieting
all the powers of his soul, inspiring him with vehement love for
the damsel, and kindling within him the fiercest fire of lust.

When Ioasaph saw that he was greatly inflamed, and was being led
captive into sin, and perceived that his thoughts about the
salvation of the damsel and her conversion to God had been set
like bait on hook to hide the deed which she purposed, and were
troubling him with the suggestion of the enemy, that, for the
salvation of a soul, it was not sin for once to lie with a woman,
then in the agony of his soul he drew a deep and lamentable
groan, and nerved himself to pray, and, with streams of tears
running down his cheeks, he cried aloud to him that is able to
save them that trust in him, saying, "On thee, O Lord, have I set
my trust: let me not be confounded for ever; neither let mine
enemies triumph over me, that hold by thy right hand.  But stand
thou by me at this hour, and according to thy will make straight
my path, that thy glorious and dreadful name may be glorified in
me thy servant, because thou art blessed for ever.  Amen."

Now when he had prayed in tears for many hours, and often bent
the knee, he sunk down upon the pavement.  After he had slumbered
awhile, he saw himself carried off by certain dread men, and
passing through places which he had never heretofore beheld.  He
stood in a mighty plain, all a-bloom with fresh and fragrant
flowers, where he descried all manner of plants of divers
colours, charged with strange and marvellous fruits, pleasant to
the eye and inviting to the touch.  The leaves of the trees
rustled clearly in a gentle breeze, and, as they shook, sent
forth a gracious perfume that cloyed not the sense.  Thrones were
set there, fashioned of the purest gold and costly stones,
throwing out never so bright a lustre, and radiant settles among
wondrous couches too beautiful to be described.  And beside them
there were running waters exceeding clear, and delightful to the
eye.  When these dread men had led him through this great and
wondrous plain, they brought him to a city that glistered with
light unspeakable, whose walls were of dazzling gold, with high
uprear'd parapets, built of gems such as man hath never seen. 
Ah!  who could describe the beauty and brightness of that city?
Light, ever shooting from above, filled all her streets with
bright rays; and winged squadrons, each of them itself a light,
dwelt in this city, making such melody as mortal ear ne'er heard.
And Ioasaph heard a voice crying, "This is the rest of the
righteous: this the gladness of them that have pleased the Lord."
When these dread men had carried him out from thence, they spake
of taking him back to earth.  But he, that had lost his heart to
that scene of joyaunce and heartsease, exclaimed, "Reave me not,
reave me not, I pray you, of this unspeakable joy, but grant me
also to dwell in one corner of this mighty city."  But they said,
"It is impossible for thee to be there now; but, with much toil
and sweat, thou shalt come hither, if thou constrain thyself."

Thus spake they; and again they crossed that mighty plain, and
bare him to regions of darkness and utter woe, where sorrow
matched the brightness which he had seen above.  There was
darkness without a ray of light, and utter gloom, and the whole
place was full of tribulation and trouble.  There blazed a
glowing furnace of fire, and there crept the worm of torment.
Revengeful powers were set over the furnace, and there were some
that were burning piteously in the fire, and a voice was heard,
saying, "This is the place of sinners; this the punishment for
them that have defiled themselves by foul practices."  Hereupon
Ioasaph was carried thence by his guides; and, when he came to
himself, immediately he trembled from head to foot, and, like a
river, his eyes dropped tears, and all the comeliness of that
wanton damsel and her fellows was grown more loathsome to him
than filth and rottenness.  And as he mused in his heart on the
memory of the visions, in longing for the good and in terror of
the evil, he lay on his bed utterly unable to arise.

Then was the king informed of his son's sickness; and he came and
asked what ailed him.  And Ioasaph told him his vision, and said,
"Wherefore hast thou laid a net for my feet, and bowed down my
soul?  If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had well nigh dwelt
in hell.  But how loving is God unto Israel, even unto such as
are of a true heart!  He hath delivered me that am lowly from the
midst of the dogs.  For I was sore troubled and I fell on sleep:
but God my Saviour from on high hath visited me, and showed me
what joy they lose that provoke him and to what punishments they
subject themselves.  And now, O my father, since thou hast
stopped thine ears not to hear the voice that will charm thee to
good, at least forbid me not to walk the straight road.  For this
I desire, this I long for, to forsake all, and reach that place,
where Barlaam the servant of Christ hath his dwelling, and with
him to finish what remaineth of my life.  But if thou keep me
back by force, thou shalt quickly see me die of grief and
despair, and thou shalt be no more called father, nor have me to
thy son."


XXXI.

Again therefore the king was seized with despondency, and again
he was like to abjure his whole way of life; and with strange
thoughts he went again unto his own palace.  But the evil
spirits, that had been sent out by Theudas for to attack the
young saint, returned to him, and, lovers of leasing though they
were, confessed their shameful defeat, for they bare visible
tokens of their defeat, upon their evil countenance.  Said
Theudas, "And be ye so weak and puny that ye cannot get the
better of one young stripling?"  Then did the evil spirits,
constrained, to their sorrow, by the might of God, bring to light
the truth, saying, "We cannot abide even the sight of the might
of Christ, and the symbol of his Passion, which they call the
Cross.  For, when that sign is made, immediately all we, the
princes of the air, and the rulers of the darkness of the world,
are utterly routed and discomfited, even before the sign is
completed.  When we first fell upon this youth, we vexed him
sore; but when he called on Christ for help, and armed him with
the sign of the Cross, he routed us in angry wise, and stablished
himself in safety.  So incontinent we found a weapon, wherewith
our chief did once confront the first-made man and prevailed
against him.  And verily we should have made this young man's
hope vain; but again Christ was called on for help, and he
consumed us in the fire of his wrath from above, and put us to
flight.  We have determined to approach the prince no more."
Thus, then, did the evil spirits plainly make known unto Theudas
all that was come to pass.

But the king, perplexed on every side, again summoned Theudas,
and said, "Most wisest of men, all that seemed good to thee have
we fulfilled, but have found no help therein.  But now, if thou
hast any device left, we will make trial thereof.  Peradventure I
shall find some escape from this evil."

Then did Theudas ask for a meeting with his son; and on the
morrow the king took him and went forth to visit the prince.  The
king sat down and provoked debate, upbraiding and chiding him for
his disobedience and stubbornness of mind.  When Ioasaph again
maintained his ease, and loudly declared that he valued nothing
so much as the love of Christ, Theudas came forward and said,
"Wherefore, Ioasaph, dost thou despise our immortal gods, that
thou hast departed from their worship, and, thus incensing thy
father the king, art become hateful to all the people?  Dost thou
not owe thy life to the gods?  And did they not present thee to
the king in answer to his prayer, thus redeeming him from the
bondage of childlessness?"  While this Theudas, waxen old in
wickedness, was putting forth these many vain arguments and
useless propositions, and weaving words about the preaching of
the Gospel, desiring to turn it into mockery, and magnify
idolatry, Ioasaph, the son of the heavenly king, and citizen of
that city which the Lord hath builded and not man, waited a while
and then said unto him,

"Give ear, thou abyss of error, blacker than the darkness that
may be felt, thou seed of Babylon, child of the building of the
tower of Chalane, whereby the world was confounded, foolish and
pitiable dotard, whose sins out-weigh the iniquity of the five
cities that were destroyed by fire and brimstone.  Why wouldest
thou mock at the preaching of salvation, whereby darkness hath
been made light, the wanderers have found the way, they that were
lost in dire captivity have been recalled.  Tell me whether is
better?  To worship God Almighty, with the only-begotten Son and
the Holy Ghost, God increate and immortal, the beginning and
well-spring of good, whose power is beyond compare, and his glory
incomprehensible, before whom stand thousand thousands, and ten
thousand times ten thousand of Angels and heavenly hosts, and
heaven and earth are full of his glow, by whom all things were
brought into being out of nothing, by whom everything is upheld
and sustained and ordered by his providence; or to serve deadly
devils and lifeless idols, whose glory and boast is in adultery
and the corrupting of boys, and other works of iniquity that have
been recorded concerning your gods in the books of your
superstition? Have ye no modesty, ye miserable men, fuel for
unquenchable fire, true copy of the Chaldean race, have ye no
shame to worship dead images, the works of men's hands?  Ye have
carved stone and graven wood and called it God.  Next ye take the
best bullock out of your folds, or (may be) some other of your
fairest beasts, and in your folly make sacrifice to your dead
divinity.  Your sacrifice is of more value than your idol; for
the image was fashioned by man, but the beast was created by God.
How much wiser is the unreasonable beast than thou the reasonable
man?  For it knoweth the hand that feedeth it, but thou knowest
not that God by whom thou wast created out of nothing, by whom
thou livest, and art preserved; and thou callest God that which
thou sawest, but now, smitten by steel, and burnt and moulded in
the fire, and beaten with hammers, which thou hast covered around
with silver and gold, and raised from the ground, and set on
high.  Then, falling upon the earth, thou liest baser than the
base stone, worshipping not God but thine own dead and lifeless
handiwork.  Or rather, the idol hath no right to be called even
dead, for how can that have died which never lived?  Thou
shouldest invent some new name worthy of such madness.  Thy stone
god is broken asunder; thy potsherd god shattered; thy brazen god
rusteth; thy gold or silver god is melted down.  Aye, and thy
gods are sold, some for a paltry, others for a great price.  Not
their divinity but their material giveth them value.  But who
buyeth God?  Who offereth God for sale?  And how is that god that
cannot move called God?  Seest thou not that the god that
standeth cannot sit, and the god that sitteth cannot stand?

"Be ashamed, thou fool, and lay thine hand upon thy mouth, thou
victim of folly, that commendest such things as these.  Estranged
from the truth, thou hast been led astray by false images,
fashioning statues and attaching to the works of thine own hands
the name of God.  O wretched man, return to thy senses, and learn
that thou art older than the god made by thee.  This is downright
madness.  Being a man, thou hast persuaded thyself that thou
canst make God.  How can this be?  Thou makest not God, but the
likeness of a man, or of some beast, sans tongue, sans throat,
sans brains, sans inwards, so that it is the similitude neither
of a man, nor of a beast, but only a thing of no use and sheer
vanity.  Why therefore flatterest thou things that cannot feel?
Why sittest thou at the feet of things that cannot move and help
thee?  But for the skill of the mason, or timber-wright, or
hammer-smith, thou hadst not had a god.  Had there been no
warders nigh at hand, thou hadst lost thy god.  He, to whom many
a populous city of fools prayeth as God to guard it, the same
hath suite of guards at hand to save him from being stolen.  And
if he be of silver or gold, he is carefully guarded; but if of
stone or clay or any other less costly ware, he guardeth himself,
for with you, no doubt, a god of clay is stronger than one of
gold.

"Do we not, then, well to laugh you to scorn, or rather to weep
over you, as men blind and without understanding?  Your deeds are
deeds of madness and not of piety.  Your man of war maketh to
himself an image after the similitude of a warrior, and calleth
it Ares.  And the lecher, making a symbol of his own soul,
deifieth his vice and calleth it Aphrodite.  Another, in honour
of his own love of wine, fashioneth an idol which he calleth
Dionysus.  Likewise lovers of all other evil things set up idols
of their own lusts; for they name their lusts their gods.  And
therefore, before their altars, there are lascivious dances, and
strains of lewd songs and mad revelries.  Who could recount in
order their abominable doings?  Who could endure to defile his
lips by the repeating of their filthy communications?  But these
are manifest to all, even if we hold our peace.  These be thine
objects of worship, O Theudas, who art more senseless than thine
idols.  Before these thou biddest me fall down and worship.  This
verily is the counsel of thine iniquity and senseless mind.  But
thou thyself shalt be like unto them, and all such as put their
trust in them.

"As for me, I will serve my God, and to him will I wholly
sacrifice myself, to God, the Creator and protector of all things
through our Lord Jesus Christ, my hope, by whom we have access
unto the Father of lights, in the Holy Ghost: by whom we have
been redeemed from bitter slavery by his blood.  For if he had
not humbled himself so far as to take the form of a servant, we
had not received the adoption of sons.  But he humbled himself
for our sake, not considering the Godhead a thing to be grasped,
but he remained that which he was, and took on himself that which
he was not, and conversed with men, and mounted the Cross in his
flesh, and was laid in the sepulchre by the space of three days;
he descended into hell, and brought out from thence them whom the
fierce prince of this world held prisoners, sold into bondage by
sin.  What harm then befell him thereby that thou thinkest to
make mock of him?  Seest thou not yonder sun, into how many a
barren and filthy place he darteth his rays?  Upon how many a
stinking corpse doth he cast his eye?  Hath he therefore any
stain of reproach?  Doth he not dry and shrivel up filth and
rottenness, and give light to dark places, himself the while
unharmed and incapable of receiving any defilement?  And what of
fire?  Doth it not take iron, which is black and cold in itself,
and work it into white heat and harden it?  Doth it receive any
of the properties of the iron?  When the iron is smitten and
beaten with hammers is the fire any the worse, or doth it in any
way suffer harm?

"If, then, these created and corruptible things take no hurt from
contact with things commoner than themselves, with what reason
dost thou, O foolish and stony-hearted man, presume to mock at me
for saying that the Son, the Word of God, never departing from
the Father's glory, but remaining the same God, for the salvation
of men hath taken upon him the flesh of man, to the end that he
may make men partakers of his divine and intelligent nature and
may lead our substance out of the nether parts of hell, and
honour it with heavenly glory; to the end that by taking of our
flesh he may ensnare and defeat the ruler of the darkness of this
world, and free our race from his tyranny.  Wherefore, I tell
thee, without suffering he met the suffering of the Cross,
presenting therein his two natures.  For, as man, he was
crucified; but, as God, he darkened the sun, shook the earth, and
raised from their graves many bodies that had fallen asleep.
Again, as man, he died; but, as God, after that he had harried
hell, he rose again.  Wherefore also the prophet cried, Hell is
in bitterness at having met thee below: for it was put to bitter
derision, supposing that it had received a mere man, but finding
God, and being made suddenly empty and led captive.  Therefore,
as God, he rose again, and ascended into heaven, from whence he
was never parted.  And our nature, so worthless and senseless
beyond everything, so graceless and dishonoured, hath he made
higher than all things, and established it upon a throne of
honour, with immortal honour shining round.  What harm therefore
came to God, the Word, that thou blasphemest without a blush?  Go
to!  Better were it to make this confession, and to worship such
a God, who is good and a lover of mankind, who commandeth
righteousness, enjoineth continency, ordaineth chastity, teacheth
mercy, giveth faith, preacheth peace; who is called and is
himself the very truth, the very love, the very goodness.  Him
were it not better to worship than thy gods of many evil
passions, of shameful names and shameful lives?  Woe unto you
that are more stony-hearted than the stones, and more senseless
than the senseless, sons of perdition, inheritors of darkness!
But blessed am I, and all Christian folk, having a good God and a
lover of mankind!  They that serve him, though, for a season in
this life they endure evil, yet shall they reap the immortal
harvest of recompense in the kingdom of unending and divine
felicity."


XXXII.

Theudas said unto him, "Behold, it is evident that our religion
was instituted by many mighty wise men, and interpreters,
marvellous in virtue and learning; and all the kings and rulers
of the earth have received it as good and sure in every point.
But that of the Galileans was preached by some country peasants,
poor and common men, a mere handful, not exceeding twelve in
number.  How then should one prefer the preaching of these few
obscure countrymen to the ordinance of the many that are mighty
and brilliantly wise?  What is the proof that your teachers be
right and the others wrong?"

Again the king's son made answer, "Belike, Theudas, thou art the
ass of the proverb, that heard but heeded not the harp; or rather
the adder that stoppeth her ears, that she may not hear the voice
of the charmers.  Well, therefore, spake the prophet concerning
thee, If the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leopard his
spots, then mayest thou also do good, that hast been taught to do
evil.  Thou fool and blind, why doth not the force of truth bring
thee to thy senses?  The very fact that your foul idols are
commended by many men of marvellous wisdom, and established by
kings, while the Gospel is preached by a few men of no mark,
sheweth the might of our religion and the weakness and deadliness
of your wicked doctrines.  Because your side, despite its having
wise advocates and mighty champions, is dying down, and waxing
weak, whilst our religion, though possessed of no human help,
shineth from afar brighter than the sun, and hath won the fulness
of the world.  If it had been set up by orators and philosophers,
and had had kings for its succour, thou that art evil wouldst
have found occasion to declare that it was wholly of human power.
But now, seeing, as thou dost, that the holy Gospel, though
composed but by common fishermen, and persecuted by every tyrant,
hath after this won the whole world for its sound hath gone out
into all lands, and its words into the ends of the world -- what
canst thou say but that it is a divine and unconquerable power
establishing its own cause for the salvation of mankind?  But
what proof seekest thou, O fool, that thy prophets are liars and
ours true, better than the truths I have told thee?  Except thy
cause had been vain talk and falsehood, it could not, possessing
such human support as it did, have suffered loss and decline. 
For he saith, `I have seen the ungodly in great power, and
exalted like the cedars of Libanus: and I went by and lo, he was
gone: and I sought him but his place could nowhere be found.'

"Concerning you, the defenders of idolatry, were these words
spoken by the prophet.  For a very, very little while and your
place shall not be found: but, like as the smoke vanisheth, and
like as wax melteth in face of the fire, so shall ye fail.  But,
as touching the divine wisdom of the Gospel, thus saith the Lord,
`Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.'  And again the Psalmist saith, `Thou, Lord, in the
beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens
are the work of thy hands.  They shall perish, but thou endurest;
and they all shall wax old as doth a garment, and as a vesture
shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art
the same, and thy years shall not fail!'  And those divine
preachers of the coming of Christ, those wise fishers of the
world, whose nets drew all men from the depths of deceit, whom
thou, in thy vileness and bondage to sin, dost vilify, did by
signs and wonders and manifold powers shine as the sun in the
world, giving sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, motion to
the lame, and life to the dead.  Their shadows alone healed all
the ailments of men.  The devils, whom ye dread as gods, they not
only cast forth from men's bodies, but even drave out of the
world itself by the sign of the cross, whereby they destroyed all
sorcery, and rendered witchcraft powerless.  And these men, by
curing every disease of man by the power of Christ, and renewing
all creation, are rightly admired as preachers of truth by all
men of sound mind.  But what hast thou thyself to say of thy wise
men and orators, whose wisdom God hath made foolish, the
advocates of the devil?  What worthy memorial have they
bequeathed to the world?  Tell me.  And what canst thou tell of
them but unreason and shamefulness, and vain craft that with
glosing words concealeth the mire of their unsavoury worship?

"Moreover such of your poets as have been able to soar a little
above this great madness have said, with more truth, that they,
which are called gods, were men; and because certain of them had
been rulers of regions and cities, and others had done something
of no great account in their lifetime, men were so deceived as to
call them gods.  It standeth on record that the man Seruch was
the first to bring in the use of images.  For it is said that in
the old times he honoured those who had achieved some memorable
deed of courage, friendship, or any other such virtue with
statues and pillars.  But after generations forgat the intention
of their ancestors: and, whereas it was only for remembrance sake
that they had set up statues and pillars to the doers of noble
deeds, now they were, little by little, led astray through the
working of the prince of evil, the devil, and treated as immortal
gods men of like passions and corruptible as themselves and
further devised sacrifices and drink-offerings for them, -- the
devils, thou mayest know, taking up their abode in these images
and diverting to themselves these honours and sacrifices.
Accordingly these devils persuade men, who refuse to have God in
their knowledge, to consider them as gods for two reasons: first,
that they may be glorified by this title (for they are puffed up
with arrogance, and delight to be honoured as gods) next, that
they may drag their poor dupes into the unquenchable fire
prepared for themselves.  Hence they teach men all iniquity and
filthiness, seeing that they have once subjected themselves to
their deceit.  So when men had arrived at this pinnacle of evil,
they, being darkened, set up every man an idol of his own vice
and his own lust, and call it a god.  They were abominable in
their error, more abominable in the absurdity of the objects that
they chose to worship, until the Lord came, and of his tender
mercy redeemed us that trust in him from this wicked and deadly
error, and taught men the true knowledge of God.  For there is no
salvation except in him, and there is none other God, neither in
heaven, nor in earth, except him only, the Maker of all, who
moveth all things by the word of his power: for he saith, `By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made stedfast, and all the
power of them by the breath of his mouth,' and, `All things were
made by him, and without him was not anything made that was
made.'"

When Theudas had heard these sayings, and seen that the word was
full of divine wisdom, like one thunder-struck, he was smitten
dumb.  Now late in time, and with difficulty, came he to
understand his own misery, for the word of salvation had touched
the darkened vision of his heart, and there fell upon him deep
remorse for his past sins.  He renounced the error of his idols,
and ran towards the light of godliness, and from henceforth
departed from his miserable life, and made himself as bitter an
enemy of vile affections and sorceries as he before had pledged
himself their devoted friend, For at this season he stood up in
the midst of the assembly, and cried with a loud voice, saying,
"Verily, O king, the Spirit of God dwelleth in thy son.  Verily,
we are defeated, and have no further apology, and have no
strength to face the words that he hath uttered.  Mighty
therefore, in sooth, is the God of the Christians: mighty is
their faith: mighty are their mysteries."

Then he turned him round toward the king's son and said, "Tell me
now, thou man, whose soul is enlightened, will Christ accept me,
if I forsake my evil deeds and turn to him?"  "Yea," said that
preacher of truth; "Yea, he receiveth thee and all that turn to
him.  And he not only receiveth thee, but he goeth out to meet
thee returning out of the way of iniquity, as though it were a
son returning from a far country.  And he falleth on his neck and
kisseth him, and he strippeth him of the shameful robe of sin,
and putteth on him a cloak of brightest glory, making mystic
gladness for the powers on high, keeping feast for the return of
the lost sheep.  The Lord himself saith, `There is exceeding
great joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth': and again,
`I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.'
And he saith also by the Prophet, `As I live, saith the Lord, I
have no pleasure in the death of the sinner, and the ungodly, but
that he should turn from his way and live.  Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil way.  And why will ye die, O house of Israel?'  For the
wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him in the day that he
turneth from his wickedness, if he do righteousness and walk in
the statutes of life, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
None of his sins which he hath committed shall be remembered
against him.  Because he hath done the decree of righteousness,
he shall live thereby.  And again he crieth by the mouth of
another prophet, `Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil: learn to do
well.  Come now, and let us reason together: though your sins be
as scarlet, I will make them white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, I will make them white as wool.'  Such therefore
being the promises made by God to them that turn to him, tarry
not, O thou man, nor make delay: but draw nigh to Christ, our
loving God, and be enlightened, and thy face shall not be
ashamed.  For as soon as thou goest down into the laver of Holy
Baptism, all the defilement of the old man, and all the burden of
thy many sins, is buried in the water, and passeth into
nothingness, and thou comest up from thence a new man, pure from
all pollution, with no spot or wrinkle of sin upon thee; and
thenceforward it is in thy power ever to keep for thyself the
purity that thou gainest hereby through the tender mercy of our
God."

When Theudas had been thus instructed, he went out immediately
and gat him to his evil den, and took his magical books, and,
because they were the beginnings of all evil, and the store-
houses of devilish mysteries, burnt them with fire.  And he
betook himself to the cave of that same holy man, to whom Nachor
also had resorted, and told him that which had befallen him,
casting dust upon his head, and groaning deeply, and watering
himself with his tears, and telling the aged man the full tale of
his loathly deeds.  He, well skilled in the saving of a soul and
the snatching it from the jaw of the wily serpent, charmed away
his sorrow with words of salvation, and pledged him forgiveness
and promised him a merciful Judge.  Then, after he had instructed
and charged him to fast many days, he cleansed him in Holy
Baptism.  And all the days of his life Theudas heartily repented
him of his misdeeds, with tears and sighs seeking the favour of
God.


XXXIII.

As for the king, when things fortuned thus, he was completely
bewildered, and plainly showed his sore vexation and tumult of
soul.  So again he called all his senators together, and
considered what means were still his to deal with his son.  Many
men put forward many counsels, but that Araches, of whom we have
spoken, the most famous in his office, and first of his
councillors, spake unto the king, saying, "What was there to be
done with thy son, O king, that we have not done, to induce him
to follow our doctrines and serve our gods?  But, as I perceive,
we aim at the impossible.  By nature, or, it may be, by chance,
he is contentious and implacable.  Now, if it be thy purpose to
deliver him to torture and punishment, thou shalt do contrary to
nature, and be no more called a father; and thou shalt lose thy
son, willing, as he is, to lay down his life for Christ his sake.
This, then, alone remaineth: to divide thy kingdom with him, and
entrust him with the dominion of that part which falleth to his
lot; and if the course of events, and the care of the business of
life, draw him to embrace our aim and way, then the thing shall
be according to our purpose; for habits, firmly established in
the soul, are difficult to obliterate, and yield quicker to
persuasion than to violence.  But if he shall continue in the
Christian religion, yet shall it be some solace to time in thy
distress, that thou hast not lost thy son."  Thus spake Araches,
and all bare witness that they welcomed his proposal.  Therefore
also the king agreed that this matter should thus be settled.  So
at day-break he called his son, and said unto him, "This is now
my latest word with thee, my son.  Unless thou be obedient
thereto, and in this way heal my heart, know thou well, that I
shall no longer spare thee."  When his son enquired the meaning
of his word, he said, "Since, after all my labours, I find thee
in all points unyielding to the persuasion of my words, come now;
I will divide with thee my kingdom, and make thee king over the
half-part thereof; and thou shalt be free, from now, to go
whatsoever way thou wilt without fear."  He, though his saintly
soul perceived that the king was casting yet another snare to
trip his purpose, resolved to obey, in order that he might escape
his hands, and take the journey that he desired.  So he answered
and said, "I have indeed been longing to go in quest of that man
of God that pointed out to me the way of salvation, and, bidding
farewell to everything, to pass the rest of my life in his
company.  But, father, since thou sufferest me not to fulfil my
heart's desire, I will obey thee herein: for where there is no
clear danger of perdition and estrangement from God, it is right
to obey one's father."

The king was filled with exceeding great joy, and divided all the
country under his sovranty into two parts, and appointed his son
king, and adorned him with the diadem, and arrayed him in all the
splendour of kingship, and sent him forth with a magnificent
body-guard into the kingdom set apart for him.  And he bade his
rulers and governors and satraps, every one that would, to depart
together with his son the king.  And he set apart a mighty and
populous city for his kingdom, and gave him everything that
befitted a king.  Thus then did Ioasaph receive the power of
kingship; and when he had reached that city, where royal state
had been prepared for him, on every tower of his city he set up
the sign of his Lord's passion, the venerable Cross of Christ.
And in person he besieged the idolatrous temples and altars, and
razed them to the ground, and uncovered their foundations,
leaving no trace of their ungodliness.

And in the middle of the city he upreared for Christ, his Lord, a
temple mighty and passing fair, and he bade the people there
often to resort thither, and offer their worship to God by the
veneration of the Cross, himself standing in the midst in the
presence of all, and earnestly giving himself unto prayer.  And
as many as were under his hand he admonished and exhorted, and
did everything to tear them away from superstitious error, and to
unite them to Christ; and he pointed out the deceits of idolatry,
and proclaimed the preaching of the Gospel, and recounted the
things concerning the condescension of God, the Word, and
preached the marvels of his coming, and made known his sufferings
on the Cross whereby we were saved, and the power of his
Resurrection, and his Ascension into heaven.  Moreover he
declared the terrible day of his dreadful second coming, and the
bliss laid up for the righteous, and the punishments awaiting
sinners.  All these truths he expounded with kindly mien and
gentle words.  For he was not minded to be reverenced and feared
for the grandeur of his power and kingly magnificence, but rather
for his humility and meekness.  Hereby also he more easily drew
all men unto himself, being verily marvellous in his acts, and
equitable and modest in spirit.  Wherefore his power, being
strongly reinforced by his gentleness and equity, caused all men
to yield themselves to his words.

What wonder, then, if, in a little while, all his subjects, in
city or country, were so well initiated into his inspired
teachings, that they renounced the errors of their many gods, and
broke away from idolatrous drink-offerings and abominations, and
were joined to the true faith and were created anew by his
doctrine, and added to the household of Christ?  And all, who for
fear of Ioasaph's father had been shut up in mountains and dens,
priests and monks, and some few bishops, came forth from their
hiding places and resorted to him gladly.  He himself would meet
and receive with honour those who had fallen upon such
tribulation and distress, for Christ his sake, and bring them to
his own palace, washing their feet, and cleansing their matted
hair, and ministering to them in every way.  Then he dedicated
his newly built church, and therein appointed for chief-priest
one of the bishops that had suffered much, and had lost his own
see, on account of his faith in Christ, an holy man, and learned
in the canons of the Church, whose heart was fulfilled with
heavenly zeal.  And forthwith, when he had made ready a rude
font, he bade baptize them that were turning to Christ.  And so
they were baptized, first the rulers and the men in authority;
next, the soldiers on service and the rest of the multitude.  And
they that were baptized not only received health in their souls,
but indeed as many as were afflicted with bodily ailments and
imperfections cast off all their trouble, and came up from the
holy font pure in soul, and sound in body, reaping an harvest of
health for soul and body alike.

Wherefore also from all quarters multitudes flocked to King
Ioasaph, desirous to be instructed by him in godliness.  And all
idolatrous images were utterly demolished, and all their wealth
and temple treasure was taken from them, and in their stead holy
courts were built for God.  For these King Ioasaph dedicated the
riches and costly vestments and treasures of the idolatrous
temples, thereby making this worthless and superfluous material
fit for service, and profitable.  And the foul fiends that dwelt
in their altars and temples were rigorously chased away and put
to flight; and these, in the hearing of many, loudly lamented the
misfortune that had overtaken them.  And all the region round
about was freed from their dark deceit, and illuminated with the
light of the blameless Christian faith.

And, soothly, the king was a good example to all; and he inflamed
and kindled the hearts of many to be of the same mind with
himself.  For such is the nature of authority.  Its subjects
alway conform to its likeness, and are wont to love the same
objects, and to practise the pursuits which they perceive to be
pleasing to their governor.  Hence, God helping, religion grew
and increased amongst them.  The king was wholly dependent on the
commandments of Christ and on his love, being a steward of the
word of grace, and pilot to the souls of many, bringing them to
safe anchorage in the haven of God.  For he knew that this, afore
all things, is the work of a king, to teach men to fear God and
keep righteousness.  Thus did he, training himself to be king
over his own passions, and, like a good pilot, keeping a firm
hold of the helm of good government for his subjects.  For this
is the end of good kingship, to be king and lord over pleasure --
which end also he achieved.  Of the nobility of his ancestors, or
the royal splendour around him, he was in no wise proud, knowing
that we all have one common forefather, made of clay, and that,
whether rich or poor, we are all of the same moulding.  He ever
abased his soul in deepest humility, and thought on the
blessedness of the world to come, and considered himself a
stranger and pilgrim in this world, but realised that that was
his real treasure which he should win after his departure hence.
Now, since all went well with him, and since he had delivered all
the people from their ancient and ancestral error, and made them
servants of him who redeemed us from evil servitude by his own
precious blood, he turned his thoughts to his next task, the
virtue of almsgiving.  Temperance and righteousness he had
already attained; he wore on his brow the crown of temperance,
and wrapped about him the purple of righteousness.  He called to
mind the uncertainty of earthly riches, how they resemble the
running of river waters.  Therefore made he haste to lay up his
treasure where neither `moth nor rust doth corrupt and where
thieves do not break through nor steal.'  So he began to
distribute all his money to the poor, sparing naught thereof.  He
knew that the possessor of great authority is bound to imitate
the giver of that authority, according to his ability; and herein
he shall best imitate God, if he hold nothing in higher honour
than mercy.  Before all gold and precious stone he stored up for
himself the treasure of almsgiving; treasure, which here
gladdeneth the heart by the hope of enjoyment to come, and there
delighteth it with the taste of the hoped-for bliss.  After this
he searched the prisons, and sought out the captives in mines, or
debtors in the grip of their creditors; and by generous largesses
to all he proved a father to all, orphans, and widows, and
beggars, a loving and good father, for he deemed that by
bestowing blessings on these he won a blessing for himself. 
Being endowed with spiritual riches, and, in sooth, a perfect
king, he gave liberally to all that were in need, for he hoped to
receive infinitely more, when the time should come for the
recompense of his works.

Now, in little while, the fame of Ioasaph was blazoned abroad;
and led, as it were by the scent of sweet ointment, all men
flocked to him daily, casting off their poverty of soul and body:
and his name was on every man's lips.  It was not fear and
oppression that drew the people to him, but desire and heart-felt
love, which by God's blessing and the king's fair life had been
planted in their hearts.

Then, too, did his father's subjects begin to come to him, and,
laying aside all error, received the Gospel of truth.  And the
house of Ioasaph grew and waxed strong, but the house of Abenner
waned and grew weak, even as the Book of the Kings declareth
concerning David and Saul.


XXXIV.

When king Abenner saw this, though late and loth, he came to his
senses, and renounced his false gods with all their impotence and
vain deceit.  Again he called an assembly of his chief
counsellors, and brought to light the thoughts of his heart.  As
they confirmed his words (for the day-spring from on high had
visited them, the Saviour who had heard the prayer of his servant
Ioasaph), it pleased the king to signify the same to his son.
Therefore on the morrow he wrote a letter to Ioasaph, running
thus:

"King Abenner to his well-beloved son Ioasaph, greeting.  Dearest
son, many thoughts have been stealing into my soul, and rule it
with a rod of iron.  I see our state vanishing, like as smoke
vanisheth, but thy religion shining brighter than the sun; and I
have come to my senses, and know that the words which thou hast
ever spoken unto me are true, and that a thick cloud of sin and
wickedness did then cover us, so that we were unable to discern
the truth, and recognize the Creator of all.  Nay, but we shut
our eyes, and would not behold the light which thou didst
enkindle more brightly for us.  Much evil did we do unto thee,
and many of the Christians, alas! did we destroy; who,
strengthened by the power that aided them, finally triumphed over
our cruelty.  But now we have removed that dense mist from our
eyes, and see some small ray of truth, and there cometh on us
repentance of our misdeeds.  But a new cloud of despair would
overshadow it; despair at the multitude of mine offences, because
I am now abominable and unacceptable to Christ, being a rebel and
a foeman unto him.  What, then, sayest thou, dearest son, hereto?
Make known to me thine answer, and teach me that am thy father
what I should do, and lead me to the knowledge of my true weal."

When Ioasaph had received this letter, and read the words
therein, his soul was filled with mingled joy and amazement.
Forthwith he entered his closet, and falling on his face before
the image of his Master, watered the ground with his tears,
giving thanks to his Lord and confessing him, and tuning lips of
exultation to sing an hymn of praise, saying:

"I will magnify thee, O God, my King, and I will praise thy name
for ever and ever.  Great art thou O Lord, and marvellous-worthy
to be praised, and of thy greatness there is no end.  Who can
express thy noble acts, or show forth all thy praise, who hast
turned the hard rock into a standing water and the flint-stone
into a springing well?  For behold this my father's flinty and
more than granite heart is at thy will melted as wax; because
thou art able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
I thank thee, Lord, thou lover of men, and God of pity, that thou
hast been, and art, long-suffering towards our offences, and hast
suffered us until now to go unpunished.  Long have we deserved to
be cast away from thy face, and made a by-word on earth, as were
the sinful inhabiters of the five cities, consumed with fire and
brimstone; but thy marvellous long-suffering hath dealt
graciously with us.  I give thanks unto thee, vile and unworthy
though I be, and insufficient of myself to glorify thy greatness.
And, by thine infinite compassions, I pray thee, Lord Jesu
Christ, Son and Word of the invisible Father, who madest all
things by thy word, and sustainest them by thy will; who hast
delivered us thine unworthy servants from the bondage of the
arch-fiend our foe: thou that wast stretched upon the Rood, and
didst bind the strong man, and award everlasting freedom to them
that lay bound in his fetters: do thou now also stretch forth
thine invisible and almighty hand, and, at the last, free thy
servant my father from that cruel bondage of the devil.  Show him
full clearly that thou art the ever living true God, and only
King, eternal and immortal.  Behold, O Lord, with favourable and
kindly eye, the contrition of my heart; and, according to thine
unerring promise, be with me that acknowledge and confess thee
the Maker and protector of all creation.  Let there be a well of
water within me springing up, and let utterance be given unto me
that I may open my mouth, and a mind well fixed in thee, the
chief corner-stone, that I, thine unprofitable servant, may be
enabled to preach to my father, as is right, the mystery of thine
Incarnation, and by thy power deliver him from the vain deceit of
wicked devils, and bring him unto thee his God and Lord, who
willest not the death of us sinners, but waitest for us to return
and repent, because thou art glorified for ever and ever.  Amen."

When he had thus prayed, and received fulness of assurance that
he should not miscarry in his desire, he took courage by the
tender mercy of Christ, and arose thence, with his royal body-
guard, and arrived at his father's palace.  When it was told unto
his father, "Thy son is come," he went forth straightway for to
meet him, and embraced and kissed him lovingly, and made
exceeding great joy, and held a general feast in honour of the
coming of his son.  And afterward, they two were closeted
together.

But how tell of all that the son spake with his father, and of
all the wisdom of his speech?  And what was that speech but the
words put into his mouth by the Holy Ghost, by whom the fishermen
enclosed the whole world in their nets for Christ and the
unlearned are found wiser than the wise.  This Holy Spirit's
grace and wisdom taught Ioasaph to speak with the king his
father, enlightening him with the light of knowledge.  Before now
he had bestowed much labour to drag his father from superstitious
error, leaving nothing unsaid and nothing undone to win him over,
but he seemed to be twanging on a broken string, and speaking to
deaf ears.  But when the Lord looked upon the lowliness of his
servant Ioasaph, and, in answer to his prayer, opened the closed
gates of his father's heart (for it is said, he will fulfil the
desire of them that fear him, and will hear their cry), then the
king easily understood the things that were spoken; so that, when
a convenient season came, through the grace of Christ, this son
triumphed over those evil spirits that had lorded it over the
soul of his father, and clean freed him from their error, and
made the word of salvation clearly known unto him, and joined him
to the living God on high.

Ioasaph took up his tale from the beginning, and expounded to his
father great and marvellous things which he knew not, which he
had never heard with the ears of his heart; and he told him many
weighty sayings concerning God, and showed him righteousness: to
wit that there is no other God in heaven above, nor in the earth
beneath, except the one God, revealed in the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost.  And he made known unto him many mysteries of
divine knowledge; and amongst them he told him the history of
creation, visible and invisible, how the Creator brought every
thing out of nothing, and how he formed man after his own image
and likeness and endowed him with power of free-will, and gave
him Paradise to his enjoyment, charging him only to abstain from
one thing, the tree of knowledge; and how, when man had broken
his commandment, he banished him out of Paradise; and how man,
fallen from union with God, stumbled into these manifold errors,
becoming the slave of sins, and subject unto death through the
tyranny of the devil, who, having once taken men captive, hath
made them utterly forget their Lord and God, and hath persuaded
them to serve him instead, by the abominable worshipping of
idols.  So our Maker, moved with compassion, through the good-
will of the Father, and the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, was
pleased, for our sakes, to be born of an holy Virgin, Mary, the
mother of God, and he, that cannot suffer, was acquainted with
sufferings.  On the third day he rose again from the dead, and
redeemed us from our first penalty, and restored to us our first
glory.  When he ascended into the heavens, from whence he had
descended, he raised us up together with him; and thence, we
believe that he shall come again, to raise up his own handiwork;
and he will recompense every man according to his works. 
Moreover Ioasaph instructed his father concerning the kingdom of
heaven that awaiteth them that are worthy thereof, and the joy
unspeakable.  Thereto he added the torment in store for the
wicked, the unquenchable fire, the outer darkness, the undying
worm and whatsoever other punishment the servants of sin have
laid up in store for themselves.

All these things set he forth in many words, which bore witness
that the grace of the Spirit was dwelling richly within him. 
Then he described the uncharted sea of the love of God towards
mankind, and how he is ready to accept the repentance of them
that turn to him; and how there is no sin too great for his
tender mercy, if we will but repent.  And when he had confirmed
these truths by many an example, and testimony of Scripture, he
made an end of speaking.


XXXV.

King Abenner was pricked to the heart by this inspired wisdom and
with loud voice and fervent heart confessed Christ his Saviour,
and forthwith forsook all superstitious error.  He venerated the
sign of the life-giving Cross in the sight of all and, in the
hearing of all, proclaimed our Lord Jesus Christ to be God.  By
telling in full the tale of his former ungodliness, and of his
own cruelty and blood-thirstiness toward the Christians, he
proved himself a great power for religion.  So here was proved in
fact, the saying of Paul; that where sin abounded, there did
grace much more abound.

While then the learned Ioasaph was speaking of God, and of piety
towards him, to the dukes and satraps and all the people there
assembled, and was as it were with a tongue of fire piping unto
them a goodly ode, the grace of the Holy Spirit descended upon
them, and moved them to give glory to God, so that all the
multitude cried aloud with one voice, "Great is the God of the
Christians, and there is none other God but our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, together with the Father and Holy Ghost, is
glorified."

Waxen full of heavenly zeal, King Abenner made a sturdy assault
on the idols, wrought of silver and gold, that were within his
palace, and tore them down to the ground.  Then he brake them
into small pieces, and distributed them to the poor, thus making
that which had been useless useful.  Furthermore he and his son
besieged the idols' temples and altars and levelled them even to
the ground, and in their stead, and to the honour of God, built
holy courts.  And not only in the city but throughout all the
country also, thus did they in their zeal.  And the evil spirits
that dwelt in those altars were driven forth with shrieks, and
cried out in terror at the invincible power of our God.  And all
the region round about, and the greater part of the neighbour
nations, were led, as by the hand, to the true Faith.  Then came
the holy Bishop, of whom we have spoken, and King Abenner was
instructed, and made perfect with Holy Baptism, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  And Ioasaph
received him as he came up from the Holy Font, in this strange
way appearing as the begetter of his own father, and proving the
spiritual father to him that begat him in the flesh: for he was
the son of his heavenly Father, and verily divine fruit of that
divine Branch, which saith, "I am the vine, ye are the branches."

Thus King Abenner, being born again of water and of the spirit,
rejoiced with joy unspeakable, and with him all the city and the
region round about received Holy Baptism, and they that were
before darkness now became children of light.  And every disease,
and every assault of evil spirits was driven far from the
believers, and all were sane and sound in body and in soul.  And
many other miracles were wrought for the confirmation of the
Faith.  Churches too were built, and the bishops, that had been
hiding for fear, discovered themselves, and received again their
own churches, whilst others were chosen from the priests and
monks, to shepherd the flock of Christ.  But King Abenner, having
thus forsaken his former disgraceful life, and repented of his
evil deeds, handed over to his son the rule of all his kingdom.
He himself dwelt in solitude, continually casting dust on his
head, and groaning for very heaviness, and watering his face with
his tears, being alone, communing with him who is everywhere
present and imploring him to forgive his sins.  And he abased
himself to such a depth of contrition and humility, that he
refused to name the name of God with his own lips, and was scarce
brought by his son's admonitions to make so bold.  Thus the king
passed through the good change and entered the road that leadeth
to virtue, so that his righteousness now surpassed his former
sins of ignorance.  For four years did he live thus in repentance
and tears and virtuous acts, and then fell into the sickness
whereof he died.  But when the end drew nigh, he began to fear
and to be dismayed, calling to remembrance the evil that he had
wrought.  But with comfortable words Ioasaph sought to ease the
distress that had fallen on him, saying, "Why art thou so full of
heaviness, O my father, and wily art thou so disquieted within
time?  Set thy hope on God, and give him thanks, who is the hope
of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain in the sea
afar, who crieth by the mouth of his prophet, `Wash you, make you
clean: put away from before mine eyes the wickedness of your
souls; learn to do well'; and `Though your sins be as scarlet, I
will make them white as snow; though they be red like crimson, I
will make them as wool.'  Fear not, therefore, O my father,
neither be of doubtful mind: for the sins of them that turn to
God prevail not against his infinite goodness.  For these,
however many, are subject to measure and number: but measure and
number cannot limit his goodness.  It is impossible then for that
which is subject to measure to exceed the unmeasurable."

With such comfortable words did Ioasaph cheer his soul, and bring
him to a good courage.  Then his father stretched out his hands,
and gave him thanks and prayed for him, blessing the day whereon
Ioasaph was born, and said "Dearest child, yet not child of me,
but of mine heavenly Father, with what gratitude can I repay
thee?  With what words of blessings may I bless thee?  What
thanks shall I offer God for thee?  I was lost, and was found
through thee: I was dead in sin and am alive again: an enemy, and
rebel against God, and am reconciled with him.  What reward
therefore shall I give thee for all these benefits?  God is he
that shall make the due recompense."  Thus saying, he pressed
many kisses on his beloved son; then, when he had prayed, and
said, "Into thy hands, O God, thou lover of men, do I commit my
spirit," he committed his soul unto the Lord in penitence and
peace.

Now, when Ioasaph had honoured with his tears his father that was
dead, and had reverently cared for his body, he buried him in a
sepulchre wherein devout men lay; not indeed clad in royal
raiment, but robed in the garment of penitence.  Standing on the
sepulchre, and lifting up his hands to heaven, the tears
streaming in floods from his eyes, he cried aloud unto God
saying,

"O God, I thank thee, King of glory, alone mighty and immortal,
that thou hast not despised my petition, and hast not held thy
peace at my tears, but hast been pleased to turn this thy
servant, my father, from the way of wickedness, and to draw him
to thyself, the Saviour of all, departing him from the
deceitfulness of idolatry, and granting him to acknowledge thee,
who art the very God and lover of souls.  And now, O my Lord and
God, whose ocean of goodness is uncharted, set him in that place
where much grass is, in a place of refreshment, where shineth the
light of thy countenance.  Remember not his old offences; but,
according to the multitude of thy mercies, blot out the hand-
writing of his sins, and destroy the tablets of his debts, and
set him at peace with thy Saints whom he slew with fire and
sword.  Charge them not to be bitter against him.  For all things
are possible with thee, the Lord of all, save only to withhold
pity from them that turn not unto thee; this is impossible.  For
thy pity is poured out upon all men, and thou savest them that
call upon thee, Lord Jesu Christ, because glory becometh thee for
ever and ever.  Amen."

Such were the prayers and intercessions that he made unto God, by
the space of seven full days, never leaving the grave, and never
thinking of meat or drink, and taking no refreshment of sleep:
but he watered the ground with his tears, and continued praying
and moaning unceasingly.  But, on the eighth day, he went back to
his palace and distributed amongst the poor all his wealth and
riches, so that not one person was left in want.


XXXVI.

In a few days, after he had ended this ministry, and emptied all
his coffers, in order that the burden of his money might not
hinder him from entering in at the narrow gate, on the fortieth
day after his father's decease, and in remembrance of him, he
called together all his officers, and those who wore soldiers'
attire, and of the citizens not a few.  Sitting in the front,
according to custom, in the audience of all he said, "Lo, as ye
see, Abenner, my father the king, hath died like any beggar.
Neither wealth nor kingly glory, nor I his loving son, nor any of
his kith and kindred, has availed to help him, or to save him
from the sentence without reprieve.  But he is gone to yonder
judgement seat, to give account of his life in this world,
carrying with him no advocate whatsoever, except his deeds, good
or bad.  And the same law is ordained by nature for every man
born of woman, and there is no escape.  Now, therefore, hearken
unto me, friends and brethren, people and holy heritage of the
Lord, whom Christ our God hath purchased with his own precious
blood, and delivered from the ancient error, and bondage of the
adversary.  Ye yourselves know my manner of life among you; that
ever since I knew Christ, and was counted worthy to become his
servant, I have hated all things, and loved him only, and how
this was my desire, to escape from the tempest and vain tumult of
the world, and commune alone with him, and in undisturbed peace
of soul serve my God and Master.  But my father's opposition held
me back, and the command that biddeth us to honour our fathers.
So, by the grace and help of God, I have not laboured in vain,
nor spent these days for naught, I have brought my father nigh to
Christ, and have taught you all to know the one true God, the
Lord of all; and yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me, which rescued me also from superstitious error, and from the
worship of idols, and freed you, O my people, from cruel
captivity.  So now it is high time to fulfil the service that I
promised to God; high time to depart thitherward, where he
himself shall lead me, where I may perform my vows which I made
unto him.  Now, therefore, look you out a man whom ye will, to be
your leader and king; for by this time ye have been conformed to
the will of the Lord, and of his commandments nothing hath been
hidden from you.  Walk ye therein; turn not aside, neither to the
right hand, nor to the left, and the God of peace be with you
all!"

When all that company and the common people heard thereof, anon
there arose a clamour, an uproar, and a mighty cry and confusion,
all weeping like orphans and bewailing their loss.  Lamenting
bitterly, they protested with oaths and with tears, that they
would never let him go, but would restrain him and not suffer in
any wise his departure.  While the common people, and they in
authority, were thus crying aloud, the king broke in, and
beckoned with his hand to the multitude and charged them to keep
silence.  He declared that he gave in to their instancy, and
dismissed them still grieving, and bearing on their cheeks the
signs of sorrow.  And Ioasaph did thus.  There was one of the
senators first in favour with Ioasaph, a man honoured for his
godliness and dignity, Barachias by name, who, as hath been
already told, when Nachor, feigning to be Barlaam, was disputing
with the philosophers, alone was ready to stand by Nachor and
fight for him, for his heart was fired with heavenly love.  Him
the king took apart, and spake gently with him, and earnestly
besought him to receive the kingdom, and, in the fear of God, to
shepherd his people; in order that he himself might take the
journey that he desired.

But Barachias would put aside and reject his offer, saying, "O
king, how wrongful is thy judgement, and thy word contrary to
divine command!  If thou hast learned to love thy neighbour as
thyself, with what right art thou eager to shift the burden off
thy back and lay it upon mine?  If it be good to be king, keep
the good to thy self: but, if it be a stone of stumbling and rock
of offence to thy soul, why put it in my pathway and seek to trip
me up?"  When Ioasaph perceived that he spake thus, and that his
purpose was fixed, he ceased from communing with him.  And now,
at about the dead of night, he wrote his people a letter, full of
much wisdom, expounding to them all godliness; telling them what
they should think concerning God, what life, what hymns and what
thanksgiving they should offer unto him.  Next, he charged them
to receive none other than Barachias to be ruler of the kingdom.
Then left he in his bed-chamber the roll containing his letter,
and, unobserved of all, went forth from his palace.  But he might
not win through undetected, for, early on the morrow, the
tidings, that he was departed, anon made commotion and mourning
among the people, and, in much haste, forth went every man for to
seek him; they being minded by all means to cut off his flight.
And their zeal was not spent in vain; for, when they had occupied
all the high-ways, and encompassed all the mountains, and
surrounded the pathless ravines, they discovered him in a water-
course, his hands uplifted to heaven, saying the prayer proper of
the Sixth Hour.

When they beheld him, they surrounded him, and besought him with
team, upbraiding him for departing from them. "But," said he,
"why labour ye in vain? No longer hope to have me to your king."
Yet gave he way to their much opposition, and turned again to
his palace. And, when he had assembled all the folk, he signified
his will. Then with oath he confirmed his word, that he would
dwell with them not one day more. "For," said he, "I have
fulfilled my ministry toward you, and have omitted naught,
neither have I kept back anything that was profitable unto you,
in failing to show or teach you, testifying to all the faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ, and pointing out the paths of repentance.
And now behold I go the road that I have long time desired, and
all ye shall see m"y face no more. Wherefore I take you to record
this day, as saith the holy Apostle, that I am pure from the
blood of you all, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God."

When they heard this, and perceived the steadfastness of his
purpose, that nothing could hinder him from his resolve, they
wept like orphans over their bereavement, but could in no wise
over-persuade him.  Then did the king take that Barachias, of
whom we have already spoken, saying, "This is he, brethren, whom
I appoint to be your king."  And though Barachias stoutly
resisted, yet he established him, unwilling and reluctant, upon
the royal throne, and placed the diadem on his head, and gave the
kingly ring into his hand.  Then he stood facing the cast and
made prayer for King Barachias, that his faith toward God might
be preserved unwavering, and that he might keep without faltering
the path of Christ's commandments.  Therewith he prayed for the
clergy and all the flock, asking of God succour for them and
salvation, and all that might fitly be asked for their welfare.

Thus he prayed, and then turning said unto Barachias, "Behold,
brother, I charge thee, as the Apostle once adjured his people,
`Take heed unto thyself, and to all the flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost hath made thee king, to feed the Lord's people, whom
he hath purchased with his own blood.'  And even as thou wast
before me in the knowledge of God, and didst serve him with a
pure conscience, so now also show the more zeal in pleasing him.
For, as thou hast received of God a mighty sovereignty, thou
owest him the greater repayment.  Render therefore to thy
Benefactor the debt of thanksgiving, by the keeping of his holy
commandments and by turning aside from every path whose end is
destruction.  For it is with kingdoms as with ships.  If one of
the sailors blunder it bringeth but small damage to the crew. 
But if the steersman err, he causeth the whole ship to perish.
Even so it is with sovranty: if a subject err, he harmeth himself
more than the state.  But if the king err, he causeth injury to
the whole realm.  Therefore, as one that shall render strict
account, if thou neglect aught of thy duty, guard thyself with
all diligence in that which is good.  Hate all pleasure that
draweth into sin: for, saith the Apostle, `Follow peace with all
men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.'
Consider the wheel of men's affairs, how it runneth round and
round, turning and whirling them now up, now down: and amid all
its sudden changes, keep thou unchanged a pious mind.  To change
with every change of affairs betokeneth an unstable heart.  But
be thou steadfast, wholly established upon that which is good. 
Be not lifted and vainly puffed up because of temporal honour;
but, with purified reason, understand the nothingness of thine
own nature, and the span-length and swift flight of life here,
and death the yoke-fellow of the flesh.  If thou consider these
things, thou shalt not be cast into the pit of arrogance, but
shalt fear God, the true and heavenly King, and verily thou shalt
be blessed.  For he saith, `Blessed are all they that fear the
Lord, and walk in his ways,' and `Blessed is the man that feareth
the Lord: he shall have great delight in his commandments.'  And
which commandments above all shouldest thou observe?  `Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy,' and `Be ye
merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful.'  For the
fulfilment of this commandment, above all, is required of them
that are in high authority.  And, soothly, the holder of great
authority ought to imitate the giver of that authority to the
best of his ability.  And herein shall he best imitate God, by
considering that nothing is to be preferred before showing mercy.
Nay, further, nothing so surely draweth the subject to loyalty
toward his Sovereign as the grace of charity bestowed on such as
need it.  For the service that cometh from fear is flattery in
disguise, with the pretence of respect cozening them that pay
heed to it; and the unwilling subject rebelleth when he findeth
occasion.  Whereas he that is held by the ties of loyalty is
steadfast in his obedience to the ruling power.  Wherefore be
thou easy of access to all and open thine ears unto the poor,
that thou mayest find the ear of God open unto thee.  For as we
are to our fellow-servants, such shall we find our Master to
us-ward.  And, like as we do hear others, so shall we be heard
ourselves: and, as we see, so shall we be seen by the divine all-
seeing eye.  Therefore pay we first mercy for mercy, that we may
obtain like for like.

"But hear yet another commandment, the fellow of the former;
`Forgive, and it shall be forgiven unto you;' and `If ye forgive
not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly father
forgive you your trespasses.'  Wherefore bear no malice against
them that offend against thee; but, when thou askest forgiveness
of thy sins, forgive thyself also them that injure thee, because
forgiveness is repaid by forgiveness, and by making peace with
our fellow-servants we are ourselves delivered from the wrath of
our Master.  Again, a lack of compassion towards them that
trespass against us maketh our own trespasses unpardonable, even
as thou hast heard what befell the man that owed ten thousand
talents, how, through his want of pity on his fellow-servant, he
was again required to pay all that mighty debt.  So we must take
good heed lest a like fate betide us.  But let us forgive every
debt, and cast all anger out of our hearts, in order that our
many debts, too, may be forgiven.  Beside this, and before all
things, keep thou that good thing which is committed to thy
trust, the holy Word of faith wherein thou hast been taught and
instructed.  And let no tare of heresy grow up amongst you, but
preserve the heavenly seed pure and sincere, that it may yield a
manifold harvest to the master, when he cometh to demand account
of our lives, and to reward us according to our deeds, when the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun, but darkness and
everlasting shame shall cover the sinners.  And now, brethren, I
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified."

And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, as it is written,
and prayed again in tears.  And he turned him round, and kissed
Barachias, whom he had chosen to their king, and all the
officers.  Then came a scene fit, belike, to make one weep.  They
all crowded around him, as though his presence meant life to
them, and his departure would reave them of their very souls; and
what piteous pleading, what extravagance of grief did they omit?
They kissed him; they hung about him; they were beside themselves
for anguish of heart. "Wo is us," cried they, "for this grievous
calamity!"  They called him, Master, Father, Saviour, Benefactor.
"Through thine," said they, "we learned to know God, and were
redeemed from error, and found rest from every ill.  What
remaineth us after thou art gone?  What evils shall not befall
us?"  Thus saying, they smote upon their breasts, and bewailed
the misfortune that had overtaken them.  But he with words of
comfort hushed their sobs, and promised to be with them still in
the spirit though he might no longer abide with them in the body.
And when he had thus spoken, in the sight of all he went forth
from the palace.  And immediately all the people followed him.
They despaired of his return; they ran from the city, as from a
sight that they could no longer endure.  But when they were
outside the city, Ioasaph addressed them with sharp words, and
chode with them harshly; and so they were parted from him, and
unwillingly went home, often turning round to look on him, and
stumbling on their road.  And some of the hotter spirits also
followed afar off weeping, until the shades of night parted them
one from another.


XXXVII.

Thus this noble man went forth from his palace rejoicing, as when
after long exile a man returneth with joy to his own country.
Outwardly he wore the robes that he was wont to wear, but beneath
was the hair-shirt which Barlaam had given him.  That night he
halted at a poor man's cabin, and stripped himself of his outer
raiment, which, as his last alms, he bestowed upon his poor host,
and thus by the prayers of that poor man, as well as of so many
others, he made God his ally, and put on his grace and help as a
garment of salvation; and, clad in a coat of gladness, thus went
he off to his hermit-life, carrying with him neither bread, nor
water, nor any necessary food, with no garment upon him save the
aforesaid rough shirt.  For his heart was wounded with a
marvellous longing and divine love for Christ the immortal King;
he was beside himself with longing, mad for God, possessed by
love of him; "For love," he saith, "is strong as fire."  So
drunken was he with this heavenly love, so parched with thirst,
according to him that saith, "Like as the hart desireth the
water-brooks, so longeth my soul after time, O God.  My soul is
athirst for the mighty and living God"; or, as the soul that is
sick of love crieth in the Song of Songs, "Thou hast ravished us,
ravished us with the desire of thee"; and, "Let me see thy
countenance, and let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is a sweet
voice, and thy countenance is comely."

It was the desire for this unspeakable comeliness of Christ that
fired the hearts of the Apostolic Quire and of the Martyr folk to
despise the things that are seen, and all this temporal life, and
the rather to choose ten thousand forms of death and torture,
being enamoured of his heavenly beauty, and bearing in mind the
charm that the divine Word used for to win our love.  Such was
the fire that was kindled in the soul of this fair youth also,
noble in body, but most noble and kingly in soul, that led him to
despise all earthly things alike, to trample on all bodily
pleasures, and to contemn riches and glory and the praise of men,
to lay aside diadem and purple, as of less worth than cobwebs,
and to surrender himself to all the hard and irksome toils of the
ascetic life, crying, "O my Christ, my soul is fixed upon thee,
and thy right hand hath upholden me."

Thus, without looking back, he passed into the depth of the
desert; and, laying aside, like a heavy burden and clog, the
stress of transitory things, he rejoiced in the Spirit, and
looked steadfastly on Christ, whom he longed for, and cried aloud
to him, as though he were there present to hear his voice,
saying, "Lord, let mine eyes never again see the good things of
this present world.  Never, from this moment, let my soul be
excited by these present vanities, but fill mine eyes with
spiritual tears; direct my goings in thy way, and show me thy
servant Barlaam.  Show me him that was the means of my salvation,
that I may learn of him the exact rule of this lonely and austere
life, and may not be tripped up through ignorance of the wiles of
the enemy.  Grant me, O Lord, to discover the way whereby to
attain unto thee, for my soul is sick of love for thee, and I am
athirst for thee, the well of salvation."

These were the thoughts of his heart continually, and he communed
with God, being made one with him by prayer and sublime
meditation.  And thus eagerly he pursued the road, hoping to
arrive at the place where Barlaam dwelt.  His meat was the herbs
that grow in the desert; for he carried nothing with him, as I
have already said, save his own bones, and the ragged garment
that was around him.

But whilst he found some food, though scanty and insufficient,
from the herbs, of water he was quite destitute in that waterless
and dry desert.  And so at noon-tide, as he held on his way under
the fierce blaze of the sun, he was parched with thirst in the
hot drought of that desert place, and he suffered the extreme of
anguish.  But desire of Christ conquered nature, and the thirst
wherewith he thirsted for God bedewed the heat of thirst for
water.

Now the devil, being envious and full of hate for that which is
beautiful, unable to endure the sight of such steadfastness of
purpose, and glowing love towards God, raised up against Ioasaph
many temptations in the wilderness.  He called to his remembrance
his kingly glory, and his magnificent body-guard, his friends,
kinsfolk and companions, and how the lives of all had depended on
his life, and he minded him of the other solaces of life.  Then
he would confront him with the hardness of virtue, and the many
sweats that she requireth, with the weakness of his flesh, with
his lack of practice in such rigours, the long years to come,
this present distress from thirst, his want of any comfort, and
the unendingness of his toils.  In a word, he raised a great
dust-cloud of reasonings in his mind, exactly, I ween, as it hath
been recorded of the mighty Antony.

But, when the enemy saw himself too weak to shake that purpose
(for Ioasaph set Christ before his mind, and glowed with love of
him, and was well strengthened by hope, and steadfast in faith,
and recked nothing of the devil and his suggestions), then was
the adversary ashamed of having fallen in the first assault.  So
he came by another road (for many are his paths of wickedness),
and endeavoured to overthrow and terrify Ioasaph by means of
divers apparitions.  Sometimes he appeared to him in black, and
such indeed he is: sometimes with a drawn sword he leapt upon
him, and threatened to strike, unless he speedily turned back. 
At other times he assumed the shapes of all manner of beasts,
roaring and making a terrible din and bellowing; or again he
became a dragon, adder, or basilisk.  But that fair and right
noble athlete kept his soul in quietness, for he had made the
Most High his refuge: and, being sober in mind, he laughed the
evil one to scorn, and said, "I know thee, deceiver, who thou
art, which stiffest up this trouble for me; which from the
beginning didst devise mischief against mankind, and art ever
wicked, and never stintest to do hurt.  How becoming and right
proper is thy habit, that thou shouldest take the shape of beasts
and of creeping things, and thus display thy bestial and crooked
nature, and thy venomous and hurtful purpose!  Wherefore, wretch,
attempt the impossible?  For ever since I discovered that these
be the contrivances and bug-bears of thy malice, I have now no
more anxiety concerning thee.  The Lord is on my side, and I
shall see my desire upon mine enemies.  I shall go upon the adder
and basilisk, the which thou dost resemble; thee, the lion and
dragon I shall tread under my feet; for I am strengthened with
the might of Christ.  Let mine enemies be ashamed and turned
backward: let them be driven and put to shame suddenly."

Thus speaking, and girding on that invincible weapon, the sign of
the Cross, he made vain the devil's shows.  For straightway all
the beasts and creeping things disappeared, like as the smoke
vanisheth, and like as wax melteth at the fire.  And he, strong
in the might of Christ, went on his way rejoicing and giving
thanks unto the Lord.  But there dwelt in that desert many divers
beasts, and all kinds of serpents, and dragon-shaped monsters,
and these met him, not now as apparitions but in sober sooth, so
that his path was beset by fear and toil.  But he overcame both,
for love, as saith the scripture, cast out fear, and longing made
toil light.  Thus he wrestled with many sundry misfortunes and
hardships until, after many days, he arrived at that desert of
the land of Senaar, wherein Barlaam dwelt.  There also he found
water and quenched the burning of his thirst.


XXXVIII.

Now two full years spent Ioasaph wandering about the ocean of
that desert, without finding Barlaam; for here also God was
proving the steadfastness of his purpose, and the nobility of his
soul.  He lived thus in the open air, scorched with heat or
frozen with cold, and, as one in search of precious treasure,
continually looking everywhere for his treasured friend, the aged
Barlaam.  Frequent were the temptations and assaults of the evil
spirits that he encountered, and many the hardships that he
endured through the lack of herbs that he needed for meat,
because the desert, being dry, yielded even these in but scant
supply.  But, being kindled by love of her Master, this
adamantine and indomitable soul bore these annoyances more easily
than other men bear their pleasures.  Wherefore he failed not of
the succour that is from above, but, many as were the sorrows and
toils Chat he endured, comfort came to him from Christ, and,
asleep or awake, refreshed his soul.  By the space of those two
years Ioasaph went about continually, seeking him for whom he
yearned, and rivers of waters ran from his eyes, as he implored
God, crying aloud and saying, "Show me, O Lord, show me the man
that was the means of my knowledge of thee, and the cause of my
many blessings.  Because of the multitude of mine offences,
deprive me not of this good thing; but grant me to see him, and
fight with him the ascetic fight."

By the grace of God, he found a cave, by following footsteps that
led thither.  There he met a monk pursuing a hermit life.  Him he
embraced and saluted tenderly.  He asked where to find Barlaam's
dwelling, and told him his own tale, laying all bare.  Of him
then he learned the abode of the man whom he sought, and thither
went foot-hot, as when a cunning hunter happeneth on the tracks
of his game.  And when he had met with certain signs, pointed out
to him by this other old hermit, he went on rejoicing, strong in
hope, like a child hoping after long absence to see his father.
For when divine love hath broken into a soul, it proveth hotter
and stronger than the natural.

So he stood before the door of the cave, and knocked, saying
"Benedic, father, benedic!"  When Barlaam heard his voice, he
came forth from the cave, and by the spirit knew him, who by
outward appearance could not easily be known, because of the
marvellous change and alteration that had changed and altered his
face from its former bloom of youth; for Ioasaph was black with
the sun's heat, and overgrown with hair, and his cheeks were
fallen in, and his eyes deep sunken, and his eyelids seared with
floods of tears, and much distress of hunger.  And Ioasaph
recognised his spiritual father, for his features were, for the
more part, the same.  So the old man stood, and, facing the East,
offered up to God a prayer of thanksgiving; and, after the
prayer, when they had said the Amen, they embraced and kissed
each other affectionately, taking their full fill of long
deferred desire.

But, when they had done with embracing and greeting, they sat
them down and conversed.  Barlaam began, saying, "Welcome art
thou, son well beloved son of God, and inheritor of the heavenly
kingdom through Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou lovest, whom
thou rightly desirest above the things that are temporal and
corruptible!  Like a prudent and wise merchant, thou hast sold
all, and bought the pearl that is beyond price, and hast found
the treasure that cannot be stolen, hidden in the field of the
commandments of the Lord; thou hast parted with all, and spared
naught of the things that so soon pass away, that thou mightest
purchase that field for thyself.  The Lord give thee the eternal
for the temporal, the things that are incorruptible and wax not
old for the corruptible!

"But tell me, dearly beloved, how thou camest hither?  How did
thy matters speed after my departure?  And hath thy father
learned to know God, or is he still carried away with his former
foolishness, still under the bondage of devilish deceits? "

Thus questioned Barlaam, and Ioasaph answered, telling him piece
by piece all that had befallen him since he went away; and in how
many ways the Lord had prospered him, until they were come
together again.

The old man listened with pleasure and amazement, and with hot
tears said, "Glory to thee, our God, that ever standest by and
succourest them that love thee!  Glory to thee, O Christ, King of
all and God all-good, that it was thy pleasure that the seed,
which I sowed in the heart of Ioasaph, thy servant, should thus
bring forth fruit an hundredfold worthy of the husbandman and
Master of our souls!  Glory to thee, good Paraclete, the all-holy
Spirit, because thou didst vouchsafe unto this man to partake of
that grace which thou gavest thine holy Apostles, and by his hand
hast delivered multitudes of people from superstitious error, and
enlightened them with the true knowledge of God!"

Thus was God blessed by both, and thus were they conversing and
rejoicing in the grace of God until evenfall.  Then stood they up
for to pray and to perform the sacred services.  Then also
remembered they that it was meal-time, and Barlaam spread his
lavish table, laden with spiritual dainties, but with little to
attract the palate of sense.  These were uncooked worts, and a
few dates, planted and tended by Barlaam's own hands, such as are
found in the same desert, and wild herbs.  So they gave thanks
and partook of the victuals set before them, and drank water from
the neighbour springing well, and again gave thanks to God, who
openeth his hand and filleth all things living.  Then they arose
again, and, when they had ended their Night Hours, after prayer,
they joined in spiritual converse again, discoursing wholesome
words, and full of heavenly wisdom, all the night long until day-
break bade them once more remember the hour of prayer.

So Ioasaph abode with Barlaam for some many years, pursuing this
marvellous and more than human life, dwelling with him as with a
father and tutor, in all obedience and lowliness, exercising
himself in every kind of virtue, and learning well from practice
how to wrestle with the invisible spirits of evil.  From that
time forward he mortified all his sinful passions, and made the
will of the flesh as subject to the spirit as slave is to his
master.  He was altogether forgetful of comforts or repose, and
tyrannized over sleep as over a wicked servant.  And, in brief,
such was his practice of the religious life, that Barlaam, who
had spent many years therein, marvelled at him, and failed to
equal the earnestness of his life.  For he took only so much of
that coarse and cheerless food as would keep him alive; else had
he died afore his time, and forfeited the reward of his well-
doing.  He subdued himself to watchings, as though he were
without flesh and body.  In prayer and mental exercise his work
was unceasing, and all the time of his life was spent in
spiritual and heavenly contemplation, so that not an hour, nor
even a single moment was wasted, from the day that he came to
dwell in the desert.  For this is the end of monastic life, never
to be found idle in spiritual employment: and well herein did
this noble and active runner of the heavenly race order his way.
And he kept his ardour unquenched from beginning to end, ever
ascending in his heart, and going from strength to strength, and
continually adding desire to desire, and zeal to zeal, until he
arrived at the bliss that he had hoped and longed for.


XXXIX.

Thus did Barlaam and Ioasaph dwell together, rivals in the good
rivalry, apart from all anxious care and all the turmoils of
life, possessing their minds undisturbed and clear of all
confusion.  After their many labours after godliness, one day
Barlaam called to him his spiritual son, whom he had begotten
through the Gospel, and opened his mouth to discourse of
spiritual things, saying, "Long ago, dearly beloved Ioasaph, was
it destined that thou shouldest dwell in this wilderness; and, in
answer to my prayer for thee, Christ promised me that I should
see it before the ending of my life.  I have seen my desire: I
have seen thee severed from the world and the concerns of the
world, united to Christ, thy mind never wavering, and come to the
measure of the perfection of his fulness.  Now therefore as the
time of my departure is at the door, and seeing that my desire,
that hath grown with my growth and aged with my years, to be for
ever with Christ, is even now being fulfilled, thou must bury my
body in the earth and restore dust to dust, but thyself abide for
the time to come in this place, holding fast to thy spiritual
life, and making remembrance of me, poor as I am.  For I fear
lest perchance the darksome army of fiends may stand in the way
of my soul, by reason of the multitude of mine ignorances.

"So do thou, my son, think no scorn of the laboriousness of thy
religious life, neither dread the length of the time, nor the
tricks of devils.  But, strong in the grace of Christ,
confidently laugh at the weakness of these thy foes; and, as for
the hardness of thy toils, and the long duration of the time, be
as one that daily expecteth his departure hence, and as if the
same day were the beginning and the end of thy religious life.
Thus, always forgetting the things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before, press toward the mark
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
according to the exhortation of the holy Apostle, who saith, `Let
us not faint; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day.  For our light affliction, which is
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are
eternal."

"Ponder thou over these things, beloved: quit thee like a man;
yea, be strong; and, as a good soldier, do thy diligence to
please him who hath called thee to be a soldier.  And, even if
the evil one stir in thee thoughts of neglecting duty, and thou
art minded to slacken the string of thy purpose, fear not his
devices, but remember the Lord's command, which saith, `In the
world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.'  Wherefore, rejoice in the Lord alway; for
he hath chosen and separated thee out of the world, and set thee,
as it were before his countenance.  The Master, who hath called
thee with a holy calling, is alway near.  Be careful for nothing,
but in everything, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving
let thy requests be made known unto God.  For he himself hath
said, "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee."  So, by the
hardness of thy life, and by scorn of its rigours, win such
thoughts as these, and rejoice, remembering our Lord God, for he
saith, `I remembered God and was glad.'

"But when the adversary, seeking another fashion of war,
proposeth high and arrogant thoughts, and suggesteth the glory of
the kingdom of this world, which thou hast forsaken, and all its
lures, hold out, as a shield before thee, the saving word that
saith, `When ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, "We are unprofitable servants, for we have
done that which was our duty to do."'  And, indeed, which of us
is able to repay the debt that we owe our Master, for that he,
though he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we
through his poverty might become rich, and, being without
suffering, yet suffered, that we might be delivered from
suffering?  What thanks hath the servant if he suffer like as his
Master?  But we fall far short of his sufferings.  Meditate upon
these things, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.  And the
peace of God which passeth all understanding shall keep thy heart
and thoughts in Christ Jesus."

When blessed Barlaam had so said, Ioasaph's tears knew no
measure, but, like water from the brimming fountain, bedewed him
and the ground whereon he sat.  He mourned over the parting, and
earnestly implored that he might be his companion on his last
journey, and might remain no longer in this world after Barlaam's
decease, saying, "Wherefore, father, seekest thou only thine own,
and not thy neighbour's welfare?  How fulfillest thou perfect
love in this, according to him that said, `Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself,' in departing thyself to rest and life, and
leaving me to tribulation and distress?  And, before I have been
well exercised in the conflicts of the religious life, before I
have learned the wily attacks of the enemy, why expose me to
fight singlehanded against their marshalled host?  And for what
purpose but to see me overthrown by their mischievous
machinations, and to see me die, alas! the true spiritual and
eternal death?  That is the fate which must befall inexperienced
and cowardly monks.  But, I beseech thee, pray the Lord to take
me also together with thee from life.  Yea, by the very hope that
thou hast of receiving the reward of thy labour, pray that, after
thy departure, I may not live one day more in the world, nor
wander into the ocean depths of this desert."

While Ioasaph spake thus in tears, the old man cheeked him gently
and calmly, saying, "Son, we ought not to resist the judgements
of God, which are beyond our reach.  For though I have oftentimes
prayed concerning this matter, and constrained the Master, that
cannot be constrained, not to part us one from the other, yet
have I been taught by his goodness that it is not expedient for
thee now to lay aside the burden of the flesh: but thou must
remain behind in the practice of virtue, until the crown, which
thou art weaving, be more glorious.  As yet, thou hast not
striven enough after the recompense in store for thee, but must
toil yet a little longer, that thou mayest joyfully enter into
the joy of thy Lord.  For myself, I am, as I reckon, well-nigh an
hundred winters old, and have now spent seventy and five years in
this desert place.  But for thee, even if thy days be not so far
lengthened as mine, yet must thou approach thereto, as the Lord
ordereth, that thou mayest prove no unworthy match for them that
have borne the burden and heat of the day.  Therefore, beloved,
gladly accept the decrees of God.  What God hath ordered, who, of
men, can scatter?  Endure, then, under the protection of his
grace.

"But be thou ever sober against thoughts other than these; and,
like a right precious treasure, keep safely from robbers thy
purity of heart, stepping up day by day to higher work and
contemplation, that that may be fulfilled in thee, which the
Saviour promised to his friends, when he said, `If any man love
me, he will keep my word: and my father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him.'"

With these words, and many others, full worthy of that sanctified
soul and inspired tongue, did the old man comfort Ioasaph's
anguished soul.  Then he sent him unto certain brethren, which
abode a long way off, for to fetch the things fitting for the
Holy Sacrifice.  And Ioasaph girded up his loins, and with all
speed fulfilled his errand: for he dreaded lest peradventure, in
his absence, Barlaam might pay the debt of nature, and, yielding
up the ghost to God, might inflict on him the loss of missing his
departing words and utterances, his last orisons and blessings.

So when Ioasaph had manfully finished his long journey, and had
brought the things required for the Holy Sacrifice, saintly
Barlaam offered up to God the unbloody Sacrifice.  When he had
communicated himself, and also given to Ioasaph of the undefiled
Mysteries of Christ, he rejoiced in the Spirit.  And when they
had taken together of their ordinary food, Barlaam again fed
Ioasaph's soul with edifying words, saying, "Well-beloved son, no
longer in this world shall we share one common hearth and board;
for now I go my last journey, even the way of my fathers.  Needs
must thou, therefore, prove thy loving affection for me by thy
keeping of God's commandments, and by thy continuance in this
place even to the end, living as thou hast learned and been
instructed, and alway remembering my poor and slothful soul.
Rejoice, therefore, with great joy, and make merry with the
gladness that is in Christ, because thou hast exchanged the
earthly and corruptible for the eternal and incorruptible; and
because there draweth nigh the reward of thy works, and thy
rewarder is already at hand, who shall come to see the vineyard
which thou hast dressed, and shall richly pay thee the wages of
thine husbandry.  `Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all
acceptation,' as proclaimed by Paul the divine, `For if we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we endure, we
shall also reign with him in his eternal and everlasting kingdom,
being illuminated with the light unapproachable, and guerdoned
with the effulgence of the blessed and life-giving Trinity.'"

Thus until even-tide and all night long did Barlaam converse with
Ioasaph, who wept tears that could not be stayed, and could not
bear the parting.  But just as day began to dawn, Barlaam ended
his discourse, lifted up his hands and eyes to heaven, and
offered his thanks to God, thus saying, "O Lord, my God, who art
everywhere present, and fillest all things, I thank thee, for
that thou hast looked upon my lowliness, and hast granted me to
fulfil the course of this mine earthly pilgrimage in thy true
Faith, and in the way of thy commandments.  And now, thou lover
of good, all-merciful Master, receive me into thine everlasting
habitations; and remember not all the sins that I have committed
against thee, in knowledge or in ignorance.  Defend also this thy
faithful servant, before whom thou hast granted to me, thine
unprofitable servant, to stand.  Deliver him from all vanity, and
all despiteful treatment of the adversary, and set him clear of
the many-meshed nets which the wicked one spreadeth abroad for to
trip all them that would full fain be saved.  Destroy, Almighty
Lord, all the might of the deceiver from before the face of thy
servant, and grant him authority to trample on the baneful head
of the enemy of our souls.  Send down from on high the grace of
thy Holy Spirit; and strengthen him against the invisible hosts,
that he may receive at thy hands the crown of victory, and that
in him thy name may be glorified, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, for to thee belongeth glory and praise for ever and
ever.  Amen."

Thus prayed he, and in fatherly wise embraced Ioasaph, and
saluted him with an holy kiss.  Then he sealed himself with the
sign of the Cross, and gathered up his feet, and, with exceeding
great joy, as at the home-coming of friends, departed on that
blessed journey, to receive his reward yonder, an old man and
full of days in the Spirit.


XL.

Then did Ioasaph embrace the good father, with all the devotion
and sorrow that can be told, and washed his corpse with his
tears.  Then he wrapped it in the hair-shirt, which Barlaam had
given him in his palace; and over him he recited the proper
psalms, chanting all the day long, and throughout the night, and
watering the venerable body of the Saint with his tears.  On the
morrow, he made a grave hard by the cave, and thither reverently
bore the sacred body, and there, like a good and honourable son,
laid his spiritual father in his sepulchre.  And then, the fire
of grief kindling all the hotter within his soul, he set himself
to pray the more earnestly, saying:

"O Lord my God, hearken unto my voice, when I cry unto thee. 
Have mercy upon me, and hear me, for I seek thee with all my
heart.  My soul hath sought for thee: O hide not thy face from
me, and turn not away in anger from thy servant.  Be thou my
helper; cast me not utterly away, and forsake me not, O God my
Saviour, because my father and mother forsake me; but do thou, O
Lord, take me up.  Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in the
right way because of mine enemies.  Deliver me not over unto the
souls of them that afflict me; for I have been cast upon thee
ever since I was born; thou art my God even from my mother's
womb.  O go not from me, because, except thee, there is none to
help me.  For lo, I set the hope of my soul upon the ocean of thy
mercies.  Be thou the pilot of my soul, thou that steerest all
creation with the unspeakable forethought of thy wisdom; and shew
thou me the way that I should walk in; and, as thou art a good
God and a lover of men, save me by the prayers and intercessions
of Barlaam thy servant, for thou art my God, and thee I glorify,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, world without end. 
Amen."

Thus prayed he, and sat him down nigh the sepulchre, a-weeping.
And as he sat, he fell asleep, and saw those dread men, whom he
had seen before, coming to him, and carrying him away to the
great and marvellous plain, and bringing him to that glorious
and exceeding bright city.  When he had passed within the gate,
there met him others, gloriously apparelled with much light,
having in their hands crowns radiant with unspeakable beauty,
such as mortal eye hath never seen.  And, when Ioasaph enquired,
"Whose are these exceeding bright crowns of glory, which I see?"
"Thine," said they, "is the one, prepared for thee, because of
the many souls which thou hast saved, and now made still more
beautiful because of the religious life that thou leadest, if
thou continue therein bravely until the end.  And this other
crown is thine also; but it must thou give unto thy father, who,
by thy means, turned from his evil way unto the Lord, and was
truly penitent."  But Ioasaph was as one sore vexed, and said,
"How is it possible that, for his repentance alone, my father
should receive reward equal to mine, that have laboured so much?"
Thus spake he, and straightway thought that he saw Barlaam, as it
were, chiding him and saying, "These are my words, Ioasaph, which
I once spake unto thee, saying, `When thou waxest passing rich,
thou wilt not be glad to distribute,' and thou understoodest not
my saying.  But now, why art thou displeased at thy father's
equality with thee in honour, and art not rather glad at heart
that thine orisons in his behalf have been heard?"  Then Ioasaph
said unto him, as he was ever wont to say, "Pardon! father,
pardon!  But shew me where thou dwellest?"  Barlaam answered, "In
this mighty and exceeding fair city.  It is my lot to dwell in
the mid-most street of the city, a street that flasheth with
light supernal."  Again Ioasaph thought he asked Barlaam to bring
him to his own habitation, and, in friendly wise, to shew him the
sights thereof.  But Barlaam said that his time was not yet come
to win those habitations, while he was under the burden of the
flesh.  "But," said he, "if thou persevere bravely, even as I
charged thee, in a little while thou shalt come hither, and gain
the same habitations, and obtain the same joy and glory, and be
my companion for ever."  Hereupon Ioasaph awoke out of sleep, but
his soul was still full of that light and ineffable glory; and
greatly wondering, he raised to his Lord a song of thanksgiving.

And he continued to the end, verily leading on earth the life of
an angel, and after the death of his aged friend using himself to
severer austerity. Twenty and five years old was he when he left
his earthly kingdom, and adopted the monastic life; and thirty
and five years in this vast desert did he, like one dis-fleshed,
endure rigours above the endurance of man, but not before he had
delivered the souls of many men from the soul-devouring dragon,
and presented them to God, saved for aye; winning herewith the
Apostolic grace.  In will he had proved a martyr, and had with
boldness confessed Christ before kings and tyrants, and had
proved himself the mighty-voiced preacher of his greatness, and
had overthrown many spirits of wickedness in the desert, and had
overcome all in the strength of Christ.  Partaking richly of the
gift of grace from above, he kept his mind's eye purified from
every earth-born cloud, and looked forward to the things that are
to come, as though they were already come.  Christ was his
recompense for all: Christ was his desire: Christ he ever saw as
present with him: Christ and his fair beauty everywhere met his
sight, according to the saying of the prophet, "I have set God
always before me; for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall
not fall."  And again, "My soul cleaveth to thee; thy right hand
hath upholden me."  For verily Ioasaph's soul clave to Christ,
being knit to him in indissoluble union.  From this marvellous
work he never swerved, never altered the rule of his ascetic
life, from beginning to end, but maintained his zeal from his
youth even until old age; or rather, he daily advanced higher in
virtue, and daily gained purer power of vision.

Thus did Ioasaph spend his days, and render unto him that called
him labour worthy of his calling, having crucified the world to
himself, and himself unto the world, and, at the last, departed
in peace unto the God of peace, and passed to that Master whom he
had alway longed for.  There he appeared in the immediate
presence of the Lord, and was crowned with the crown of glory
already prepared for him: there it is granted to him to behold
Christ, to be with Christ, to rejoice for ever in the fair beauty
of Christ, into whose hands he commended his spirit, when he
departed to walk in the land of the living, where is the song of
them that feast, the dwelling-place of them that rejoice.

As for his venerable body, it befell thus; about the very hour of
Ioasaph's death, there came by divine revelation, from one of the
neighbouring cells, a certain holy man.  It was the same that
once pointed out to Ioasaph his way to Barlaam.  This man
honoured the corpse with sacred hymns, and shed tears, the token
of affection, over him, and performed all the last Christian
rites, and laid him in the sepulchre of his father Barlaam; for
it was only meet that their bodies should rest side by side,
since their souls were to dwell through eternity together.

In obedience to the strict command of a dread Angel that appeared
to him in a dream, this hermit, who had performed the last rites,
journeyed to the kingdom of India, and, entering in to King
Barachias, made known unto him all that had befallen Barlaam, and
this blessed Ioasaph.  Barachias, making no delay, set forth with
a mighty host, and arrived at the cave, and beheld their
sepulchre, and wept bitterly over it, and raised the gravestone.
There he descried Barlaam and Ioasaph lying, as they had been in
life.  Their bodies had not lost their former hue, but were whole
and uncorrupt, together with their garments.  These, the
consecrated tabernacles of two holy souls, that sent forth full
sweet savour, and showed naught distressful, were placed by King
Barachias in costly tombs and conveyed by him into his own
country.

Now when the people heard tell of that which had come to pass,
there assembled a countless multitude out of all the cities and
regions round about, to venerate and view the bodies of these
Saints.  Thereupon, sooth to say, they chanted the sacred hymns
over them, and vied one with another to light lamps lavishly, and
rightly and fitly, might one say, in honour of these children and
inheritors of light.  And with splendour and much solemnity they
laid their bodies in the Church which Ioasaph had built from the
very foundation.  And many miracles and cures, during the
translation and deposition of their relics, as also in later
times, did the Lord work by his holy servants.  And King
Barachias and all the people beheld the mighty virtues that were
shown by them; and many of the nations round about, that were
sick of unbelief and ignorance of God, believed through the
miracles that were wrought at their sepulchre.  And all they that
saw and heard of the Angelic life of Ioasaph, and of his love of
God from his childhood upward, marvelled, and in all things
glorified God that alway worketh together with them that love
him, and granteth them exceeding great reward.

Here endeth this history, which I have written, to the best of my
ability, even as I heard it from the truthful lips of worthy men
who delivered it unto me.  And may God grant that all we that
read or hear this edifying story may obtain the heritage of such
as have pleased the Lord, by the prayers and intercessions of
blessed Barlaam and Ioasaph, of whom this story telleth, in
Christ Jesu our Lord; to whom belongeth worship, might, majesty
and glory, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and for
evermore, world without end.  Amen.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barlaam and Ioasaph

