The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Cook's Decameron:
A Study in Taste:
Containing Over Two Hundred Recipes For Italian Dishes
by Mrs. W. G. Water*** 


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Cook's Decameron:
A Study in Taste:
Containing Over Two Hundred Recipes For Italian Dishes

by Mrs. W. G. Water

June, 1997  [Etext #930]


****The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Cook's Decameron****
***This file should be named ckdec10.txt or ckdec10.zip****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, ckdec11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, ckdec10a.txt.


This etext was prepared by Metra Christofferson, metra@theonramp.net.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Cook's Decameron:  A Study In Taste

Containing Over Two Hundred Recipes For Italian Dishes

By

Mrs. W. G. Waters

"Show me a pleasure like dinner, which comes every day and lasts an
hour." -- Talleyrand circa 1901



To

A. V.

In memory of Certain Ausonian Feasts



Preface

Montaigne in one of his essays* mentions the high excellence
Italian cookery had attained in his day.  "I have entered into this
Discourse upon the Occasion of an Italian I lately receiv'd into my
Service, and who was Clerk of the Kitchen to the late Cardinal
Caraffa till his Death.  I put this Fellow upon an Account of his
office:  Where he fell to Discourse of this Palate-Science, with
such a settled Countenance and Magisterial Gravity, as if he had
been handling some profound Point of Divinity.  He made a Learned
Distinction of the several sorts of Appetites, of that of a Man
before he begins to eat, and of those after the second and third
Service:  The Means simply to satisfy the first, and then to raise
and acute the other two:  The ordering of the Sauces, first in
general, and then proceeded to the Qualities of the Ingredients,
and their Effects:  The Differences of Sallets, according to their
seasons, which ought to be serv'd up hot, and which cold:  The
Manner of their Garnishment and Decoration, to render them yet more
acceptable to the Eye after which he entered upon the Order of the
whole Service, full of weighty and important Considerations."

It is consistent with Montaigne's large-minded habit thus to
applaud the gifts of this master of his art who happened not to be
a Frenchman.  It is a canon of belief with the modern Englishman
that the French alone can achieve excellence in the art of cookery,
and when once a notion of this sort shall have found a lodgment in
an Englishman's brain, the task of removing it will be a hard one.
Not for a moment is it suggested that Englishmen or any one else
should cease to recognise the sovereign merits of French cookery;
all that is entreated is toleration, and perchance approval, of
cookery of other schools.  But the favourable consideration of any
plea of this sort is hindered by the fact that the vast majority of
Englishmen when they go abroad find no other school of cookery by
the testing of which they may form a comparison.  This universal
prevalence of French cookery may be held to be a proof of its
supreme excellence--that it is first, and the rest nowhere;

but the victory is not so complete as it seems, and the facts would
bring grief and humiliation rather than patriotic pride to the
heart of a Frenchman like Brillat-Savarin.  For the cookery we meet
in the hotels of the great European cities, though it may be based
on French traditions, is not the genuine thing, but a bastard,
cosmopolitan growth, the same everywhere, and generally vapid and
uninteresting.  French cookery of the grand school suffers by being
associated with such commonplace achievements.  It is noted in the
following pages how rarely English people on their travels
penetrate where true Italian cookery may be tasted, wherefore it
has seemed worth while to place within the reach of English
housewives some Italian recipes which are especially fitted for the
presentation of English fare to English palates under a different
and not unappetising guise.  Most of them will be found simple and
inexpensive, and special care has been taken to include those
recipes which enable the less esteemed portions of meat and the
cheaper vegetables and fish to be treated more elaborately than
they have hitherto been treated by English cooks.

The author wishes to tender her acknowledgments to her husband for
certain suggestions and emendations made in the revision of the
introduction, and for his courage in dining, "greatly daring," off
many of the dishes.  He still lives and thrives.  Also to Mrs.
Mitchell, her cook, for the interest and enthusiasm she has shown
in the work, for her valuable advice, and for the care taken in
testing the recipes.



Contents



Prologue



Part I

The First Day
The Second Day.
The Third Day.
The Fourth Day
The Fifth Day.
The Sixth Day.
The Seventh Day
The Eighth Day
The Ninth Day.
The Tenth Day.



Part II -- Recipes

Sauces

No.

    1. Espagnole or Brown Sauce.

    2. Velute Sauce.

    3. Bechamel Sauce.

    4. Mirepoix Sauce (for masking).

    5. Genoese Sauce.

    6. Italian Sauce.

    7. Ham Sauce (Salsa di Prosciutto).

    8. Tarragon Sauce.

    9. Tomato Sauce.

   10. Tomato Sauce Piquante.

   11. Mushroom Sauce.

   12. Neapolitan Sauce.

   13. Neapolitan Anchovy Sauce.

   14. Roman Sauce (Salsa Agro-dolce).

   15. Roman Sauce (another way).

   16. Supreme Sauce.

   17. Pasta marinate (for masking Italian Frys).

   18. White Villeroy.



Soups

   19. Clear Soup.

   20. Zuppa Primaverile (Spring Soup).

   21. Soup alla Lombarda.

   22. Tuscan Soup.

   23. Venetian Soup.

   24. Roman Soup.

   25. Soup alla Nazionale.

   26. Soup alla Modanese.

   27. Crotopo Soup.

   28. Soup all'Imperatrice.

   29. Neapolitan Soup.

   30. Soup with Risotto.

   31. Soup alla Canavese.

   32. Soup alla Maria l'ia.

   33. Zuppa d'Erbe (Lettuce Soup).

   34. Zuppa Regina di Riso (Queen's soup).



Minestre

   35. A Condiment for Seasoning Minestre, &c.

   36. Minestra alla Casalinga.

   37. Minestra of Rice and Turnips.

   38. Minestra alla Capucina.

   39. Minestra of Semolina.

   40. Minestrone alla Milanese.

   41. Minestra of Rice and Cabbage.

   42. Minestra of Rice and Celery.

   43. Anguilla alla Milanese (Eels).

   44. Filletti di Pesce alla Villeroy (Fillets of Fish).

   45. Astachi all'Italiana (Lobster).

   46. Baccala alla Giardiniera (Cod).

   47. Triglie alla Marinara (Mullet).

   48. Mullet alla Tolosa.

   49. Mullet alla Triestina.

   50. Whiting alla Genovese.

   51. Merluzzo in Bianco (Cod).

   52. Merluzzo in Salamoia (Cod).

   53. Baccala in Istufato (Haddock).

   54. Naselli con Piselli (Whiting).

   55. Ostriche alla Livornese (Oysters).

   56. Ostriche alla Napolitana  (Oysters).

   57. Ostriche alla Neneziana (Oysters).

   58. Pesci diversi alla Casalinga (Fish).

   59. Pesce alla Genovese (Sole or Turbot).

   60. Sogliole in Zimino (Sole).

   61. Sogliole al tegame (Sole).

   62. Sogliole alla Livornese (Sole).

   63. Sogliole alla Veneziana (Sole).

   64. Sogliole alla parmigiana (Sole).

   65. Salmone alla Genovese (Salmon).

   66. Salmone alla Perigo (Salmon).

   67. Salmone alla giardiniera (Salmon).

   68. Salmone alla Farnese (Salmon).

   69. Salmone alla Santa Fiorentina (Salmon).

   70. Salmone alla Francesca (Salmon).

   71. Fillets of Salmon in Papiliotte.



Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, &c.

   72. Manzo alla Certosina (Fillet of Beef).

   73. Stufato alla Fiorentina (Stewed Beef).

   74. Coscia di Manzo al Forno (Rump Steak).

   75. Polpettine alla Salsa Piccante (Beef Olives).

   76. Stufato alla Milanese (Stewed Beef).

   77. Manzo Marinato Arrosto (Marinated Beef).

   78. Manzo con sugo di Barbabietole (Fillet of Beef).

   79. Manzo in Insalata (Marinated Beef).

   80. Filetto di Bue con Pistacchi (Fillets of Beef with
Pistacchios).

   81. Scalopini di Rizo (Beef with Risotto).

   82. Tenerumi alla Piemontese (Tendons of Veal).

   83. Bragiuole di Vitello (Veal Cutlets).

   84. Costolette alla Monza (Veal Cutlets).

   85. Vitello alla Pellegrina (Breast of Veal).

   86. Frittura Piccata al Marsala (Fillet of Veal).

   87. Polpettine Distese (Veal Olives).

   88. Coste di Vitello Imboracciate (Ribs of Veal).

   89. Costolette di Montone alla Nizzarda (Mutton Cutlets).

   90. Petto di Castrato all'Italiana (Breast of Mutton).

   91. Petto di Castrato alla Salsa piccante (Breast of Mutton).

   92. Tenerumi d' Agnello alla Villeroy (Tendons of Lamb).

   93. Tenerumi d' Agnello alla Veneziana (Tendons of Lamb).

   94. Costoletto d'Agnello alla Costanza (Lamb Cutlets).



Tongue, Sweetbread, Calf's Head, Liver, Sucking Pig, &c.

   95. Timballo alla Romana.

   96. Timballo alla Lombarda.

   97. Lingua alla Visconti (Tongue).

   98. Lingua di Manzo al Citriuoli (Tongue with Cucumber).

   99. Lingue di Castrato alla Cuciniera (Sheep's Tongues).

  100.. Lingue di Vitello all'Italiana (Calves' Tongues).

  101. Porcelletto alla Corradino (Sucking Pig).

  102. Porcelletto da Latte in Galantina (Sucking Pig).

  103. Ateletti alla Sarda.

  1O4. Ateletti alla Genovese.

  105. Testa di Vitello alla Sorrentina (Calf's Head).

  106. Testa di Vitello con Salsa Napoletana (Calf's head).

  107. Testa di Vitello alla Pompadour (Calf's Head).

  108. Testa di Vitello alla Sanseverino (Calf's Head).

  109. Testa di Vitello in Frittata (Calf's Head).

  110. Zampetti (Calves' Feet).

  111. Bodini Marinati.

  112. Animelle alla Parmegiana (Sweetbread).

  113. Animelle in Cartoccio (Sweetbread).

  114. Animelle all'Italiana (Sweetbread).

  115. Animelle Lardellate (Sweetbread).

  116. Frittura di Bottoni e di Animelle (Sweetbreads and
Mushrooms).

  117. Cervello in Filiserbe (Calf's Brains).

  118. Cervello alla Milanese (Calf's Brains).

  119. Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains).

  120. Frittuta of Cervello (Calf's Brains).

  121. Cervello alla Frittata Montano (Calf's Brains).

  122. Marinata di Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains).

  123. Minuta alla Milanese (Lamb's Sweetbread).

  124. Animelle al Sapor di Targone (Lamb's Fry).

  125. Fritto Misto alla Villeroy.

  126. Fritto Misto alla Piemontese.

  127. Minuta di Fegatini (Ragout of Fowls' Livers).

  128. Minuta alla Visconti(Chickens' Livers).

  129. Croutons alla Principessa.

  130. Croutons alla Romana.



Fowl, Duck, Game, Hare, Rabbit, &c.

  131. Soffiato di Cappone (Fowl Souffle).

  132. Pollo alla Fiorentina (Chicken).

  133. Pollo ali'Oliva (Chicken).

  134. Pollo alla Villereccia (Chicken).

  135. Pollo alla Cacciatora (Chicken).

  136. Pollastro alla Lorenese (Fowl).

  137. Pollastro in Fricassea al Burro (Fowl).

  138. Pollastro in istufa di Pomidoro (Braized Fowl).

  139. Cappone con Riso (Capon with Rice).

  140. Dindo Arrosto alla Milanese (Roast Turkey).

  141. Tacchinotto all'Istriona (Turkey Poult).

  142. Fagiano alla Napoletana (Pheasant).

  143. Fagiano alla Perigo (Pheasant).

  144. Anitra Selvatica (Wild Duck).

  145. Perniciotti alla Gastalda (Partridges).

  146. Piccioni alla Diplomatica (Snipe).

  147. Piccioni alla minute (Pigeons)

  148. Piccioni in Ripieno (Stuffed Pigeons).

  149. Lepre in istufato (Stewed Hare).

  150. Lepre Agro-dolce (Hare).

  151. Coniglio alla Provenzale (Rabbit).

  152. Coniglio arrostito alla Corradino (Roast Rabbit).

  153. Coniglio in salsa Piccante (Rabbit).



Vegetables

  154. Asparagi alla salsa Suprema (Asparagus).

  155. Cavoli di Bruxelles alla Savoiarda (Brussels Sprouts).

  156. Barbabietola alla Parmigiana (Beetroot).

  157. Fave alla Savoiarda (Beans).

  158. Verze alla Capuccina (Cabbage).

  159. Cavoli fiori alla Lionese (Cauliflower).

  160. Cavoli fiori fritti (Cauliflower).

  161. Cauliflower alla Parmigiana.

  162. Cavoli Fiori Ripieni.

  163. Sedani alla l'armigiana (Celery).

  164. Sedani Fritti all'Italiana (Celery).

  165. Cetriuoli alla Parmigiana (Cucumber).

  166. Cetriuoli alla Borghese (Cucumber).

  167. Carote al sughillo (Carrots).

  168. Carote e piselli alla panna (Carrots and peas).

  169. Verze alla Certosina (Cabbage).

  170. Lattughe al sugo (Lettuce).

  171. Lattughe farcite alla Genovese (Lettuce).

  172. Funghi cappelle infarcite (Stuffed Mushrooms).

  173. Verdure miste (Macedoine of Vegetables).

  174. Patate alla crema (Potatoes in cream).

  175. Cestelline cli patate alla giardiniera (Potatoes).

  176. Patate al Pomidoro (Potatoes with Tomato Sauce).

  177. Spinaci alla Milanese (Spinach).

  178. Insalata di patate (Potato salad).

  179. Insalata alla Navarino (Salad).

  180. Insalata di pomidoro (Tomato Salad).

  181. Tartufi alla Dino (Truffles).



Macaroni, Rice, Polenta, All Other Italian Pastes

  182. Macaroni with Tomatoes Macaroni alla Casalinga.

  183. Macaroni al Sughillo.

  184. Macaroni alla Livornese.

  186. Tagliarelle and Lobster.

  187. Polenta.

  188. Polenta Pasticciata.

  189. Battuffoli.

  190. Risotto all'Italiana.

  191. Risotto alla Genoxese.

  192. Risotto alla Spagnuola.

  193. Risotto alla Capuccina.

  194. Risotto alla Parigina.

  195. Ravioli.

  196. Ravioli alla Fiorentina.

  197. Gnoechi alla Romana.

  198. Gnoechi alla Lombarda.

  199. Frittata di Riso (Savoury Rice Pancake).



Omelettes and Other Egg Dishes

  200. Uova ai Tartufi (Eggs with Truffles).

  201. Uova al Pomidoro (Eggs and Tomatoes).

  202. Uova ripiene (Canapes of Egg).

  203. Uova alla Fiorentina (Eggs).

  204. Uova in fili (Egg Canapes).

  205. Frittata di funghi (Mushroom Omelette).

  206. Frittata eon Pomidoro (Tomato Omelette).

  207. Frittata con Asparagi (Asparagus Omelette).

  208. Frittata eon erbe (Omelette with Herbs).

  209. Frittata Montata (Omelette Souffle').

  210. Frittata di Proseiutto (Ham Omelette).



Sweets and Cakes

  211. Bodino off Semolina.

  212. Crema rappresa (Coffee Cream).

  213. Crema Montata alle Fragole (Strawberry Cream).

  214. Croccante di Mandorle (Cream Nougat).

  215. Crema tartara alla Caramella (Caramel Cream).

  216. Cremona Cake.

  217. Cake alla Tolentina.

  218. Riso all'Imperatrice.

  219. Amaretti leggier (Almond Cakes).

  220. Cakes alla Livornese.

  221. Genoese Pastry.

  222. Zabajone.

  223. Iced Zabajone.

  224. Panforte di Siena (Sienese Hardbake).



New Century Sauce

  225. Fish Sauce.

  226. Sauce Piquante (for Meat, Fowl, Game, Rabbit, &c.).

  227. Sauce for Venison, Hare, &c.

  228. Tomato Sauce Piquante.

  229. Sauce for Roast Pork, Ham, &c.

  230. For masking Cutlets, &c.



Part I

The Cook's Decameron

Prologue

The Marchesa di Sant'Andrea finished her early morning cup of tea,
and then took up the batch of correspondence which her maid had
placed on the tray.  The world had a way of treating her in kindly
fashion, and hostile or troublesome letters rarely veiled their
ugly faces under the envelopes addressed to her; wherefore the
perfection of that pleasant half-hour lying between the last sip of
tea and the first step to meet the new day was seldom marred by the
perusal of her morning budget.  The apartment which she graced with her
seemly presence was a choice one in the Mayfair Hotel, one
which she had occupied for the past four or five years during her
spring visit to London; a visit undertaken to keep alive a number
of pleasant English friendships which had begun in Rome or Malta.
London had for her the peculiar attraction it has for so many
Italians, and the weeks she spent upon its stones were commonly the
happiest of the year.

The review she took of her letters before breaking the seals first
puzzled her, and then roused certain misgivings in her heart.  She
recognised the handwriting of each of the nine addresses, and at
the same time recalled the fact that she was engaged to dine with
every one of the correspondents of this particular morning.  Why
should they all be writing to her? She had uneasy forebodings of
postponement, and she hated to have her engagements disturbed; but
it was useless to prolong suspense, so she began by opening the
envelope addressed in the familiar handwriting of Sir John
Oglethorpe, and this was what Sir John had to say--

"My Dear Marchesa, words, whether written or spoken, are powerless
to express my present state of mind.  In the first place, our
dinner on Thursday is impossible, and in the second, I have lost
Narcisse and forever.  You commented favourably upon that supreme
of lobster and the Ris de Veau a la Renaissance we tasted last
week, but never again will you meet the handiwork of Narcisse.  He
came to me with admirable testimonials as to his artistic
excellence; with regard to his moral past I was, I fear, culpably
negligent, for I now learn that all the time he presided over my
stewpans he was wanted by the French police on a charge of
murdering his wife.  A young lady seems to have helped him; so I
fear Narcisse has broken more than one of the commandments in this
final escapade.  The truly great have ever been subject to these
momentary aberrations, and Narcisse being now in the hands of
justice--so called--our dinner must needs stand over, though not, I
hope, for long.  Meantime the only consolation I can perceive is
the chance of a cup of tea with you this afternoon.

   J. O."

Sir John Oglethorpe had been her husband's oldest and best friend.
He and the Marchesa had first met in Sardinia, where they had both
of them gone in pursuit of woodcock, and since the Marchesa had
been a widow, she and Sir John had met either in Rome or in London
every year.  The dinner so tragically manque  had been arranged to
assemble a number of Anglo-Italian friends; and, as Sir John was as
perfect as a host as Narcisse was as a cook, the disappointment was
a heavy one.  She threw aside the letter with a gesture of
vexation, and opened the next.

"Sweetest Marchesa," it began, "how can I tell you my grief at
having to postpone our dinner for Friday.  My wretched cook (I gave
her seventy-five pounds a year), whom I have long suspected of
intemperate habits, was hopelessly inebriated last night, and had
to be conveyed out of the house by my husband and a dear, devoted
friend who happened to be dining with us, and deposited in a four-
wheeler.  May I look in tomorrow afternoon and pour out my grief to
you? Yours cordially,

"Pamela St. Aubyn Fothergill."

When the Marchesa had opened four more letters, one from Lady
Considine, one from Mrs. Sinclair, one from Miss Macdonnell, and
one from Mrs. Wilding, and found that all these ladies were obliged
to postpone their dinners on account of the misdeeds of their
cooks, she felt that the laws of average were all adrift.  Surely
the three remaining letters must contain news of a character to
counterbalance what had already been revealed, but the event showed
that, on this particular morning, Fortune was in a mood to strike
hard. Colonel Trestrail, who gave in his chambers carefully devised
banquets, compounded by a Bengali who was undoubtedly something of
a genius, wrote to say that this personage had left at a day's
notice, in order to embrace Christianity and marry a lady's-maid
who had just come into a legacy of a thousand pounds under the will
of her late mistress.  Another correspondent, Mrs. Gradinger, wrote
that her German cook had announced that the dignity of womanhood
was, in her opinion, slighted by the obligation to prepare food for
others in exchange for mere pecuniary compensation.  Only on
condition of the grant of perfect social equality would she consent
to stay, and Mrs. Gradinger, though she held advanced opinions, was
hardly advanced far enough to accept this suggestion.  Last of all,
Mr. Sebastian van der Roet was desolate to announce that his cook,
a Japanese, whose dishes were, in his employer's estimation,
absolute inspirations, had decamped and taken with him everything
of value he could lay hold of; and more than desolate, that he was
forced to postpone the pleasure of welcoming the Marchesa di
Sant' Andrea at his table.

When she had finished reading this last note, the Marchesa gathered
the whole mass of her morning's correspondence together, and
uttering a few Italian words which need not be translated, rolled
it into a ball and hurled the same to the farthest corner of the
room.  "How is it," she ejaculated, "that these English, who
dominate the world abroad, cannot get their food properly cooked at
home? I suppose it is because they, in their lofty way, look upon
cookery as a non-essential, and consequently fall victims to gout
and dyspepsia, or into the clutches of some international
brigandaccio, who declares he is a cordon bleu.  One hears now and
again pleasant remarks about the worn-out Latin races, but I know
of one Latin race which can do better than this in cookery."  And
having thus delivered herself, the Marchesa lay back on the pillows
and reviewed the situation.

She was sorry in a way to miss the Colonel's dinner.  The dishes
which the Bengali cook turned out were excellent, but the host
himself was a trifle dictatorial and too fond of the sound of his
own voice, while certain of the inevitable guests were still worse.
Mrs. Gradinger's letter came as a relief; indeed the Marchesa had
been wondering why she had ever consented to go and pretend to
enjoy herself by eating an ill-cooked dinner in company with social
reformers and educational prigs.  She really went because she liked
Mr. Gradinger, who was as unlike his wife as possible, a stout
youth of forty, with a breezy manner and a decided fondness for
sport.  Lady Considine's dinners were indifferent, and the guests
were apt to be a bit too smart and too redolent of last season's
Monte Carlo odour.  The Sinclairs gave good dinners to perfectly
selected guests, and by reason of this virtue, one not too common,
the host and hostess might be pardoned for being a little too well
satisfied with themselves and with their last new bibelot.  The
Fothergill dinners were like all other dinners given by the
Fothergills of society.  They were costly, utterly undistinguished,
and invariably graced by the presence of certain guests who seemed
to have been called in out of the street at the last moment.  Van
der Roet's Japanese menus were curious, and at times inimical to
digestion, but the personality of the host was charming.  As to Sir
John Oglethorpe, the question of the dinner postponed troubled her
little:  another repast, the finest that London's finest restaurant
could furnish, would certainly be forthcoming before long.  In Sir
John's case, her discomposure took the form of sympathy for her
friend in his recent bereavement.  He had been searching all his
life for a perfect cook, and he had found, or believed he had
found, such an one in Narcisse; wherefore the Marchesa was fully
persuaded that, if that artist should evade the guillotine, she
would again taste his incomparable handiwork, even though he were
suspected of murdering his whole family as well as the partner of
his joys.

That same afternoon a number of the balked entertainers
foregathered in the Marchesa's drawing-room, the dominant subject
of discourse being the approaching dissolution of London society
from the refusal of one human to cook food for another.  Those
present were gathered in two groups.  In one the Colonel, in spite
of the recent desertion of his Oriental, was asserting that the
Government should be required to bring over consignments of
perfectly trained Indian cooks, and thus trim the balance between
dining room and kitchen; and to the other Mrs. Gradinger, a gaunt,
ill-dressed lady in spectacles, with a commanding nose and dull,
wispy hair, was proclaiming in a steady metallic voice, that it was
absolutely necessary to double the school rate at once in order to
convert all the girls and some of the boys as well, into perfectly
equipped food-cooking animals; but her audience gradually fell
away, and in an interval of silence the voice of the hostess was
heard giving utterance to a tentative suggestion.

"But, my dear, it is inconceivable that the comfort and the
movement of society should depend on the humours of its servants.
I don't blame them for refusing to cook if they dislike cooking,
and can find other work as light and as well paid; but, things
being as they are, I would suggest that we set to work somehow to
make ourselves independent of cooks."

"That 'somehow' is the crux, my dear Livia," said Mrs. Sinclair.
"I have a plan of my own, but I dare not breathe it, for I'm sure
Mrs. Gradinger would call it 'anti-social,' whatever that may
mean."

"I should imagine that it is a term which might be applied to any
scheme which robs society of the ministrations of its cooks," said
Sir John.

"I have heard mathematicians declare that what is true of the whole
is true of its parts," said the Marchesa.  "I daresay it is, but I
never stopped to inquire.  I will amplify on my own account, and
lay down that what is true of the parts must be true of the whole.
I'm sure that sounds quite right.  Now I, as a unit of society, am
independent of cooks because I can cook myself, and if all the
other units were independent, society itself would be independent--
ecco!"

"To speak in this tone of a serious science like Euclid seems
rather frivolous," said Mrs. Gradinger.  "I may observe--" but here
mercifully the observation was checked by the entry of Mrs. St.
Aubyn Fothergill.

She was a handsome woman, always dominated by an air of serious
preoccupation, sumptuously, but not tastefully dressed.  In the
social struggle upwards, wealth was the only weapon she possessed,
and wealth without dexterity has been known to fail before this.
She made efforts, indeed, to imitate Mrs. Sinclair in the
elegancies of menage, and to pose as a woman of mind after the
pattern of Mrs. Gradinger; but the task first named required too
much tact, and the other powers of endurance which she did not
possess.

"You'll have some tea, Mrs. Fothergill?" said the Marchesa.  "It's
so good of you to have come."

"No, really, I can't take any tea; in fact, I couldn't take any
lunch out of vexation at having to put you off, my dear Marchesa."

"Oh, these accidents will occur.  We were just discussing the best
way of getting round them," said the Marchesa.  "Now, dear,"
--speaking to Mrs. Sinclair--"let's have your plan.  Mrs. Gradinger
has fastened like a leech on the Canon and Mrs. Wilding, and won't
hear a word of what you have to say."

"Well, my scheme is just an amplification of your mathematical
illustrations, that we should all learn to cook for ourselves.  I
regard it no longer as impossible, or even difficult, since you
have informed us that you are a mistress of the art.  We'll start a
new school of cookery, and you shall teach us all you know."

"Ah, my dear Laura, you are like certain English women in the
hunting field.  You are inclined to rush your fences," said the
Marchesa with a deprecatory gesture.  "And just look at the people
gathered here in this room.  Wouldn't they--to continue the horsey
metaphor--be rather an awkward team to drive?"

"Not at all, if you had them in suitable surroundings.  Now,
supposing some beneficent millionaire were to lend us for a month
or so a nice country house, we might install you there as Mistress
of the stewpans, and sit at your feet as disciples," said Mrs.
Sinclair.

"The idea seems first-rate," said Van der Roet; "and I suppose, if
we are good little boys and girls, and learn our lessons properly,
we may be allowed to taste some of our own dishes."

"Might not that lead to a confusion between rewards and
punishments?" said Sir John.

"If ever it comes to that," said Miss Macdonnell with a mischievous
glance out of a pair of dark, flashing Celtic eyes, "I hope that
our mistress will inspect carefully all pupils' work before we are
asked to eat it.  I don't want to sit down to another of Mr. Van der
Roet's Japanese salads made of periwinkles and wallflowers."

"And we must first catch our millionaire," said the Colonel.

During these remarks Mrs. Fothergill had been standing "with parted
lips and straining eyes," the eyes of one who is seeking to "cut in."
Now came her chance. "What a delightful idea dear Mrs. Sinclair's
is. We have been dreadfully extravagant this year over buying
pictures, and have doubled our charitable subscriptions, but I believe
I can still promise to act in a humble way the part of Mrs. Sinclair's
millionaire. We have just finished doing up the 'Laurestinas,' a little
place we bought last year, and it is quite at your service, Marchesa,
as soon as you liketo occupy it."

This unlooked-for proposition almost took away the Marchesa's
breath. "Ah, Mrs. Fothergill," she said, "it was Mrs. Sinclair's
plan, not mine. She kindly wishes to turn me into a cook for I know
not how long, just at the hottest season of the year, a fate I should
hardly have chosen for myself."

"My dear, it would be a new sensation, and one you would enjoy
beyond everything. I am sure it is a scheme every one here will hail
with acclamation," said Mrs. Sinclair. All other conversation had
now ceased, and the eyes of the rest of the company were fixed on the
speaker. "Ladies and gentlemen," she went on, "you have heard my
suggestion, and you have heard Mrs. Fothergill's most kind and
opportune offer of her country house as the seat of our school of
cookery.  Such an opportunity is one in ten thousand. Surely all of
us---even the Marchesa--must see that it is one not to be neglected."

"I approve thoroughly," said Mrs. Gradinger; "the acquisition of
knowledge, even in so material a field as that of cookery, is always
a clear gain."

"It will give Gradinger a chance to put in a couple of days at Ascot,"
whispered Van der Roet.

"Where Mrs. Gradinger leads, all must follow, said Miss Macdonnell.
"Take the sense of the meeting, Mrs. Sinclair, before the Marchesa
has time to enter a protest."

"And is the proposed instructress to have no voice in the matter?"
said the Marchesa, laughing.

"None at all, except to consent," said Mrs. Sinclair; "you are going
to be absolute mistress over us for the next fortnight, so you
surely might obey just this once."

"You have been denouncing one of our cherished institutions,
Marchesa," said Lady Considine, "so I consider you are bound to help
us to replace the British cook by something better."

"If Mrs. Sinclair has set her heart on this interesting experiment. 
You may as well consent at once, Marchesa," said the Colonel, "and
teach us how to cook, and--what may be a harder task--to teach us
to eat what other aspirants may have cooked."

"If this scheme really comes off," said Sir John, "I would suggest
that the Marchesa should always be provided with a plate of her own
up her sleeve--if I may use such an expression--so that any void in
the menu, caused by failure on the part of the under-skilled or
over-ambitious amateur, may be filled by what will certainly be a
chef-d'oeuvre."

"I shall back up Mrs. Sinclair's proposition with all my power,"
said Mrs. Wilding.  "The Canon will be in residence at Martlebridge
for the next month, and I would much rather be learning cookery
under the Marchesa than staying with my brother-in-law at Ealing."

"You'll have to do it, Marchesa," said Van der Roet; "when a new
idea catches on like this, there's no resisting it."

"Well, I consent on one condition--that my rule shall be absolute,"
said the Marchesa, "and I begin my career as an autocrat by giving
Mrs. Fothergill a list of the educational machinery I shall want,
and commanding her to have them all ready by Tuesday morning, the
day on which I declare the school open."

A chorus of applause went up as soon as the Marchesa ceased
speaking.

"Everything shall be ready," said Mrs. Fothergill, radiant with
delight that her offer had been accepted, "and I will put in a full
staff of servants selected from our three other establishments."

"Would it not be as well to send the cook home for a holiday?" said
the Colonel.  "It might be safer, and lead to less broth being
spoilt."

"It seems," said Sir John, "that we shall be ten in number, and I
would therefore propose that, after an illustrious precedent, we
limit our operations to ten days. Then if we each produce one
culinary poem a day we shall, at the end of our time, have provided
the world with a hundred new reasons for enjoying life, supposing,
of course, that we have no failures.  I propose, therefore, that
our society be called the 'New Decameron.'"

"Most appropriate," said Miss Macdonnell, "especially as it owes
its origin to an outbreak of plague--the plague in the kitchen."



The First Day

On the Tuesday morning the Marchesa travelled down to the
"Laurestinas," where she found that Mrs. Fothergill had been as
good as her word.  Everything was in perfect order.  The Marchesa
had notified to her pupils that they must report themselves that
same evening at dinner, and she took down with her her maid, one of
those marvellous Italian servants who combine fidelity with
efficiency in a degree strange to the denizens of more progressive
lands.  Now, with Angelina's assistance, she proposed to set before
the company their first dinner all'Italiana, and the last they
would taste without having participated in the preparation.  The
real work was to begin the following morning.

The dinner was both a revelation and a surprise to the majority of
the company.  All were well travelled, and all had eaten of the
mongrel French dishes given at the "Grand" hotels of the principal
Italian cities, and some of them, in search of adventures, had
dined at London restaurants with Italian names over the doors,
where--with certain honourable exceptions--the cookery was
French, and not of the best, certain Italian plates being included
in the carte for a regular clientele, dishes which would always be
passed over by the English investigator, because he now read, or
tried to read, their names for the first time.  Few of the
Marchesa's pupils had ever wandered away from the arid table d'hote
in Milan, or Florence, or Rome, in search of the ristorante at
which the better class of townsfolk were wont to take their
colazione.  Indeed, whenever an Englishman does break fresh ground
in this direction, he rarely finds sufficient presence of mind to
controvert the suggestions of the smiling minister who, having
spotted his Inglese, at once marks down an omelette aux fines
herbes and a biftek aux pommes as the only food such a creature can
consume.  Thus the culinary experiences of Englishmen in Italy have
led to the perpetuation of the legend that the traveller can indeed
find decent food in the large towns, "because the cooking there is
all French, you know," but that, if he should deviate from the
beaten track, unutterable horrors, swimming in oil and reeking with
garlic, would be his portion.  Oil and garlic are in popular
English belief the inseparable accidents of Italian cookery, which
is supposed to gather its solitary claim to individuality from the
never-failing presence of these admirable, but easily abused, gifts
of Nature.

"You have given us a delicious dinner, Marchesa," said Mrs. Wilding
as the coffee appeared.  "You mustn't think me captious in my
remarks--indeed it would be most ungracious to look a gift-dinner
in the--What are you laughing at, Sir John? I suppose I've done
something awful with my metaphors--mixed them up somehow."

"Everything Mrs. Wilding mixes will be mixed admirably, as
admirably, say, as that sauce which was served with the Manzo alla
Certosina," Sir John replied.

"That is said in your best style, Sir John," replied Mrs. Wilding;
"but what I was going to remark was, that I, as a poor parson's
wife, shall ask for some instruction in inexpensive cooking before
we separate.  The dinner we have just eaten is surely only within
the reach of rich people."

"I wish some of the rich people I dine with could manage now and
then to reach a dinner as good," said the Colonel.

"I believe it is a generally received maxim, that if you want a
truth to be accepted you must repeat the same in season and out,
whenever you have the opportunity," said the Marchesa.  "The
particular truth I have now in mind is the fact that Italian
cookery is the cookery of a poor nation, of people who have scant
means wherewith to purchase the very inferior materials they must
needs work with; and that they produce palatable food at all is, I
maintain, a proof that they bring high intelligence to the task. 
Italian culinary methods have been developed in the struggle when
the cook, working with an allowance upon which an English cook
would resign at once, has succeeded by careful manipulation and the
study of flavouring in turning out excellent dishes made of fish
and meat confessedly inferior.  Now, if we loosen the purse-strings
a little, and use the best English materials, I affirm that we
shall achieve a result excellent enough to prove that Italian
cookery is worthy to take its stand beside its great French rival. 
I am glad Mrs. Wilding has given me an opportunity to impress upon
you all that its main characteristics are simplicity and cheapness,
and I can assure her that, even if she should reproduce the most
costly dishes of our course, she will not find any serious increase
in her weekly bills.  When I use the word simplicity, I allude, of
course, to everyday cooking. Dishes of luxury in any school require
elaboration, care, and watchfulness."



Menu -- Dinner*

Zuppa d'uova alla Toscana.  Tuscan egg-soup.
Sogliole alla Livornese.  Sole alla Livornese.
Manzo alla Certosina.  Fillet of beef, Certosina sauce.
Minuta alla Milanese.  Chickens' livers alla Milanese.
Cavoli fiodi ripieni.  Cauliflower with forcemeat.
Cappone arrosto con insalata.  Roast capon with salad.
Zabajone.  Spiced custard.
Uova al pomidoro.  Eggs and tomatoes.

-----------------------------------------

*The recipes for the dishes contained in all these menus will be
found in the second part of the book.  The limits of the seasons
have necessarily been ignored.



The Second Day

Wednesday's luncheon was anticipated with some curiosity, or even
searchings of heart, as in it would appear the first-fruits of the
hand of the amateur.  The Marchesa wisely restricted it to two
dishes, for the compounding of which she requisitioned the services
of Lady Considine, Mrs. Sinclair, and the Colonel.  The others she
sent to watch Angelina and her circle while they were preparing the
vegetables and the dinner entrees.  After the luncheon dishes had
been discussed, they were both proclaimed admirable.  It was a true
bit of Italian finesse on the part of the Marchesa to lay a share
of the responsibility of the first meal upon the Colonel, who was
notoriously the most captious and the hardest to please of all the
company; and she did even more than make him jointly responsible,
for she authorised him to see to the production of a special curry
of his own invention, the recipe for which he always carried in his
pocket-book, thus letting India share with Italy in the honours of
the first luncheon. 

"My congratulations to you on your curry, Colonel Trestrail," said
Miss Macdonnell. "You haven't followed the English fashion of
flavouring a curry by emptying the pepper-pot into the dish?"

"Pepper properly used is the most admirable of condiments," the
Colonel said.

"Why this association of the Colonel and pepper?" said Van der
Roet.  "In this society we ought to be as nice in our phraseology
as in our flavourings, and be careful to eschew the incongruous. 
You are coughing, Mrs. Wilding.  Let me give you some water."

"I think it must have been one of those rare grains of the
Colonel's pepper, for you must have a little pepper in a curry,
mustn't you, Colonel?  Though, as Miss Macdonnell says, English
cooks generally overdo it.

"Vander is in one of his pleasant witty moods," said the Colonel,
"but I fancy I know as much about the use of pepper as he does
about the use of oil colours; and now we have, got upon art
criticism, I may remark, my dear Vander, I have been reminded that
you have been poaching on my ground.  I saw a landscape of yours
the other day, which looked as if some of my curry powder had got
into the sunset.  I mean the one poor blind old Wilkins bought at
your last show."

"Ah, but that sunset was an inspiration, Colonel, and consequently
beyond your comprehension."

"It is easy to talk of inspiration," said Sir John, "and, perhaps,
now that we are debating a matter of real importance, we might
spend our time more profitably than in discussing what is and what
is not a good picture.  Some inspiration has been brought into our
symposium, I venture to affirm that the brain which devised and the
hand which executed the Tenerumi di Vitello we have just tasted,
were both of them inspired.  In the construction of this dish there
is to be recognised a breath of the same afflatus which gave us the
Florentine campanile, and the Medici tombs, and the portrait of
Monna Lisa.  When we stand before any one of these masterpieces, we
realise at a glance how keen must have been the primal insight, and
how strenuous the effort necessary for the evolution of so
consummate an achievement; and, with the savour of the Tenerumi di
Vitello still fresh, I feel that it deserves to be added to the
list of Italian capo lavori.  Now, as I was not fortunate enough to
be included in the pupils' class this morning, I must beg the next
time the dish is presented to us -- and I imagine all present will
hail its renaissance with joy -- that I may be allowed to lend a
hand, or even a finger, in its preparation."

"Veal, with the possible exception of Lombard beef, is the best
meat we get in Italy," said the Marchesa, "so an Italian cook, when
he wants to produce a meat dish of the highest excellence,
generally turns to veal as a basis.  I must say that the breast of
veal, which is the part we had for lunch today, is a somewhat
insipid dish when cooked English fashion.  That we have been able
to put it before you in more palatable form, and to win for it the
approval of such a connoisseur as Sir John Oglethorpe, is largely
owing to the judicious use of that Italian terror--more dire to
many English than paper-money or brigands--garlic."

"The quantity used was infinitesimal," said Mrs. Sinclair, "but it
seems to have been enough to subdue what I once heard Sir John
describe as the pallid solidity of the innocent calf."

"I fear the vein of incongruity in our discourse, lately noted by
Van der Roet, is not quite exhausted," said Sir John.  "The Colonel
was up in arms on account of a too intimate association of his name
with pepper, and now Mrs. Sinclair has bracketed me with the calf,
a most useful animal, I grant, but scarcely one I should have
chosen as a yokefellow; but this is a digression.  To return to our
veal. I had a notion that garlic had something to do with the
triumph of the Tenerumi, and, this being the case, I think it would
be well if the Marchesa were to give us a dissertation on the use
of this invaluable product."

"As Mrs. Sinclair says, the admixture of garlic in the dish in
question was a very small one, and English people somehow never
seem to realise that garlic must always be used sparingly.  The
chief positive idea they have of its characteristics is that which
they gather from the odour of a French or Italian crowd of peasants
at a railway station.  The effect of garlic, eaten in lumps as an
accompaniment to bread and cheese, is naturally awful, but garlic
used as it should be used is the soul, the divine essence, of
cookery.  The palate delights in it without being able to identify
it, and the surest proof of its charm is manifested by the flatness
and insipidity which will infallibly characterise any dish usually
flavoured with it, if by chance this dish should be prepared
without it.  The cook who can employ it successfully will be found
to possess the delicacy of perception, the accuracy of judgment,
and the dexterity of hand, which go to the formation of a great
artist.  It is a primary maxim, and one which cannot be repeated
too often, that garlic must never be cut up and used as part of the
material of any dish.  One small incision should be made in the
clove, which should be put into the dish during the process of
cooking, and allowed to remain there until the cook's palate gives
warning that flavour enough has been extracted.  Then it must be
taken out at once.  This rule does not apply in equal degree to the
use of the onion, the large mild varieties of which may be cooked
and eaten in many excellent bourgeois dishes; but in all fine
cooking, where the onion flavour is wanted, the same treatment
which I have prescribed for garlic must be followed."

The Marchesa gave the Colonel and Lady Considine a holiday that
afternoon, and requested Mrs. Gradinger and Van der Roet to attend
in the kitchen to help with the dinner.  In the first few days of
the session the main portion of the work naturally fell upon the
Marchesa and Angelina, and in spite of the inroads made upon their
time by the necessary directions to the neophytes, and of the
occasional eccentricities of the neophytes' energies, the dinners
and luncheons were all that could be desired.  The Colonel was not
quite satisfied with the flavour of one particular soup, and Mrs.
Gradinger was of opinion that one of the entrees, which she wanted
to superintend herself, but which the Marchesa handed over to Mrs.
Sinclair, had a great deal too much butter in its composition.
Her conscience revolted at the  action of consuming in one dish
enough butter to solace the  breakfast-table of an  honest working
man for two or three days; but the faintness of these criticisms
seemed to prove that every one was well satisfied with the
rendering of the menu of the day.



Menu -- Lunch

Tenerumi di Vitello.  Breast of veal.
Piccione alla minute.  Pigeons, braized with liver, &c.
Curry

Menu -- Dinner

Zuppa alla nazionale.  Soup alla nazionale.
Salmone alla Genovese.  Salmon alla Genovese.
Costolette alla Costanza.  Mutton cutlets alla Costanza.
Fritto misto alla Villeroy.  Lamb's fry alla Villeroy.
Lattughe al sugo.  Stuffed Lettuce.
Dindo arrosto alla Milanese.  Roast turkey alla Milanese.
Crema montata alle fragole.  Strawberry cream.
Tartufi alla Dino.  Truffles alla Dino.



The Third Day

"I observe, dear Marchesa," said Mrs. Fothergill at breakfast on
Thursday morning, "that we still follow the English fashion in our
breakfast dishes.  I have a notion that, in this particular
especially, we gross English show our inferiority to the more
spirituelles nations of the Continent, and I always feel a new
being after the light meal of delicious coffee and crisp bread and
delicate butter the first morning I awake in dear Paris."

"I wonder how it happens, then, that two goes of fish, a plateful
of omelette, and a round and a half of toast and marmalade are
necessary to repair the waste of tissue in dear England?" Van der
Roet whispered to Miss Macdonnell.

"It must be the gross air of England or the gross nature of the--"

The rest of Miss Macdonnell's remark was lost, as the Marchesa
cried out in answer to Mrs. Fothergill, "But why should we have
anything but English breakfast dishes in England? The defects of
English cookery are manifest enough, but breakfast fare is not
amongst them.  In these England stands supreme; there is nothing to
compare with them, and they possess the crowning merit of being
entirely compatible with English life. I cannot say whether it may
be the effect of the crossing, or of the climate on this side, or
that the air of England is charged with some subtle stimulating
quality, given off in the rush and strain of strenuous national
life, but the fact remains that as soon as I find myself across the
Channel I want an English breakfast.  It seems that I am more
English than certain of the English themselves, and I am sorry that
Mrs. Fothergill has been deprived of her French roll and butter.  I
will see that you have it to-morrow, Mrs. Fothergill, and to make
the illusion complete, I will order it to be sent to your room."

"Oh no, Marchesa, that would be giving too much trouble, and I am
sure you want all the help in the house to carry out the service as
exquisitely as you do," said Mrs. Fothergill hurriedly, and
blushing as well as her artistic complexion would allow.

"I fancy," said Mrs. Sinclair, "that foreigners are taking to
English breakfasts as well as English clothes.  I noticed when I
was last in Milan that almost every German or Italian ate his two
boiled eggs for breakfast, the sign whereby the Englishman used to
be marked for a certainty. "

"The German would probably call for boiled eggs when abroad on
account of the impossibility of getting such things in his own
country.  No matter how often you send to the kitchen for properly
boiled eggs in Germany, the result is always the same cold slush,"
said Mrs. Wilding; "and I regret to find that the same plague is
creeping into the English hotels which are served by German
waiters."

"That is quite true," said the Marchesa; "but in England we have no
time to concern ourselves with mere boiled eggs, delicious as they
are.  The roll of delicacies is long enough, or even too long
without them.  When I am in England, I always lament that we have
only seven days a week and one breakfast a day, and when I am in
Italy I declare that the reason why the English have overrun the
world is because they eat such mighty breakfasts.  Considering how
good the dishes are, I wonder the breakfasts are not mightier than
they are."

"It always strikes me that our national barrenness of ideas appears
as plainly in our breakfasts as anywhere," said Mrs. Gradinger. 
"There is a monotony about them which--"

"Monotony!" interrupted the Colonel.  "Why, I could dish you up a
fresh breakfast every day for a month.  Your conservative
tendencies must be very strong, Mrs. Gradinger, if they lead you to
this conclusion."

"Conservative! On the contrary, I--that is, my husband--always
votes for Progressive candidates at every election," said Mrs.
Gradinger, dropping into her platform intonation, at the sound of
which consternation arose in every breast.  "I have, moreover, a
theory that we might reform our diet radically, as well as all
other institutions; but before I expound this, I should like to say
a few words on the waste of wholesome food which goes on.  For
instance, I went for a walk in the woods yesterday afternoon, where
I came upon a vast quantity of fungi which our ignorant middle
classes would pronounce to be poisonous, but which I--in common
with every child of the intelligent working-man educated in a board
school where botany is properly taught--knew to be good for food."

"Excuse me one moment," said Sir John, "but do they really use
board-school children as tests to see whether toadstools are
poisonous or not?"

"I do not think anything I said justified such an inference," said
Mrs. Gradinger in the same solemn drawl; "but I may remark that the
children are taught from illustrated manuals accurately drawn and
coloured.  Well, to come back to the fungi, I took the trouble to
measure the plot on which they were growing, and found it just ten
yards square.  The average weight of edible fungus per square yard
was just an ounce, or a hundred and twelve pounds per acre.  Now,
there must be at least twenty millions of acres in the United
Kingdom capable of producing these fungi without causing the
smallest damage to any other crop, wherefore it seems that, owing
to our lack of instruction, we are wasting some million tons of
good food per annum; and I may remark that this calculation pre-
supposes, that each fungus springs only once in the season; but I
have reason to believe that certain varieties would give five or
six gatherings between May and October, so the weight produced
would be enormously greater than the quantity I have named."

Here Mrs. Gradinger paused to finish her coffee, which was getting
cold, and before she could resume, Sir John had taken up the
parole.  "I think the smaller weight will suffice for the present,
until the taste for strange fungi has developed, or the pressure of
population increased.  And before stimulating a vastly increased
supply, it will be necessary to extirpate the belief that all
fungi, except the familiar mushroom, are poisonous, and perhaps to
appoint an army of inspectors to see that only the right sort are
brought to market."

"Yes, and that will give pleasant and congenial employment to those
youths of the working-classes who are ambitious of a higher career
than that of their fathers," said Lady Considine, "and the
ratepayers will rejoice, no doubt, that they are participating in
the general elevation of the masses."

"Perhaps Mrs. Gradinger will gather a few of her less deadly fungi,
and cook them and eat them herself, pour encourager les autres,"
said Miss Macdonnell.  "Then, if she doesn't die in agonies, we may
all forswear beef and live on toadstools."

"I certainly will," said Mrs. Gradinger; "and before we rise from
table I should like--"

"I fear we must hear your remarks at dinner, Mrs. Gradinger," said
the Marchesa.  "Time is getting on, and some of the dishes to-day
are rather elaborate, so now to the kitchen."



Menu -- Lunch.

Risotto alla Genovese.  Savoury rice.
Pollo alla Villereccia.  Chicken alla Villereccia.
Lingue di Castrato alla cucinira. Sheeps' tongues alla cucinira

Menu -- Dinner

Zuppa alla Veneziana.  Venetian soup.
Sogliole alla giardiniera.  Sole with Vegetables.
Timballo alla Romana.  Roman pie.
Petto di Castrato alla salsa di burro.  Breast of mutton with
butter sauce.
Verdure miste.  Mixed vegetables.
Crema rappresa.  Coffee cream.
Ostriche alla Veneziana.  Oyster savoury.



THE FOURTH DAY

THE Colonel was certainly the most severely critical member of the
company.  Up to the present juncture he had been sparing of
censure, and sparing of praise likewise, but on this day, after
lunch, he broke forth into loud praise of the dish of beef which
appeared in the menu.  After specially commending this dish he went
on--

"It seems to me that the dinner of yesterday and to-day's
lunch bear the cachet of a fresh and admirable school of cookery. 
In saying this I don't wish to disparage the traditions which have
governed the preparation of the delicious dishes put before us up
to that date, which I have referred to as the parting of the ways,
the date when the palate of the expert might detect a new hand upon
the keys, a phrase once employed, I believe, with regard to some
man who wrote poetry.  To meet an old friend, or a thoroughly
tested dish, is always pleasant, but old friends die or fall out,
and old favourite dishes may come to pall at last; and for this
reason I hold that the day which brings us a new friend or a new
dish ought to be marked with white chalk."

"And I think some wise man once remarked," said Sir John, "that
the discovery of a dish is vastly more important than the discovery
of a star, for we have already as many stars as we can possibly
require, but we can never have too many dishes."

"I was wondering whether any one would detect the variations I
made yesterday, but I need not have wondered, with such an expert
at table as Colonel Trestrail," said the Marchesa with a laugh. 
"Well, the Colonel has found me out; but from the tone of his
remarks I think I may hope for his approval.  At any rate, I'm sure
he won't move a vote of censure."

"If he does, we'll pack him off to town, and sentence him to dine
at his club every day for a month," said Lady Considine.

"What crime has this particular club committed?" said Mrs.
Sinclair in a whisper.

"Vote of censure! Certainly not," said the Colonel, with an angry
ring in his voice.  Mrs. Sinclair did not love him, and had
calculated accurately the carrying power of her whisper.  "That
would be the basest ingratitude.  I must, however, plead guilty to
an attack of curiosity, and therefore I beg you, Marchesa, to let
us into the secret of your latest inspiration."

"Its origin was commonplace enough," said the Marchesa, "but in a
way interesting.  Once upon a time--more years ago than I care to
remember--I was strolling about the Piazza Navona in Rome, and
amusing myself by going from one barrow to another, and turning
over the heaps of rubbish with which they were stocked.  All the
while I was innocently plagiarising that fateful walk of Browning's
round the Riccardi Palace in Florence, the day when he bought for a
lira the Romana homocidiorum.  The world knows what was the outcome
of Browning's purchase, but it will probably never fathom the full
effect of mine.  How do his lines run?"

                                        "These
I picked the book from.  Five compeers in flank
Stood left and right of it as tempting more--
A dog's-eared Spicilegium, the fond tale
O' the frail one of the Flower, by young Dumas,
Vulgarised Horace for the use of schools,
The Life, Death, Miracles of Saint Somebody,
Saint Somebody Else, his Miracles, Death and Life."

"Well, the choice which lay before me on one particular barrow was
fully as wide, or perhaps wider than that which met the poet's eye,
but after I had espied a little yellow paper-covered book with the
title La Cucina Partenopea, overo il Paradiso dei gastronomi, I
looked no farther.  What infinite possibilities of pleasure might
lie hidden under such a name.  I secured it, together with the
Story of Barlaam and Josaphat, for thirty-five centesimi, and
handed over the coins to the hungry-eyed old man in charge, who
regretted, I am sure, when he saw the eager look upon my face, that
he had not marked the books a lira at least.  I should now be a
rich woman if I had spent all the money I have spent as profitably
as those seven sold.  Besides being a master in the art of cookery,
the author was a moral philosopher as well; and he addresses his
reader in prefatory words which bespeak a profound knowledge of
life.  He writes:  'Though the time of man here on earth is passed
in a never-ending turmoil, which must make him often curse the
moment when he opened his eyes on such a world; though life itself
must often become irksome or even intolerable, nevertheless, by
God's blessing, one supreme consolation remains for this wretched
body of ours.  I allude to that moment when, the forces being spent
and the stomach craving support, the wearied mortal sits down to
face a good dinner.  Here is to be found an effectual balm for the
ills of life:  something to drown all remembrance of our ill-
humours, the worries of business, or even family quarrels.  In
sooth, it is only at table that a man may bid the devil fly away
with Solomon and all his wisdom, and give himself up to an earthly
delight, which is a pleasure and a profit at the same time.'"

"The circumstances under which this precious book was found seem to
suggest a culinary poem on the model of the 'Ring and the Book,"'
said Mrs. Sinclair, "or we might deal with the story in practical
shape by letting every one of us prepare the same dish.  I fancy
the individual renderings of the same recipe would vary quite as
widely as the versions of the unsavoury story set forth in Mr.
Browning's little poem."

"I think we had better have a supplementary day for a trial of the
sort Mrs. Sinclair suggests," said Miss Macdonnell.  "I speak with
the memory of a preparation of liver I tasted yesterday in the
kitchen--one of the dishes which did not appear at dinner."

"That is rather hard on the Colonel," said Van der Roet; "he did
his best, and now, see how hard he is trying to look as if he
didn't know what you are alluding to!"

"I never in all my life--" the Colonel began; but the Marchesa,
fearing a storm, interfered. "I have a lot more to tell you about
my little Neapolitan book," she went on, "and I will begin  by
saying that, for the future, we cannot do better than make free use
of it.  The author opens with an announcement that he means to give
exact quantities for every dish, and then, like a true Neapolitan,
lets quantities go entirely, and adopts the rule-of-thumb system. 
And I must say I always find the question of quantities a difficult
one.  Some books give exact measures, each dish being reckoned
enough for four persons, with instructions to increase the measures
in proportion to the additional number of diners but here a rigid
rule is impossible, for a dish which is to serve by itself, as a
supper or a lunch, must necessarily be bigger than one which merely
fills one place in a dinner menu.  Quantities can be given
approximately in many cases, but flavouring must always be a
question of individual taste.  Latitude must be allowed, for all
cooks who can turn out distinguished work will be found to be
endowed with imagination, and these, being artists, will never
consent to follow a rigid rule of quantity.  To put it briefly,
cooks who need to be told everything, will never cook properly,
even if they be told more than everything.  And after all, no one
takes seriously the quantities given by the chef of a millionaire
or a prince; witness the cook of the Prince de Soubise, who
demanded fifty hams for the sauces and garnitures of a single
supper, and when the Prince protested that there could not possibly
be found space for them all on the table, offered to put them all
into a glass bottle no bigger than his thumb.  Some of
Francatelli's quantities are also prodigious, as, for instance,
when to make a simple glaze he calls for three pounds of gravy
beef, the best part of a ham, a knuckle of veal, an old hen, and
two partridges."

Menu-- Lunch

Maccheroni al sugillo.  Macaroni with sausage and tomatoes.
Manzo in insalata.  Beef, pressed and marinated.
Lingue di vitello all'Italiana.  Calves' tongues.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa alla Modanese.  Modenese soup.
Merluzzo in salamoia.  Cod with sauce piquante.
Pollastro in istufa di pomidoro.  Stewed chicken with tomatoes.
Porcelletto farcito alla Corradino.  Stuffed suckling pig.
Insalata alla Navarino.  Navarino salad.
Bodino di semolino.  Semolina pudding.
Frittura di cocozze.  Fried cucumber.



The Fifth Day

The following day was very warm, and some half-dozen of the party
wandered into the garden after lunch and took their coffee under a
big chestnut tree on the lawn.  "And this is the 16th of June,"
said Lady Considine.  "Last year, on this very day, I started for
Hombourg.  I can't say I feel like starting for Hombourg, or any
other place, just at present."

"But why should any one of us want to go to Hombourg?" said Sir
John.  "Nobody can be afraid of gout with the admirable diet we
enjoy here." 

"I beg you to speak for yourself, Sir John," said Lady Considine. 
"I have never yet gone to Hombourg on account of gout."

"Of course not, my dear friend, of course not; there are so many
reasons for going to Hombourg.  There's the early rising, and the
band, and the new people one may meet there, and the change of
diet--especially the change of diet.  But, you see, we have found
our change of diet within an hour of London, so why--as I before
remarked--should we want to rush off to Hombourg?"

"I am a firm believer in that change of diet," said Mrs. Wilding,
"though in the most respectable circles the true-bred Briton still
talks about foreign messes, and affirms that anything else than
plain British fare ruins the digestion.  I must say my own
digestion is none the worse for the holiday I am having from the
preparations of my own 'treasure.' I think we all look remarkably
well; and we don't quarrel or snap at each other, and it would be
hard to find a better proof of wholesome diet than that."

"But I fancied Mrs. Gradinger looked a little out of sorts this
morning, and I'm sure she was more than a little out of temper when
I asked her how soon we were to taste her dish of toadstools," said
Miss Macdonnell.

"I expect she had been making a trial of the British fungi in her
bedroom," said Van der Roet; "and then, you see, our conversation
isn't quite 'high toned' enough for her taste.  We aren't
sufficiently awake to the claims of the masses.  Can any one
explain to me why the people who are so full of mercy for the mass,
are so merciless to the unit?"

"That is her system of proselytising," said the Colonel, "and if
she is content with outward conversion, it isn't a bad one.  I
often feel inclined to agree to any proposition she likes to put
forward, and I would, if I could stop her talking by my
submission."

"You wouldn't do that, Colonel, even in your suavest mood," said
Van der Roet; "but I hope somebody will succeed in checking her
flow of discourse before long.  I'm getting worn to a shadow by the
grind of that awful voice."

"I thought your clothes were getting a bit loose," said the
Colonel, " but I put that phenomenon down to another reason.  In
spite of Mrs. Wilding's praise of our present style of cooking, I
don't believe our friend Vander finds it substantial enough to
sustain his manly bulk, and I'll tell you the grounds of my belief. 
A few mornings ago, when I was shaving, I saw the butcher bring
into the house a splendid sirloin, and as no sirloin has appeared
at table, I venture to infer that this joint was a private affair
of Vander's, and that he, as well as Mrs. Gradinger, has been going
in for bedroom cookery.  Here comes the Marchesa; we'll ask her to
solve the mystery."

"I can account for the missing sirloin," said the Marchesa.  "The
Colonel is wrong for once.  It went duly into the kitchen, and not
to Mr. Van der Roet's bedroom; but I must begin with a slight
explanation, or rather apology.  Next to trial by jury, and the
reverence paid to rank, and the horror of all things which, as poor
Corney Grain used to say, 'are not nice,' I reckon the Sunday
sirloin, cooked and served, one and indivisible as the typical
fetish of the great English middle class.  With this fact before my
eyes, I can assure you I did not lightly lay a hand on its
integrity.  My friends, you have eaten that sirloin without knowing
it.  You may remember that yesterday after lunch the Colonel was
loud in praise of a dish of beef.  Well, that beef was a portion of
the same, and not the best portion.  The Manzo in insalata, which
pleased the Colonel's palate, was that thin piece at the lower end,
the chief function of which, when the sirloin is cooked whole,
seems to lie in keeping the joint steady on the dish while
paterfamilias carves it.  It is never eaten in the dining-room hot,
because every one justly prefers and goes for the under cut;
neither does it find favour at lunch next day, for the reason that,
as cold beef, the upper cut is unapproachable.  I have never heard
that the kitchen hankers after it inordinately; indeed, its
ultimate destination is one of the unexplained mysteries of
housekeeping.  I hold that never, under any circumstances, should
it be cooked with the sirloin, but always cut off and marinated and
braized as we had it yesterday.  Thus you get two hot dishes; our
particular sirloin has given us three.  The parts of this joint
vary greatly in flavour, and in texture as well, and by
accentuating this variation by treatment in the kitchen, you escape
that monotony which is prone to pervade the table so long as the
sirloin remains in the house.  Mrs. Sinclair is sufficiently
experienced as a housekeeper to know that the dish of fillets we
had for dinner last night was not made from the under cut of one
sirloin.  It was by borrowing a little from the upper part that I
managed to fill the dish, and I'm sure that any one who may have
got one of the uppercut fillets had no cause to grumble.  The
Filetto di Bue which we had for lunch to-day was the residue of the
upper cut, and, admirable as is a slice of cold beef taken from
this part of the joint, I think it is an excellent variation to
make a hot dish of it sometimes.  On the score of economy, I am
sure that a sirloin treated in this fashion goes a long way
further."

"The Marchesa demolishes one after another of our venerable
institutions with so charming a despatch that we can scarcely
grieve for them," said Sir John.  "I am not philosopher enough to
divine what change may come over the British character when every
man sits down every day to a perfectly cooked dinner.  It is
sometimes said that our barbarian forefathers left their northern
solitudes because they hankered after the wine and delicate meats
of the south, and perhaps the modern Briton may have been led to
overrun the world by the hope of finding a greater variety of diet
than he gets at home.  It may mean, Marchesa, that this movement of
yours for the suppression of English plain cooking will mark the
close of our national expansion."

"My dear Sir John, you may rest assured that your national
expansion, as well as your national cookery, will continue in spite
of anything we may accomplish here, and I say good luck to them
both.  When have I ever denied the merits of English cookery? "
said the Marchesa.  "Many of its dishes are unsurpassed.  These
islands produce materials so fine, that no art or elaboration can
improve them.  They are best when they are cooked quite plainly,
and this is the reason why simplicity is the key-note of English
cookery.  A fine joint of mutton roasted to a turn, a plain fried
sole with anchovy butter a broiled chop or steak or kidney, fowls
or game cooked English fashion, potatoes baked in their skins and
eaten with butter and salt, a rasher of Wiltshire bacon and a new-
laid egg, where will you beat these? I will go so far as to say no
country can produce a bourgeoises dish which can be compared with
steak and kidney pudding.  But the point I want to press home is
that Italian cookery comes to the aid of those who cannot well
afford to buy those prime qualities of meat and fish which allow of
this perfectly plain treatment.  It is, as I have already said, the
cookery of a nation short of cash and unblessed with such excellent
meat and fish and vegetables as you lucky islanders enjoy.  But it
is rich in clever devices of flavouring, and in combinations, and I
am sure that by its help English people of moderate means may fare
better and spend less than they spend now, if only they will take a
little trouble."



Menu -- Lunch

Gnocchi alla Romana.  Semolina with parmesan.
Filetto di Bue al pistacchi.  Fillet of beef with pistachios
Bodini marinati.  Marinated rissoles.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa Crotopo.  Croute au pot soup.
Sogliole alla Veneziana.  Fillets of sole.
Ateletti alla Sarda.  Atelets of ox-palates, &c.
Costolette di Montone alla Nizzarda.  Mutton cutlets.
Pollo alla Fiorentina.  Fowl with macaroni.
Crema tartara alla Caramella.  Caramel cream.
Uova rimescolati al tartufi.  Eggs with truffles.



The Sixth Day

The following morning, at breakfast, a servant announced that Sir
John Oglethorpe was taking his breakfast in his room, and that
there was no need to keep anything in reserve for him.  It was
stated, however, that Sir John was in no way indisposed, and that
he would join the party at lunch.

He seated himself in his usual place, placid and fresh as ever;
but, unharmed as he was physically, it was evident to all the
company that he was suffering from some mental discomposure.  Miss
Macdonnell, with a frank curiosity which might have been trying in
any one else, asked him point-blank the reason of his absence from
the meal for which, in spite of his partiality for French cookery,
he had a true Englishman's devotion.

"I feel I owe the company some apology for my apparent
churlishness," he said; "but the fact is, that I have received some
very harrowing, but at the same time very interesting, news this
morning.  I think I told you the other day how the vacancy in my
kitchen has led up to a very real tragedy, and that the abhorred
Fury was already hovering terribly near the head of poor Narcisse. 
Well, I have just received from a friend in Paris journals
containing a full account of the trial of Narcisse and of his fair
accomplice.  The worst has come to pass, and Narcisse has been
doomed to sneeze into the basket like a mere aristocrat or
politician during the Terror I was greatly upset by this news, but
I was interested, and in a measure consoled, to find an enclosure
amongst the other papers, an envelope addressed to me in the
handwriting of the condemned man.  This voix d'outre tombe, I
rejoice to say, confides to me the secret of that incomparable
sauce of his, a secret which I feared might be buried with Narcisse
in the prison ditch."

The Marchesa sighed as she listened.  The recipe of the sauce was
safe indeed, but she knew by experience how wide might be the gulf
between the actual work of an artist and the product of another
hand guided by his counsels, let the hand be ever so dexterous, and
the counsels ever so clear.  "Will it be too much," she said, "to
ask you to give us the details of this painful tragedy ?"

"It will not," Sir John replied reflectively. "The last words of
many a so-called genius have been enshrined in literature: 
probably no one will ever know the parting objurgation
of Narcisse.  I will endeavour, however, to give you some notion as
to what occurred, from the budget I have just read.  I fear the
tragedy was a squalid one.  Madame, the victim, was elderly,
unattractive in person, exacting in temper, and the owner of
considerable wealth--at least, this is what came out at the trial. 
It was one of those tangles in which a fatal denouement is
inevitable; and, if this had not come through Mademoiselle Sidonie,
it would have come through somebody else.  The lovers plotted to
remove madame by first drugging her, then breaking her skull with
the wood chopper, and then pitching her downstairs so as to produce
the impression that she had met her death in this fashion.  But
either the arm of Mademoiselle Sidonie--who was told off to do the
hammering--was unskilled in such work, or the opiate was too weak,
for the victim began to shriek before she gave up the ghost. 
Detection seemed imminent, so Narcisse, in whom the quality of
discretion was evidently predominant, bolted at once and got out of
the country.  But the facts were absolutely clear.  The victim
lived long enough to depose that Mademoiselle Sidonie attacked her
with the wood chopper, while Narcisse watched the door.  The
advocate of Narcisse did his work like a man.  He shed the
regulation measure of tears; he drew graphic pictures of the
innocent youth of Narcisse, of his rise to eminence, and of his
filial piety as evidenced by the frequent despatch of money and
comestibles to his venerable mother, who was still living near
Bourges.  Once a year, too, this incomparable artist found time to
renew his youth by a sojourn in the simple cottage which saw his
birth, and by embracing the giver of his life.  Was it possible
that a man who treated one woman with such devotion and reverence
could take the life of another? He adduced various and picturesque
reasons to show that such an event must be impossible, but the jury
took the opposite view.  Some one had to be guillotined, and the
intelligent jury decided that Paris could spare Narcisse better
than it could spare Mademoiselle Sidonie.  I fear the fact that he
had deigned to sell his services to a brutal islander may have
helped them to come to this conclusion, but there were other and
more weighty reasons.  Of the supreme excellence of Narcisse as an
artist the jury knew nothing, so they let him go hang--or worse--
but of Mademoiselle Sidonie they knew a good deal, and their
knowledge, I believe, is shared by certain English visitors to
Paris.  She is one of the attractions of the Fantasies d'Arcadie,
and her latest song, Bonjour Coco, is sung and whistled in every
capital of Europe; so the jury, thrusting aside as mere pedantry
the evidence of facts, set to work to find some verdict which would
not eclipse the gaiety of La Ville Lumiere by cutting short the
career of Mademoiselle Sidonie.  The art of the chef appealed to
only a few, and he dies a mute, but by no means inglorious martyr: 
the art of the chanteuse appeals to the million, the voice of the
many carries the day, and Narcisse must die."

"It is a revolting story," said Mrs. Gradinger, "and one possible
only in a corrupted and corrupting society.  It is wonderful, as
Sir John remarks, how the conquering streams of tendency manifest
themselves even in an affair like this.  Ours is a democratic age,
and the wants and desires of the many, who find delight in this
woman's singing, override the whims of the pampered few, the
employers of such costly luxuries as men cooks."

"You see you are a mere worm, Sir John," laughed Miss Macdonnell,
"and you had better lay out your length to be trampled on."

"Yes, I have long foreseen our fate, we who happen to possess what
our poor brother hankers after.  Well, perhaps I may take up the
worm's role at once and 'turn', that is, burn the recipe of
Narcisse."

"O Sir John, Sir John," cried Mrs. Sinclair "any such burning would
remind me irresistibly of Mr. Mantalini's attempts at suicide. 
There would be an accurate copy in your pocket-book, and besides
this you would probably have learnt off the recipe by heart."

"Yes, we know our Sir John better than that, don't we?" said the
Marchesa; "but, joking apart, Sir John, you might let me have the
recipe at once.  It would go admirably with one of our lunch dishes
for to-morrow."

But on the subject of the sauce, Sir John--like the younger Mr.
Smallweed on the subject of gravy--was adamant.  The wound caused
by the loss of Narcisse was, he declared, yet too recent:  the very
odour of the sauce would provoke a thousand agonising regrets.  And
then the hideous injustice of it all:  Narcisse the artist,
comparatively innocent (for to artists a certain latitude must be
allowed), to moulder in quicklime, and this greedy, sordid
murderess to go on ogling and posturing with superadded popularity
before an idiot crowd unable to distinguish a Remoulade from a
Ravigotte! "No, my dear Marchesa," he said, "the secret of Narcisse
must be kept a little longer, for, to tell the truth, I have an
idea.  I remember that ere this fortunes have been made out of
sauces, and if this sauce be properly handled and put before the
public, it may counteract my falling, or rather disappearing rents. 
If only I could hit upon a fetching name, and find twenty thousand
pounds to spend in advertising, I might be able once more to live
on my acres."

"Oh, surely we shall be able to find you a name between us," said
Mrs. Wilding; "money, and things of that sort are to be procured in
the city, I believe; and I daresay Mr. Van der Roet will design a
pretty label for the sauce bottles."

Menu -- Lunch.

Pollo all'olive.  Fowl with olives.
Scaloppine di rive.  Veal cutlets with rice.
Sedani alla parmigiana.  Stewed celery.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa primaverile.  Spring soup
Sote di Salmone al funghi.  Salmon with mushrooms.
Tenerumi d'Agnello alla veneziana.  Breast of lamb alla Veneziana.
Testa di Vitello alla sorrentina.  Calf's head alla Sorrentina.
Fagiano alla perigo.  Pheasant with truffles.
Torta alla cremonese.  Cremona tart.
Uova alla fiorentina, Egg savoury.



The Seventh Day

"It seems invidious to give special praise where everything is so
good," said Mrs. Sinclair next day at lunch, "but I must say a word
about that clear soup we had at dinner last night.  I have never
ceased to regret that my regard for manners forbade me ask for a
second helping."

"See what it is to have no manners," said Van der Roet.  "I plunged
boldly for another portion of that admirable preparation of calf's
head at dinner.  If I hadn't, I should have regretted it for ever
after.  Now, I'm sure you are just as curious about the
construction of these masterpieces as I am, Mrs. Sinclair, so we'll
beg the Marchesa to let us into the secret."

"Mrs. Sinclair herself had a hand in the calf's-head dish, 'Testa
di Vitello alla sorrentina,' so perhaps I may hand over that part
of the question to her.  I am very proud that one of my pupils
should have won praise from such a distinguished expert as Mr. Van
der Roet, and I leave her to expound the mystery of its charm.  I
think I may without presumption claim the clear soup as a triumph,
and it is a discovery of my own.  The same calf's head which Mrs.
Sinclair has treated with such consummate skill, served also as the
foundation for the stock of the clear soup.  This stock certainly
derived its distinction from the addition of the liquor in which
the head was boiled.  A good consomme can no doubt be made with
stock-meat alone, but the best soup thus made will be inferior to
that we had for dinner last night.  Without the calf's head you
will never get such softness, combined with full roundness on the
tongue, and the great merit of calf's head is that it lets you
attain this excellence without any sacrifice of transparency."

"I have marvelled often at the clearness of your soups, Marchesa,"
said the Colonel.  "What clearing do you use to make them look like
pale sherry?"

"No one has any claim to be called a cook who cannot make soup
without artificial clearing," said the Marchesa.  "Like the poet,
the consomme is born, not made.  It must be clear from the
beginning, an achievement which needs care and trouble like every
other artistic effort, but one nevertheless well within the reach
of any student who means to succeed.  To clear a soup by the
ordinary medium of white of egg or minced beef is to destroy all
flavour and individuality.  If the stock be kept from boiling until
it has been strained, it will develop into a perfectly clear soup
under the hands of a careful and intelligent cook.  The fleeting
delicate aroma which, as every gourmet will admit, gives such
grateful aid to the palate, is the breath of garden herbs and of
herbs alone, and here I have a charge to bring against contemporary
cookery.  I mean the neglect of natural in favour of manufactured
flavourings.  With regard to herbs, this could not always have been
the rule, for I never go into an old English garden without finding
there a border with all the good old-fashioned pot herbs growing
lustily.  I do not say that the use of herbs is unknown, for of
course the best cookery is impossible without them, but I fear that
sage mixed with onion is about the only one which ever tickles the
palate of the great English middle-class.  And simultaneously with
the use of herb flavouring in soup has arisen the practice of
adding wine, which to me seems a very questionable one.  If wine is
put in soup at all, it must be used so sparingly as to render its
presence imperceptible.  Why then use it at all? In some sauces
wine is necessary, but in all cases it is as difficult to regulate
as garlic, and requires the utmost vigilance on the part of the
cook."

"My last cook, who was very stout and a little middle-aged, would
always use flavouring sauces from the grocer's rather than walk up
to the garden, where we have a most seductive herb bed," said Mrs.
Wilding; "and then, again, the love of the English for pungent-made
sauces is another reason for this makeshift practice.  'Oh, a
table-spoonful of somebody's sauce will do for the flavouring,' and
in goes the sauce, and the flavouring is supposed to be complete. 
People who eat their chops, and steaks, and fish, and game, after
having smothered the natural flavour with the same harsh condiment,
may be satisfied with a cuisine of this sort, but to an unvitiated
palate the result is nauseous."

"Yet as a Churchwoman, Mrs. Wilding, you ought to speak with
respect of English sauces.  I think I have heard how a libation of
one of them, which was poured over a certain cathedral, has made it
look as good as new," said Miss Macdonnell, "and we have lately
learned that one of the most distinguished of our party is
ambitious to enter the same career."

"I would suggest that Sir John should devote all that money he
proposes to make by the aid of his familiar spirit--the ghost of
Narcisse--to the building of a temple in honour of the tenth muse,
the muse of cookery," said Mrs. Sinclair; "and what do you think,
Sir John, of a name I dreamt of last night for your sauce, 'The New
Century Sauce'? How will that do?"

"Admirably," said Sir John after a moment's pause; "admirably
enough to allow me to offer you a royalty on every bottle sold. 
'The New Century Sauce', that's the name for me; and now to set to
work to build the factory, and to order plans for the temple of the
tenth muse."

Menu -- Lunch.

Maccheroni al pomidoro.  Macaroni with tomatoes,
Vitello alla pellegrina.  Veal cutlets alla pellegrina.
Animelle al sapor di targone.  Sweetbread with tarragon sauce.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa alla Canavese.  Soup alla Canavese
Naselli con piselli.  Whiting with peas.
Coscia di manzo al forno.  Braized ribs of beef.
Lingua alla Visconti.  Tongue with grapes.
Anitra selvatica.  Wild duck.
Zabajone ghiacciato.  Iced syllabub.
Crostatini alla capucina.  Savoury of rice, truffles, &c.



The Eighth Day

"We are getting unpleasantly near the end of our time," said the
Colonel, "but I am sure not one of us has learnt one tithe of what
the Marchesa has to teach."

"My dear Colonel Trestrail," said the Marchesa, "an education in
cookery does not mean the teaching of a certain number of recipes. 
Education, I maintain, is something far higher than the mere
imparting of facts; my notion of it is the teaching of people to
teach themselves, and this is what I have tried to do in the
kitchen.  With some of you I am sure I have succeeded, and a book
containing the recipe of every dish we have tried will be given to
every pupil when we break up."

"I think the most valuable lesson I have learnt is that cookery is
a matter for serious study," said Mrs. Sinclair.  "The popular
English view seems to be that it is one of those things which gets
itself done.  The food is subjected to the action of heat, a little
butter, or pepper, or onion, being added by way of flavouring, and
the process is complete.  To put it bluntly, it requires at least
as much mental application to roast a fowl as to cut a bodice; but
it does not strike the average Englishwoman in this way, for she
will spend hours in thinking and talking about dressmaking (which
is generally as ill done as her cooking), while she will be
reluctant to give ten minutes to the consideration as to how a
luncheon or supper dish shall be prepared.  The English middle
classes are most culpably negligent about the food they eat, and as
a consequence they get exactly the sort of cooks they deserve to
get.  I do not blame the cooks; if they can get paid for cooking
ill, why should they trouble to learn to cook well?"

"I agree entirely," said Mrs. Wilding.  "That saying, 'What I like
is good plain roast and boiled, and none of your foreign
kickshaws,' is, as every one knows, the stock utterance of John
Bull on the stage or in the novel; and, though John Bull is not in
the least like his fictitious presentment, this form of words is
largely responsible for the waste and want of variety in the
English kitchen.  The plain roast and boiled means a joint every
day, and this arrangement the good plain cook finds an admirable
one for several reasons:  it means little trouble, and it means
also lots of scraps and bones and waste pieces.  The good plain
cook brings all the forces of obstruction to bear whenever the
mistress suggests made dishes; and, should this suggestion ever be
carried out, she takes care that the achievement shall be of a
character not likely to invite repetition.  Not long ago a friend
of mine was questioning a cook as to soups, whereupon the cook
answered that she had never been required to make such things where
she had lived; all soups were bought in tins or bottles, and had
simply to be warmed up.  Cakes, too, were outside her repertoire,
having always been 'had in' from the confectioner's, while
'entrys' were in her opinion, and in the opinion of her various
mistresses, 'un'ealthy' and not worth making."

"My experience is that, if a mistress takes an interest in cooking,
she will generally have a fairly efficient cook," said Mrs. Fothergill.
"I agree with Mrs. Sinclair that our English cooks are spoilt by
neglect; and I think it is hard upon them, as a class, that so many
inefficient women should be able to pose as cooks while they are
unable to boil a potato properly."

"And the so-called schools of cookery are quite useless in what
they teach," said Miss Macdonnell.  "I once sent a cook of mine to
one to learn how to make a clear soup, and when she came back, she
sent up, as an evidence of her progress, a potato pie coloured pink
and green, a most poisonous-looking dish--and her clear soups were
as bad as ever."

Said the Colonel, "I will beg leave to enter a protest against the
imperfections of that repast which is supposed to be the peculiar
delight of the ladies, I allude to afternoon tea.  I want to know
why it is that unless I happen to call just when the tea is brought
up--I grant, I know of a few houses which are honourable
exceptions--I am fated to drink that most abominable of all
decoctions, stewed lukewarm tea.  'Will you have some tea? I'm
afraid it isn't quite fresh,' the hostess will remark without a
blush.  What would she think if her husband at dinner were to say,
'Colonel, take a glass of that champagne.  It was opened the day
before yesterday, and I daresay the fizz has gone off a little'?
Tea is cheap enough, and yet the hostess seldom or never thinks of
ordering up a fresh pot.  I believe it is because she is afraid of
the butler."

"I sympathise with you fully, Colonel," said Lady Considine, "and
my withers are unwrung.  You do not often honour me with your
presence on Tuesdays, but I am sure I may claim to be one of your
honourable exceptions."

"Indeed you may," said the Colonel.  "Perhaps men ought not to
intrude on these occasions; but I have a preference for taking tea
in a pretty drawing-room, with a lot of agreeable women, rather
than in a club surrounded by old chaps growling over the latest job
at the War Office, and a younger brigade chattering about the
latest tape prices, and the weights for the spring handicaps."

"All these little imperfections go to prove that we are not a
nation of cooks," said Van der Roet.  "We can't be everything. 
Heine once said that the Romans would never have found time to
conquer the world if they had been obliged to learn the Latin
grammar; and it is the same with us.  We can't expect to found an
empire all over the planet, and cook as well as the French, who--
perhaps wisely--never willingly emerge from the four corners of
their own land."

"There is energy enough left in us when we set about some purely
utilitarian task," said Mrs. Wilding, "but we never throw ourselves
into the arts with the enthusiasm of the Latin races.  I was
reading the other day of a French costumier who rushed to inform a
lady, who had ordered a turban, of his success, exclaiming,
'Madame, apres trots nun's d'insomnie les plumes vent placees.' And
every one knows the story of Vatel's suicide because the fish
failed to arrive.  No Englishman would be capable of flights like
these."

"Really, this indictment of English cookery makes me a little
nervous," said Lady Considine "I have promised to join in a driving
tour through the southern counties.  I shudder to think of the
dinners I shall have to eat at the commercial hotels and posting-
houses on our route."

"English country inns are not what they ought to be, but now and
then you come across one which is very good indeed, as good, if not
better, than anything you could find in any other country; but I
fear I must admit that, charges.  Considered, the balance is
against us," said Sir John.

"When you start you ought to secure Sir John's services as courier,
Lady Considine," said the Marchesa.  "I once had the pleasure of
driving for a week through the Apennines in a party under his
guidance, and I can assure you we found him quite honest and
obliging."

"Ah, Marchesa, I was thinking of that happy time this very
morning," said Sir John.  "Of Arezzo, where we were kept for three
days by rain, which I believe is falling there still.  Of Cortona,
with that wonderful little restaurant on the edge of the cliff,
whence you see Thrasumene lying like a silver mirror in the plain
below.  Of Perugia, the august, of Gubbio, Citta di Castello, Borgo
San Sepolcro, Urbino, and divers others.  If you go for a drive in
Italy, you still may meet with humours of the road such as
travellers of old were wont to enjoy.  I well remember on the road
between Perugia and Gubbio we began to realise we were indeed
traversing mountain paths.  On a sudden the driver got down, waved
his arms, and howled to some peasants working in a field below. 
These, on their part, responded with more arm-waving and howling,
directed apparently towards a village farther up the hill,
whereupon we were assailed with visions of brigands, and amputated
ears, and ransom.  But at a turn of the road we came upon two
magnificent white oxen, which, being harnessed on in front, drew
us, and our carriages and horses as well, up five miles of steep
incline.  These beautiful fellows, it seemed, were what the driver
was signalling for, and not for brigands.  Again, every inn we
stayed at supplied us with some representative touch of local life
and habit.  Here the whole personnel of the inn, reinforced by a
goodly contingent of the townsfolk, would accompany us even into
our bedrooms, and display the keenest interest in the unpacking of
our luggage.  There the cook would come and take personal
instructions as to the coming meal, throwing out suggestions the
while as to the merits of this or that particular dish, and in one
place the ancient chambermaid insisted that one of the ladies, who
had got a slight cold, should have the prete put into her bed for a
short time to warm it.  You need not look shocked, Colonel.  The
prete in question was merely a wooden frame, in the midst of which
hangs a scaldino filled with burning ashes--a most comforting
ecclesiastic, I can assure you.  All the inns we visited had
certain characteristics in common.  The entrance is always dirty,
and the staircase too, the dining rooms fairly comfortable, the
bedrooms always clean and good, and the food much better than you
would expect to find in such out-of-the-way places; indeed I cannot
think of any inn where it was not good and wholesome, while often
it was delicious.  In short, Lady Considine, I strongly advise you
to take a drive in Italy next spring, and if I am free I shall be
delighted to act as courier."

"Sir John has forgotten one or two touches I must fill in," said
the Marchesa.  "It was often difficult to arrange a stopping-place
for lunch, so we always stocked our basket before starting.  After
the first day's experience we decided that it was vastly more
pleasant to take our meal while going uphill at a foot-pace, than
in the swing and jolt of a descent, so the route and the pace of
the horses had to be regulated in order to give us a good hour's
ascent about noon.  Fortunately hills are plentiful in this part of
Italy, and in the keen air we generally made an end of the vast
store of provisions we laid in, and the generous fiascho was always
empty a little too soon.  Our drive came to an end at Fano, whither
we had gone on account of a strange romantic desire of Sir John to
look upon an angel which Browning had named in one of his poems. 
Ah! how vividly I can recall our pursuit of that picture.  It was a
wet, melancholy day.  The people of Fano were careless of the fame
of their angel, for no one knew the church which it graced.  At
last we came upon it by the merest chance, and Sir John led the
procession up to the shrine, where we all stood for a time in
positions of mock admiration.  Sir John tried hard to keep up the
imposition, but something, either his innate honesty or the
chilling environment of disapproval of Guercino's handiwork, was
too much for him.  He did his best to admire, but the task was
beyond his powers, and he raised no protest when some scoffer
affirmed that, though Browning might be a great poet, he was a
mighty poor judge of painting, when he gave in his beautiful poem
immortality to this tawdry theatrical canvas.  'I think,' said Sir
John, 'we had better go back to the hotel and order lunch.  It
would have been wiser to have ordered it before we left.' We were
all so much touched by his penitence that no one had the heart to
remind him how a proposition as to lunch had been made by our
leading Philistine as soon as we arrived, a proposition waved aside
by Sir John as inadmissible until the 'Guardian Angel' should have
been seen and admired."

"I plead guilty," said Sir John.  "I think this experience gave a
death-blow to my career as an appreciator.  Anyhow, I quite forget
what the angel was like, and for reminiscences of Fano have to fall
back upon the excellent colazione we ate in the externally
unattractive, but internally admirable, Albergo del Moro."



Menu -- Lunch.

Astachi all'Italiana.  Lobster all'Italiana
Filetto di bue alla Napolitana.  Fillet of beef with Neapolitan
sauce.
Risotto alla spagnuola.  Savoury rice.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa alla Romana.  Soup with quenelles.
Salmone alla Genovese.  Salmon alla Genovese.
Costolette in agro-dolce.  Mutton cutlets with Roman sauce.
Flano di spinacci.  Spinach in a mould.
Cappone con rive.  Capon with rice.
Croccante di mandorle.  Almond sweet.
Ostriche alla Napolitana.  Oyster savoury.



The Ninth Day

"Since I have been associated with the production of a dinner, I
have had my eyes opened as to the complicated nature of the task,
and the numerous strings which have to be pulled in order to ensure
success," said the Colonel; "but, seeing that a dinner- party with
well-chosen sympathetic guests and distinguished dishes represents
one of the consummate triumphs of civilisation, there is no reason
to wonder.  To achieve a triumph of any sort demands an effort."

"Effort," said Miss Macdonnell.  "Yes, effort is the word I
associate with so many middle-class English dinners.  It is an
effort to the hosts, who regard the whole business as a mere paying
off of debts; and an effort to the guests, who, as they go to
dress, recall grisly memories of former similar experiences.  It
often astonishes me that dinner-giving of this character should
still flourish."

"The explanation is easy," said Van der Roet; "it flourishes
because it gives a mark of distinction.  It is a delicious moment
for Mrs. Johnson when she is able to say to Mrs. Thompson, 'My
dear, I am quite worn-out; we dined out every day last week, and
have four more dinners in the next five days.' These good people
show their British grit by the persistency with which they go on
with their penitential hospitality, and their lack of ideas in
never attempting to modify it so as to make it a pleasure instead
of a disagreeable duty."

"It won't do to generalise too widely, Van der Roet," said Sir
John.  "Some of these good people surely enjoy their party-giving;
and, from my own experience of one or two houses of this sort, I
can assure you the food is quite respectable.  The great
imperfection seems to lie in the utter want of consideration in the
choice of guests.  A certain number of people and a certain
quantity of food shot into a room, that is their notion of a
dinner-party."

"Of course we understand that the success of a dinner depends much
more on the character of the guests than on the character of the
food," said Mrs. Sinclair; "and most of us, I take it, are able to
fill our tables with pleasant friends; but what of the dull people
who know none but dull people? What gain will they get by taking
counsel how they shall fill their tables?"

"More, perhaps, than you think, dear Mrs. Sinclair," said Sir John. 
"Dull people often enjoy themselves immensely when they meet dull
people only.  The frost comes when the host unwisely mixes in one
or two guests of another sort--people who give themselves airs of
finding more pleasure in reading Stevenson than the sixpenny
magazines, and who don't know where Hurlingham is.  Then the sheep
begin to segregate themselves from the goats, and the feast is
manque."

"Considering what a trouble and anxiety a dinner-party must be to
the hostess, even under the most favouring conditions, I am always
at a loss to discover why so many women take so much pains, and
spend a considerable sum of money as well, over details which are
unessential, or even noxious," said Mrs. Wilding.  "A few flowers
on the table are all very well--one bowl in the centre is enough--
but in many houses the cost of the flowers equals, if it does not
outrun, the cost of all the rest of the entertainment.  A few roses
or chrysanthemums are perfect as accessories, but to load a table
with flowers of heavy or pungent scent is an outrage.  Lilies of
the valley are lovely in proper surroundings, but on a dinner-table
they are anathema.  And then the mass of paper monstrosities which
crowd every corner.  Swans, nautilus shells, and even wild boars
are used to hold up the menu.  Once my menu was printed on a satin
flag, and during the war the universal khaki invaded the dinner
table.  Ices are served in frilled baskets of paper, which have a
tendency to dissolve and amalgamate with the sweet.  The only paper
on the table should be the menu, writ plain on a handsome card."

"No one can complain of papery ices here," said the Marchesa. 
"Ices may be innocuous, but I don't favour them, and no one seems
to have felt the want of them; at least, to adopt the phrase of the
London shopkeeper, 'I have had no complaints.' And even the ice,
the very emblem of purity, has not escaped the touch of the dinner-
table decorator.  Only a few days ago I helped myself with my
fingers to what looked like a lovely peach, and let it flop down
into the lap of a bishop who was sitting next to me.  This was the
hostess's pretty taste in ices."

"They are generally made in the shape of camelias this season,"
said Van der Roet.  "I knew a man who took one and stuck it in his
buttonhole. "

"I must say I enjoy an ice at dinner," said Lady Considine.  "I
know the doctors abuse them, but I notice they always eat them when
they get the chance."

"Ah, that is merely human inconsistency," said Sir John.  "I am
inclined to agree with the Marchesa that ice at dinner is an
incongruity, and may well be dispensed with.  I think I am correct,
Marchesa, in assuming that Italy, which has showered so many boons
upon us, gave us also the taste for ices."

"I fear I must agree," said the Marchesa.  "I now feel what a
blessing it would have been for you English if you had learnt from
us instead the art of cooking the admirable vegetables your gardens
produce.  How is it that English cookery has never found any better
treatment for vegetables than to boil them quite plain? French
beans so treated are tender, and of a pleasant texture on the
palate, but I have never been able to find any taste in them.  They
are tasteless largely because the cook persists in shredding them
into minute bits, and I maintain that they ought to be cooked
whole--certainly when they are young--and sautez, a perfectly plain
and easy process, which is hard to beat.  Plain boiled cauliflower
is doubtless good, but cooked alla crema it is far better; indeed,
it is one of the best vegetable dishes I know.  But perhaps the
greatest discovery in cookery we Italians ever made was the
combination of vegetables and cheese.  There are a dozen excellent
methods of cooking cauliflower with cheese, and one of these has
come to you through France, choux-fleurs au gratin, and has become
popular.  Jerusalem artichokes treated in the same fashion are
excellent; and the cucumber, nearly always eaten raw in England,
holds a first place as a vegetable for cooking.  I seem to remember
that every one was loud in its praises when we tasted it as an
adjunct to Manzo alla Certosina.  Why is it that celery is for the
most part only eaten raw with cheese? We have numberless methods of
cooking it in Italy, and beetroot and lettuce as well.  There is no
spinach so good as English, and nowhere is it so badly cooked; it
is always coarse and gritty because so little trouble is taken with
it, and I can assure you that the smooth, delicate dish which we
call Flano di spinacci is not produced merely by boiling and
chopping it, and turning it out into a dish."



Menu -- Lunch

Minestrone alla Milanese.  Vegetable broth.
Coniglio alla Provenzale.  Rabbit alla Provenzale.
Insalata di pomidoro.  Tomato salad.

Menu -- Dinner.

Zuppa alla Maria Pia.  Soup alla Maria Pia.
Anguilla con ortaggi alla Milanese.  Eels with vegetables.
Manzo con sugo di barbabietoli.  Fillet of beef with beetroot
sauce.
Animelle alla parmegiana.  Sweetbread with parmesan.
Perniciotti alla Gastalda.  Partridges alla Gastalda.
Uova ripiani.  Stuffed eggs.



The Tenth Day

The sun rose on the tenth and last day at the "Laurestinas" as he
was wont to rise on less eventful mornings.  At breakfast the
Marchesa proposed that the lunch that day should be a little more
ornate than usual, and the dinner somewhat simpler.  She
requisitioned the services of six of the company to prepare the
lunch, and at the same time announced that they would all have a
holiday in the afternoon except Mrs. Sinclair, whom she warned to
be ready to spend the afternoon in the kitchen helping prepare the
last dinner.

Four dishes, all admirable, appeared at lunch, and several of the
party expressed regret that the heat of the weather forbade them
from tasting every one; but Sir John was not of these.  He ate
steadily through the menu, and when he finally laid down his knife
and fork he heaved a sigh, whether of satisfaction or regret it
were hard to say.

"It is a commonplace of the deepest dye to remark that ingratitude
is inherent in mankind,"  he began; "I am compelled to utter it,
however, by the sudden longing I feel for a plate from the hand of
the late lamented Narcisse after I have eaten one of the best
luncheons ever put on a table."

"Experience of one school of excellence has caused a hankering
after the triumphs of another," said Miss Macdonnell "There is one
glory of the Marchesa, there is, or was, another of Narcisse, and
the taste of the Marchesa's handiwork has stimulated the desire of
comparision.  Never mind, Sir John, perhaps in another world
Narcisse may cook you--"

"Oh stop, stop, for goodness' sake," cried Sir John, "I doubt
whether even he could make me into a dainty dish to set before the
King of Tartarus, though the stove would no doubt be fitted with
the latest improvements and the fuel abundant."

"Really, Sir John, I'm not sure I ought not to rise and protest,"
said Mrs. Wilding, "and I think I would if it weren't our last
day."

"Make a note of Sir John's wickedness, and pass it on to the Canon
for use in a sermon," said Van der Roet.

"I can only allow you half-an-hour, Laura," said the Marchesa to
Mrs. Sinclair, "then you must come and work with me for the
delectation of these idle people, who are going to spend the
afternoon talking scandal under the chestnuts."

"I am quite ready to join you if I can be of any help," said Mrs.
Gradinger.  "When knowledge is to be acquired, I am always loath to
stand aside, not for my own sake so much as for the sake of others
less fortunate, to whom I might possibly impart it hereafter."

"You are very good," said the Marchesa, "but I think I must adhere
to my original scheme of having Mrs. Sinclair by herself.  I see
coffee is now being taken into the garden, so we will adjourn, if
you please."

After the two workers had departed for the kitchen, an unwonted
silence fell on the party under the chestnuts.  Probably every one
was pondering over the imminent dissolution of the company, and
wondering whether to regret or rejoice.  The peace had been kept
marvellously well, considering the composition of the company. 
Mrs. Fothergill at times had made a show of posing as the
beneficent patron, and Mrs. Gradinger had essayed to teach what
nobody wanted to learn; but firm and judicious snubbing had kept
these persons in their proper places.  Nearly every one was sorry
that the end had come.  It had been real repose to Mrs. Wilding to
pass ten days in an atmosphere entirely free from all perfume of
the cathedral close.  Lady Considine had been spending freely of
late, and ten days' cessation of tradesmen's calls, and servants on
board wages, had come as a welcome relief.  Sir John had gained a
respite from the task he dreaded, the task of going in quest of a
successor to Narcisse.  Now as he sat consuming his cigarette in
the leisurely fashion so characteristic of his enjoyment--and those
who knew him best were wont to say that Sir John practiced few arts
so studiously as that of enjoyment--he could not banish the figure
of Narcisse from his reverie.  A horrible thought assailed him that
this obsession might spring from the fact that on this very morning
Narcisse might have taken his last brief walk out of the door of La
Roquette, and that his disembodied spirit might be hovering around. 
Admirable as the cookery of the Marchesa had been, and fully as he
had appreciated it, he felt he would give a good deal to be assured
that on this the last evening of the New Decameron he might sit
down to a dinner prepared by the hand of his departed chef.

That evening the guests gathered round the table with more
empressement than usual.  The Marchesa seemed a little flurried,
and Mrs. Sinclair, in a way, shared her excitement.  The menu, for
the first time, was written in French,  a fact which did not escape
Sir John's eye.  He made no remark as to the soup; it was the best
of its kind, and its French name made it no better than the other
triumphs in the same field which the Marchesa had achieved.  But
when Sir John tasted the first mouthful of the fish he paused, and
after a reflective and regretful look at his plate, he cast his eye
round the table.  All the others, however, were too busily intent
in consuming the Turbot la Vatel to heed his interrogative glance,
so he followed suit, and after he had finished his portion, asked,
sotto voce, for another bit.

In the interval before the service of the next dish Sir John made
several vain attempts to catch the Marchesa's eye, and more than
once tried to get in a word; but she kept up a forced and rather
nervous conversation with Lady Considine and Van der Roet, and
refused to listen.  As Sir John helped himself to the next dish,
Venaison sauce Grand Veneur, the feeling of astonishment which had
seized him when he first tasted the fish deepened into something
like Consternation.  Had his palate indeed deceived him, or had the
Marchesa, by some subtle effort of experimental genius, divined the
secret of Narcisse--the secret of that incomparable sauce, the
recipe of which was safely bestowed in his pocket-book?
Occasionally he had taken a brief nap under the verandah after
lunch:  was it possible that in his sleep he might have murmured,
in her hearing, words which gave the key of the mystery, and the
description of those ingredients which often haunted his dreams?
One thing was certain, that tile savour which rose from the venison
before him was the same which haunted his memory as the parting
effort of the ill-starred Narcisse.

Sir John was the least superstitious of mortals, still here he was
face to face with one of these conjunctions of affairs which the
credulous accept as manifestations of some hidden power, and
sceptics as coincidences and nothing more.  All the afternoon he
had been thinking of Narcisse, and yearning beyond measure for
something suggestive of his art; and here, on his plate before him,
was food which might have been touched by the vanished hand.  The
same subtle influence pervaded the Chartreuse a la cardinal, the
roast capon and salad, and the sweet.  At last, when the dinner was
nearly over, and when the Marchesa had apparently said all she had
to say to Van der Roet, he lifted up his voice and said, "
Marchesa, who gave you the recipe for the sauce with which the
venison was served this evening?"

The Marchesa glanced at Mrs. Sinclair, and then struck a hand-bell
on the table.  The door opened, and a little man, habited in a
cook's dress of spotless white, entered and came forward.  "M.
Narcisse," said the Marchesa, "Sir John wants to know what sauce
was used in dressing the venison; perhaps you can tell him."

Here the Marchesa rose and left the room, and all the rest followed
her, feeling it was unmeet that such a reunion should be witnessed
by other eyes, however friendly they might be.

           * * * * * * *

"Now, you must tell us all about it," said Lady Considine, as soon
as they got into the drawing-room, "and how you ever managed to get
him out of this scrape."

"Oh, there isn't much to tell," said the Marchesa.  "Narcisse was
condemned, indeed, but no one ever believed he would be executed. 
One of my oldest friends is married to an official high up in the
Ministry of Justice, and I heard from her last week that Narcisse
would certainly be reprieved; but I never expected a free pardon. 
Indeed, he got this entirely because it was discovered that
Mademoiselle Sidonie, his accomplice, was really a Miss Adah
Levine, who had graduated at a music-hall in East London, and that
she had announced her intention of retiring to the land of her
birth, and ascending to the apex of her profession on the strength
of her Parisian reputation.  Then it was that the reaction in
favour of Narcisse set in; the boulevards could not stand this. 
The journals dealt with this new outrage in their best Fashoda
style; the cafes rang with it:  another insult cast upon unhappy
France, whose destiny was, it seemed, to weep tears of blood to the
end of time.  There were rumours of an interpellation in the
Chamber, the position of the Minister of the Interior was spoken of
as precarious, indeed the Eclaireur reported one evening that he
had resigned.  Pockets were picked under the eyes of sergents de
ville, who were absorbed in proclaiming to each other their
conviction of the innocence of Narcisse, and the guilt of cette
coquine Anglaise.  Cabmen en course ran down pedestrians by the
dozen, as they discussed l'affaire Narcisse to an accompaniment of
whip-cracking.  In front of the Cafe des Automobiles a belated
organ-grinder began to grind the air of Mademoiselle Sidonie's
great song Bonjour Coco, whereupon the whole company rose with
howls and cries of, 'A bas les Anglais, a bas les Juifs.  'Conspuez
Coco.' In less than five minutes the organ was disintegrated, and
the luckless minstrel flying with torn trousers down a side street. 
For the next few days la haute gomme promenaded with fragments of
the piano organ suspended from watch chains as trophies of victory. 
But this was not all.  Paris broke out into poetry over l'affaire
Narcisse, and here is a journal sent to me by my friend which
contains a poem in forty-nine stanzas by Aristophane le Beletier,
the cher maitre of the 'Moribonds,' the very newest school of
poetry in Paris.  I won't inflict the whole of it on you, but two
stanzas I must read--

  "'Puisse-je te rappeler loin des brouillards maudits.
    Vers la France, sainte mere et nourrice!
  Reviens a Lutece, de l'art vrai paradis,
    Je t'evoque, O Monsieur Narcisse!
 
  Quitte les saignants bifteks, de tes mains sublimes
    Gueris le sein meurtri de ta mere!
  Detourne ton glaive trenchant de tes freles victimes
    Vers l'Albion et sa triste Megere.'"

"Dear me, it sounds a little like some other Parisian odes I have
read recently," said Lady Considine.  "The triste Megere, I take
it, is poor old Britannia, but what does he mean by his freles
victimes?"

"No doubt they are the pigeons and the rabbits, and the chickens
and the capons which Narcisse is supposed to have slaughtered in
hecatombs, in order to gorge the brutal appetite of his English
employer," said Miss Macdonnell.  "After disregarding such an
appeal as this M. Narcisse had better keep clear of Paris for the
future, for if he should go back and be recognised I fancy it would
be a case of 'conspuvez Narcisse."'

"The French seem to have lost all sense of exactness," said Mrs.
Gradinger, "for the lines you have just read would not pass muster
as classic.  In the penultimate line there are two syllables in
excess of the true Alexandrine metre, and the last line seems too
long by one.  Neither Racine nor Voltaire would have taken such
liberties with prosody.  I remember a speech in Phaedre of more
than a hundred lines which is an admirable example of what I mean. 
I dare say some of you know it.  It begins:--

  "Perfide! oses-tu bien te montrer devant moi? Monstre,"

but before the reciter could get fairly under way the door
mercifully opened, and Sir John entered.  He advanced towards the
Marchesa, and shook her warmly by the hand, but said nothing; his
heart was evidently yet too full to allow him to testify his relief
in words.  He was followed closely by the Colonel, who, taking his
stand on the hearth-rug, treated the company to a few remarks,
couched in a strain of unwonted eulogy.  In the whole course of his
life he had never passed a more pleasant ten days, though, to be
sure, he had been a little mistrustful at first.  As to the outcome
of the experiment, if they all made even moderate use of the
counsels they had received from the Marchesa, the future of cookery
in England was now safe.  He was not going to propose a formal vote
of thanks, because anything he could say would be entirely
insufficient to express the gratitude he felt, and because he
deemed that each individual could best thank the Marchesa on his or
her behalf.

There was a momentary silence when the Colonel ceased, and then a
clearing of the throat and a preliminary movement of the arms gave
warning that Mrs. Gradinger was going to speak.  The unspoken
passage from Racine evidently sat heavily on her chest.  Abstracted
and overwrought as he was, these symptoms aroused in Sir John a
consciousness of impending danger, and he rushed, incontinent, into
the breach, before the lady's opening sentence was ready.

"As Colonel Trestrail has just remarked, we, all of us, are in debt
to the Marchesa in no small degree; but, in my case, the debt is
tenfold.  I am sure you all understand why.  As a slight
acknowledgment of the sympathy I have received from every one here,
during my late trial, I beg to ask you all to dine with me this day
week, when I will try to set before you a repast a la Francaise,
which I hope may equal, I cannot hope that it will excel, the
dinners all'Italiana we have tasted in this happy retreat. 
Narcisse and I have already settled the menu."

"I am delighted to accept," said the Marchesa.  "I have no
engagement, and if I had I would throw my best friend over."

"And this day fortnight you must all dine with me," said Mrs.
Sinclair.  "I will spend the intervening days in teaching my new
cook how to reproduce the Marchesa's dishes.  Then, perhaps, we may
be in a better position to decide on the success of the Marchesa's
experiment."

        *   *   *   *   *   *   *

The next morning witnessed the dispersal of the party.  Sir John
and Narcisse left by an early train, and for the next few days the
reforming hand of the last-named was active in the kitchen.  He
arrived before the departure of the temporary aide, and had not
been half-an-hour in the house before there came an outbreak which
might easily have ended in the second appearance of Narcisse at the
bar of justice, as homicide, this time to be dealt with by a
prosaic British jury, which would probably have doomed him to the
halter.  Sir John listened over the balusters to the shrieks and
howls of his recovered treasure, and wisely decided to lunch at his
club.  But the club lunch, admirable as it was, seemed flat and
unappetising after the dainty yet simple dishes he had recently
tasted; and the following day he set forth to search for one of
those Italian restaurants, of which he had heard vague reports. 
Certainly the repast would not be the same as at the "Laurestinas,"
but it might serve for once.  Alas! Sir John did not find the right
place, for there are "right places" amongst the Italian restaurants
of London.  He beat a hasty retreat from the first he entered, when
the officious proprietor assured him that he would serve up a
dejeuner in the best French style.  At the second he chose a dish
with an Italian name, but the name was the only Italian thing about
it.  The experiment had failed.  It seemed as if Italian
restaurateurs were sworn not to cook Italian dishes, and the next
day he went to do as best he could at the club.

But before he reached the club door he recalled how, many years
ago, he and other young bloods used to go for chops to Morton's, a
queer little house at the back of St. James' Street, and towards
Morton's he now turned his steps.  As he entered it, it seemed as
if it was only yesterday that he was there.  He beheld the waiter,
with mouth all awry, through calling down the tube.  The same old
mahogany partitions to the boxes, and the same horse-hair benches. 
Sir John seated himself in a box, where there was one other luncher
in the corner, deeply absorbed over a paper.  This luncher raised
his head and Sir John recognised Van der Roet.

"My dear Vander, whatever brought you here, where nothing is to be
had but chops? I didn't know you could eat a chop."

"I didn't know it myself till to-day," said Van der Roet, with a
hungry glance at the waiter, who rushed by with a plate of smoking
chops in each hand.  "The fact is, I've had a sort of hankering
after an Italian lunch, and I went out to find one, but I didn't
exactly hit on the right shop, so I came here, where I've been told
you can get a chop properly cooked, if you don't mind waiting."

"Ah! I see," said Sir John, laughing.  "We've both been on the same
quest, and have been equally unlucky.  Well, we shall satisfy our
hunger here at any rate, and not unpleasantly either."

"I went to one place," said Van der Roet "and before ordering I
asked the waiter if there was any garlic in the dish I had ordered. 
'Garlic, aglio, no, sir, never.' Whereupon I thought I would go
somewhere else.  Next I entered the establishment of Baldassare
Romanelli.  How could a man with such a name serve anything else
than the purest Italian cookery, I reasoned, so I ordered,
unquestioning, a piatio with an ideal Italian name, Manzo alla
Terracina.  Alas! the beef used in the composition thereof must
have come in a refrigerating chamber from pastures more remote than
those of Terracina, and the sauce served with it was simply fried
onions.  In short, my dish was beefsteak and onions, and very bad
at that.  So in despair I fell back upon the trusty British chop."

As Van der Roet ceased speaking another guest entered the room, and
he and Sir John listened attentively while the new-comer gave his
order.  There was no mistaking the Colonel's strident voice. "Now,
look here! I want a chop underdone, underdone, you understand, with
a potato, and a small glass of Scotch whisky, and I'll sit here."

"The Colonel, by Jove," said Sir John; "I expect he's been
restaurant-hunting too."

"Hallo!" said the Colonel, as he recognised the other two, "I
never thought I should meet you here:  fact is, I've been reading
about agricultural depression' and how it is the duty of everybody
to eat chops so as to encourage the mutton trade, and that sort of
thing."

"Oh, Colonel, Colonel," said Van der Roet.  "You know you've been
hungering after the cookery of Italy, and trying to find a genuine
Italian lunch, and have failed, just as Sir John and I failed, and
have come here in despair.  But never mind, just wait for a year or
so, until the 'Cook's Decameron' has had a fair run for its money,
and then you'll find you'll fare as well at the ordinary Italian
restaurant as you did at the 'Laurestinas,' and that's saying a
good deal."



Part II -- Recipes

Sauces

As the three chief foundation sauces in cookery, Espagnole or brown
sauce, Velute or white sauce, and Bechamel, are alluded to so often
in these pages, it will be well to give simple Italian recipes for
them.

Australian wines may be used in all recipes where wine is
mentioned:  Harvest Burgundy for red, and Chasselas for Chablis.

No. 1.  Espagnole, or Brown Sauce

The chief ingredient of this useful sauce is good stock, to which
add any remnants and bones of fowl or game.  Butter the bottom of a
stewpan with at least two ounces of butter, and in it put slices of
lean veal, ham, bacon, cuttings of beef, fowl, or game trimmings,
three peppercorns, mushroom trimmings, a tomato, a carrot and a
turnip cut up, an onion stuck with two cloves, a bay leaf, a sprig
of thyme, parsley and marjoram.  Put the lid on the stewpan and
braize well for fifteen minutes, then stir in a tablespoonful of
flour, and pour in a quarter pint of good boiling stock and boil
very gently for fifteen minutes, then strain through a tamis, skim
off all the grease, pour the sauce into an earthenware vessel, and
let it get cold.  If it is not rich enough, add a little Liebig or
glaze.  Pass through a sieve again before using.

No. 2.  Velute Sauce

The same as above, but use , white stock, no beef, and only
pheasant or fowl trimmings, button mushrooms, cream instead of
glaze, and a chopped shallot.

No. 3.  Bechamel Sauce

Ingredients:  Butter, ham, veal, carrots, shallot, celery bay leaf,
cloves, thyme, peppercorns, potato flour, cream, fowl stock.

Prepare a mirepoix by mixing two ounces of butter, trimmings of
lean veal and ham, a carrot, a shallot, a little celery, all cut
into dice, a bay leaf, two cloves, four peppercorns, and a little
thyme.  Put this on a moderate fire so as not to let it colour, and
when all the moisture is absorbed add a tablespoonful of potato
flour.  Mix well, and gradually add equal quantities of cream and
fowl stock, and stir till it boils.  Then let it simmer gently. 
Stir occasionally, and if it gets too thick, add more cream and
white stock.  After two hours pass it twice slowly through a tamis
so as to get the sauce very smooth.

No. 4. Mirepoix Sauce (for masking)

Ingredients:  Bacon, onions, carrots, ham, a bunch of herbs,
parsley, mushrooms, cloves, peppercorns, stock, Chablis.

Put the following ingredients into a stewpan:  Some bits of bacon
and lean ham, a carrot, all cut into dice, half an onion, a bunch
of herbs, a few mushroom cuttings, two cloves, and four
peppercorns.  To this add one and a quarter pint of good stock and
a glass of Chablis, boil rapidly for ten minutes then simmer till
it is reduced to a third.  Pass through a sieve and use for masking
meat, fowl, fish, &c.

No. 5.  Genoese Sauce

Ingredients:  Onion, butter, Burgundy, mushrooms, truffles,
parsley, bay leaf, Espagnole sauce (No.1), blond of veal, essence
of fish, anchovy butter, crayfish or lobster butter.

Cut up a small onion and fry it in butter, add a glass of Burgundy,
some cuttings of mushrooms and truffles, a pinch of chopped parsley
and half a bay leaf.  Reduce half.  In another saucepan put two
cups of Espagnole sauce, one cup of veal stock, and a tablespoonful
of essence of fish, reduce one-third and add it to the other
saucepan, skim off all the grease, boil for a few minutes, and pass
through a sieve.  Then stir it over the fire, and add half a
teaspoonful of crayfish and half of anchovy butter.

No. 6.  Italian Sauce

Ingredients:  Chablis, mushrooms, leeks, a bunch of herbs,
peppercorns, Espagnole sauce, game gravy or stock, lemon.

Put into a stewpan two glasses of Chablis, two tablespoonsful of
mushroom trimmings, a leek cut up, a bunch of herbs, five
peppercorns, and boil till it is reduced to half.  In another
stewpan mix two glasses of Espagnole (No. 1) or Velute sauce (No 2)
and half a glass of game gravy, boil for a few minutes then blend
the contents of the two stewpans, pass through a sieve, and add the
juice of a lemon.

No. 7.  Ham Sauce, Salsa di Prosciutto

Ingredients:  Ham, Musca or sweet port, vinegar, basil spice.

Cut up an ounce of ham and pound it in a mortar then mix it with
three dessert spoonsful of port or Musca and a teaspoonful of
vinegar a little dried basil and a pinch of spice.  Boil it up, and
then pass it through a sieve and warm it up in a bain-marie.  Serve
with roast meats.  If you cannot get a sweet wine add half a
teaspoonful of sugar.  Australian Muscat is a good wine to use.

No. 8.  Tarragon Sauce

Ingredients:  Tarragon, stock, butter, flour.

To half a pint of good stock add two good sprays of fresh tarragon,
simmer for quarter of an hour in a stewpan and keep the lid on.  In
another stewpan melt one ounce of butter and mix it with three
dessert-spoonsful of flour, then gradually pour the stock from the
first stewpan over it, but take out the tarragon.  Mix well, add a
teaspoonful of finely chopped tarragon and boil for two minutes.

No. 9.  Tomato Sauce

Ingredients:  Tomatoes, ham, onions, basil, salt, oil, garlic,
spices.

Broil three tomatoes, skin them and mix them with a tablespoonful
of chopped ham, half an onion, salt, a dessert-spoonful of oil, a
little pounded spice and basil.  Then boil and pass through a
sieve.  Whilst the sauce is boiling, put in a clove of garlic with
a cut, but remove it before you pass the sauce through the sieve.

No. 10.  Tomato Sauce Piquante

Ingredients:  Ham, butter, onion, carrot, celery, bay leaf, thyme,
cloves, peppercorns, vinegar, Chablis, stock, tomatoes, Velute or
Espagnole sauce, castor sugar, lemon.

Cut up an ounce of ham, half an onion, half a carrot, half a stick
of celery very fine, and fry them in butter together with a bay
leaf, a sprig of thyme, one clove and four peppercorns.  Over this
pour a third of a cup of vinegar, and when the liquid is all
absorbed, add half a glass of Chablis and a cup of stock.  Then add
six tomatoes cut up and strained of all their liquid.  Cook this in
a covered stewpan and pass it through a sieve, but see that none of
the bay leaf or thyme goes through.  Mix this sauce with an equal
quantity of Velute (No. 2) or Espagnole sauce, (No. 1), let it boil
and pass through a sieve again and at the last add a teaspoonful of
castor sugar, the juice of half a lemon, and an ounce of fresh
butter.  (Another tomato sauce may be made like this, but use stock
instead of vinegar and leave out the lemon juice and sugar.)

No. 11.  Mushroom Sauce

Ingredients:  Velute sauce, essence of mushrooms, butter.

Mix two dessert-spoonsful of essence of mushrooms with a cupful of
Velute sauce (No. 2), reduce, keep on stirring, and just before
serving add an ounce of butter.  This sauce can be made with
essence of truffle, or game, or shallot.

No. 12.  Neapolitan Sauce

Ingredients:  Onions, ham, butter, Marsala, blond of veal, thyme,
bay leaf, peppercorns, cloves, mushrooms, Espagnole sauce (No. 1),
tomato sauce, game stock or essence.

Fry an onion in butter with some bits of cut-up ham, then pour a
glass of Marsala over it, and another of blond of veal, add a sprig
of thyme, a bay leaf, four peppercorns, a clove, a tablespoonful of
mushroom cuttings, and reduce half.  In another saucepan put two
cups of Espagnole sauce, one cupful of tomato sauce, and half a cup
of game stock or essence.  Reduce a third, and add the contents of
the first saucepan, boil the sauce a few minutes, and pass it
through a sieve.  Warm it up in a bain-marie before using.

No. 13.  Neapolitan Anchovy Sauce

Ingredients:  Anchovies, fennel, flour, spices, parsley, marjoram,
garlic, lemon juice, vinegar, cream.

Wash three anchovies in vinegar, bone and pound them in a mortar
with a teaspoonful of chopped fennel and a pinch of cinnamon.  Then
mix in a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and marjoram, a squeeze of
lemon juice, a teaspoonful of flour, half a gill of boiled cream
and the bones of the fish for which you will use this sauce.  Pass
through a sieve, add a clove of garlic with a cut in it, and boil. 
If the fish you are using is cooked in the oven, add a little of
the liquor in which it has been cooked to the sauce.  Take out the
garlic before serving.  Instead of anchovies you may use caviar,
pickled tunny, or any other pickled fish.

No. 14.  Roman Sauce  (Salsa Agro-dolce)

Ingredients:  Espagnole sauce, stock, burnt sugar, vinegar,
raisins, pine nuts or almonds.

Mix two spoonsful of burnt sugar with one of vinegar, and dilute
with a little good stock.  Then add two cups of Espagnole sauce
(No. 1), a few stoned raisins, and a few pinocchi* (pine nuts) or
shredded almonds.  Keep this hot in a bain-marie, and serve with
cutlets, calf's head or feet or tongue.

*The pinocchi which Italians use instead of almonds can be bought
in London when in season

No. 15. Roman Sauce (another way)

Ingredients:  Espagnole sauce, an onion, butter, flour, lemon,
herbs, nutmeg, raisins, pine nuts or almonds, burnt sugar.

Cut up a small bit of onion, fry it slightly in butter and a little
flour, add the juice of a lemon and a little of the peel grated, a
bouquet of herbs, a pinch of nutmeg, a few stoned raisins, shredded
almonds or pinocchi, and a tablespoonful of burnt sugar.  Add this
to a good Espagnole (No. 1), and warm it up in a bain-marie.

No. 16.  Supreme Sauce

Ingredients:  White sauce, fowl stock, butter.

Put three-quarters of a pint of white sauce into a saucepan, and
when it is nearly boiling add half a cup of concentrated fowl
stock.  Reduce until the sauce is quite thick, and when about to
serve pass it through a tamis into a bain-marie and add two
tablespoonsful of cream.

No. 17.  Pasta marinate (For masking Italian Frys)

Ingredients:  Semolina flour, eggs, salt, butter (or olive oil),
vinegar, water.

Mix the following ingredients well together:  two ounces of
semolina flour, the yolks of two eggs, a little salt, and two
ounces of melted butter.  Add a glass of water so as to form a
liquid substance.  At the last add the whites of two eggs beaten up
to a snow.  This will make a good paste for masking meat, fish,
vegetables, or sweets which are to be fried in the Italian manner,
but if for meat or vegetables add a few drops of vinegar or a
little lemon juice.

No. 18.  White Villeroy

Ingredients:  Butter, flour, eggs, cream, nutmeg, white stock.

Make a light-coloured roux by frying two ounces of butter and two
ounces of flour, stir in some white stock and keep it very smooth. 
Let it boil, and add the yolks of three eggs, mixed with two
tablespoonsful of cream and a pinch of nutmeg.  Pass it through a
sieve and use for masking cutlets, fish, &c.



Soups

No. 19.  Clear Soup

Ingredients:  Stock meat, water, a bunch of herbs (thyme, parsley,
chervil, bay leaf, basil, marjoram), three carrots, three turnips,
three onions, three cloves stuck in the onions, one blade of mace.

Cut up three pounds of stock meat small and put it in a stock pot
with two quarts of cold water, three carrots, and three turnips cut
up, three onions with a clove stuck in each one, a bunch of herbs
and a blade of mace.  Let it come to the boil and then draw it off,
at once skim off all the scum, and keep it gently simmering, and
occasionally add two or three tablespoonsful of cold water.  Let it
simmer all day, and then strain it through a fine cloth.

Some of the liquor in which a calf's head has been cooked, or even
a calf's foot, will greatly improve a clear soup.

The stock should never be allowed to boil as long as the meat and
vegetables are in the stock pot.

No. 20.  Zuppa Primaverile (Spring Soup)

Ingredients:  Clear soup, vegetables.

Any fresh spring vegetables will do for this soup, but they must
all be cooked separately and put into the soup at the last minute. 
It is best made with fresh peas, asparagus tips, and a few strips
of tarragon.

No. 21.  Soup alla Lombarda

Ingredients:  Clear soup, fowl forcemeat, Bechamel (No. 3), peas,
lobster butter, eggs, asparagus.

Make a firm forcemeat of fowl and divide it into three parts, to
the first add two spoonsful of cream Bechamel, to the second four
spoonsful of puree of green peas, to the third two spoonsful of
lobster butter and the yolk of an egg; thus you will have the
Italian colours, red, white, and green.  Butter a pie dish and make
little quenelles of the forcemeat.  Just before serving boil them
for four minutes in boiling stock, take them out carefully and put
them in a warm soup tureen with two spoonsful of cooked green peas
and pour a very fresh clear soup over them.  Hand little croutons
fried in lobster butter separately.

No. 22.  Tuscan Soup

Ingredients:  Stock, eggs.

Whip up three or four eggs, gradually add good stock to them, and
keep on whisking them up until they begin to curdle.  Keep the soup
hot in a bain-marie.

No. 23.  Venetian Soup

Ingredients:  Clear soup, butter, flour, Parmesan, eggs.

Make a roux by frying two ounces of butter and two ounces of flour,
add an ounce of grated cheese and half a cup of good stock.  Mix up
well so as to form a paste, and then take it off the fire and add
the yolks of four eggs, mix again and form the again and form the
paste into little quenelles.  Boil these in a little soup, strain
off, put them into the tureen and pour a good clear soup over them.

No. 24.  Roman Soup

Ingredients:  Stock, butter, eggs, salt, crumb of bread, parsley,
nutmeg, flour, Parmesan.

Mix three and a half ounces of butter with two eggs and four ounces
of crumbs of bread soaked in stock, a little chopped parsley, salt,
and a pinch of nutmeg.  Reduce this and add two tablespoonsful of
flour and one of grated Parmesan.  Form this into little quenelles
and boil them in stock for a few minutes put them into a tureen and
pour a good clear soup over them.

No. 25.  Soup alla Nazionale

Ingredients:  Clear soup, savoury custard.

Make a savoury custard and divide it into three parts, one to be
left white, another coloured red with tomato, and the third green
with spinach.  Put a layer of each in a buttered saucepan and cook
for about ten minutes, cut it into dice, so that you have the three
Italian colours (red, white, and green) together, then put the
custard into a soup tureen and pour a good clear soup over it.

 No. 26.  Soup alla Modanese

Ingredients :  Stock, spinach, butter, salt, eggs, Parmesan,
nutmeg, croutons.

Wash one pound of spinach in five or six waters, then chop it very
fine and mix it with three ounces of butter, salt it and warm it
up.  Then let it get cold, pass through a hair sieve, and add two
eggs, a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, and very little nutmeg. 
Add this to some boiling stock in a copper saucepan, put on the
lid, and on the top put some hot coals so that the eggs may curdle
and help to thicken the soup.  Serve with fried croutons.

No. 27.  Crotopo Soup

Ingredients:  Clear soup, veal, ham, eggs, salt, pepper, nutmeg,
rolls.

Pound half a pound of lean veal in a mortar, then add three ounces
of cooked ham with some fat in it, the yolk of an egg, salt,
pepper, and very little nutmeg.  Pass through a sieve, cut some
small French rolls into slices, spread them with the above mixture,
and colour them in the oven.  Then cut them in halves or quarters,
put them into a tureen, and just before serving pour a very good
clear soup over them.

No. 28.  Soup all'Imperatrice

Ingredients:  Breast of fowl, eggs, salt, pepper, ground rice,
nutmeg, clear stock.

Pound the breast of a fowl in a mortar, and add to it a teaspoonful
of ground rice, the yolk of an egg, salt, pepper, and a pinch of
nutmeg.  Pass this through a sieve, form quenelles with it, and
pour a good clear soup over them.

No. 29.  Neapolitan Soup

Ingredients:  Fowl, potato flour, eggs, Bechamel sauce, peas,
asparagus, spinach, clear soup.

Mix a quarter pound of forcemeat of fowl with a tablespoonful of
potato flour, a tablespoonful of Bechamel sauce (No. 3), and the
yolk of an egg; put this into a tube about the size round of an
ordinary macaroni; twenty minutes before serving squirt the
forcemeat into a saucepan with boiling stock, and nip off the
forcemeat as it comes through the pipe into pieces about an inch
and a half long.  Let it simmer, and add boiled peas and asparagus
tips.  If you like to have the fowl macaroni white and green, you
can colour half the forcemeat with a spoonful of spinach colouring. 
Serve in a good clear soup.

No. 30.  Soup with Risotto

Ingredients:  Risotto (No. 189), eggs, bread crumbs, clear or brown
soup.

If you have some good risotto left, you can use it up by making it
into little balls the size of small nuts.  Egg and bread crumb and
fry them in butter; dry them and put them into a soup tureen with
hot soup.  The soup may be either clear or brown.

No. 31.  Soup alla Canavese

Ingredients:   White stock, butter, onions, carrot, celery, tomato,
cauliflower, fat bacon, parsley, sage, Parmesan, salt, pepper.

Chop up half an onion, half a carrot, half a stick of celery, a
small bit of fat bacon, and fry them in two ounces of butter.  Then
cover them with good white stock, boil for a few minutes, pass
through a sieve, and add two tablespoonsful of tomato puree.  Then
blanch half a cauliflower in salted water, let it get cold, drain
all the water out of it, and break it up into little bunches and
put them into a stock pot with the stock, a small leaf of dried
sage, crumbled up, and a little chopped parsley, and let it all
boil; add a pinch of grated cheese and some pepper.  Serve with
grated Parmesan handed separately.

No. 32.  Soup alla Maria Pia

Ingredients:  White stock, eggs, butter, peas, white beans, carrot,
onion, leeks, celery, cream croutons.

Soak one pound of white beans for twelve hours, then put them into
a stock pot with a little salt, butter, and water, add a carrot, an
onion, two leeks, and a stick of celery, and simmer until the
vegetables are well cooked; then take out all the fresh vegetables,
drain the beans and pass them through a sieve, but first dilute
them with good stock.  Put this puree into a stock pot with good
white stock, and when it has boiled keep it hot in-a bain- marie
until you are about to serve; then mix the yolk of three eggs in a
cup of cream, and add this to the soup.  Pour the soup into a warm
tureen, add some boiled green peas, and serve with fried croutons
handed separately.

No. 33.  Zuppa d' Erbe (Lettuce Soup)

Ingredients:  Stock, sorrel, endive, lettuce, chervil, celery,
carrot, onion, French roll, Parmesan cheese.

Boil the following vegetables and herbs in very good stock for an
hour:  Two small bunches of sorrel, a bunch of endive, a lettuce, a
small bunch of chervil, a stick of celery, a carrot and an onion,
all well washed and cut up.  Then put some slices of toasted French
roll into a tureen and pour the above soup over them.  Serve with
grated Parmesan handed separately.

No. 34.  Zuppa Regina di Riso (Queen's Soup)

Ingredients:  Fowl stock, ground rice, milk, butter.

Put a tablespoonful of ground rice into a saucepan and gradually
add half a pint of milk, boil it gently for twelve minutes in a
bainmarie, but stir the whole time, so as to get it very smooth. 
Just before serving add an ounce of butter, pass it through a
sieve, and mix it with good fowl stock.



Minestre

Minestra is a thick broth, very much like hotch-potch, only
thicker.  In Italy it is often served at the beginning of dinner
instead of soup; it also makes an excellent lunch dish.  Two or
three tablespoonsful of No. 35 will be found a great improvement to
any of these minestre.

No. 35.  A Condiment for Seasoning Minestre, &c.

Ingredients:  Onions, celery, carrots, butter, salt, stock,
tomatoes, mushrooms.

Cut up an onion, a stick of celery, and a carrot; fry them in
butter and salt; add a few bits of cooked ham and veal cut up, two
mushrooms, and the pulp of a tomato.  Cook for a quarter of an
hour, and add a little stock occasionally to keep it moist.  Pass
through a sieve, and use for seasoning minestre, macaroni, rice,
&c.  It should be added when the dish is nearly cooked.

No. 36.  Minestra alla Casalinga

Ingredients:  Rice, butter, stock, vegetables.

All sorts of vegetables will serve for this dish.  Blanch them in
boiling salted water, then drain and fry them in butter.  Add
plenty of good stock, and put them on a slow fire.  Boil four
ounces of rice in stock, and when it is well done add the stock
with the vegetables.  Season with two or three spoonsful of No. 35,
and serve with grated cheese handed separately.

No. 37.  Minestra of Rice and Turnips

Ingredients:  Rice, turnips, butter, gravy, tomatoes.

Cut three or four young turnips into slices and put them on a dish,
strew a little salt over them, cover them with another dish, and
let them stand for about two hours until the water has run out of
them.  Then drain the slices, put them in a frying-pan and fry them
slightly in butter.  Add some good gravy and mashed-up tomatoes,
and after having cooked this for a few minutes pour it into good
boiling stock.  Add three ounces of well-washed rice, and boil for
half-an-hour.

Minestra loses its flavour if it is boiled too long.  In Lombardy,
however, rice, macaroni, &c., are rarely boiled enough for English
tastes.

No. 38.  Minestra alla Capucina

Ingredients:  Rice, anchovies, butter, stock, and onions.

Scale an anchovy, pound it, and fry it in butter together with a
small onion cut across, and four ounces of boiled rice.  Add a
little salt, and when the rice is a golden brown, take out the
onion and gradually add some good stock until the dish is of the
consistency of rice pudding.

No. 39.  Minestra of Semolina

Ingredients:  Stock, semolina, Parmesan.

Put as much stock as you require into a saucepan, and when it
begins to boil add semolina very gradually, and stir to keep it
from getting lumpy Cook it until the semolina is soft, and serve
with grated Parmesan handed separately.  To one quart of soup use
three ounces of semolina

No. 40.  Minestrone alla Milanese

Ingredients:  Rice or macaroni, ham, bacon, stock, all sorts of
vegetables.

Minestrone is a favourite dish in Lombardy when vegetables are
plentiful.  Boil all sorts of vegetables in stock, and add bits of
bacon, ham, onions braized in butter, chopped parsley, a clove of
garlic with two cuts, and rice or macaroni.  Put in those
vegetables first which require most cooking, and do not make the
broth too thin.  Leave the garlic in for a quarter of an hour only.

No. 41.  Minestra of Rice and Cabbage

Ingredients:  Rice, cabbage, stock, ham, tomato sauce.

Cut off the stalk and all the hard outside leaves of a cabbage,
wash it and cut it up, but not too small, then drain and cook it in
good stock and add two ounces of boiled rice.  This minestre is
improved by adding a little chopped ham and a few spoonsful of
tomato sauce.

No. 42.  Minestra of Rice and Celery

Ingredients:  Celery, rice, stock.

Cut up a head of celery and remove all the green parts, then boil
it in good stock and add two ounces of rice, and boil till it is
well cooked.



Fish

No. 43.  Anguilla alla Milanese (Eels).

Ingredients:  Eels, butter, flour, stock, bay leaves, salt, pepper,
Chablis, a macedoine of vegetables.

Cut up a big eel and fry it in two ounces of butter, and when it is
a good colour add a tablespoonful of flour, about half a pint of
stock, a glass of Chablis, a bay leaf, pepper, and salt, and boil
till it is well cooked.  In the meantime boil separately all sorts
of vegetables, such as carrots, cauliflower, celery, beans,
tomatoes, &c.  Take out the pieces of eel, but keep them hot,
whilst you pass the liquor which forms the sauce through a sieve
and add the vegetables to this.  Let them boil a little longer and
arrange them in a dish; place the pieces of eel on them and cover
with the sauce.  It is most important that the eels should be
served very hot.

Any sort of fish will do as well for this dish.

No. 44.  Filletti di Pesce alla Villeroy (Fillets of Fish)

Ingredients:  Fish, flour, butter, Villeroy.

Any sort of fish will do, turbot, sole, trout, &c.  Cut it into
fillets, flour them over and cook them in butter in a covered
stewpan; then make a Villeroy (No. 18), dip the fillets into it and
fry them in clarified butter.

No. 45.  Astachi all'Italiana (Lobster)

Ingredients:  Lobsters, Velute sauce, Marsala, butter, forcemeat of
fish, olives, anchovy butter, button mushrooms, truffles, lemon,
crayfish, Italian sauce.

Two boiled lobsters are necessary.  Cut all the flesh of one of the
lobsters into fillets and put them into a saucepan with half a cup
of Velute sauce (No. 2) and half a glass of Marsala, and boil for a
few minutes.  Put a crouton of fried bread on an oval dish and
cover it with a forcemeat of fish, and on this place the whole
lobster, cover it with buttered paper, and put it in a moderate
oven just long enough to cook the forcemeat.  Then make some
quenelles of anchovy butter, olives, and button mushrooms, mix them
with Italian sauce (No. 6), and garnish the dish with them, and
round the crouton arrange the fillets of lobster with a garnish of
slices of truffle.  Add a dessert-spoonful of crayfish butter and a
good squeeze of lemon juice to the sauce, and serve.

No. 46.  Baccala alla Giardiniera (Cod)

Ingredients:  Cod or hake, carrots, turnips, butter, herbs.

Boil a piece of cod or hake and break it up into flakes, then cut
up two carrots and a turnip; boil them gently, and when they are
half boiled drain and put them into a stewpan with an ounce of
butter, half a teacup of boiling water, salt, and herbs.  When they
are well cooked add the fish and serve.  Fillets of lemon soles may
also be cooked this way

No. 47.  Triglie alla Marinara (Mullet)

Ingredients:  Mullet, salt, pepper, onions, parsley, oil, water.

Cut a mullet into pieces and put it into a stewpan (with the lid
on), with salt, pepper, a cut-up onion, some chopped parsley, half
a wineglass of the finest olive oil and half a pint of water, and
in this cook the fish gently.  Arrange the fillets on a dish, pour
a little of the broth over them, and add the onion and parsley. 
Instead of mullet you can use cod, hake, whiting, lemon sole, &c.

No. 48.  Mullet alla Tolosa

Ingredients:  Mullet, butter, salt, onions, parsley, almonds,
anchovies, button mushrooms, tomatoes.

Cut off the fins and gills of a mullet, put it in a fireproof dish
with two ounces of butter and salt.  Cut up a small bit of onion, a
sprig of parsley, a few blanched almonds, one anchovy, and a few
button mushrooms, previously softened in hot water, and put them
over the fish and bake for twenty minutes Then add two
tablespoonsful of tomato sauce or puree, and when cooked serve.  If
you like, use sole instead of mullet.

No. 49.  Mullet alla Triestina

Ingredients:  Mullet (or sole or turbot), butter, salt half a
lemon, Chablis.

Put the fish in a fireproof dish with one and a half ounces of
butter, salt, a squeeze of lemon juice, and half a glass of
Chablis.  Put it on a very, slow fire and turn the fish when
necessary.  When it is cooked serve in the dish.

No. 50.  Whiting alla Genovese

Ingredients:  Whiting, butter, pepper, salt, bay leaf claret,
parsley, onions, garlic capers, vinegar, Espagnole sauce,
mushrooms, anchovies.

Put one or two whiting into a stewpan with two ounces of butter,
salt, pepper, two bay leaves, and a glass of claret or Burgundy;
cook on a hot fire and turn the fish when necessary.  Have ready
beforehand a remoulade sauce made in the following manner:  Put in
a saucepan 1 1/2 ounces of butter, half a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, half an onion, a clove of garlic (with one cut), four
capers, one anchovy, all chopped up except the garlic.  Then add
three tablespoonsful of vinegar and reduce the sauce.  Add two
glasses of Espagnole sauce (No. 1) and a little good stock; boil it
all up (take out the garlic and bay leaves) and pass through a
sieve, then pour it over the whiting.  Boil it all again for a few
minutes, and before serving garnish with a few button mushrooms
cooked separately.  The remoulade sauce will be much better if made
some hours beforehand.

No. 51.  Merluzzo in Bianco (Cod)

Ingredients:  Cod or whiting, salt, onions, parsley, cloves,
turnips, marjoram, chervil, milk.

Boil gently in a big cupful of salted water two onions, one turnip,
a pinch of chopped parsley, chervil, and marjoram and four cloves. 
After half an hour pass this through a sieve (but first take out
the cloves), and add an equal quantity of milk and a little cream,
and in this cook the fish and serve with the sauce over it.

No. 52.  Merluzzo in Salamoia (Cod)

Ingredients:  Cod, hake, whiting or red mullet, onions, parsley,
mint, marjoram, turnips, mushrooms, chervil, cloves, salt, milk,
cream, eggs.

Put a salt-spoonful of salt, two onions, a little parsley,
marjoram, mint, chervil, a turnip, a mushroom, and the heads of two
cloves into a stewpan and simmer in a cupful of milk for half an
hour, then let all the ingredients settle at the bottom, and pass
the broth through a hair sieve, and add to it an equal quantity of
milk or cream, and in it cook your fish on a slow fire.  When the
fish is quite cooked, pour off the sauce, but leave a little on the
fish to keep it warm; reduce the rest in a bain- marie; stir all
the time, so that the milk may not curdle.  Thicken the sauce with
the yolk of an egg, and when about to serve pour it over the fish.

No. 53.  Baccala in Istufato (Haddock)

Ingredients:  Haddock or lemon sole, carrots, anchovies, lemon,
pepper, butter, onions, flour, white wine, stock.

Stuff a haddock (or filleted lemon sole) with some slices of carrot
which have been masked with a paste made of pounded anchovies, very
little chopped lemon peel, salt and pepper.  Then fry an onion with
two cuts across it in butter.  Take out the onion as soon as it has
become a golden colour, flour the fish and put it in the butter,
and when it has been well fried on both sides pour a glass of
Marsala over it, and when it is all absorbed add a cup of fowl or
veal stock and let it simmer for half an hour, then skim and reduce
the sauce, pour it over the fish and serve.

No. 54.  Naselli con Piselli (Whiting)

Ingredients:  Whiting, onions, parsley, peas, tomatoes, butter,
Parmesan, Bechamel sauce.

Cut a big whiting into two or three pieces and fry them slightly in
butter, add a small bit of onion, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley
and fry for a few minutes more.  Then add some peas which have been
cooked in salted water, three tablespoonsful of Bechamel sauce (No.
3), and three of tomato puree, and cook all together on a moderate
fire.

No. 55.  Ostriche alla Livornese (Oysters)

Ingredients:  Oysters, parsley, shallot, anchovies, fennel pepper,
bread crumbs, cream, lemon

Detach the oysters from their shells and put then into china shells
with their own liquor.  Have ready a dessert-spoonful of parsley,
shallot, anchovy and very little fennel, add a tablespoonful of
bread crumbs and a little pepper, and mix the whole with a little
cream.  Put some of this mixture on each oyster, and then bake them
in a moderate fire for a quarter of an hour.  At the last minute
add a squeeze of lemon juice to each oyster and serve on a folded
napkin.

No. 56.  Ostriche alla Napolitana (Oysters)

Ingredients:  Oysters, parsley, celery, thyme, pepper, garlic, oil,
lemon.

Prepare the oysters as above, but rub each shell with a little
garlic.  Put on each oyster a mixture made of chopped parsley, a
little thyme, pepper, and bread crumbs.  Then pour a few drops of
oil on each shell, put them on the gridiron on an open fire, grill
for a few minutes, and add a little lemon , juice before serving.

No. 57.  Ostriche alla Veneziana (Oysters)

Ingredients:  Oysters, butter, shallots, truffles, lemon juice,
forcemeat of fish.

Take several oysters out of their shells and cook them in butter, a
little chopped shallot, and their own liquor, add a little lemon
juice and then put in each of the deeper shells a layer of
forcemeat made of fish and chopped truffles, then an oyster or two,
and over this again another layer of the forcemeat, cover up with
the top shell and put them in a fish kettle and steam them.  Then
remove the top shell and arrange the shells with the oysters on a
napkin and serve.

No. 58.  Pesci diversi alla Casalinga (Fish)

Ingredients:  Any sort of fish, celery, parsley, carrots, garlic,
onion, anchovies, almonds, capers, mushrooms, butter, salt, pepper,
flour, tomatoes.

Chop up a stick of celery, a sprig of parsley, a carrot, an onion. 
Pound up an anchovy in brine (well cleaned, boned, and scaled),
four shredded almonds, three capers and two mushrooms.  Put all
this into a saucepan with one ounce of butter, salt and pepper, and
fry for a few minutes, then add a few spoonsful of hot water and a
tablespoonful of flour and boil gently for ten minutes, put in the
fish and cook it until it is done.  If you like, you may add a
little tomato sauce.

No. 59.  Pesce alla Genovese (Sole or Turbot)

Ingredients:  Fish (sole, mullet, or turbot), butter, salt, onion,
garlic, carrots, celery, parsley, nutmeg, pepper, spice, mushrooms,
tomatoes, flour, anchovies.

Fry an onion slightly in one and a half ounces of butter, add a
small cut-up carrot, half a stick of celery, a sprig of parsley,
and a salt anchovy (scaled), which will dissolve in the butter. 
Into this put the fish cut up in pieces, a pinch of spice and
pepper, and let it simmer for a few minutes, then add two cut-up
mushrooms, a tomato mashed up, and a little flour.  Mix all
together, and cook for twenty minutes.

No. 60.  Sogliole in Zimino (Sole)

Ingredients:  Sole, onion, beetroot, butter, celery, tomato sauce
or white wine.

Cut up a small onion and fry it slightly in one ounce of butter,
then add some slices of beetroot (well-washed and drained), and a
little celery cut up; to this add fillets of sole or haddock, salt
and pepper.  Boil on a moderate on the fish kettle.  When the
beetroot is near]y cooked add two tablespoonsful of tomato puree
and boil till all is well cooked.  Instead of the tomato you may
use half a glass of Chablis.

No. 61.  Sogliole al tegame (Sole)

Ingredients:  Sole (or mullet), butter, anchovies, parsley, garlic,
capers, eggs.

Put an ounce of butter and an anchovy in a saucepan together with a
sole or mullet.  Fry lightly for a few minutes, then strew a little
pepper and chopped parsley over it, put in a clove of garlic with
one cut, and cook for half an hour, but turn the fish over when one
side is sufficiently done.  A few minutes before taking it off the
fire add three capers and stir in the yolk of an egg at the last
minute.  Do not leave the garlic in more than five minutes.

No. 62. Sogliole alla Livornese (Sole)

Ingredients:  Sole, butter, garlic, pepper, sa]t, tomatoes, fennel.

Fillet a sole and put it in a saute-pan with one and a half ounces
of butter and a clove of garlic with one cut in it, then sprinkle
over it a little chopped fennel, salt and pepper, and let it cook
for a few minutes.  Turn over the fillets w hen they are
sufficiently cooked on one side, take out the garlic and cover the
fish with a puree of tomatoes at the last.

No. 63.  Sogliole alla Veneziana (Sole)

Ingredients:  Sole, anchovies, butter, bacon, onion, stock,
Chablis, salt, nutmeg, parsley, Spanish olives, one bay leaf.

Fillet a sole and interlard each piece with a bit of anchovy.  Tie
up the fillets and put them in a saute-pan with two ounces of
butter, a slice of bacon or ham, and a few small slices of onion. 
Cover half over with good stock and a glass of Chablis, and add
salt, a pinch of nutmeg, a bunch of parsley, and a bay leaf.  Cover
with buttered paper, and cook on a slow fire for about an hour. 
Drain the fish, pass the liquor through a sieve, reduce it to the
consistency of a thick sauce, and pour it over the fish.  Garnish
each fillet with a Spanish olive stuffed with anchovy.

No. 64.  Sogliole alla Parmigiana (Sole).*

Ingredients:  Sole, Parmesan, butter, cream, cayenne.

Fillet a sole and wipe each piece with a clean cloth, then place
them in a fireproof dish, and put a small piece of butter on each
fillet.  Then make a good white sauce, and mix it with two
tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan and half a gill of cream.  Cover
the fish well with the sauce, and bake in a moderate oven for
twenty minutes.

*Lemon soles may be used in any of the above-named dishes.

No. 65.  Salmone alla Genovese (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, Genoese sauce (No. 5), butter, lemon.

Boil a bit of salmon, drain it, take off the skin, and mask it with
a Genoese sauce, to which add a spoonful of the water in which the
salmon has been boiled, and at the last add a pat of fresh butter
and a squeeze of lemon juice.

No. 66.  Salmone alla Perigo (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, forcemeat of fish, truffles, butter, Madeira,
croutons of bread, crayfish tails, anchovy butter.

Cut a bit of salmon into well shaped fillets, and marinate them in
lemon juice and a bunch of herbs for two hours, wipe them, put a
layer of forcemeat of fish over each, and decorate them with slices
of truffle.  When put them into a well-buttered saute-pan with half
a cup of stock and a glass of Madeira or Marsala, cover with
buttered paper, and put them into a moderate oven for twenty
minutes.  Arrange the fillets in a circle on croutons of bread,
garnish the centre with crayfish tails and with truffles cut into
dice, a quarter of a pint of Velute sauce (No. 2), and half a
teaspoonful of anchovy butter.  Glaze the fillets and serve.

No. 67.  Salmone alla giardiniera (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, forcemeat of fish, vegetables, butter,
Bechamel, and Espagnole sauce.

Prepare the fillets as above (No. 66), and put on each a layer of
white forcemeat of fish.  Cook a macedoine of vegetables
separately, and garnish each fillet with some of it, then cook them
in a covered stewpan Put a crouton of bread in an entree dish and
garnish it with cooked peas, mixed with Bechamel sauce (No. 3),
stock, and butter.  Around this place the fillets of fish, leaving
the centre with the peas uncovered.  Pour some rich Espagnole sauce
(No. 1) round the fillets and serve.

No. 68.  Salmone alla Farnese (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, oil, lemon juice, thyme, salt, pepper,
nutmeg, mayonnaise sauce, lobster butter, gelatine, Velute sauce,
olives, anchovy butter, white truffles, mushrooms in oil, crayfish.

Boil a piece of salmon, and when cold cut it into fillets and
marinate them for two hours in oil, lemon juice, salt, thyme
pepper, and nutmeg.  Then make a good mayonnaise and add to it some
lobster butter mixed with a little dissolved gelatine and Velute
sauce (No. 2).  Wipe the fillets and arrange them in a circle on a
dish, and pour the mayonnaise over them.  Then decorate the border
of the dish with aspic jelly, and in the centre put some stoned
Spanish olives stuffed with anchovy butter, truffles, mushrooms in
oil, and crayfish tails.

No. 69.  Salmone alla Santa Fiorentina (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, eggs, mayonnaise, parsley, flour.

Marinate a piece of boiled salmon for an hour; take out the bone
and cut the fish into fillets, wipe them, roll them in flour and
dip them in eggs beaten up or in mayonnaise sauce, and fry them a
good colour.  Arrange in a circle on the dish, garnish with fried
parsley, and serve with Dutch or mayonnaise sauce.  Any fillets of
fish may be cooked in this manner.

No. 70.  Salmone alla Francesca (Salmon)

Ingredients:  Salmon, butter, onions, parsley, salt, pepper,
nutmeg, stock, Chablis, Espagnole sauce (No.1) mushrooms, anchovy
butter, lemon.

Put a firm piece of salmon in a stewpan with one and a half ounces
of butter, an onion cut up, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley
(blanched), salt, pepper, very little nutmeg, a cup of stock, and a
glass of Chablis.  Cook for half an hour over a hot fire, turn the
salmon occasionally, and if it gets dry, add a cup of Espagnole
sauce.  Let it boil until sufficiently cooked, and then put it on a
dish.  Into the sauce put four mushrooms cooked in white sauce,
half a teaspoonful of anchovy butter and a little lemon juice. 
Pour the sauce over the salmon and serve.

No. 71.  Fillets of Salmon in Papiliotte

Ingredients:  Salmon, oil, lemon juice, salt, pepper, nutmeg,
herbs.

Cut a piece of salmon into fillets, marinate them in oil, lemon
juice, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and herbs for two hours.  Wipe and put
them into paper souffle cases with a little oil, butter, and herbs. 
Cook them on a gridiron, and serve with a sauce piquante made in
the following manner:  Half a pint of rich Espagnole sauce (No. 1)
and a dessert-spoonful of New Century* sauce, warmed up in a bain-
marie.

*Can be obtained at Messrs Lazenby's, Wigmoree Street, W.



Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, &C.

No. 72.  Manzo alla Certosina (Fillet of Beef)

Ingredients:  Fillet of beef or rump steak, bacon, olive oil, salt,
nutmeg, anchovies, herbs, stock, garlic.

Put a piece of very tender rump steak or fillet of beef into a
stewpan with two slices of fat bacon and three teaspoonsful of the
finest olive oil; season with salt and a tiny pinch of nutmeg; let
it cook uncovered, and turn the meat over occasionally.  When it is
nicely browned add an anchovy minced and mixed with chopped herbs,
and a small clove of garlic with one cut across it.  Then cover the
whole with good stock, put the cover on the stewpan, and when it is
all sufficiently cooked, skim the grease off the sauce, pass it
through a sieve, and pour it over the beef.  Leave the garlic in
for five minutes only.

No. 73.  Stufato alla Florentina (Stewed Beef)

Ingredients:  Beef, mutton, or veal, onions, rosemary, Burgundy,
tomatoes, stock, potatoes, butter, garlic.

Cut up an onion and three leaves of rosemary, fry them slightly in
an ounce of butter, then add meat (beef, mutton, or veal), cut into
fair-sized pieces, salt it and fry it a little, then pour half a
glass of Burgundy over it, and add two tablespoonsful of tomato
conserve, or better still, fresh tomatoes in a puree.  Cover up the
stewpan and cook gently, stir occasionally, and add some stock if
the stew gets too dry.  If you like to add potatoes, cut them up,
put them in the stewpan an hour before serving, and cook them with
the meat.  A clove of garlic with one cut may be added for five
minutes.

No. 74.  Coscia di Manzo al Forno (Rump Steak)

Ingredients:  Rump steak, ham, salt, pepper, spice, fat bacon,
onion, stock, white wine.

Lard a bit of good rump steak with bits of lean ham, and season it
with salt, pepper, and a little spice, slightly brown it in butter
for a few minutes, then cover it with three or four slices of fat
bacon and put it into a stewpan with an onion chopped up, a cup of
good stock, and half a glass of white wine; cook with the cover on
the stewpan for about an hour.  You may add a clove of garlic for
ten minutes.

No. 75.  Polpettine alla Salsa Piccante (Beef Olives)

Ingredients:  Beef steak, butter, onions, stock, sausage meat.

Cut some thin slices of beef steak, and on each place a little
forcemeat of fowl or veal, to which add a little sausage meat: 
roll up the slices of beef and cook them with butter and onions,
and when they are well browned pour some stock over them, and let
them absorb it.  Serve with a tomato sauce (No. 10), or sauce
piquante made with a quarter of a pint of rich Espagnole (No. 1),
and a dessert-spoonful of New Century sauce (see No. 71 note).

No. 76. Stufato alla Milanese (Stewed Beef)

Ingredients:  Rump steak, bacon, ham, salt, pepper, cinnamon,
cloves, butter, onions, Burgundy.

Beat a piece of rump steak to make it tender and lard it well, cut
up some bits of fat bacon and dust them over with salt, pepper, and
a tiny pinch of cinnamon, and put them on the steak.  Stick three
cloves into the steak, then put it into a stewpan, add a little of
the fat of the beef chopped up, an ounce of butter, an onion cut
up, and some bits of lean ham.  Put in sufficient stock to cover
the steak, add a glass of Burgundy, and stew gently until it is
cooked.

No. 77.  Manzo Marinato Arrosto (Marinated Beef)

Ingredients:  Beef, salt, larding bacon, Burgundy, vinegar, spices,
herbs, flour.

Beat a piece of rump steak, or fillet to make it tender; sprinkle
it well with salt and some chopped herbs, and leave it for an hour;
then lard it and marinate it as follows:  Half a pint of red wine
(Australian Harvest Burgundy is best), half a glass of vinegar, a
pinch of spice, and a bouquet of herbs; leave it in this for
twenty-four hours then take it out, drain it well sprinkle it with
flour, and roast it for twenty minutes before a clear fire, braize
it till quite tender, then press and glaze it.  The thin end of a
sirloin is excellent cooked this way.  Serve cold

No. 78.  Manzo con sugo di Barbabietole (Fillet of Beef)

Ingredients:  Beef, beetroot, salt.

Cut up three raw beetroots put them into an earthen ware pot and
cover them with water.  Keep them in some warm place, and allow
them to ferment for five, six, or eight days according to the
season; the froth at the top of the water will indicate the
necessary fermentation.  The take out the pieces of beetroot, skim
off all the froth, and into the fermented liquor put a good piece
of tender rump steak or fillet with some salt.  Braize for four
hours and serve.

No. 79.  Manzo in Insalata (Marinated Beef)

Ingredients:  Beef, oil, salt, pepper, vinegar, parsley, capers,
mushrooms, olives, vegetables.

Cook a fillet of beef (or the thin end of a sirloin), which has
been previously marinated for two days in oil, salt, pepper,
vinegar, and chopped parsley.  When cold press and glaze it,
garnish it with capers, mushrooms preserved in vinegar or gherkins,
olives, and any kind of vegetables marinated like the beef.  Serve
cold.

No. 80.  Filetto di Bue con Pistacchi (Fillets of Beef with
Pistacchios)

Ingredients:  Fillet of beef, oil, salt, flour, pistacchio nuts,
gravy.

Cut a piece of tender beef into little fillets, and put a them in a
stewpan with a tablespoonful of olive oil and salt.  After they
have cooked for a few minutes, powder them with flour, and strew
over each fillet some chopped pistacchio nuts.  Add a few spoonsful
of very good boiling gravy, and cook for another half-hour.

No. 81. Scalopini di Riso (Beef with Risotto)

Ingredients:  Rump steak, butter, rice, truffles, tongue, stock,
mushrooms.

Slightly stew a bit of rump steak with bits of tongue and
mushrooms; let it get cold, and cut it into scallops.  Butter a pie
dish, and garnish the bottom of it with cooked tongue and slices of
cooked truffle, then over this put a layer of well-cooked and
seasoned risotto (No. 190), then a layer of the scallops of beef,
and then another layer of risotto.  Heat in a bain-marie, and turn
out of the pie dish, and serve with a very good sauce poured round
it.

No. 82. Tenerumi alla Piemontese (Tendons of Veal)

Ingredients:  Tendons of veal, fowl forcemeat, truffles, risotto
(No. 190), a cock s comb, tongue.

Tendons of veal are that part of the breast which lies near the
ribs, and forms an opaque gristly substance.  Partly braize a fine
bit of this joint, and press it between two plates till cold.  Cut
it up into fillets, and on each spread a thin layer of fowl
forcemeat, and decorate with slices of truffle.  Put the fillets
into a stewpan, cover them with very good stock, and boil till the
forcemeat and truffles are quite cooked.  Prepare a risotto
all'Italiana (No. 190), put it on a dish and decorate it with bits
of red tongue cut into shapes, and in the centre put a whole cooked
truffle and a white cock's comb, both on a silver skewer.  Place
the tendons of veal round the dish.  Add a good Espagnole sauce
(No. 1) and serve.

If you like, leave out the risotto and serve the veal with
Espagnole sauce mixed with cooked peas and chopped truffle.

No. 83.  Bragiuole di Vitello (Veal Cutlets)

Ingredients:  Veal, salt, pepper, butter, bacon, carrots, flour,
Chablis, water, lemon.

Cut a bit of veal steak into pieces the size of small cutlets, salt
and pepper them, and put them in a wide low stewpan.  Add two
ounces of butter, a cut-up carrot, and some bits of bacon also cut
up.  When they are browned, add a spoonful of flour, half a glass
of Chablis, and half a glass of water, and cook on a slow fire for
half an hour, then take out the cutlets, reduce the sauce, and pass
it through a sieve.  Put it back on the fire and add an ounce of
butter and a good squeeze of lemon, and when hot pour it over the
cutlets.

No. 84.  Costolette alla Manza (Veal Cutlets)

Ingredients:  Veal cutlets (fowl or turkey cutlets), forcemeat,
truffles, mushrooms, tongue, parsley, pasta marinate (No. 17).

Cut a few horizontal lines along your cutlets, and on each put a
little veal or fowl forcemeat, to which add in equal quantities
chopped truffles, tongue, mushrooms, and a little parsley.  Over
this put a thin layer of pasta marinate, and fry the cutlets on a
slow fire.

No. 85.  Vitello alla Pellegrina (Breast of Veal)

Ingredients:  Breast of veal, butter, onions, sugar, stock, red
wine, mushrooms, bacon, salt, flour, bay leaf.

Roast a bit of breast of veal, then glaze over two Spanish onions
witl1 butter and a little sugar, and when they arc a good colour
pour a teacup of stock and a glass of Burgundy over them, and add a
few mushrooms, a bay leaf, some salt, and a few bits of bacon. 
When the mushrooms and onions are cooked, skim off the fat and
thicken the sauce with a little flour and butter fried together;
pour it over the veal and put the onions and mushrooms round the
dish.

No. 86.  Frittura Piccata al Marsala (Fillet of Veal)

Ingredients:  Veal, butter, Marsala, stock, lemon, bacon.

Cut a tender bit of veal steak into small fillets, cut off all the
fat and stringy parts, flour them and fry them in butter.  When
they are slightly browned add a glass of Marsala and a teacup of
good stock, and fry on a very hot fire, so that the fillets may
remain tender.  Take them off the fire, put a little roll of fried
bacon on each, add a squeeze of lemon juice, and serve.

No. 87.  Polpettine Distese (Veal Olives)

Ingredients:  Veal steak, butter, bread, eggs, pistacchio nuts,
spice, parsley.

Cut some slices of veal steak very thin as for veal olives, and
spread them out in a well-buttered stewpan.  On each slice of veal
put half a spoonful of the following mixture:  Pound some crumb of
bread and mix it with a whole egg; add a little salt, some
pistacchio nuts, herbs, and parsley chopped up, and a little
butter.  Roll up each slice of veal, cover with a sheet of buttered
paper, put the cover on the stewpan and cook for three-quarters of
an hour in two ounces of butter on a slow fire.  Thicken the sauce
with a dessert-spoonful of flour and butter fried together.

No. 88.  Coste di Vitello Imboracciate (Ribs of Veal)

Ingredients:  Ribs of veal, butter, eggs, Parmesan, bread crumbs,
parsley.

Cut all the sinews from a piece of neck or ribs of veal, cover the
meat with plenty of butter and half cook it on a slow fire, then
let it get cold.  When cold, egg it over and roll it in bread
crumbs mixed with a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan; fry in butter
and serve with a garnish of fried parsley and a rich sauce.  A
dessert-spoonful of New Century sauce mixed with quarter of a pint
of good thick stock makes a good sauce.  (See No. 226.)

No. 89.  Costolette di Montone alla Nizzarda  (Mutton Cutlets)

Ingredients:  Mutton cutlets, butter, olives, mushrooms, cucumbers.

Trim as many cutlets as you require, and marinate them in vinegar,
herbs, and spice for two hours.  Before cooking wipe them well and
then saute them in clarified butter, and when they are well
coloured on both sides and resist the pressure of the finger, drain
off the butter and pour four tablespoonsful of Espagnole sauce (No.
1) with a teaspoonful of vinegar and six bruised pepper corns over
them.  Arrange them on a dish, putting between each cutlet a
crouton of fried bread, and garnish with olives stuffed with
chopped mushrooms and with slices of fried cucumber.

No. 90.  Petto di Castrato all'Italiana (Breast of Mutton)

Ingredients:  Breast of mutton, veal, forcemeat, eggs, herbs,
spice, Parmesan.

Stuff a breast of mutton with veal forcemeat mixed with two eggs
beaten up, herbs, a little spice, and a tablespoonful of grated
Parmesan, braize it in stock with a bunch of herbs and two onions. 
Serve with Italian sauce (No. 6).

No. 91.  Petto di Castrato alla Salsa piccante (Breast of Mutton)

Ingredients:  Same as No. 90.

When the breast of mutton has been stuffed and cooked as above, let
it get cold and then cut it into fillets, flour them over, fry in
butter, and serve with tomato sauce piquante (No. 10), or one
dessert-spoonful of New Century sauce in a quarter pint of good
stock or gravy.

No. 92.  Tenerumi d'Agnello alla Villeroy (Tendons of Lamb)

Ingredients:  Tendons of lamb, eggs, bread crumbs, truffles,
butter, stock, Villeroy sauce.

Slightly cook the tendons (the part of the breast near the ribs) of
lamb, press them between two dishes till cold, then cut into a good
shape and dip them into a Villeroy sauce (No. 18) egg and bread-
crumb, and saute them in butter.  When about to serve, put them in
a dish with very good clear gravy.  A teaspoonful of chopped mint
and a tablespoonful of chopped truffles mixed with the bread crumbs
will be a great improvement.

No. 93.  Tenerumi d' Agnello alla Veneziana  (Tendons of Lamb)

Ingredients:  Tendons of lamb, butter, parsley, onions, stock.

Fry the tendons of lamb in butter together with a teaspoonful of
chopped parsley and an onion.  Serve with good gravy

No. 94.  Costolette d' Agnello alla Costanza (Lamb Cutlets)

Ingredients:  Lamb cutlets, butter, stock, cocks' combs, fowl's
liver, mushrooms.

Fry as many lamb cutlets as you require very sharply in butter,
drain off the butter and replace it with some very good stock or
gravy.  Make a ragout of cocks' combs, bits of fowl's liver and
mushrooms all cut up; add a white sauce with half a gill of cream
mixed with it, and with this mask the cutlets, and saute them for
fifteen minutes.



Tongue, Sweetbread, Calf's Head, Liver, Sucking Pig, &C.

No. 95.  Timballo alla Romana

Ingredients:  Cold fowl, game, or sweetbread, butter, lard, flour,
Parmesan, truffles, macaroni, onions, cream.

Make a light paste of two ounces of butter, two of lard, and half a
pound of flour, and put it in the larder for two hours.  In the
meantime boil a little macaroni and let it get cold, then line a
plain mould with the paste, and fill it with bits of cut-up fow1,
or game, or sweetbread, bits of truffle cut in small dice, grated
Parmesan, and a little chopped onion.  Put these ingredients in
alternately, and after each layer add enough cream to moisten. 
Fill the mould quite full, then roll out a thin paste for the top
and press it well together at the edges to keep the cream from
boiling out.  Bake it in a moderate oven for an hour and a half,
turn it out of the mould, and serve with a rich brown sauce. 
Decorate the top with bits of red tongue and truffles cut into
shapes or with a little chopped pistacchio nut.

No. 96.  Timballo alla Lombarda

Ingredients:  Macaroni, fowl or game, eggs, stock, Velute sauce
(No. 2), tongue, butter, truffles.

Butter a smooth mould, then boil some macaroni, but take care that
it is in long pieces.  When cold, take the longest bits and line
the bottom of the mould, making the macaroni go in circles; and
when you come to the end of one piece, join on the next as closely
as possible until the whole mould is lined; paint it over now and
then with white of egg beaten up; then mask the whole inside with a
thin layer of forcemeat of fowl, which should also be put on with
white of egg to make it adhere; then cut up the bits of macaroni
which remain, warm them up in some good fowl stock and Velute sauce
much reduced, a little melted butter, some bits of truffle cut into
dice, tongue, fowl, or game also cut up in pieces.  When the mould
is full, put on another layer of forcemeat, steam for an hour, then
turn out and serve with a very good brown sauce.

No. 97.  Lingua alla  Visconti (Tongue)

Ingredients:  Tongue, glaze, bread, spinach, white grapes, port.

Soak a smoked tongue in fresh water for forty-eight hours, then
boil it till it is tender.  Peel off the skin, cut the tongue in
rather thick slices, and glaze them.  Prepare an oval border of
fried bread, cover it with spinach about two inches thick, and on
this arrange the slices of tongue.  Fill in the centre of the dish
with white grapes cooked in port or muscat.

No. 98.  Lingua di Manzo al Citriuoli (Tongue with Cucumber)

Ingredients:  Ox tongue, salt, pepper, nutmeg, parsley, bacon, veal,
carrots, onions, thyme, bay leaves, cloves, stock.

Gently boil an ox tongue until you can peel off the skin, then lard
it, season it with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and chopped parsley, and
boil it with some bits of bacon, ham, veal, a carrot, an onion, two
bay leaves, thyme and two cloves.  Pour some good stock over it and
let it simmer gently until it is cooked.  Put the tongue on a dish
and garnish it with slices of fried cucumber.  Boil the cucumber
for five minutes before you fry it, to take away the bitter taste. 
Serve the tongue with a sauce piquante, made with one dessert-
spoonful of New Century sauce to a quarter pint of good Espangole
sauce (No. 1).

No. 99.  Lingue di Castrato alla Cuciniera (Sheep's Tongues)

Ingredients:  Sheep's tongues, bacon, beef, onions, herbs, spice,
eggs, butter, flour.

Cook three or four sheep's tongues in good stock, and add some
slices of bacon, bits of beef, two onions, a bunch of herbs, and a
pinch of spice.  Let them get cold, flour them and mask them with
egg beaten up and fry quickly in butter.  Serve with Italian sauce
(No. 6)

No. 100.  Lingue di Vitello all'Italiana (Calves' Tongues)

Ingredients:  Calves' tongues, salt, butter, stock, water, glaze,
potatoes, ham, truffles, sauce piquante.

Rub a good handful of salt into two or three calves' tongues and
leave them for twenty-four hours, then wash off all the salt and
soak them in fresh water for two hours.  Stew them gently till
tender, take them out, skin and braize them in butter and good
stock for half an hour.  Let them get cold and cut them into slices
about half an inch thick; put the slices into a buttered saute-pan
and cover them with a good thick glaze; let them get quite hot and
then arrange them on a border of potatoes, and garnish each slice
with round shapes of cooked ham and truffle.  Fill the centre with
any vegetables you like; fried cucumber is excellent, but if you
use it do not forget to boil it for five minutes before you fry it
to take away the bitter taste.  Serve with a sauce piquante (No.
10, or No. 226).

No. 101.  Porcelletto alla Corradino (Sucking Pig)

Ingredients:  Sucking pig, ham, eggs, Parmesan, truffles,
mushrooms, garlic, bay leaves, coriander seeds, pistacchio nuts,
veal forcemeat, suet, bacon, herbs, spice.

Bone a sucking pig, remove all the inside and fill it with a
stuffing made of veal forcemeat mixed with a little chopped suet,
ham, bacon, herbs, two tablespoonsful of finely chopped pistacchio
nuts, a pinch of spice, six coriander seeds, two tablespoonsful of
grated Parmesan, cuttings of truffles and mushrooms all bound
together with eggs.  Sew the pig up and braize it in a big stewpan
with bits of bacon, a clove of garlic with two cuts, a bunch of
herbs and one bay leaf, for half an hour.  Then pour off the gravy,
cover the pig with well-buttered paper, and finish cooking it in
the oven.  Garnish the top with vegetables and truffles cut into
shapes, slices of lemon and sprigs of parsley.  Serve with a good
sauce piquante (No. 229).  Do not leave the garlic in for more than
ten minutes.

No. 102.  Porcelletto da Latte in Galantina (Sucking Pig)

Ingredients:  Sucking pig, forcemeat of fowl, bacon, truffles,
pistacchio nuts, ham, lemon, veal, bay leaves, salt, carrots,
onions, shallots, parsley, stock, Chablis, gravy.

Bone a sucking pig all except its feet, but be careful not to cut
the skin on its back.  Lay it out on a napkin and line it inside
with a forcemeat of fowl and veal about an inch thick, over this
put a layer of bits of marinated bacon, slices of truffle,
pistacchio nuts, cooked ham, and some of the flesh of the pig, then
another layer of forcemeat until the pig's skin is fairly filled. 
Keep its shape by sewing it lightly together, then rub it all over
with lemon juice and cover it with slices of fat bacon, roll it up
and stitch it in a pudding cloth.  Then put the bones and cuttings
into a stewpan with bits of bacon and veal steak cut up, two bay
leaves, salt, a carrot, an onion, a shallot, and a bunch of
parsley.  Into this put the pig with a bottle of white wine and
sufficient stock to cover it, and cook on a slow fire for three
hours.  Then take it out, and when cold take off the pudding-cloth. 
Pass the liquor through a hair sieve, and, if necessary, add some
stock; reduce and clarify it.  Decorate the dish with this jelly
and serve cold.

No. 103.  Ateletti alla Sarda

Ingredients:  Veal or fowl, ox palates, stock, tongue, truffles,
butter, mushrooms, sweetbread.

Soak two ox palates in salted water for four hours, then boil them
until the rough skin comes off, and cook them in good stock for six
hours, press them between two plates and let them get cold.  Roll
some forcemeat of veal or fowl in flour, cut it into small pieces
about the size of a cork, boil them in salted water, let them get
cold and cut them into circular pieces.  Cut the ox palates also
into circular pieces the same size as the bits of forcemeat, then
thinner circles of cooked tongue and truffles.  String these pieces
alternately on small silver skewers.  Reduce to half its quantity a
pint of Velute sauce (No. 2), and add the cuttings of the truffles,
mushroom trimmings, bits of sweetbread, and a squeeze of lemon
juice.  Let it get cold and then mask the atelets (or skewers with
the forcemeat, &c.) with it, and fry them quickly in butter.  Fry a
large oval crouton of bread, scoop out the centre and fill it with
fried slices of cucumber and truffles boiled in a little Chablis. 
Stick the skewers into the crouton and pour the sauce round it.

For a maigre dish use fillets of fish, truffles, mushrooms, and
Bechamel sauce (No. 3).  The cucumber should be boiled for five
minutes before it is fried.

No. 104.  Ateletti alla Genovese

Ingredients:  Veal, sweetbread, calf's brains, ox palates,
mushrooms, fonds d'artichauds, cocks' combs, eggs, Parmesan, bread
crumbs.

Cook two ox palates as in the last recipe, then take equal
quantities of veal steak, sweetbread, calf s brains, equal
quantities of mushrooms, fonds d'artichauds, and cocks' combs.  Fry
them all in butter except the palates, but be careful to put the
veal in first, as it requires longer cooking; the brains should go
in last.  Then put all these ingredients on a cutting board and add
the palates (cooked separately); cut them all into pieces of equal
size, either round or square, but keep the ingredients separate,
and string them alternately on silver skewers, as in the last
recipe.  Then pound up all the cuttings and add a little crumb of
bread soaked in stock, the yolks of three eggs, the whites of two
well beaten up, two dessert-spoonsful of grated Parmesan, salt to
taste, and chopped truffles.  Mix all this well together and mask
the atelets with it; egg and bread crumb them and fry in butter. 
When they are a good colour, serve with fried parsley.

No. 105.  Testa di Vitello alla Sorrentina (Calf's Head)

Ingredients:  Calf's head, veal, sweetbread, truffles, mushrooms,
pistacchio nuts, eggs, herbs, spice, stock, bacon, ham.

Boil a half calf's head well, and when it is half cold, bone it and
fill it with a stuffing of veal, the calf's brains, sweetbread,
truffles, mushrooms, pistacchio nuts, the yolks of two eggs, herbs,
and a little spice.  Then stitch it up and braize it in good stock,
with some slices of bacon, ham, and a bunch of herbs.  Serve with
brain sauce mixed with cream.

No. 106.  Testa di Vitello con Salsa Napoletana (Calf's Head)

Ingredients:  Calf's head, calf's liver, bacon, suet, truffles,
almonds, olives, calf's brains, capers, spice, coriander seeds,
herbs, ham, stock.

Boil half a calf's head, bone it and fill it with a stuffing made
of four ounces of calf's liver, well chopped up and pounded in a
mortar; two ounces of bacon, one ounce of suet, three truffles, six
almonds, three olives, six coriander seeds, six capers, the calf's
brains, a pinch of spice and a teaspoonful of chopped herbs.  Roll
up the head, tie it up and put it into a stewpan with some bits of
bacon, ham, and very good stock, and stew it slowly.  Serve with
Neapolitan sauce (No.12),or with tomato sauce piquante (No. 10).

No. 107.  Testa di Vitello alla Pompadour (Calf's Head)

Ingredients:  Calf's head, calf's brains, cream, eggs, truffles,
cinnamon, stock, butter, Parmesan.

Boil and bone half a calf's head and fill it with a stuffing made
of the calf's brains, a gill of cream, the yolks of two eggs, two
truffles cut up, a little chopped ham, and a tiny pinch of
cinnamon.  Boil it in good stock, and when it is sufficiently
cooked take it out and mask it all over with a mixture of butter,
yolk of egg, and a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, then brown it
in the oven and serve hot.

No. 108.  Testa di Vitello alla Sanseverino (Calf's Head)

Ingredients:  Calf's head, sweetbread, fowl's liver, anchovies,
herbs, capers, garlic, bacon, ham, Malmsey or Muscat.

Boil and bone half a calf's head, and fill it with a stuffing made
of half a pound of sweetbread, a fowl's liver, two anchovies, a
teaspoonful of chopped herbs, a few chopped capers, and the calf's
brains.  Roll the head up, stitch it together and braize it in half
a tumbler of Malmsey or Australian Muscat (Burgoyne's), half a cup
of very good white stock, some bits of ham and bacon, and a clove
of garlic with two cuts.  Cook it gently for four hours and serve
it with its own sauce.  Do not leave the garlic in longer than ten
minutes.

No. 109.  Testa di Vitello in Frittata (Calf's Head)

Ingredients:  Calf's head, eggs, Parmesan, ham, pepper, butter,
croutons.

A good rechauffe' of calf's head may be made in the following
manner:  After the head has been well boiled in good stock, cut it
into slices and mask these with a mixture of eggs well beaten up,
grated Parmesan, pepper, and chopped ham.  Fry in butter, and
garnish with fried parsley and fried croutons.  Serve with a sauce
made of a quarter of a pint of good Bechamel (No. 3) and a dessert-
spoonful of New Century sauce.

No. 110.  Zampetti (Calves' Feet)

Ingredients:  Calves' or pigs' feet, butter, leeks or small onions,
parsley, salt, pepper, stock, tomatoes, eggs, cheese, cinnamon.

Blanch and bone two or more calves' or pigs' feet and put them into
a stewpan with butter, leeks, or onions, chopped parsley, salt,
pepper, and a little stock.  Let them boil till the liquid is
somewhat reduced, then add good meat gravy and two tablespoonsful
of tomato puree, and just before taking the stewpan off the fire,
add the yolks of two eggs beaten up, a tablespoonful of grated
cheese, and a tiny pinch of cinnamon.  Mix all well together and
serve very hot.

No. 111.  Bodini Marinati

Ingredients:  Veal forcemeat, truffles, sweetbread, mushrooms,
herbs, flour, pasta marinate (No. 17), tongue, butter.

Make a mixture of truffles, tongue, sweetbread, mushrooms, and
herbs, all chopped up, and add it to a forcemeat of veal, the
proportions being two-thirds veal forcemeat and the other
ingredients one third.  Mix this well and form it into little balls
about the size of a pigeon's egg, flour them and mask them all over
with pasta marinate (No. 17).  Fry them in butter over a slow fire,
so that the balls may be well cooked through, and when they are the
right colour dry them in a napkin and serve very hot.

These bodini may be made with various ingredients; they will be
most delicate with a forcemeat of fowl and bits of brain mixed with
herbs, truffle, cooked ham, or tongue.  They are also excellent
made with fish (sole, mullet, turbot, &c.), either cooked or raw,
and marinated in lemon, salt, pepper, oil, nutmeg, and parsley.

No. 112.  Animelle alla Parmegiana (Sweetbread)

Ingredients:  Sweetbread, bread crumbs, Parmesan, butter.

Blanch as many sweetbreads as you require, and then roll them in
bread crumbs mixed with grated Parmesan, salt, and pepper; wrap
them up in buttered grease-proof paper and grill them.  When they
are cooked, take off the paper, and serve with a good sauce in a
sauce-boat.

No. 113.  Animelle in Cartoccio (Sweetbread)

Ingredients:  Sweetbread, butter, herbs, salt, pepper, bread
crumbs, Parmesan, lemons, gravy, tomatoes.

Blanch a pound of sweetbread cuttings, mix it with two ounces of
melted butter, chopped herbs, salt, and pepper, and put it into
paper souffle cases.  Then strew over each some bread crumbs mixed
with grated Parmesan, put the cases in the oven, and when they are
browned serve either with good gravy and lemon juice or with tomato
sauce (No. 9).

No. 114.  Animelle all'Italiana (Sweetbread)

Ingredients:  Sweetbread, butter, onions, salt, herbs, eggs, glaze,
Risotto (No. 190), truffles, quenelles of fowl, Espagnole sauce,
white sauce.

Blanch as many sweetbreads as you require, cut them into quarters
and saute them in butter with a small onion cut up, salt, and a
bunch of herbs.  Then pour over them two cups of white sauce and
cook gently for twenty minutes; take out the sweetbreads and put
them in a stewpan.  Reduce the sauce, and add to it a mixture made
of the yolks of four eggs, one and a half ounce of butter and a
teaspoonful of glaze; pass it through a sieve, pour it over the
sweetbreads, and keep them warm in a bain-marie.  Have ready a good
Risotto all'Italiana (No. 190), and put it into a border mould (but
first decorate the inside of the mould with slices of truffle), put
it in a moderate oven, and when it is warm turn it out on a dish. 
Place the sweetbreads on the risotto and fill in the centre with
quenelles of fowl and Espagnole sauce (No. 1).

No. 115.  Animelle Lardellate (Sweetbread)

Ingredients:  Sweetbreads, larding, bacon, stock, a macedoine of
vegetables.

Blanch two sweetbreads, lard them, and cook them very slowly in
good stock.  Skim the stock and reduce it to a glaze to cover the
sweetbreads.  Then cut them into three or four pieces and arrange
them round a dish, but see that the larding is well glazed over. 
In the centre of the dish place a piece of bread in the shape of a
cup and fill this with a macedoine of vegetables.

No. 116.  Frittura di Bottoni e di Animelle (Sweetbread and
Mushrooms)

Ingredients:  Sweetbread, fresh button mushrooms, flour, bread
crumbs, salt, pepper, parsley, butter, lemons.

Peel some button mushrooms and cut them in halves.  Boil a
sweetbread, and cut it into pieces about the same size as the
mushrooms, flour, egg, and bread crumb them, and fry in butter;
then serve with a garnish of fried parsley.  Hand cut lemons with
this dish.

No. 117.  Cervello in Fili serbe (Calf's Brains)

Ingredients:  Calf's brains, stock, butter, parsley, lemon.

Boil half a calf's brain in good stock for ten minutes then drain
and pour a little melted butter and the juice of half a lemon over
the brain; add some chopped parsley fried for one minute in butter,
and serve as hot as possible.

No. 118.  Cervello alla Milanese (Calf's Brains)

Ingredients:  Calf s brains, eggs, bread crumbs, butter.

Scald a calf's brain and let it get cold.  Wipe it on a cloth, and
get it as dry as possible, then cut it into pieces about the size
of a walnut, egg and bread crumb them, fry in butter, and strew a
little salt over them.

No. 119.  Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains)

Ingredients:  Calf's brains, eggs, flour, mushrooms, Velute sauce.

Scald a calf's brain, and when cold cut it up and mask each piece
with a thick sauce made of well-reduced Velute (No. 2), mixed with
chopped cooked mushrooms; flour them over and dip them into the
yolk of an egg, and fry as quickly as possible.

No. 120.  Frittura of Liver and Brains

Ingredients:  Calf's liver and brains (or lamb's or pig's fry),
butter, ham, flour, puff pastry.

Cut up half a pound of liver in small slices, flour and fry them in
butter or dripping, together with a calf's or pig's or sheep's
brain, previously scalded and also cut up.  Serve with bits of
fried ham and little diamond-shaped pieces of puff pastry.

No. 121.  Cervello in Frittata Montano (Calf's Brains)

Ingredients:  Calf's brains, stock, cream, eggs, spice, Parmesan,
butter.

Boil a calf's brain in good stock for ten minutes, let it get cold,
cut it up into little balls, and mask each piece with a mixture
made of half a gill of cream, the yolks of two eggs, a little
spice, a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, and the whites of two
eggs well beaten up.  Fry the balls in butter, and serve as hot as
possible.  You may mask and cook the calf's brain without cutting
it up, if you prefer it so.

No. 122.  Marinata di Cervello alla Villeroy (Calf's Brains)

Ingredients:  Calf's brains, stock, Bechamel sauce, eggs, butter,
lemon, forcemeat of fowl, flour.

Boil a calf's or sheep's brain in good stock, wipe it well, and cut
it up.  Reduce a pint of Bechamel (No. 3), and add to it the yolks
of three eggs, an ounce of butter, and the juice of a lemon.  When
it boils throw in the cut-up brain; let it cool, then take out the
brain and form it into little balls about the size of a small
walnut.  Make a forcemeat of fowl, and add a dessert-spoonful of
flour to it, and spread it out very thin on a paste-board, and into
this wrap the balls of brain, each separately.  Dip them into a
pasta marinate (No. 17), and fry them a golden brown.

No. 123.  Minuta alla Milanese (Lamb's Sweetbread)

Ingredients:  Lamb's sweetbread, butter, onions, stock, Chablis,
salt, lemon, herbs, cocks' combs, fowls' livers.

Cut up equal quantities of lamb's sweetbreads, cocks' combs, fowls'
livers in pieces about the size of a filbert, flour and fry them
slightly in butter and a small bit of onion, add half a glass of
Chablis, a cup of good stock, and a bunch of herbs.  reduce the
sauce, and thicken it with a tablespoonful of butter and flour
fried together.  Make a border of Risotto all'Italiana (No. 190),
and put the sweetbread, &c., together with the sauce in the centre.

No. 124.  Animelle al Sapor di Targone (Lamb's Fry)

Ingredients:  Lamb's fry, ham, garlic, larding bacon, spice, herbs,
butter, flour, stock.

The lamb's fry should be nearly all sweetbread, and very little
liver.  Lard each piece with bacon and ham, and roll it in chopped
herbs and a pinch of pounded spice.  Then dip it in flour and
braize in good stock, to which add three ounces of butter, some
bits of bacon, ham, a bay leaf, herbs, and a clove of garlic with
two cuts.  Cook until the fry is well glazed over, and serve with
Tarragon sauce (No. 8).  Do not leave the garlic in longer than ten
minutes.

No. 125.  Fritto Misto alla Villeroy

Ingredients:  Cocks' combs, calf's brains, sweetbread, stock,
truffles, mushrooms, Villeroy, eggs, bread crumbs.

Cook some big cocks' combs, bits of calf s brains, and sweetbread
in good stock, then drain them and marinate them slightly in lemon
juice and herbs.  Prepare a Villeroy (No. 18), and add to it
cuttings of sweetbread, brains, truffles, mushrooms, &c.  When it
is cold, mask the cocks' combs and other ingredients with it, egg
and bread-crumb them, and fry them a golden brown.

No. 126.  Fritto Misto alla Piemontese

Ingredients:  Sweetbread, calf s brains, ox palate, flour, eggs,
Chablis, salt, herbs butter.

Make a thin paste with a tablespoonful of flour, the yolks of two
eggs, two Spoonsful of Chablis, and a little salt.  Mix this up
well, and if it is too thick add a little water.  Beat up the
whites of the two eggs into a snow.  In the meantime blanch a
sweetbread, half a calf's brain, and a few bits of cooked ox
palate; boil them all up with a bunch of herbs; cut them into
pieces about the size of a walnut, and dip them into the paste so
that each piece is well covered, then dip them into the beaten-up
whites of egg, and fry them very quickly in butter.  This fry is
generally served with a garnish of French beans,  which should not
be cut up, but half boiled, then dried, floured over and fried
together with the other ingredients.  The ox palates should be
boiled for at least six hours before you use them in this dish.

No. 127.  Minuta di Fegatini (Ragout of Fowls' Livers)

Ingredients:  Fowls' or turkeys' livers, flour, butter, parsley,
onions, salt, pepper, stock, Chablis.

Cut the livers in half, flour them, and fry lightly in butter with
chopped parsley, very little chopped onion, salt and pepper, then
add a quarter pint of boiling stock and half a glass of Chablis,
and cook until the sauce is somewhat reduced.  You can also cook
the livers simply in good meat gravy, but in this case they should
not be floured.  Serve with a border of macaroni (No. 183), or
Risotto (No. 190), or Polenta (No. 187).

No. 128.  Minuta alla Visconti (Chickens' Livers)

Ingredients:  Fowls' livers, eggs, cheese, butter, cream, cayenne
pepper.

Braize two fowls' livers in butter, then pound them up, and mix
with a little cream, a tablespoonful of grated cheese and a dust of
cayenne.

Spread this rather thickly over small squares of toast, and keep
them hot whilst you make a custard with half an ounce of butter, an
egg well beaten up, and a tablespoonful of cheese.  Stir it over
the fire till thick and then spread it on the hot toast.  Serve
very hot.  This makes a good savoury.

No. 129.  Croutons alla Principesca

Ingredients:  Croutons, tongue, sweetbread, truffles, fowl or game,
Velute sauce, stock, eggs, butter.

Fry a bit of bread in butter till it is a light brown colour, then
cut it into heart-shaped pieces.  Prepare a ragout with bits of
tongue, sweetbread, fowl or game, truffles, two or three spoonsful
of well-reduced Velute sauce (No. 2), and two or three of reduced
gravy.  Put a spoonful of the ragout in each crouton, and over it a
layer of fowl forcemeat half an inch thick; trim the edges neatly,
glaze them with the yolk of eggs beaten up, and put them in a
buttered fireproof dish in the oven for twenty minutes.  Then glaze
them with reduced stock and serve hot.

For a maigre dish use fish for the ragout and forcemeat.

No. 130.  Croutons alla Romana

Ingredients:  Bread, fowl forcemeat, tongue, truffles, herbs,
cream, stock, butter, flour, eggs.

Cut a bit of crumb of bread into round or square shapes, and on
each put a spoonful of fowl or rabbit forcemeat, a little chopped
tongue, and a slight flavouring of chopped herbs; cover with a
slice of bread the same shape as the underneath piece, put them in
a buttered fireproof dish, and moisten them well with cream,
butter, and stock.  Cook until all the liquor is absorbed, but turn
them over so that both sides may be well cooked, then flour and dip
them into beaten-up eggs; fry them a good colour and serve very
hot.

For a maigre dish use forcemeat of fish or lobster, and more cream
instead of stock.



Fowl, Duck, Game, Hare,  Rabbit, &c.

No. 131.  Soffiato di Cappone (Fowl Souffle)

Ingredients:  Fowl, Bechamel, stock, semolina flour, potatoes,
salt, eggs, butter, smoked tongue or ham.

Prepare a puree of fowl or turkey and a small quantity of grated
tongue or ham, and whilst you are pounding the meat add some good
gravy or stock.  Then make a Bechamel sauce (No. 3) and add two
table-spoonsful of semolina flour, a boiled potato and salt to
taste, boil it up and add the puree of fowl, then let it get nearly
cold, add yolks of eggs and the white beaten up into a snow.  (For
one pint of the puree use the yolks of three eggs.) Pour the whole
into a buttered souffle case, and half an hour before serving put
it in a moderate oven and serve hot.  You can use game instead of
fowl, and serve in little souffle cases.

No. 132.  Pollo alla Fiorentina (Chicken)

Ingredients:  Fowl, butter, vegetables, rice or macaroni,
peppercorns, stock, ham, tomatoes, bay leaves, onions, cloves,
Liebig.

Roll up a fowl in buttered paper and put it in the oven in a
fireproof dish with all kinds of vegetables and a few peppercorns. 
Leave it there for about two hours, then put the fowl and
vegetables into two quarts of good stock and let it simmer for one
hour; serve on well-boiled rice or macaroni and pour the following
sauce over it.  Sauce:  Two pounds tomatoes, one big cup of good
stock, a quarter pound of chopped ham, three bay leaves, one onion
stuck with cloves, one teaspoonful of Liebig.  Simmer an hour and a
half.

No. 133.  Pollo all'Oliva (Chicken)

Ingredients:  Fowl, onions, celery, salt, parsley, carrots, butter,
stock, olives, tomatoes.

Cut up half an onion, a stick of celery, a sprig of parsley, a
carrot, and cook them all in a quarter pound of butter.  Into this
put a fowl cut up and let it act brown all over, turn when
necessary and then baste it with boiling stock.  Add four Spanish
olives cut up and four others pounded in a mortar, eight whole
olives and three tablespoonsful of tomato puree reduced, and when
the fowl is well cooked pour the sauce over it.

No. 134.  Pollo alla Villereccia (Chicken)

Ingredients:  Fowl, butter, flour, stock, bacon, ham, mushrooms,
onions, cloves, eggs, cream, lemons.

Cut up a fowl into quarters and put it into a saucepan with three
ounces of butter and a tablespoonful of flour Put it on the fire,
and when it is well browned add half a pint of stock, bits of bacon
and ham, butter, three mushrooms (previously boiled), an onion
stuck with three cloves.  When this is cooked skim off the grease,
pass the sauce through a sieve, and add the yolks of two eggs mixed
with two tablespoonsful of cream.  Lastly, add a squeeze of lemon
juice to the sauce and pour it over the fowl.

No. 135.  Pollo alla Cacciatora (Chicken)

Ingredients:  The same as No. 134 and tomatoes.

Cook the fowl exactly as above, but add either a puree of tomatoes
or tomato sauce.

No. 136.  Pollastro alla Lorenese (Fowl)

Ingredients:  Fowl, butter, parsley, lemon, small onions, bread
crumbs.

Cut up a fowl and put it into a frying pan with two ounces of
butter, one onion cut up and a sprig of chopped parsley, salt and
pepper; put it on the fire and cook it, but turn the pieces several
times:  then take them out and roll them whilst hot in bread
crumbs, and fry them.  Serve with cut lemons.

No. 137.  Pollastro in Fricassea al Burro (Fowl)

Ingredients:  Fowl, butter, fat bacon, ham, mushrooms, truffles,
herbs, spice, gravy.

Cut up a fowl and cook it in a fricassee of butter, bacon, ham,
herbs, mushrooms, truffles, spice, and good gravy or stock.  Serve
in its own gravy.

No. 138.  Pollastro in istufa di Pomidoro (Braized Fowl)

Ingredients:  Fowl, bacon, ham, bay leaf, spice, garlic, Burgundy,
tomatoes.

Braize a fowl with bits of fat bacon, ham, a bay leaf, a clove of
garlic with one cut in it, a pinch of spice, and a glass of
Burgundy.  Only leave the garlic in for five minutes.  When cooked
serve with tomato sauce (No. 9).

No. 139.  Cappone con Riso (Capon with Rice)

Ingredients:  Capon, veal forcemeat, fat bacon, stock, rice,
truffles, mushrooms, cocks' combs, kidneys or fowls' liver, supreme
sauce, milk, Chablis.

Stuff a fine capon with a good firm forcemeat made of veal, tongue,
ham, and chopped truffles; cover it with larding bacon; tie it up
in buttered paper, and cook it in very good white stock.  In the
meantime boil four ounces of rice in milk till quite stiff, mix in
some chopped truffles, and make ten little timbales of it.  Take
out the capon when it is sufficiently cooked and place it on a
dish; garnish it with cooked mushrooms, cocks' combs, kidneys, or
fowls' livers, and pour a sauce supreme (No. 16) over it; round the
dish place the timbales of rice, and between each put a whole
truffle cooked in white wine.  Serve a sauce supreme in a sauce
bowl.

No. 140.  Dindo Arrosto alla Milanese (Roast Turkey)

Ingredients:  Turkey, sausage meat, prunes, chestnuts, a pear,
butter, Marsala, salt, rosemary ,bacon, carrot, onion, turnip,
garlic.

Blanch for seven or eight minutes three prunes, quarter of a pound
of sausage meat, three tablespoonsful of chestnut puree, two small
slices of bacon, half a cooked pear, and saute them in butter; chop
up the liver and gizzard of the turkey, mix them with the other
ingredients, and add half a glass of Marsala; use this as a
stuffing for the turkey, and first braize it for three quarters of
an hour with salt, butter, a blade of rosemary, bits of fat bacon,
a carrot, a turnip, an onion, three cloves, and a clove of garlic
with a cut; then roast it before a clear fire for about twenty
minutes; put it back into the sauce till it is ready to serve. 
Only leave the garlic in ten minutes.

No. 141.  Tacchinotto all'Istrione (Turkey Poult)

Ingredients:  A turkey poult, ham, mace, bay leaves, lemons, water,
salt, onions, parsley, celery, carrots, Chablis.

Truss a turkey poult, and cover it all over with slices of ham or
bacon, put two bay leaves and four slices of lemon on it, and
sprinkle with a small pinch of mace, then sew it up tight in a
dishcloth, and stew it in good stock, salt, an onion, parsley, a
stick of celery, a carrot, and a pint of Chablis; cook for an hour,
take it out of the cloth, and pour a good rich sauce over it.  It
is also good cold with aspic jelly.

No. 142.  Fagiano alla Napoletana (Pheasant)

Ingredients:  Pheasant, macaroni, gravy, butter, Parmesan,
tomatoes.

Lard a pheasant, roast it, and serve it on a layer of macaroni
cooked with good reduced gravy, two ounces of butter, a
tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, and a puree of tomatoes.  Serve
with Neapolitan sauce (No. 12) in a sauce bowl.

No. 143.  Fagiano alla Perigo (Pheasant)

Ingredients:  Pheasant, butter, truffles, larding bacon, Madeira.

Make a mixture of three tablespoonsful of chopped truffles, three
ounces of butter and a little salt, and with this stuff a pheasant. 
Then cover it with slices of fat bacon and keep it in a cool place
till next day.  A few hours before serving, roast the pheasant and
baste it well with melted butter and a wine-glass of Madeira or
Marsala.  Make a crouton of fried bread the shape of your dish, and
over this put a Layer of forcemeat of fowl and a number of small
fowl quenelles; cover them with buttered paper, then put the dish
in the oven for a few minutes so as to settle the forcemeat.  When
the pheasant is cooked, place it on the crouton and garnish it with
slices of truffle which have been previously cooked in Madeira, and
serve with a Perigord sauce.

No. 144.  Anitra Selvatica (Wild Duck)

Ingredients:  Wild duck, butter, fowls' livers, Marsala, gravy,
turnips, carrots, parsley, mushrooms.

Cut a wild duck into quarters and put it into a stewpan with two
fowls' livers cut up and fried in butter.  When the pieces of duck
are coloured on both sides, pour off the butter, and in its place
pour a glass of Marsala, a cup of stock, and a cup of Espagnole
sauce (No.1), and cook gently for ten minutes.  In the meantime
shape and blanch six young turnips and as many young carrots, put
them into a stewpan, and on the top of them put the pieces of wild
duck, liver, &c.  Pass the liquor through a sieve and pour it over
the wild duck, add a bunch of parsley and other herbs and five
little mushrooms cut up, and cook on a slow fire for half an hour. 
Skim the sauce, pass it through a sieve and add a pinch of sugar. 
Put the pieces of wild duck in an entree dish, add the vegetables,
&c., pour the sauce over and serve.

No. 145.  Perniciotti alla Gastalda (Partridges)

Ingredients:  Partridges, cauliflower, bacon, sausage, fowls'
livers, carrots, onions herbs, stock, gravy, butter, Madeira.

Cut a cauliflower into quarters, blanch for a few minutes, drain,
and put it into a saucepan with some bits of bacon.  Let it drain
on paper till dry, then arrange the bits in a circle in a deep
stewpan, and in the centre put a small bit of sausage, the livers
of the partridges, a fowl's liver cut up, a carrot, an onion, and a
bunch of herbs.  Cover about three-quarters high with good stock
and gravy, put butter on the top and boil gently for an hour; then
take out the sausage, replace it by two or three partridges, and
simmer for three-quarters of an hour.  In the meantime cut a
sausage in thin slices and line a mould with it.  When the birds
are cooked, take them out, drain and cut them up, and fill the
mould with alternate layers of partridge and cauliflower, and steam
for half an hour.  Five minutes before serving turn the mould over
on a plate, but do not take it off, so as to let all the grease
drain off.  Cut up the fowls' and partridges' livers, make them
into scallops and glaze them.  Wipe off all the grease round the
mould; take it off, garnish the dish with the scallops of liver and
serve hot with an Espagnole sauce (No. 1) reduced, and add a glass
of Madeira or Marsala, and a glass of essence of game to it.  This
is an excellent way of cooking an old partridge or pheasant.

No. 146.  Beccaccini alla Diplomatica (Snipe)

Ingredients:  Snipe, ham, larding bacon, herbs, Marsala, croutons,
truffles, cocks' combs, mushrooms, sweetbread, tongue.

Truss fourteen snipe and cook them in a mirepoix made with plenty
of ham, fat bacon, herbs, and a wine glass of Marsala.  When they
are cooked pour off the sauce, skim off the grease and reduce it. 
Take the two smallest snipe and make a forcemeat of them by
pounding them in a mortar with the livers of all the snipe, then
dilute this with reduced Espagnole sauce (No. 1) and add it to the
first sauce.  Cut twelve croutons of bread just large enough to
hold a snipe each, and fry them in butter.  Add some chopped herbs
and truffles to the forcemeat, spread it on the croutons, and on
each place a snipe and cover it with a bit of fat bacon and
buttered paper.  Put them in a moderate oven for a few minutes,
arrange them on a dish, and pour some of their own sauce over them. 
Garnish the spaces between the croutons with white cocks' combs,
mushrooms, and truffles.  The truffles should be scooped out and
filled with a little stuffing of sweetbread, tongue, and truffles
mixed with a little of the sauce of the snipe.  Serve the rest of
the sauce in a sauce-boat.

No. 147.  Piccioni alla minute (Pigeons)

Ingredients:  Pigeons, butter, truffles, herbs, fowls' livers,
sweetbread, salt, flour, stock, Burgundy.

Prepare two pigeons and put them into a stewpan with two ounces of
butter, two truffles cut up, two fowls' livers, half-pound of
sweetbread cuttings (boiled), a bunch of herbs and salt.  Let them
brown a little, then add a dessert-spoonful of flour mixed with
stock, and half a glass of Burgundy, and stew gently for half an
hour.

No. 148.  Piccioni in Ripieno (Stuffed Pigeons)

Ingredients:  Pigeons, sweetbread, parsley, onions, carrots, salt,
pepper, bacon, stock, Chablis, fowls' livers, and gizzards.

Cut up a sweetbread, a fowl's liver and gizzard, an onion, a sprig
of parsley, and add salt and pepper.  Put this stuffing into two
pigeons, tie larding bacon over them, and put them into a stewpan
with a glass of Chablis, a cup of stock, an onion, and a carrot. 
When cooked pass the sauce through a sieve, skim it, add a little
more sauce, and pour it over the pigeons.

No. 149.  Lepre in istufato (Stewed Hare)

Ingredients:  Hare, butter, onions, garlic, marjoram, celery, ham,
salt, Chablis, stock, mushrooms, spice, tomatoes.

Put into a stewpan three ounces of butter, an onion cut up, a clove
of garlic with a cut across it, a sprig of marjoram, and a little
cut-up ham.  Fry these slightly, put the hare cut up into the same
stewpan, and let it get brown.  Then pour a glass of Chablis and a
glass of stock over it; add a little tomato sauce or a mashed-up
tomato, a pinch of spice, and a few mushrooms; take out the garlic
and let the rest stew gently for an hour or more.  Keep the cover
on the stewpan, but stir the stew occasionally.

No. 150.  Lepre Agro-dolce  (Hare)

Ingredients:  Hare, vinegar butter, onion, ham, stock salt, sugar,
chocolate, almonds, raisins.

Cut up a hare and wash the pieces in vinegar, then cook them in
butter, chopped onion, some bits of ham stock and a little salt. 
Half fill a wine-glass with sugar and add vinegar until the glass
is three-quarters full mix the vinegar and sugar well together, and
when the hare is browned all over and nearly cooked, pour the
vinegar over it and add a dessert spoonful of grated chocolate a
few shredded almonds and stoned raisins.  Mix all well together and
cook for a few minutes more.  This is a favourite Roman dish.

No. 151.  Coniglio alla Provenzale (Rabbit)

Ingredients:  Rabbit, flour butter, stock, Chablis, parsley onion,
spice, mushrooms.

Cut up a rabbit, wipe the pieces, flour them over, and fry them in
butter until they  are coloured all over.  Then  pour a glass of
Chablis over them, add some chopped parsley, half an onion, three
mushrooms, salt, and a cup of good stock.  Cover the stewpan and
cook on a moderate fire for about three-quarters of an hour. 
Should the stew act too dry, add a spoonful of stock occasionally.


No. 152.  Coniglio arrostito alla Corradino  (Roast Rabbit)

Ingredients:  Rabbit, pig's fry, butter, salt, pepper, fennel, bay
leaf, onions.

Make a stuffing  of pig's fry (previously cooked in butter), salt,
pepper, fennel, an onion, all chopped up, and a bay leaf.  With
this stuff a rabbit  we11 and braize it for half an hour, then
roast it before a brisk fire and baste it well with  good gravy. 
If you like, put in a clove of garlic with one cut whilst it is
being braized, but only leave it in for five  minutes.  Serve with
ham sauce (Salsa di prosciutto, No. 7.) A fowl may be cooked in
this way.

No. 153.  Coniglio in salsa Piccante (Rabbit)

Ingredients:  Rabbit, butter, flour, celery, parsley, onion,
carrot, mushrooms, cloves, spices, Burgundy, stock, capers,
anchovies.

Cut up a rabbit, wipe the pieces well on a dishcloth, flour them
over and put them into a frying- pan with two ounces of butter and
fry for about ten minutes.  Then add half a stick of celery,
parsley, an onion, half a carrot, and three mushrooms, all cut up,
three cloves, a pinch of spice and salt, a glass of Burgundy, and
the same quantity of stock; cover the stewpan and cook for half an
hour, then put the pieces of rabbit into another stewpan and pass
the liquor through a sieve; press it well with a wooden spoon, so
as to get as much through as possible, pour this over the rabbit
and add four capers and an anchovy in brine pounded in a mortar,
mix all well together, let it simmer for a few minutes, then serve
hot with a garnish of croutons fried in butter.




Vegetables

No. 154.  Asparagi alla salsa Suprema (Asparagus)

Ingredients:  Asparagus, butter, nutmeg, salt, supreme sauce (No.
16) gravy, lemon, Parmesan.

Cut some asparagus into pieces about an inch long and cook them in
boiling water with salt, then drain and put them into a saute pan
with one and a half ounce of melted butter and sautez for a few
minutes, but first add salt, a pinch of nutmeg, and a dust of
grated cheese.  Pour a little supreme sauce over them, and at the
last add a little gravy, one ounce of fresh butter, and a squeeze
of lemon juice.

No. 155.  Cavoli di Bruxelles alla Savoiarda (Brussels Sprouts)

Ingredients:  Brussels sprouts, butter, pepper, stock, Bechamel
sauce, Parmesan, croutons.

Take off the outside leaves of half a pound of Brussels sprouts,
wash and boil them in salted water.  Let them get cool, drain, and
put them in a pie-dish with two ounces of fresh butter, a quarter
pint of very good stock, a little pepper, and a dust of grated
Parmesan.  When they are well glazed over, pour off the sauce,
season with three tablespoonsful of boiling Bechamel sauce (No. 3),
and serve with croutons fried in butter.

No. 156.  Barbabietola alla Parmigiana (Beetroot)

Ingredients:  Beetroot, white sauce, Parmesan, Cheddar.

Boil a beetroot till it is quite tender, peel it, cut into slices,
put it in a fireproof dish, and cover it with a thick white sauce. 
Strew a little grated Parmesan and Cheddar- over it.  Put it in the
oven for a few minutes, and serve very hot in the dish.

No. 157.  Fave alla Savoiarda (Beans)

Ingredients:  Beans, stock, a bunch of herbs, Bechamel sauce.

Boil one pound of broad beans in salt and water, skin and cook them
in a saucepan with a quarter pint of reduced stock and a hunch of
herbs.  Drain them, take out the herbs, and season with two glasses
of Bechamel sauce (No. 3).

No. 158.  Verze alla Capuccina (Cabbage)

Ingredients:  Cabbage or greens, anchovies, salt, butter, parsley,
gravy, Parmesan.

Boil two cabbages in a good deal of water, and cut them into
quarters.  Fry two anchovies slightly in butter and chopped
parsley, add the cabbages, and at the last three tablespoonsful of
good gravy, two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan, salt and pepper,
and when cooked, serve.

No. 159.  Cavoli fiodi alla Lionese (Cauliflower)

Ingredients:  Cauliflower, butter, onions, parsley, lemon,
Espagnole sauce.

Blanch a cauliflower and boil it, but not too much.  Cut up a small
onion, fry it slightly in butter and chopped parsley, and when it
is well coloured, add the cauliflower and finish cooking it, then
take it out, put it in a dish, pour a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1)
over it, and add a squeeze of lemon juice.

No. 160.  Cavoli fiodi fritti (Cauliflower)

Ingredients:  Cauliflower or broccoli, gravy, lemon, salt, eggs,
butter.

Break up a broccoli or cauliflower into little bunches, blanch
them, and put them on the fire in a saucepan with good gravy for a
few minutes, then marinate them with lemon juice and salt, let them
get cold, egg them over, and fry in butter.

No. 161.  Cauliflower alla Parmigiana

Ingredients:  Cauliflower, butter, Parmesan, Cheddar, Espagnole,
stock.

Boil a cauliflower in salted water, then sautez it in butter, but
be careful not to cook it too much.  Take it off the fire and strew
grated Parmesan and Cheddar over it then put in a fireproof dish
and add a good spoonful of stock and one of Espagnole (No. 1), and
put it in the oven for ten minutes.

No. 162.  Cavoli Fiori Ripieni

Ingredients:  Cauliflower, butter, stock, forcemeat of fowl,
tongue, truffles, mushrooms, parsley, Espagnole, eggs.

Break up a cauliflower into separate little bunches, blanch them,
and put them in butter, and a quarter pint of reduced stock.  Make
a forcemeat of fowl, add bits of tongue, truffles, mushrooms, and
parsley, all cut up small and mixed with butter.  With this mask
the pieces of cauliflower, egg and breadcrumb them, fry like
croquettes, and serve with a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1).

No. 163.  Sedani alla Parmigiana (Celery)

Ingredients:  Celery, stock, ham, salt, pepper, Cheddar, Parmesan,
butter, gravy.

Cut all the green off a head of celery, trim the rest.  Cut it into
pieces about four inches long, blanch and braize them in good
stock, ham, salt, and pepper. When cooked, drain and arrange them
on a dish, sprinkle with grated Parmesan and Cheddar, and add one
and a half ounce of butter, then put them in the oven till they
have taken a good colour, pour a little good gravy over them and
serve.

No. 164.  Sedani fritti all'Italiana (Celery)

Ingredients:  Same as No. 163, eggs, bread crumbs, tomatoes.

Prepare a head of celery as above, and cut it up into equal pieces. 
Blanch and braize as above, and when cold egg and breadcrumb and
sautez in butter.  Serve with tomato sauce.

No. 165.  Cetriuoli alla Parmigiana (Cucumber)

Ingredients:  Cucumber, butter, cheese, gravy, salt, cayenne.

Cut a cucumber into slices about half an inch thick, boil for five
minutes in salted water, drain in a sieve, and fry slightly in
melted butter, then strew a little grated Parmesan over it, and add
a good thick gravy, put it into the oven for ten minutes to brown,
and serve as hot as possible.

No. 166.  Cetriuoli alla Borghese (Cucumber)

Ingredients:  Cucumber, cream, salt, Bechamel sauce, butter,
Parmesan, cayenne pepper.

Cook a cucumber as in No. 165, braize it for five minutes, add to
it a good rich Bechamel (No. 3), mixed with cream and grated
Parmesan Spread this well over the cucumber, and put it into the
oven for ten minutes keeping the rounds of cucumber separate, so as
to arrange them in a circle on a very hot dish.  Care should be
taken not to cook the cucumber too long, or it will break in pieces
and spoil the look of the dish

No. 167.  Carote al sughillo (Carrots)

Ingredients:  Carrots, stock, butter, sausage, pepper.

Boil some young carrots in stock, slice them up, and put them in a
stewpan witl1 a sausage cut up; cook for quarter of an hour on a
slow fire, then stir up the fire, and when the carrots and sausage
are a good colour add a good Espagnole sauce (No. 1), and serve.

No. 168.  Carote e piselli alla panna (Carrots and Peas)

Ingredients:  Young carrots, peas, cream, salt.

Half cook equal quantities of peas and young carrots (the carrots
should be cut in dice, and will require a little longer cooking),
then put them together in a stewpan with three or four
tablespoonsful of cream, and cook till quite tender.  Serve hot.

No. 169.  Verze alla Certosine (Cabbage)

Ingredients:  Cabbage, butter, salt, leeks or shallots, sardines,
cheese.

Any vegetable may be cooked in the following simple manner:  Boil
them well, then slightly fry a little bit of leek or shallot and a
sardine in butter; drain the vegetables, put them in the butter,
and cook gently so that they may absorb all the flavour, and at the
last add a dust of grated cheese and a tiny pinch of spice.

No. 170.  Lattughe al sugo  (Lettuce)

Ingredients:  Lettuce, Parmesan, bacon, stock, butter, croutons of
bread, gravy.

Take off the outside leaves of a lettuce, blanch and drain them
well.  Put on each leaf a mixture of grated Parmesan, salt, little
bits of chopped bacon or ham, add a little good stock, cover over
with buttered paper, and cook in a hot oven for five minutes.  Then
drain off the stock and roll up each leaf with the bacon, &:c., put
them on croutons of fried bread and pour some good thick gravy over
them.

No. 171  Lattughe farcite alla Genovese (Lettuce)

Ingredients:  Lettuce, forcemeat of fowl or veal, ham, Espagnole
sauce.

Prepare a lettuce as above, and spread on each leaf a spoonful of
forcemeat of fowl or veal, add a little cooked ham chopped up, roll
up the leaves, and cook as above.  Drain them on a cloth, arrange
them neatly on a dish, and pour some good Espagnole sauce (No. 1)
over them.

No. 172.  Funghi cappelle infarcite (Stuffed Mushrooms)

Ingredients:  Mushrooms, bread, stock, garlic, parsley, salt,
Parmesan, butter, eggs, cream.

Choose a dozen good fresh mushrooms, take off the stalks and put
the tops into a saucepan with a little butter.  See that they lie
bottom upwards.  Then cut up and mix together half the stalks of
the mushrooms, a little bread crumb soaked in gravy, the merest
scrap of garlic and a little chopped parsley.  Put this into a
separate saucepan and add to it two eggs, half a gill of cream,
salt, and two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan.  Mix well so as to
get a smootl1 paste and fill in the cavities of the mushrooms with
it.  Then add a little more butter, strew some bread crumbs over
each mushroom, and cook in the oven for ten to fifteen minutes.

No. 173.  Verdure miste (Macedoine of Vegetables)

Ingredients:  Cauliflower, carrots, celery, spinach, butter, cream,
pepper, Parmesan.

Boil some carrots, cauliflower, spinach, and celery (all cut up) in
water.  Then put them in layers in a buttered china mould, and
between each layer add a little cream, pepper, and a little grated
Parmesan and Cheddar.  Fill the mould in this manner, and put it in
the oven for half an hour, so that the vegetables may cook without
adhering to the mould.  Turn out and serve.

No. 174.  Patate alla crema(Potatoes in cream)

Ingredients:  Potatoes, butter, Parmesan, white stock, cream,
pepper, salt.

Boil two pounds of potatoes in salted water for a quarter of an
hour, peel and cut them into slices about the size of a penny, then
arrange them in layers in a very deep fireproof dish (with a lid),
and on each layer pour a little melted butter, a little good white
stock and a dust of grated Parmesan.  Reduce a pint and a half of
cream to half its quantity, add a little pepper, and pour it over
the potatoes.  Put the dish in the oven for twenty minutes.  Serve
as hot as possible.

No. 175.  Cestelline di patate alla giardiniera (Potatoes)

Ingredients:  Potatoes, white stock, salt, butter, peas, asparagus,
sprouts, beans, &c.

Choose some big sound potatoes, cut them in half and scoop out a
little of the centre so as to form a cavity, blanch them in salted
water and cook for a quarter of an hour in good white stock and a
little butter.  Then fill in the cavities with a macedoine of
cooked vegetables and add a little cream to each.

No. 176.  Patate al Pomidoro (Potatoes with Tomato Sauce)

Ingredients:  Potatoes, butter, salt, tomatoes, lemon, stock.

Peel three or four raw potatoes, cut them in slices about the size
of a five- shilling piece, then put them into a stewpan with two
ounces of melted butter, and cook them gently until they are a good
colour, add salt, drain off the butter, then glaze them by adding
half a glass of good stock.  Arrange them on a dish, pour some good
tomato sauce over them, and add a little butter and a squeeze of
lemon juice.

No. 177.  Spinaci alla Milanese (Spinach)

Ingredients:  Spinach, butter, Velute sauce, salt, pepper, flour,
stock.

Wash three pounds of spinach at least six times, boil it in a pint
of water, then mince it up very fine, pass it through a hair-sieve,
and put it in a saucepan with one and a half ounces of butter, add
a cupful of reduced Velute sauce (No. 2) with cream, salt, and
pepper, add a dessert-spoonful of flour and butter mixed, and boil
until the spinach is firm enough to make into a shape, garnish with
hardboiled eggs cut into quarters, and pour a good Espagnole sauce
(No. 1) round the dish.

No. 178.  Insalata di patate (Potato salad)

Ingredients:  New potatoes, oil, white vinegar, onions, parsley,
tarragon, chervil, celery, cream, salt, pepper, tarragon vinegar,
watercress, cucumber, truffles.

Steam as many new potatoes as you require until they are well
cooked, let them get cold, cut them into slices and pour three
teaspoonsful of salad oil and one of white vinegar over them.  Then
rub a salad bowl with onion, put in a layer of the potato slices,
and sprinkle with chopped parsley, tarragon, chervil, and celery,
then another layer of potatoes until you have used all the
potatoes; cover them with whipped cream seasoned with salt, pepper,
and a little tarragon vinegar, and garnish the top with watercress,
a few thin slices of truffle cooked in white wine, and some slices
of cooked cucumber.

No. 179.  Insalata alla Navarino (Salad)

Ingredients:  Peas, bean onions, potatoes, tarragon, chives,
parsley, tomatoes, anchovies, oil, vinegar, ham.

Mix a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of chopped
onion, a teaspoonful of tarragon and chopped chives with half a
gill of oil and half a gill of vinegar.  Put this into a salad bowl
with all  sorts of cooked vegetables:  peas, haricot beans, small
onions, and potatoes cut up, and mix  them w ell but gently, so as
not to break the vegetables.  Then add two or three anchovies in
oil, and on the top place three or four ripe tomatoes cut in 
slices.  A little cooked  smoked ham cut in dice added to this
salad is a great improvement.

No. 180.  Insalata di pomidoro (Tomato Salad)

Ingredients:  Tomatoes, mayonnaise, shallot, horseradish, gherkin,
anchovies, fish, cucumber, lettuce, chervil, tarragon, eggs.

Mix the following ingredients:  two anchovies in oil boned and
minced, a gill of mayonnaise sauce, a little grated horseradish,
very little chopped shallot, a little cold salmon or trout, and a
small gherkin chopped.  With this mixture stuff some ripe tomatoes. 
Then make a good salad of endive or lettuce, a teaspoonful of
chopped tarragon and chervil, season it with oil, vinegar, salt,
and pepper (the proportions should be three of oil to one of
vinegar), put a layer of slices of cucumber in the salad, place the
tomatoes on the top of these, and decorate them with hard-boiled
eggs passed through a wire sieve.

No. 181.  Tartufi alla Dino (Truffles)

Ingredients:  Truffles, fowl forcemeat, champagne.

Allow one truffle for each person, scoop out the inside, chop it up
fine and mix with a good forcemeat of fowl.  With this fill up the
truffles, place a thin layer of truffle on the top of each, and
cook them in champagne in a stewpan for about half an hour.  Then
take them out, make a rich sauce, to which add the champagne you
have used and some of the chopped truffle, put the truffles in this
sauce and keep hot for ten minutes.  Serve in paper souffle cases.



Macaroni, Rice, Polenta, and Other Italian Pastes*

*Italian pastes of the best quality can be obtained at Cosenza's,
Wigmore Street, NW.  For the following dishes, tagliarelle and
spaghetti are recommended.

No. 182.  Macaroni with Tomatoes

Ingredients:  Macaroni, tomatoes, butter, onion, basil, pepper,
salt.

Fry half an onion slightly in butter, and as soon as it is coloured
add a puree of two big cooked tomatoes.  Then boil quarter of a
pound of macaroni separately, drain it and put it in a deep
fireproof dish, add the tomato puree and three tablespoonsful of
grated Parmesan and Cheddar mixed, and cook gently for a quarter of
an hour before serving.  This dish may be made with vermicelli,
spaghetti, or any other Italian paste.

No. 183.  Macaroni alla Casalinga

Ingredients:  Macaroni, butter, stock, cheese, water, salt, nutmeg.

Cut up a quarter pound of macaroni in small pieces and put it in
boiling salted water.  When sufficiently cooked, drain and put it
into a saucepan with two ounces of butter, add good gravy or stock,
three tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan and Cheddar mixed, and a
tiny pinch of nutmeg.  Stir over a brisk fire, and serve very hot.

No. 184.  Macaroni al Sughillo

Ingredients:  Macaroni, stock, tomatoes, sausage, cheese.

Half cook four ounces of macaroni, drain it and put it in layers in
a fireproof dish, and gradually add good beef gravy, four
tablespoonsful of tomato puree, and thin slices of sausage. 
Sprinkle with grated Parmesan and Cheddar, and cook for about
twenty minutes.  Before serving pass the salamander over the top to
brown the macaroni.

No. 185.  Macaroni alla Livornese

Ingredients:  Macaroni, mushrooms, tomatoes, Parmesan, butter,
pepper, salt, milk.

Boil about four ounces of macaroni, and stew four or five mushrooms
in milk with pepper and salt.  Put a layer of the macaroni in a
buttered fireproof dish, then a layer of tomato puree, then a layer
of the mushrooms and another layer of macaroni.  Dust it all over
with grated Parmesan and Cheddar, put it in the oven for half an
hour, and serve very hot.

No. 186.  Tagliarelle and Lobster

Ingredients:  Tagliarelle, lobster, cheese, butter.

Boil half a pound of tagliarelle, and cut up a quarter of a pound
of lobster.  Butter a fireproof dish, and strew it well with grated
Parmesan and Cheddar mixed, then put in the tagliarelle and lobster
in layers, and between each layer add a little butter.  Strew
grated cheese over the top, put it in the oven for twenty minutes,
and brown the top with a salamander.

No. 187.  Polenta

Polenta is made of ground Indian-corn, and may be used either as a
separate dish or as a garnish for roast meat, pigeons, fowl, &c. 
It is made like porridge; gradually drop the meal with one hand
into boiling stock or water, and stir continually with a wooden
spoon with the other hand.  In about a quarter of an hour it will
be quite thick and smooth, then add a little butter and grated
Parmesan, and one egg beaten up.  Let it get cold, then put it in
layers in a baking-dish, add a little butter to each layer,
sprinkle with plenty of Parmesan, and bake it for about an hour in
a slow oven.  Serve hot.

No. 188.  Polenta Pasticciata

Ingredients:  Polenta, butter, cheese, mushrooms, tomatoes.

Prepare a good polenta as above, put it in layers in a fireproof
dish, and add by degrees one and a half ounces of melted butter,
two cooked mushrooms cut up, and two tablespoonsful of grated
cheese.  (If you like, you may add a good-sized tomato mashed up.)
Put the dish in the oven, and before serving brown it over with
salamander.

No. 189.  Battuffoli

Ingredients:  Polenta, onion, butter, salt, stock, Parmesan.

Make a somewhat firm polenta (No. 187) with half a pound of ground
maize and a pint and a half of salted water, add a small onion cut
up and fried in butter, and stir the polenta until it is
sufficiently cooked.  Then take it off the fire and arrange it by
spoonsful in a large fireproof dish, and give each spoonful the
shape and size of an egg.  Place them one against the other, and
when the first layer is done, pour over it some very good gravy or
stock, and plenty of grated Parmesan.  Arrange it thus layer by
layer.  Put it into the oven for twenty minutes, and serve very
hot.

No. 190.  Risotto all'Italiana

Ingredients:  Rice, an onion, butter, stock, tomatoes, cheese.

Fry a small onion slightly in butter, then add half a pint of very
good stock.  Boil four ounces of rice, but do not let it get pulpy,
add it to the above with three medium-sized tomatoes in a puree. 
Mix it all up well, add more stock, and two tablespoonsful of
grated Parmesan and Cheddar mixed, and serve hot.

No. 191.  Risotto alla Genovese

Ingredients:  Rice, beef or veal, onions, parsley, butter, stock,
Parmesan, sweetbread or sheep's brains.

Cut up a small onion and fry it slightly in butter with some
chopped parsley, add to this a little veal, also chopped up, and a
little suet.  Cook for ten minutes and then add two ounces of rice
to it.  Mix all with a wooden spoon, and after a few minutes begin
to add boiling stock gradually; stir with the spoon, so that the
rice whilst cooking may absorb the stock; when it is half cooked
add a few spoonsful of good gravy and a sweetbread or sheep's
brains (previously scalded and cut up in pieces), and, if you like,
a little powdered saffron dissolved in a spoonful of stock and
three tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan and Cheddar mixed.  Stir
well until the rice is quite cooked, but take care not to get it
into a pulp.

No. 192.  Risotto alla Spagnuola

Ingredients:  Rice, pork, ham, onions, tomatoes, butter, stock,
vegetables, Parmesan.

Put a small bit of onion and an ounce of butter into a saucepan,
add half a pound of tomatoes cut up and fry for a few minutes. 
Then put in some bits of loin of pork cut into dice and some bits
of lean ham.  After a time add four ounces of rice and good stock,
and as soon as it begins to boil put on the cover and put the
saucepan on a moderate fire.  When the rice is half cooked add any
sort of vegetable, by preference peas, asparagus cut up, beans, and
cucumber cut up, cook for another quarter of an hour, and serve
with grated Parmesan and Cheddar mixed and good gravy.

No. 193.  Risotto alla Capuccina

Ingredients:  Risotto (No. 190) eggs, truffles, smoked tongue,
butter.

Make a good risotto, and when cooked put it into a fireproof dish. 
When cold cut into shapes with a dariole mould and fry for a few
minutes in butter, then turn the darioles out, scoop out a little
of each and fill it with eggs beaten up, cover each with a slice of
truffle and garnish with a little chopped tongue.  Put them in the
oven for ten minutes.

No. 194.  Risotto alla Parigina

Ingredients:  Risotto (No. 190), game, sauce, butter.

Make a good risotto, and when cooked pour it into a fireproof dish,
let it get cold, and then cut it out with a dariole mould, or else
form it into little balls about the size of a pigeon's egg.  Fry
these in butter and serve with a rich game sauce poured over them.

No. 195.  Ravioli

Ingredients:  Flour, eggs, butter, salt, forcemeat, Parmesan, gravy
or stock.

Make a paste with a quarter pound of flour, the yolk of two eggs, a
little salt and two ounces of butter.  Knead this into a firm
smooth paste and wrap it up in a damp cloth for half an hour, then
roll it out as thin as possible, moisten it with a paste-brush
dipped in water, and cut it into circular pieces about three inches
in diameter.  On each piece put about a teaspoonful of forcemeat of
fowl, game, or fish mixed with a little grated Parmesan and the
yolks of one or two eggs.  Fold the paste over the forcemeat and
pinch the edges together, so as to give them the shape of little
puffs; let them dry in the larder, then blanch by boiling them in
stock for quarter of an hour and drain them in a napkin.  Butter a
fireproof dish, put in a layer of the ravioli, powder them over
with grated Parmesan, then another layer of ravioli and more
Parmesan.  Then add enough very good gravy to cover them, put the
dish in the oven for about twenty-five minutes, and serve in the
dish.

No. 196.  Ravioli alla Fiorentina

Ingredients:  Beetroot, eggs, Parmesan, milk or cream, nutmeg,
spices, salt, flour, gravy.

Wash a beetroot and boil it, and when it is sufficiently cooked
throw it into cold water for a few minutes, then drain it, chop it
up and add to it four eggs, one ounce of grated Parmesan, one ounce
of grated Cheddar, two and a half ounces of boiled cream or milk, a
small pinch of nutmeg and a little salt.  Mix all well together
into a smooth firm paste, then roll into balls about the size of a
walnut, flour them over well, let them dry for half an hour, then
drop them very carefully one by one into boiling stock and when
they float on the top take them out with a perforated ladle, put
them in a deep dish, dust them over with Parmesan and pour good
meat or game gravy over them.

No. 197.  Gnocchi alla Romana

Ingredients:  Semolina, butter, Parmesan, eggs, nutmeg, milk,
cream.

Boil half a pint of milk in a saucepan, then add two ounces of
butter, four ounces of semolina, two tablespoonsful of grated
Parmesan, the yolks of three eggs, and a tiny pinch of nutmeg.  Mix
all well together, then let it cool, and spread out the paste so
that it is about the thickness of a finger.  Put a little butter
and grated Parmesan and two tablespoonsful of cream in a fireproof
dish, cut out the semolina paste with a small dariole mould and put
it in the dish.  Dust a little more Parmesan over it, put it in the
oven for five minutes and serve in the dish.

No. 198.  Gnocchi alla Lombarda

Ingredients:  Potatoes, flour, salt, Parmesan and Gruyere cheese,
butter, milk, eggs.

Boil two or three big potatoes, and pass them through a hair sieve,
mix in two tablespoonsful of flour, an egg beaten up, and enough
milk to form a rather firm paste; stir until it is quite smooth. 
Roll it into the shape of a German sausage, cut it into rounds
about three quarters of an inch thick, and put it into the larder
to dry for about half an hour.  Then drop the gnocchi one by one
into boiling salted water and boil for ten minutes.  Take them out
with a slice, and put them in a well-buttered fireproof dish, add
butter between each layer, and strew plenty of grated Parmesan and
Cheddar over them.  Put them in the oven for ten minutes, brown the
top with a salamander, and serve very hot.

No. 199.  Frittata di Riso (Savoury Rice Pancake)

Ingredients:  Rice, milk, salt, butter, cinnamon, eggs, Parmesan.

Boil quarter of a pound of rice in milk until it is quite soft and
pulpy, drain off the milk and add to the rice an ounce of butter,
two tablespoonsful of grated Parmesan, and a pinch of cinnamon, and
when it has got rather cold, the yolks of four eggs beaten up.  Mix
all well together, and with this make a pancake with butter in a
frying pan



Omelettes And Other Egg Dishes

No. 200.  Uova al Tartufi (Eggs with Truffles)

Ingredients:  Eggs, butter, cream, truffles, Velute sauce,
croutons.

Beat up six eggs, pass them through a sieve, and put them into a
saucepan with two ounces of butter and two tablespoonsful of cream. 
Put the saucepan in a bain-marie, and stir so that the eggs may not
adhere.  Sautez some slices of truffle in butter, cover them with
Velute sauce (No. 2) and a glass of Marsala, and add them to the
eggs.  Serve very hot with fried and glazed croutons.  Instead of
truffles you can use asparagus tips, peas, or cooked ham.

No. 201.  Uova al Pomidoro (Eggs and Tomatoes)

Ingredients:  Eggs, salt, tomatoes, onion, parsley, butter, pepper.

Cut up three or four tomatoes, and put them into a stewpan with a
piece of butter the size of a walnut and a clove of garlic with a
cut in it.  Put the lid on the stewpan and cook till quite soft,
then take out the garlic, strain the tomatoes through a fine
strainer into a bain-marie, beat up two eggs and add them to the
tomatoes, and stir till quite thick, then put in two tablespoonsful
of grated cheese, and serve on toast.

No. 202.  Uova ripiene (Canapes of Egg)

Ingredients:  Eggs, butter, salt, pepper, nutmeg, cheese, parsley,
mushrooms, Bechamel and Espagnole sauce, stock.

Boil as many eggs as you want hard, and cut them in half
lengthwise; take out the yolks and mix them with some fresh butter,
salt, pepper, very little nutmeg, grated cheese, a little chopped
parsley, and cooked mushrooms also chopped.  Then mix two
tablespoonsful of good Bechamel sauce (No. 3) with the raw yolk of
one or two eggs and add it to the rest.  Put all in a saucepan with
an ounce of butter and good stock, then fill up the white halves
with the mixture, giving them a good shape; heat them in a bain-
marie, and serve with a very good clear Espagnole sauce (No. 1).

No. 203.  Uova alla Fiorentina (Eggs)

Ingredients:  Eggs, butter, Parmesan, cream, flour, salt, pepper,
curds.

Boil as many eggs as you require hard, then cut them in half and
take out the yolks and pound them in a mortar with equal quantities
of butter and curds, a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, salt and
pepper.  Put this in a saucepan and add the yolks of eight eggs and
the white of one (this is for twelve people), mix all well together
and reduce a little.  With this mixture fill the hard whites of the
eggs and spread the rest of the sauce on the bottom of the dish,
and on this place the whites.  Then in another saucepan mix half a
gill of cream and an ounce of butter, a dessert-spoonful of flour,
salt, and pepper; let this boil for a minute, and then glaze over
the eggs in the dish with it, and on the top of each egg put a
little bit of butter, and over all a powdering of grated cheese. 
Put this in the oven, pass the salamander over the top, and when
the cheese is coloured serve at once.

No. 204.  Uova in fili (Egg Canapes)

Ingredients:  Eggs, butter, mushrooms, onions, flour, white wine,
fish or meat stock, salt, pepper, croutons of bread.

Put into a saucepan two ounces of butter, three large fresh
mushrooms cut into slices, and an onion cut up, fry them slightly,
and when the onion begins to colour add a spoonful of flour, a
quarter of a glass of Chablis, salt and pepper, and occasionally
add a spoonful of either fish or meat stock.  Let this simmer for
half an hour, so as to reduce it to a thick sauce.  Then boil as
many eggs as you want hard; take out the yolks, but keep them
whole.  Cut up the whites into slices, and add them to the above
sauce, pour the sauce into a dish, and on the top of it place the
whole yolks of egg, each on a crouton of bread.

No. 205.  Frittata di funghi (Mushroom Omelette)

Ingredients:  Mushrooms, butter, eggs, bread crumbs, Parmesan,
marjoram, garlic.

Clean four or five mushrooms, cut them up, and put them into a
frying-pan with one and a half ounces of butter, a clove of garlic
with two cuts in it, and a little salt; fry them lightly till the
mushrooms are nearly cooked, and then take out the garlic.  In the
meantime beat up separately the yolks and the whites of two or
three eggs, add a little crumb of bread soaked in water, a
tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, and two leaves of marjoram; go on
beating all up until the crumb of bread has become entirely
absorbed by the eggs, then pour this mixture into the frying-pan
with the mushrooms, mix all well together and make an omelette in
the usual way.

No. 206.  Frittata con Pomidoro (Tomato Omelette)

Ingredients:  Eggs, tomatoes, butter, marjoram, parsley, spice.

Peel two tomatoes and take out the seeds; then mix them with an
ounce of butter, chopped marjoram, parsley, and a tiny pinch of
spice.  Add three eggs beaten up (the yolks and whites separately),
and make an omelette.

No. 207.  Frittata con Asparagi (Asparagus Omelette)

Ingredients:  Eggs, asparagus, butter, ham, herbs, cheese.

Blanch a dozen heads of asparagus and cook them slightly, then cut
them up and mix with two ounces of butter, bits of cut-up ham,
herbs, and a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan.  Add them to three
beaten-up eggs and make an omelette.

No. 208.  Frittata con erbe (Omelette with Herbs)

Ingredients:  Eggs, onions, sorrel, mint, parsley, asparagus,
marjoram, salt, pepper, butter.

Chop a little sorrel, a small bit of onion, mint, parsley,
marjoram, and fry in two ounces of butter, add some cut-up
asparagus, salt, and pepper.  Then add three eggs beaten up and a
little grated cheese, and make your omelette.

No. 209.  Frittata Montata (Omelette Souffle)

Ingredients:  Eggs, Parmesan, pepper, parsley.

Beat up the whites of three eggs to a froth and the yolks
separately with a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, chopped
parsley, and a little pepper.  Then mix them and make a light
omelette.

No. 210.  Frittata di Prosciutto (Ham Omelette)

Ingredients:  Eggs, ham, Parmesan, mint, pepper, clotted cream.

Beat up three eggs and add to them two tablespoonsful of clotted
cream, one tablespoonful of chopped ham, one of grated Parmesan,
chopped mint and a little pepper, and make the omelette in the
usual way.



Sweets and Cakes

No. 211.  Bodino of Semolina

Ingredients:  Semolina, milk, eggs, castor sugar, lemon, sultanas,
rum, butter, cream, or Zabajone (No. 222).

Boil one and a half pints of milk with four ounces of castor sugar,
and gradually add five ounces of semolina, boil for a quarter of an
hour more and stir continually with a wooden spoon, then take the
saucepan off the fire, and when it is cooled a little, add the
yolks of six and the whites of two eggs well beaten up, a little
grated lemon peel, three-quarters of an ounce of sultanas and two
small glasses of rum.  Mix well, so as to get it very smooth, pour
it into a buttered mould and serve either hot or cold.  If cold,
put whipped cream flavoured with stick vanilla round the dish; if
hot, a Zabajone (No. 222).

No. 212.  Crema rappresa (Coffee Cream)

Ingredients:  Coffee, cream, eggs, sugar, butter.

Bruise five ounces of freshly roasted Mocha coffee, and add it to
three-quarters of a pint of boiling cream; cover the saucepan, let
it simmer for twenty minutes, then pass through a bit of fine
muslin.  In the meantime mix the yolks of ten eggs and two whole
eggs with eight ounces of castor sugar and a glass of cream; add
the coffee cream to this and pass the whole through a fine sieve
into a buttered mould.  Steam in a bain-marie for rather more than
an hour, but do not let the water boil; then put the cream on ice
for about an hour, and before serving turn it out on a dish and
pour some cream flavoured with stick vanilla round it.

No. 213.  Crema Montata alle Fragole (Strawberry Cream)

Ingredients:  Cream, castor sugar, Maraschino, strawberries or
strawberry jam.

Put a pint of cream on ice, and after two hours whip it up.  Pass
three tablespoonsful of strawberry jam through a sieve and add two
tablespoonsful of Maraschino; mix this with the cream and build it
up into a pyramid.  Garnish with meringue biscuits and serve
quickly.  You may use fresh strawberries when in season, but then
add castor sugar to taste.

No. 214.  Croccante di Mandorle (Cream Nougat)

Ingredients:  Almonds, sugar, lemon juice, butter, castor sugar,
pistachios, preserved fruits.

Blanch half a pound of almonds, cut them into shreds and dry them
in a slow oven until they are a light brown colour; then put a
quarter pound of lump sugar into a saucepan and caramel it lightly;
stir well with a wooden spoon.  When the sugar is dissolved, throw
the hot almonds into it and also a little lemon juice.  Take the
saucepan off the fire and mix the almonds with the sugar, pour it
into a buttered mould and press it against the sides of the mould
with a lemon, but remember that the casing of sugar must be very
thin.  (You may, if you like, spread out the mixture on a flat dish
and line the mould with your hands, but the sugar must be kept
hot.) Then take it out of the mould and decorate it with castor
sugar, pistacchio nuts, and preserved fruits.  Fill this case with
whipped cream and preserved fruits or fresh strawberries.

No. 215.  Crema tartara alla Caramella (Caramel Cream)

Ingredients:  Cream, eggs, caramel sugar, vanilla or lemon
flavouring.

Boil a pint of cream and give it any flavour you like.  When cold,
add the yolks of eight eggs and two tablespoonsful of castor sugar,
mix well and pass it through a sieve; then burn some sugar to a
caramel, line a smooth mould with it and pour the cream into it. 
Boil in a bain-marie for an hour and serve hot or cold.

No. 216.  Cremona Cake

Ingredients:  Ground rice, ground maize, sugar, one orange, eggs,
salt, cream, Maraschino, almonds, preserved cherries.

Weigh three eggs, and take equal quantities of castor sugar,
butter, ground rice and maize (the last two together); make a light
paste with them, but only use one whole egg and the yolks of the
two others, add the scraped peel of an orange and a pinch of salt. 
Roll this paste out to the thickness of a five-shilling piece,
colour it with the yolk of an egg and bake it in a cake tin in a
hot oven until it is a good colour, then take it out and cut it
into four equal circular pieces.  Have ready some well-whipped
cream and flavour it with Maraschino, put a thick layer of this on
one of the rounds of pastry, then cover it with:  the next round,
on which also put a layer of cream, and so on until you come to the
last round, which forms the top of the cake.  Then split some
almonds and colour them in the oven, cover the top of the cake with
icing sugar flavoured with orange, and decorate the top with the
almonds and preserved cherries.

No. 217.  Cake alla Tolentina

Ingredients:  Sponge-cake, jam, brandy or Maraschino, cream, pine-
apple.

Make a medium-sized sponge-cake; when cold cut off the top and
scoop out all the middle and leave only the brown case; cover the
outside with a good coating of jam or red currant jelly, and
decorate it with some of the white of the cake cut into fancy
shapes.  Soak the rest of the crumb in brandy or Maraschino and mix
it with quarter of a pint of whipped cream and bits of pineapple
cut into small dice; fill the cake with this; pile it up high in
the centre and decorate the top with the brown top cut into fancy
shapes.

No. 218.  Riso all'Imperatrice

Ingredients:  Rice, sugar, milk, ice, preserved fruits, blanc-
mange, Maraschino, cream.

Boil two dessert-spoonsful of rice and one of sugar in milk.  When
sufficiently boiled, drain the rice and let it get cold.  In the
meantime place a mould on ice, and decorate it with slices of
preserved fruit, and fix them to the mould with just enough nearly
cold dissolved isinglass to keep them in place.  Also put half a
pint of blanc-mange on the ice, and stir it till it is the right
consistency, gradually add the boiled rice, half a glass of
Maraschino, some bits of pineapple cut in dice, and last of all
half a pint of whipped cream.  Fill the mould with this, and when
it is sufficiently cold, turn it out and serve with a garnish of
glace fruits or a few brandy cherries.

No. 219.  Amaretti leggieri (Almond Cakes)

Ingredients:  Almonds (sweet and bitter), eggs, castor sugar.

Blanch equal quantities of sweet and bitter almonds, and dry them a
little in the oven, then pound them in a mortar, and add nearly
double their quantity of castor sugar.  Mix with the white of an
egg well beaten up into a snow, and shape into little balls about
the size of a pigeon's egg.  Put them on a piece of stout white
paper, and bake them in a very slow oven.  They should be very
light and delicate in flavour.

No. 220.  Cakes alla Livornese

Ingredients:  Almonds, eggs, sugar, salt, potato flour, butter.

Pound two ounces of almonds, and mix them with the yolks of two
eggs and a spoonful of castor sugar flavoured with orange juice. 
Then mix two ounces of sugar with an egg, and to this add the
almonds, a pinch of salt, and gradually strew in one and a half
ounces of potato flour.  When it is all well mixed, add one ounce
of melted butter, shape the cakes and bake them in a slow oven.

No. 221.  Genoese Pastry

Ingredients:  Eggs, sugar, butter, flour, almonds, orange or lemon,
brandy.

Weigh four eggs, and take equal weights of castor sugar, butter,
and flour.  Pound three ounces of almonds, and mix them with an
egg, melt the butter, and mix all the ingredients with a wooden
spoon in a pudding basin for ten minutes, then add a little scraped
orange or lemon peel, and a dessert-spoonful of brandy.  Spread out
the paste in thin layers on a copper baking sheet, cover them with
buttered paper, and bake in a moderately hot oven.

These cakes must be cut into shapes when they are hot, as otherwise
they will break.

No. 222.  Zabajone

Ingredients:  Eggs, sugar, Marsala, Maraschino or other light-
coloured liqueur, sponge fingers.

Zabajone is a kind of syllabub.  It is made with Marsala and
Maraschino, or Marsala and yellow Chartreuse.  Reckon the
quantities as follows:  for each person the yolks of three eggs,
one teaspoonful of castor sugar to each egg, and a wine-glass of
wine and liqueur mixed.  Whip up the yolks of the eggs with the
sugar, then gradually add the wine.  Put this in a bain-marie, and
stir until it has thickened to the consistency of a custard.  Take
care, however, that it does not boil.  Serve hot in custard
glasses, and hand sponge fingers with it.

No. 223.  Iced Zabajone

Ingredients:  Eggs, castor sugar, Marsala, cinnamon, lemon, stick
vanilla, rum, Maraschino, butter, ice.

Mix the yolks of ten eggs, two dessert-spoonsful of castor sugar,
and three wine- glasses of Marsala, add half a stick of vanilla, a
small bit of whole cinnamon, and the peel of half a lemon cut into
slices.

Whip this up lightly over a slow fire until it is nearly boiling
and slightly frothy; then remove it, take out the cinnamon,
vanilla, and lemon pool, and whip up the rest for a minute or two
away from the fire.  Add a tablespoonful of Maraschino and one of
rum, and, if you like, a small quantity of dissolved isinglass. 
Stir up the whole, pour it into a silver souffle dish, and put it
on ice.  Serve with sponge cakes or iced wafers.

No. 224.  Pan-forte di Siena(Sienese Hardbake)

Ingredients:  Honey, almonds, filberts, candied lemon peel, pepper,
cinnamon, chocolate, corn flour, large wafers.

Boil half a pound of honey in a copper vessel, and then add to it a
few blanched almonds and filberts cut in halves or quarters and
slightly browned, a little candied lemon peel, a dust of pepper and
powdered cinnamon and a quarter pound of grated chocolate.  Mix all
well together, and gradually add a tablespoonful of corn flour end
two of ground almonds to thicken it.  Then take the vessel off the
fire, spread the mixture on large wafers, and make each cake about
an inch thick.  Garnish them on the top with almonds cut in half,
and dust over a little powdered sugar and cinnamon, then put them
in a very slow oven for an hour.



NEW CENTURY SAUCE * * The New Century Sauce may be bought at
Messrs. Lazenby's, Wigmore Street, W

No. 225.  Fish Sauce

Add one dessert-spoonful of the sauce to a quarter pint of melted
butter sauce.

No. 226.  Sauce Piquante (for Meat, Fowl, Game, Rabbit, &c.)

One dessert-spoonful to a quarter pint of ordinary brown or white
stock.  It may be thickened by a roux made by frying two ounces of
butter with two ounces of flour.

No. 227.  Sauce for Venison, Hare, &c.

Two dessert-spoonsful of New Century Sauce to half a pint of game
gravy or sauce, and a small teaspoonful of red currant jelly.

No. 228.  Tomato Sauce Piquante

Fry three medium-sized tomatoes in one and a half ounce of butter. 
Pass this through a sieve, then boil it up in a bain-marie till it
thickens, and add one dessertspoonful of New Century Sauce.

No. 229.  Sauce for Roast Pork, Ham, &c.

Add to any ordinary white or brown sauce one dessert-spoonful of
New Century Sauce and two of port or Burgundy if the sauce is
brown, two of Chablis if white.

No. 230.  For masking Cutlets, &c.

Making a roux by frying two ounces of butter with two ounces of
flour, and add two tablespoonsful of boiling stock.  Stir in one
dessert-spoonful of New Century Sauce.  Let it get cold, and it
will then be quite firm and ready for masking cutlets, &c.

End Project Gutenberg Etext of A Cook's Decameron.


