*****The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Castle of Otranto******
#1 in our series by Horace Walpole


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Castle of Otranto

by Horace Walpole

October, 1996  [Etext #696]


*****The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Castle of Otranto******
*****This file should be named cotrt10.txt or cotrt10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, cotrt11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, cotrt10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Castle of Otranto by Horace Walpole
Scanned and proofed by David Price
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





The Castle of Otranto




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.



THE following work was found in the library of an ancient Catholic 
family in the north of England.  It was printed at Naples, in the 
black letter, in the year 1529.  How much sooner it was written does 
not appear.  The principal incidents are such as were believed in the 
darkest ages of Christianity; but the language and conduct have 
nothing that savours of barbarism.  The style is the purest Italian.

If the story was written near the time when it is supposed to have 
happened, it must have been between 1095, the era of the first 
Crusade, and 1243, the date of the last, or not long afterwards.  
There is no other circumstance in the work that can lead us to guess 
at the period in which the scene is laid:  the names of the actors are 
evidently fictitious, and probably disguised on purpose:  yet the 
Spanish names of the domestics seem to indicate that this work was not 
composed until the establishment of the Arragonian Kings in Naples had 
made Spanish appellations familiar in that country.  The beauty of the 
diction, and the zeal of the author (moderated, however, by singular 
judgment) concur to make me think that the date of the composition was 
little antecedent to that of the impression.  Letters were then in 
their most flourishing state in Italy, and contributed to dispel the 
empire of superstition, at that time so forcibly attacked by the 
reformers.  It is not unlikely that an artful priest might endeavour 
to turn their own arms on the innovators, and might avail himself of 
his abilities as an author to confirm the populace in their ancient 
errors and superstitions.  If this was his view, he has certainly 
acted with signal address.  Such a work as the following would enslave 
a hundred vulgar minds beyond half the books of controversy that have 
been written from the days of Luther to the present hour.

This solution of the author's motives is, however, offered as a mere 
conjecture.  Whatever his views were, or whatever effects the 
execution of them might have, his work can only be laid before the 
public at present as a matter of entertainment.  Even as such, some 
apology for it is necessary.  Miracles, visions, necromancy, dreams, 
and other preternatural events, are exploded now even from romances.  
That was not the case when our author wrote; much less when the story 
itself is supposed to have happened.  Belief in every kind of prodigy 
was so established in those dark ages, that an author would not be 
faithful to the manners of the times, who should omit all mention of 
them.  He is not bound to believe them himself, but he must represent 
his actors as believing them.

If this air of the miraculous is excused, the reader will find nothing 
else unworthy of his perusal.  Allow the possibility of the facts, and 
all the actors comport themselves as persons would do in their 
situation.  There is no bombast, no similes, flowers, digressions, or 
unnecessary descriptions.  Everything tends directly to the 
catastrophe.  Never is the reader's attention relaxed.  The rules of 
the drama are almost observed throughout the conduct of the piece.  
The characters are well drawn, and still better maintained.  Terror, 
the author's principal engine, prevents the story from ever 
languishing; and it is so often contrasted by pity, that the mind is 
kept up in a constant vicissitude of interesting passions.

Some persons may perhaps think the characters of the domestics too 
little serious for the general cast of the story; but besides their 
opposition to the principal personages, the art of the author is very 
observable in his conduct of the subalterns.  They discover many 
passages essential to the story, which could not be well brought to 
light but by their NAIVETE and simplicity.  In particular, the 
womanish terror and foibles of Bianca, in the last chapter, conduce 
essentially towards advancing the catastrophe.

It is natural for a translator to be prejudiced in favour of his 
adopted work.  More impartial readers may not be so much struck with 
the beauties of this piece as I was.  Yet I am not blind to my 
author's defects.  I could wish he had grounded his plan on a more 
useful moral than this:  that "the sins of fathers are visited on 
their children to the third and fourth generation."  I doubt whether, 
in his time, any more than at present, ambition curbed its appetite of 
dominion from the dread of so remote a punishment.  And yet this moral 
is weakened by that less direct insinuation, that even such anathema 
may be diverted by devotion to St. Nicholas.  Here the interest of the 
Monk plainly gets the better of the judgment of the author.  However, 
with all its faults, I have no doubt but the English reader will be 
pleased with a sight of this performance.  The piety that reigns 
throughout, the lessons of virtue that are inculcated, and the rigid 
purity of the sentiments, exempt this work from the censure to which 
romances are but too liable.  Should it meet with the success I hope 
for, I may be encouraged to reprint the original Italian, though it 
will tend to depreciate my own labour.  Our language falls far short 
of the charms of the Italian, both for variety and harmony.  The 
latter is peculiarly excellent for simple narrative.  It is difficult 
in English to relate without falling too low or rising too high; a 
fault obviously occasioned by the little care taken to speak pure 
language in common conversation.  Every Italian or Frenchman of any 
rank piques himself on speaking his own tongue correctly and with 
choice.  I cannot flatter myself with having done justice to my author 
in this respect:  his style is as elegant as his conduct of the 
passions is masterly.  It is a pity that he did not apply his talents 
to what they were evidently proper for - the theatre.

I will detain the reader no longer, but to make one short remark.  
Though the machinery is invention, and the names of the actors 
imaginary, I cannot but believe that the groundwork of the story is 
founded on truth.  The scene is undoubtedly laid in some real castle.  
The author seems frequently, without design, to describe particular 
parts.  "The chamber," says he, "on the right hand;" "the door on the 
left hand;" "the distance from the chapel to Conrad's apartment:" 
these and other passages are strong presumptions that the author had 
some certain building in his eye.  Curious persons, who have leisure 
to employ in such researches, may possibly discover in the Italian 
writers the foundation on which our author has built.  If a 
catastrophe, at all resembling that which he describes, is believed to 
have given rise to this work, it will contribute to interest the 
reader, and will make the "Castle of Otranto a still more moving 
story.



SONNET TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LADY MARY COKE.



THE gentle maid, whose hapless tale
These melancholy pages speak;
Say, gracious lady, shall she fail
To draw the tear adown thy cheek?

No; never was thy pitying breast
Insensible to human woes;
Tender, tho' firm, it melts distrest
For weaknesses it never knows.

Oh! guard the marvels I relate
Of fell ambition scourg'd by fate,
From reason's peevish blame.
Blest with thy smile, my dauntless sail
I dare expand to Fancy's gale,
For sure thy smiles are Fame.

H. W.



CHAPTER I.



MANFRED, Prince of Otranto, had one son and one daughter:  the latter, 
a most beautiful virgin, aged eighteen, was called Matilda.  Conrad, 
the son, was three years younger, a homely youth, sickly, and of no 
promising disposition; yet he was the darling of his father, who never 
showed any symptoms of affection to Matilda.  Manfred had contracted a 
marriage for his son with the Marquis of Vicenza's daughter, Isabella; 
and she had already been delivered by her guardians into the hands of 
Manfred, that he might celebrate the wedding as soon as Conrad's 
infirm state of health would permit.

Manfred's impatience for this ceremonial was remarked by his family 
and neighbours.  The former, indeed, apprehending the severity of 
their Prince's disposition, did not dare to utter their surmises on 
this precipitation.  Hippolita, his wife, an amiable lady, did 
sometimes venture to represent the danger of marrying their only son 
so early, considering his great youth, and greater infirmities; but 
she never received any other answer than reflections on her own 
sterility, who had given him but one heir.  His tenants and subjects 
were less cautious in their discourses.  They attributed this hasty 
wedding to the Prince's dread of seeing accomplished an ancient 
prophecy, which was said to have pronounced that the castle and 
lordship of Otranto "should pass from the present family, whenever the 
real owner should be grown too large to inhabit it."  It was difficult 
to make any sense of this prophecy; and still less easy to conceive 
what it had to do with the marriage in question.  Yet these mysteries, 
or contradictions, did not make the populace adhere the less to their 
opinion.

Young Conrad's birthday was fixed for his espousals.  The company was 
assembled in the chapel of the Castle, and everything ready for 
beginning the divine office, when Conrad himself was missing.  
Manfred, impatient of the least delay, and who had not observed his 
son retire, despatched one of his attendants to summon the young 
Prince.  The servant, who had not stayed long enough to have crossed 
the court to Conrad's apartment, came running back breathless, in a 
frantic manner, his eyes staring, and foaming at the month.  He said 
nothing, but pointed to the court.

The company were struck with terror and amazement.  The Princess 
Hippolita, without knowing what was the matter, but anxious for her 
son, swooned away.  Manfred, less apprehensive than enraged at the 
procrastination of the nuptials, and at the folly of his domestic, 
asked imperiously what was the matter?  The fellow made no answer, but 
continued pointing towards the court-yard; and at last, after repeated 
questions put to him, cried out, "Oh! the helmet! the helmet!"

In the meantime, some of the company had run into the court, from 
whence was heard a confused noise of shrieks, horror, and surprise.  
Manfred, who began to be alarmed at not seeing his son, went himself 
to get information of what occasioned this strange confusion.  Matilda 
remained endeavouring to assist her mother, and Isabella stayed for 
the same purpose, and to avoid showing any impatience for the 
bridegroom, for whom, in truth, she had conceived little affection.

The first thing that struck Manfred's eyes was a group of his servants 
endeavouring to raise something that appeared to him a mountain of 
sable plumes.  He gazed without believing his sight.

"What are ye doing?" cried Manfred, wrathfully; "where is my son?"

A volley of voices replied, "Oh! my Lord! the Prince! the Prince! the 
helmet! the helmet!"

Shocked with these lamentable sounds, and dreading he knew not what, 
he advanced hastily, - but what a sight for a father's eyes! - he 
beheld his child dashed to pieces, and almost buried under an enormous 
helmet, an hundred times more large than any casque ever made for 
human being, and shaded with a proportionable quantity of black 
feathers.

The horror of the spectacle, the ignorance of all around how this 
misfortune had happened, and above all, the tremendous phenomenon 
before him, took away the Prince's speech.  Yet his silence lasted 
longer than even grief could occasion.  He fixed his eyes on what he 
wished in vain to believe a vision; and seemed less attentive to his 
loss, than buried in meditation on the stupendous object that had 
occasioned it.  He touched, he examined the fatal casque; nor could 
even the bleeding mangled remains of the young Prince divert the eyes 
of Manfred from the portent before him.

All who had known his partial fondness for young Conrad, were as much 
surprised at their Prince's insensibility, as thunderstruck themselves 
at the miracle of the helmet.  They conveyed the disfigured corpse 
into the hall, without receiving the least direction from Manfred.  As 
little was he attentive to the ladies who remained in the chapel.  On 
the contrary, without mentioning the unhappy princesses, his wife and 
daughter, the first sounds that dropped from Manfred's lips were, 
"Take care of the Lady Isabella."

The domestics, without observing the singularity of this direction, 
were guided by their affection to their mistress, to consider it as 
peculiarly addressed to her situation, and flew to her assistance.  
They conveyed her to her chamber more dead than alive, and indifferent 
to all the strange circumstances she heard, except the death of her 
son.

Matilda, who doted on her mother, smothered her own grief and 
amazement, and thought of nothing but assisting and comforting her 
afflicted parent.  Isabella, who had been treated by Hippolita like a 
daughter, and who returned that tenderness with equal duty and 
affection, was scarce less assiduous about the Princess; at the same 
time endeavouring to partake and lessen the weight of sorrow which she 
saw Matilda strove to suppress, for whom she had conceived the warmest 
sympathy of friendship.  Yet her own situation could not help finding 
its place in her thoughts.  She felt no concern for the death of young 
Conrad, except commiseration; and she was not sorry to be delivered 
from a marriage which had promised her little felicity, either from 
her destined bridegroom, or from the severe temper of Manfred, who, 
though he had distinguished her by great indulgence, had imprinted her 
mind with terror, from his causeless rigour to such amiable princesses 
as Hippolita and Matilda.

While the ladies were conveying the wretched mother to her bed, 
Manfred remained in the court, gazing on the ominous casque, and 
regardless of the crowd which the strangeness of the event had now 
assembled around him.  The few words he articulated, tended solely to 
inquiries, whether any man knew from whence it could have come?  
Nobody could give him the least information.  However, as it seemed to 
be the sole object of his curiosity, it soon became so to the rest of 
the spectators, whose conjectures were as absurd and improbable, as 
the catastrophe itself was unprecedented.  In the midst of their 
senseless guesses, a young peasant, whom rumour had drawn thither from 
a neighbouring village, observed that the miraculous helmet was 
exactly like that on the figure in black marble of Alfonso the Good, 
one of their former princes, in the church of St. Nicholas.

"Villain!  What sayest thou?" cried Manfred, starting from his trance 
in a tempest of rage, and seizing the young man by the collar; "how 
darest thou utter such treason?  Thy life shall pay for it."

The spectators, who as little comprehended the cause of the Prince's 
fury as all the rest they had seen, were at a loss to unravel this new 
circumstance.  The young peasant himself was still more astonished, 
not conceiving how he had offended the Prince.  Yet recollecting 
himself, with a mixture of grace and humility, he disengaged himself 
from Manfred's grip, and then with an obeisance, which discovered more 
jealousy of innocence than dismay, he asked, with respect, of what he 
was guilty?  Manfred, more enraged at the vigour, however decently 
exerted, with which the young man had shaken off his hold, than 
appeased by his submission, ordered his attendants to seize him, and, 
if he had not been withheld by his friends whom he had invited to the 
nuptials, would have poignarded the peasant in their arms.

During this altercation, some of the vulgar spectators had run to the 
great church, which stood near the castle, and came back open-mouthed, 
declaring that the helmet was missing from Alfonso's statue.  Manfred, 
at this news, grew perfectly frantic; and, as if he sought a subject 
on which to vent the tempest within him, he rushed again on the young 
peasant, crying -

"Villain! Monster! Sorcerer! 'tis thou hast done this! 'tis thou hast 
slain my son!"

The mob, who wanted some object within the scope of their capacities, 
on whom they might discharge their bewildered reasoning, caught the 
words from the mouth of their lord, and re-echoed -

"Ay, ay; 'tis he, 'tis he:  he has stolen the helmet from good 
Alfonso's tomb, and dashed out the brains of our young Prince with 
it," never reflecting how enormous the disproportion was between the 
marble helmet that had been in the church, and that of steel before 
their eyes; nor how impossible it was for a youth seemingly not 
twenty, to wield a piece of armour of so prodigious a weight

The folly of these ejaculations brought Manfred to himself:  yet 
whether provoked at the peasant having observed the resemblance 
between the two helmets, and thereby led to the farther discovery of 
the absence of that in the church, or wishing to bury any such rumour 
under so impertinent a supposition, he gravely pronounced that the 
young man was certainly a necromancer, and that till the Church could 
take cognisance of the affair, he would have the Magician, whom they 
had thus detected, kept prisoner under the helmet itself, which he 
ordered his attendants to raise, and place the young man under it; 
declaring he should be kept there without food, with which his own 
infernal art might furnish him.

It was in vain for the youth to represent against this preposterous 
sentence:  in vain did Manfred's friends endeavour to divert him from 
this savage and ill-grounded resolution.  The generality were charmed 
with their lord's decision, which, to their apprehensions, carried 
great appearance of justice, as the Magician was to be punished by the 
very instrument with which he had offended:  nor were they struck with 
the least compunction at the probability of the youth being starved, 
for they firmly believed that, by his diabolic skill, he could easily 
supply himself with nutriment.

Manfred thus saw his commands even cheerfully obeyed; and appointing a 
guard with strict orders to prevent any food being conveyed to the 
prisoner, he dismissed his friends and attendants, and retired to his 
own chamber, after locking the gates of the castle, in which he 
suffered none but his domestics to remain.

In the meantime, the care and zeal of the young Ladies had brought the 
Princess Hippolita to herself, who amidst the transports of her own 
sorrow frequently demanded news of her lord, would have dismissed her 
attendants to watch over him, and at last enjoined Matilda to leave 
her, and visit and comfort her father.  Matilda, who wanted no 
affectionate duty to Manfred, though she trembled at his austerity, 
obeyed the orders of Hippolita, whom she tenderly recommended to 
Isabella; and inquiring of the domestics for her father, was informed 
that he was retired to his chamber, and had commanded that nobody 
should have admittance to him.  Concluding that he was immersed in 
sorrow for the death of her brother, and fearing to renew his tears by 
the sight of his sole remaining child, she hesitated whether she 
should break in upon his affliction; yet solicitude for him, backed by 
the commands of her mother, encouraged her to venture disobeying the 
orders he had given; a fault she had never been guilty of before.

The gentle timidity of her nature made her pause for some minutes at 
his door.  She heard him traverse his chamber backwards, and forwards 
with disordered steps; a mood which increased her apprehensions.  She 
was, however, just going to beg admittance, when Manfred suddenly 
opened the door; and as it was now twilight, concurring with the 
disorder of his mind, he did not distinguish the person, but asked 
angrily, who it was?  Matilda replied, trembling -

"My dearest father, it is I, your daughter."

Manfred, stepping back hastily, cried, "Begone!  I do not want a 
daughter;" and flinging back abruptly, clapped the door against the 
terrified Matilda.

She was too well acquainted with her father's impetuosity to venture a 
second intrusion.  When she had a little recovered the shock of so 
bitter a reception, she wiped away her tears to prevent the additional 
stab that the knowledge of it would give to Hippolita, who questioned 
her in the most anxious terms on the health of Manfred, and how he 
bore his loss.  Matilda assured her he was well, and supported his 
misfortune with manly fortitude.

"But will he not let me see him?" said Hippolita mournfully; "will he 
not permit me to blend my tears with his, and shed a mother's sorrows 
in the bosom of her Lord?  Or do you deceive me, Matilda?  I know how 
Manfred doted on his son:  is not the stroke too heavy for him? has he 
not sunk under it?  You do not answer me - alas! I dread the worst! - 
Raise me, my maidens; I will, I will see my Lord.  Bear me to him 
instantly:  he is dearer to me even than my children."

Matilda made signs to Isabella to prevent Hippolita's rising; and both 
those lovely young women were using their gentle violence to stop and 
calm the Princess, when a servant, on the part of Manfred, arrived and 
told Isabella that his Lord demanded to speak with her.

"With me!" cried Isabella.

"Go," said Hippolita, relieved by a message from her Lord:  "Manfred 
cannot support the sight of his own family.  He thinks you less 
disordered than we are, and dreads the shock of my grief.  Console 
him, dear Isabella, and tell him I will smother my own anguish rather 
than add to his."

As it was now evening the servant who conducted Isabella bore a torch 
before her.  When they came to Manfred, who was walking impatiently 
about the gallery, he started, and said hastily -

"Take away that light, and begone."

Then shutting the door impetuously, he flung himself upon a bench 
against the wall, and bade Isabella sit by him.  She obeyed trembling.

"I sent for you, Lady," said he - and then stopped under great 
appearance of confusion.

"My Lord!"

"Yes, I sent for you on a matter of great moment," resumed he.  "Dry 
your tears, young Lady - you have lost your bridegroom.  Yes, cruel 
fate! and I have lost the hopes of my race!  But Conrad was not worthy 
of your beauty."

"How, my Lord!" said Isabella; "sure you do not suspect me of not 
feeling the concern I ought:  my duty and affection would have always 
- "

"Think no more of him," interrupted Manfred; "he was a sickly, puny 
child, and Heaven has perhaps taken him away, that I might not trust 
the honours of my house on so frail a foundation.  The line of Manfred 
calls for numerous supports.  My foolish fondness for that boy blinded 
the eyes of my prudence - but it is better as it is.  I hope, in a few 
years, to have reason to rejoice at the death of Conrad."

Words cannot paint the astonishment of Isabella.  At first she 
apprehended that grief had disordered Manfred's understanding.  Her 
next thought suggested that this strange discourse was designed to 
ensnare her:  she feared that Manfred had perceived her indifference 
for his son:  and in consequence of that idea she replied -

"Good my Lord, do not doubt my tenderness:  my heart would have 
accompanied my hand.  Conrad would have engrossed all my care; and 
wherever fate shall dispose of me, I shall always cherish his memory, 
and regard your Highness and the virtuous Hippolita as my parents."

"Curse on Hippolita!" cried Manfred.  "Forget her from this moment, as 
I do.  In short, Lady, you have missed a husband undeserving of your 
charms:  they shall now be better disposed of.  Instead of a sickly 
boy, you shall have a husband in the prime of his age, who will know 
how to value your beauties, and who may expect a numerous offspring."

"Alas, my Lord!" said Isabella, "my mind is too sadly engrossed by the 
recent catastrophe in your family to think of another marriage.  If 
ever my father returns, and it shall be his pleasure, I shall obey, as 
I did when I consented to give my hand to your son:  but until his 
return, permit me to remain under your hospitable roof, and employ the 
melancholy hours in assuaging yours, Hippolita's, and the fair 
Matilda's affliction."

"I desired you once before," said Manfred angrily, "not to name that 
woman:  from this hour she must be a stranger to you, as she must be 
to me.  In short, Isabella, since I cannot give you my son, I offer 
you myself."

"Heavens!" cried Isabella, waking from her delusion, "what do I hear?  
You! my Lord!  You!  My father-in-law! the father of Conrad! the 
husband of the virtuous and tender Hippolita!"

"I tell you," said Manfred imperiously, "Hippolita is no longer my 
wife; I divorce her from this hour.  Too long has she cursed me by her 
unfruitfulness.  My fate depends on having sons, and this night I 
trust will give a new date to my hopes."

At those words he seized the cold hand of Isabella, who was half dead 
with fright and horror.  She shrieked, and started from him, Manfred 
rose to pursue her, when the moon, which was now up, and gleamed in at 
the opposite casement, presented to his sight the plumes of the fatal 
helmet, which rose to the height of the windows, waving backwards and 
forwards in a tempestuous manner, and accompanied with a hollow and 
rustling sound.  Isabella, who gathered courage from her situation, 
and who dreaded nothing so much as Manfred's pursuit of his 
declaration, cried -

"Look, my Lord! see, Heaven itself declares against your impious 
intentions!"

"Heaven nor Hell shall impede my designs," said Manfred, advancing 
again to seize the Princess.

At that instant the portrait of his grandfather, which hung over the 
bench where they had been sitting, uttered a deep sigh, and heaved its 
breast.

Isabella, whose back was turned to the picture, saw not the motion, 
nor knew whence the sound came, but started, and said -

"Hark, my Lord!  What sound was that?" and at the same time made 
towards the door.

Manfred, distracted between the flight of Isabella, who had now 
reached the stairs, and yet unable to keep his eyes from the picture, 
which began to move, had, however, advanced some steps after her, 
still looking backwards on the portrait, when he saw it quit its 
panel, and descend on the floor with a grave and melancholy air.

"Do I dream?" cried Manfred, returning; "or are the devils themselves 
in league against me?  Speak, internal spectre!  Or, if thou art my 
grandsire, why dost thou too conspire against thy wretched descendant, 
who too dearly pays for - "  Ere he could finish the sentence, the 
vision sighed again, and made a sign to Manfred to follow him.

"Lead on!" cried Manfred; "I will follow thee to the gulf of 
perdition."

The spectre marched sedately, but dejected, to the end of the gallery, 
and turned into a chamber on the right hand.  Manfred accompanied him 
at a little distance, full of anxiety and horror, but resolved.  As he 
would have entered the chamber, the door was clapped to with violence 
by an invisible hand.  The Prince, collecting courage from this delay, 
would have forcibly burst open the door with his foot, but found that 
it resisted his utmost efforts.

"Since Hell will not satisfy my curiosity," said Manfred, "I will use 
the human means in my power for preserving my race; Isabella shall not 
escape me."

The lady, whose resolution had given way to terror the moment she had 
quitted Manfred, continued her flight to the bottom of the principal 
staircase.  There she stopped, not knowing whither to direct her 
steps, nor how to escape from the impetuosity of the Prince.  The 
gates of the castle, she knew, were locked, and guards placed in the 
court.  Should she, as her heart prompted her, go and prepare 
Hippolita for the cruel destiny that awaited her, she did not doubt 
but Manfred would seek her there, and that his violence would incite 
him to double the injury he meditated, without leaving room for them 
to avoid the impetuosity of his passions.  Delay might give him time 
to reflect on the horrid measures he had conceived, or produce some 
circumstance in her favour, if she could - for that night, at least - 
avoid his odious purpose.  Yet where conceal herself?  How avoid the 
pursuit he would infallibly make throughout the castle?

As these thoughts passed rapidly through her mind, she recollected a 
subterraneous passage which led from the vaults of the castle to the 
church of St. Nicholas.  Could she reach the altar before she was 
overtaken, she knew even Manfred's violence would not dare to profane 
the sacredness of the place; and she determined, if no other means of 
deliverance offered, to shut herself up for ever among the holy 
virgins whose convent was contiguous to the cathedral.  In this 
resolution, she seized a lamp that burned at the foot of the 
staircase, and hurried towards the secret passage.

The lower part of the castle was hollowed into several intricate 
cloisters; and it was not easy for one under so much anxiety to find 
the door that opened into the cavern.  An awful silence reigned 
throughout those subterraneous regions, except now and then some 
blasts of wind that shook the doors she had passed, and which, grating 
on the rusty hinges, were re-echoed through that long labyrinth of 
darkness.  Every murmur struck her with new terror; yet more she 
dreaded to hear the wrathful voice of Manfred urging his domestics to 
pursue her.

She trod as softly as impatience would give her leave, yet frequently 
stopped and listened to hear if she was followed.  In one of those 
moments she thought she heard a sigh.  She shuddered, and recoiled a 
few paces.  In a moment she thought she heard the step of some person.  
Her blood curdled; she concluded it was Manfred.  Every suggestion 
that horror could inspire rushed into her mind.  She condemned her 
rash flight, which had thus exposed her to his rage in a place where 
her cries were not likely to draw anybody to her assistance.  Yet the 
sound seemed not to come from behind.  If Manfred knew where she was, 
he must have followed her.  She was still in one of the cloisters, and 
the steps she had heard were too distinct to proceed from the way she 
had come.  Cheered with this reflection, and hoping to find a friend 
in whoever was not the Prince, she was going to advance, when a door 
that stood ajar, at some distance to the left, was opened gently:  but 
ere her lamp, which she held up, could discover who opened it, the 
person retreated precipitately on seeing the light.

Isabella, whom every incident was sufficient to dismay, hesitated 
whether she should proceed.  Her dread of Manfred soon outweighed 
every other terror.  The very circumstance of the person avoiding her 
gave her a sort of courage.  It could only be, she thought, some 
domestic belonging to the castle.  Her gentleness had never raised her 
an enemy, and conscious innocence made her hope that, unless sent by 
the Prince's order to seek her, his servants would rather assist than 
prevent her flight.  Fortifying herself with these reflections, and 
believing by what she could observe that she was near the mouth of the 
subterraneous cavern, she approached the door that had been opened; 
but a sudden gust of wind that met her at the door extinguished her 
lamp, and left her in total darkness.

Words cannot paint the horror of the Princess's situation.  Alone in 
so dismal a place, her mind imprinted with all the terrible events of 
the day, hopeless of escaping, expecting every moment the arrival of 
Manfred, and far from tranquil on knowing she was within reach of 
somebody, she knew not whom, who for some cause seemed concealed 
thereabouts; all these thoughts crowded on her distracted mind, and 
she was ready to sink under her apprehensions.  She addressed herself 
to every saint in heaven, and inwardly implored their assistance.  For 
a considerable time she remained in an agony of despair.

At last, as softly as was possible, she felt for the door, and having 
found it, entered trembling into the vault from whence she had heard 
the sigh and steps.  It gave her a kind of momentary joy to perceive 
an imperfect ray of clouded moonshine gleam from the roof of the 
vault, which seemed to be fallen in, and from whence hung a fragment 
of earth or building, she could not distinguish which, that appeared 
to have been crushed inwards.  She advanced eagerly towards this 
chasm, when she discerned a human form standing close against the 
wall.

She shrieked, believing it the ghost of her betrothed Conrad.  The 
figure, advancing, said, in a submissive voice -

"Be not alarmed, Lady; I will not injure you."

Isabella, a little encouraged by the words and tone of voice of the 
stranger, and recollecting that this must be the person who had opened 
the door, recovered her spirits enough to reply -

"Sir, whoever you are, take pity on a wretched Princess, standing on 
the brink of destruction.  Assist me to escape from this fatal castle, 
or in a few moments I may be made miserable for ever."

"Alas!" said the stranger, "what can I do to assist you?  I will die 
in your defence; but I am unacquainted with the castle, and want - "

"Oh!" said Isabella, hastily interrupting him; "help me but to find a 
trap-door that must be hereabout, and it is the greatest service you 
can do me, for I have not a minute to lose."

Saying a these words, she felt about on the pavement, and directed the 
stranger to search likewise, for a smooth piece of brass enclosed in 
one of the stones.

"That," said she, "is the lock, which opens with a spring, of which I 
know the secret.  If we can find that, I may escape - if not, alas! 
courteous stranger, I fear I shall have involved you in my 
misfortunes:  Manfred will suspect you for the accomplice of my 
flight, and you will fall a victim to his resentment."

"I value not my life," said the stranger, "and it will be some comfort 
to lose it in trying to deliver you from his tyranny."

"Generous youth," said Isabella, "how shall I ever requite - "

As she uttered those words, a ray of moonshine, streaming through a 
cranny of the ruin above, shone directly on the lock they sought.

"Oh! transport!" said Isabella; "here is the trap-door!" and, taking 
out the key, she touched the spring, which, starting aside, discovered 
an iron ring.  "Lift up the door," said the Princess.

The stranger obeyed, and beneath appeared some stone steps descending 
into a vault totally dark.

"We must go down here," said Isabella.  "Follow me; dark and dismal as 
it is, we cannot miss our way; it leads directly to the church of St. 
Nicholas.  But, perhaps," added the Princess modestly, "you have no 
reason to leave the castle, nor have I farther occasion for your 
service; in a few minutes I shall be safe from Manfred's rage - only 
let me know to whom I am so much obliged."

"I will never quit you," said the stranger eagerly, "until I have 
placed you in safety - nor think me, Princess, more generous than I 
am; though you are my principal care - "

The stranger was interrupted by a sudden noise of voices that seemed 
approaching, and they soon distinguished these words -

"Talk not to me of necromancers; I tell you she must be in the castle; 
I will find her in spite of enchantment."

"Oh, heavens!" cried Isabella; "it is the voice of Manfred!  Make 
haste, or we are ruined! and shut the trap-door after you."

Saying this, she descended the steps precipitately; and as the 
stranger hastened to follow her, he let the door slip out of his 
hands:  it fell, and the spring closed over it.  He tried in vain to 
open it, not having observed Isabella's method of touching the spring; 
nor had he many moments to make an essay.  The noise of the falling 
door had been heard by Manfred, who, directed by the sound, hastened 
thither, attended by his servants with torches.

"It must be Isabella," cried Manfred, before he entered the vault.  
"She is escaping by the subterraneous passage, but she cannot have got 
far."

What was the astonishment of the Prince when, instead of Isabella, the 
light of the torches discovered to him the young peasant whom he 
thought confined under the fatal helmet!

"Traitor!" said Manfred; "how camest thou here?  I thought thee in 
durance above in the court."

"I am no traitor," replied the young man boldly, "nor am I answerable 
for your thoughts."

"Presumptuous villain!" cried Manfred; "dost thou provoke my wrath?  
Tell me, how hast thou escaped from above?  Thou hast corrupted thy 
guards, and their lives shall answer it."

"My poverty," said the peasant calmly, "will disculpate them:  though 
the ministers of a tyrant's wrath, to thee they are faithful, and but 
too willing to execute the orders which you unjustly imposed upon 
them."

"Art thou so hardy as to dare my vengeance?" said the Prince; "but 
tortures shall force the truth from thee.  Tell me; I will know thy 
accomplices."

"There was my accomplice!" said the youth, smiling, and pointing to 
the roof.

Manfred ordered the torches to be held up, and perceived that one of 
the cheeks of the enchanted casque had forced its way through the 
pavement of the court, as his servants had let it fall over the 
peasant, and had broken through into the vault, leaving a gap, through 
which the peasant had pressed himself some minutes before he was found 
by Isabella.

"Was that the way by which thou didst descend?" said Manfred.

"It was," said the youth.

"But what noise was that," said Manfred, "which I heard as I entered 
the cloister?"

"A door clapped," said the peasant; "I heard it as well as you."

"What door?" said Manfred hastily.

"I am not acquainted with your castle," said the peasant; "this is the 
first time I ever entered it, and this vault the only part of it 
within which I ever was."

"But I tell thee," said Manfred (wishing to find out if the youth had 
discovered the trap-door), "it was this way I heard the noise.  My 
servants heard it too."

"My Lord," interrupted one of them officiously, "to be sure it was the 
trap-door, and he was going to make his escape."

"Peace, blockhead!" said the Prince angrily; "if he was going to 
escape, how should he come on this side?  I will know from his own 
mouth what noise it was I heard.  Tell me truly; thy life depends on 
thy veracity."

"My veracity is dearer to me than my life," said the peasant; "nor 
would I purchase the one by forfeiting the other."

"Indeed, young philosopher!" said Manfred contemptuously; "tell me, 
then, what was the noise I heard?"

"Ask me what I can answer," said he, "and put me to death instantly if 
I tell you a lie."

Manfred, growing impatient at the steady valour and indifference of 
the youth, cried -

"Well, then, thou man of truth, answer!  Was it the fall of the trap-
door that I heard?"

"It was," said the youth.

"It was!" said the Prince; "and how didst thou come to know there was 
a trap-door here?"

"I saw the plate of brass by a gleam of moonshine," replied he.

"But what told thee it was a lock?" said Manfred.  "How didst thou 
discover the secret of opening it?"

"Providence, that delivered me from the helmet, was able to direct me 
to the spring of a lock," said he.

"Providence should have gone a little farther, and have placed thee 
out of the reach of my resentment," said Manfred.  "When Providence 
had taught thee to open the lock, it abandoned thee for a fool, who 
did not know how to make use of its favours.  Why didst thou not 
pursue the path pointed out for thy escape?  Why didst thou shut the 
trap-door before thou hadst descended the steps?"

"I might ask you, my Lord," said the peasant, "how I, totally 
unacquainted with your castle, was to know that those steps led to any 
outlet? but I scorn to evade your questions.  Wherever those steps 
lead to, perhaps I should have explored the way - I could not be in a 
worse situation than I was.  But the truth is, I let the trap-door 
fall:  your immediate arrival followed.  I had given the alarm - what 
imported it to me whether I was seized a minute sooner or a minute 
later?"

"Thou art a resolute villain for thy years," said Manfred; "yet on 
reflection I suspect thou dost but trifle with me.  Thou hast not yet 
told me how thou didst open the lock."

"That I will show you, my Lord," said the peasant; and, taking up a 
fragment of stone that had fallen from above, he laid himself on the 
trap-door, and began to beat on the piece of brass that covered it, 
meaning to gain time for the escape of the Princess.  This presence of 
mind, joined to the frankness of the youth, staggered Manfred.  He 
even felt a disposition towards pardoning one who had been guilty of 
no crime.  Manfred was not one of those savage tyrants who wanton in 
cruelty unprovoked.  The circumstances of his fortune had given an 
asperity to his temper, which was naturally humane; and his virtues 
were always ready to operate, when his passions did not obscure his 
reason.

While the Prince was in this suspense, a confused noise of voices 
echoed through the distant vaults.  As the sound approached, he 
distinguished the clamours of some of his domestics, whom he had 
dispersed through the castle in search of Isabella, calling out -

"Where is my Lord? where is the Prince?"

"Here I am," said Manfred, as they came nearer; "have you found the 
Princess?"

The first that arrived, replied, "Oh, my Lord!  I am glad we have 
found you."

"Found me!" said Manfred; "have you found the Princess?"

"We thought we had, my Lord," said the fellow, looking terrified, "but 
- "

"But, what?" cried the Prince; "has she escaped?"

"Jaquez and I, my Lord - "

"Yes, I and Diego," interrupted the second, who came up in still 
greater consternation.

"Speak one of you at a time," said Manfred; "I ask you, where is the 
Princess?"

"We do not know," said they both together; "but we are frightened out 
of our wits."

"So I think, blockheads," said Manfred; "what is it has scared you 
thus?"

"Oh! my Lord," said Jaquez, "Diego has seen such a sight! your 
Highness would not believe our eyes."

"What new absurdity is this?" cried Manfred; "give me a direct answer, 
or, by Heaven - "

"Why, my Lord, if it please your Highness to hear me," said the poor 
fellow, "Diego and I - "

"Yes, I and Jaquez - " cried his comrade.

"Did not I forbid you to speak both at a time?" said the Prince:  
"you, Jaquez, answer; for the other fool seems more distracted than 
thou art; what is the matter?"

"My gracious Lord," said Jaquez, "if it please your Highness to hear 
me; Diego and I, according to your Highness's orders, went to search 
for the young Lady; but being comprehensive that we might meet the 
ghost of my young Lord, your Highness's son, God rest his soul, as he 
has not received Christian burial - "

"Sot!" cried Manfred in a rage; "is it only a ghost, then, that thou 
hast seen?"

"Oh! worse! worse! my Lord," cried Diego:  "I had rather have seen ten 
whole ghosts."

"Grant me patience!" said Manfred; "these blockheads distract me.  Out 
of my sight, Diego! and thou, Jaquez, tell me in one word, art thou 
sober? art thou raving? thou wast wont to have some sense:  has the 
other sot frightened himself and thee too?  Speak; what is it he 
fancies he has seen?"

"Why, my Lord," replied Jaquez, trembling, "I was going to tell your 
Highness, that since the calamitous misfortune of my young Lord, God 
rest his precious soul! not one of us your Highness's faithful 
servants - indeed we are, my Lord, though poor men - I say, not one of 
us has dared to set a foot about the castle, but two together:  so 
Diego and I, thinking that my young Lady might be in the great 
gallery, went up there to look for her, and tell her your Highness 
wanted something to impart to her."

"O blundering fools!" cried Manfred; "and in the meantime, she has 
made her escape, because you were afraid of goblins! - Why, thou 
knave! she left me in the gallery; I came from thence myself."

"For all that, she may be there still for aught I know," said Jaquez; 
"but the devil shall have me before I seek her there again - poor 
Diego!  I do not believe he will ever recover it."

"Recover what?" said Manfred; "am I never to learn what it is has 
terrified these rascals? - but I lose my time; follow me, slave; I 
will see if she is in the gallery."

"For Heaven's sake, my dear, good Lord," cried Jaquez, "do not go to 
the gallery.  Satan himself I believe is in the chamber next to the 
gallery."

Manfred, who hitherto had treated the terror of his servants as an 
idle panic, was struck at this new circumstance.  He recollected the 
apparition of the portrait, and the sudden closing of the door at the 
end of the gallery.  His voice faltered, and he asked with disorder -

"What is in the great chamber?"

"My Lord," said Jaquez, "when Diego and I came into the gallery, he 
went first, for he said he had more courage than I.  So when we came 
into the gallery we found nobody.  We looked under every bench and 
stool; and still we found nobody."

"Were all the pictures in their places?" said Manfred.

"Yes, my Lord," answered Jaquez; "but we did not think of looking 
behind them."

"Well, well!" said Manfred; "proceed."

"When we came to the door of the great chamber," continued Jaquez, "we 
found it shut."

"And could not you open it?" said Manfred.

"Oh! yes, my Lord; would to Heaven we had not!" replied he - "nay, it 
was not I neither; it was Diego:  he was grown foolhardy, and would go 
on, though I advised him not - if ever I open a door that is shut 
again - "

"Trifle not," said Manfred, shuddering, "but tell me what you saw in 
the great chamber on opening the door."

"I! my Lord!" said Jaquez; "I was behind Diego; but I heard the 
noise."

"Jaquez," said Manfred, in a solemn tone of voice; "tell me, I adjure 
thee by the souls of my ancestors, what was it thou sawest? what was 
it thou heardest?"

"It was Diego saw it, my Lord, it was not I," replied Jaquez; "I only 
heard the noise.  Diego had no sooner opened the door, than he cried 
out, and ran back.  I ran back too, and said, 'Is it the ghost?'  'The 
ghost! no, no,' said Diego, and his hair stood on end - 'it is a 
giant, I believe; he is all clad in armour, for I saw his foot and 
part of his leg, and they are as large as the helmet below in the 
court.'  As he said these words, my Lord, we heard a violent motion 
and the rattling of armour, as if the giant was rising, for Diego has 
told me since that he believes the giant was lying down, for the foot 
and leg were stretched at length on the floor.  Before we could get to 
the end of the gallery, we heard the door of the great chamber clap 
behind us, but we did not dare turn back to see if the giant was 
following us - yet, now I think on it, we must have heard him if he 
had pursued us - but for Heaven's sake, good my Lord, send for the 
chaplain, and have the castle exorcised, for, for certain, it is 
enchanted."

"Ay, pray do, my Lord," cried all the servants at once, "or we must 
leave your Highness's service."

"Peace, dotards!" said Manfred, "and follow me; I will know what all 
this means."

"We! my Lord!" cried they with one voice; "we would not go up to the 
gallery for your Highness's revenue."  The young peasant, who had 
stood silent, now spoke.

"Will your Highness," said he, "permit me to try this adventure?  My 
life is of consequence to nobody; I fear no bad angel, and have 
offended no good one."

"Your behaviour is above your seeming," said Manfred, viewing him with 
surprise and admiration - "hereafter I will reward your bravery - but 
now," continued he with a sigh, "I am so circumstanced, that I dare 
trust no eyes but my own.  However, I give you leave to accompany me."

Manfred, when he first followed Isabella from the gallery, had gone 
directly to the apartment of his wife, concluding the Princess had 
retired thither.  Hippolita, who knew his step, rose with anxious 
fondness to meet her Lord, whom she had not seen since the death of 
their son.  She would have flown in a transport mixed of joy and grief 
to his bosom, but he pushed her rudely off, and said -

"Where is Isabella?"

"Isabella! my Lord!" said the astonished Hippolita.

"Yes, Isabella," cried Manfred imperiously; "I want Isabella."

"My Lord," replied Matilda, who perceived how much his behaviour had 
shocked her mother, "she has not been with us since your Highness 
summoned her to your apartment."

"Tell me where she is," said the Prince; "I do not want to know where 
she has been."

"My good Lord," says Hippolita, "your daughter tells you the truth:  
Isabella left us by your command, and has not returned since; - but, 
my good Lord, compose yourself:  retire to your rest:  this dismal day 
has disordered you.  Isabella shall wait your orders in the morning."

"What, then, you know where she is!" cried Manfred.  "Tell me 
directly, for I will not lose an instant - and you, woman," speaking 
to his wife, "order your chaplain to attend me forthwith."

"Isabella," said Hippolita calmly, "is retired, I suppose, to her 
chamber:  she is not accustomed to watch at this late hour.  Gracious 
my Lord," continued she, "let me know what has disturbed you.  Has 
Isabella offended you?"

"Trouble me not with questions," said Manfred, "but tell me where she 
is."

"Matilda shall call her," said the Princess.  "Sit down, my Lord, and 
resume your wonted fortitude."

"What, art thou jealous of Isabella?" replied he, "that you wish to be 
present at our interview!"

"Good heavens! my Lord," said Hippolita, "what is it your Highness 
means?"

"Thou wilt know ere many minutes are passed," said the cruel Prince.  
"Send your chaplain to me, and wait my pleasure here."

At these words he flung out of the room in search of Isabella, leaving 
the amazed ladies thunderstruck with his words and frantic deportment, 
and lost in vain conjectures on what he was meditating.

Manfred was now returning from the vault, attended by the peasant and 
a few of his servants whom he had obliged to accompany him.  He 
ascended the staircase without stopping till he arrived at the 
gallery, at the door of which he met Hippolita and her chaplain.  When 
Diego had been dismissed by Manfred, he had gone directly to the 
Princess's apartment with the alarm of what he had seen.  That 
excellent Lady, who no more than Manfred doubted of the reality of the 
vision, yet affected to treat it as a delirium of the servant.  
Willing, however, to save her Lord from any additional shock, and 
prepared by a series of griefs not to tremble at any accession to it, 
she determined to make herself the first sacrifice, if fate had marked 
the present hour for their destruction.  Dismissing the reluctant 
Matilda to her rest, who in vain sued for leave to accompany her 
mother, and attended only by her chaplain, Hippolita had visited the 
gallery and great chamber; and now with more serenity of soul than she 
had felt for many hours, she met her Lord, and assured him that the 
vision of the gigantic leg and foot was all a fable; and no doubt an 
impression made by fear, and the dark and dismal hour of the night, on 
the minds of his servants.  She and the chaplain had examined the 
chamber, and found everything in the usual order.

Manfred, though persuaded, like his wife, that the vision had been no 
work of fancy, recovered a little from the tempest of mind into which 
so many strange events had thrown him.  Ashamed, too, of his inhuman 
treatment of a Princess who returned every injury with new marks of 
tenderness and duty, he felt returning love forcing itself into his 
eyes; but not less ashamed of feeling remorse towards one against whom 
he was inwardly meditating a yet more bitter outrage, he curbed the 
yearnings of his heart, and did not dare to lean even towards pity.  
The next transition of his soul was to exquisite villainy.

Presuming on the unshaken submission of Hippolita, he flattered 
himself that she would not only acquiesce with patience to a divorce, 
but would obey, if it was his pleasure, in endeavouring to persuade 
Isabella to give him her hand - but ere he could indulge his horrid 
hope, he reflected that Isabella was not to be found.  Coming to 
himself, he gave orders that every avenue to the castle should be 
strictly guarded, and charged his domestics on pain of their lives to 
suffer nobody to pass out.  The young peasant, to whom he spoke 
favourably, he ordered to remain in a small chamber on the stairs, in 
which there was a pallet-bed, and the key of which he took away 
himself, telling the youth he would talk with him in the morning.  
Then dismissing his attendants, and bestowing a sullen kind of half-
nod on Hippolita, he retired to his own chamber.



CHAPTER II.



MATILDA, who by Hippolita's order had retired to her apartment, was 
ill-disposed to take any rest.  The shocking fate of her brother had 
deeply affected her.  She was surprised at not seeing Isabella; but 
the strange words which had fallen from her father, and his obscure 
menace to the Princess his wife, accompanied by the most furious 
behaviour, had filled her gentle mind with terror and alarm.  She 
waited anxiously for the return of Bianca, a young damsel that 
attended her, whom she had sent to learn what was become of Isabella.  
Bianca soon appeared, and informed her mistress of what she had 
gathered from the servants, that Isabella was nowhere to be found.  
She related the adventure of the young peasant who had been discovered 
in the vault, though with many simple additions from the incoherent 
accounts of the domestics; and she dwelt principally on the gigantic 
leg and foot which had been seen in the gallery-chamber.  This last 
circumstance had terrified Bianca so much, that she was rejoiced when 
Matilda told her that she would not go to rest, but would watch till 
the Princess should rise.

The young Princess wearied herself in conjectures on the flight of 
Isabella, and on the threats of Manfred to her mother.  "But what 
business could he have so urgent with the chaplain?" said Matilda, 
"Does he intend to have my brother's body interred privately in the 
chapel?"

"Oh, Madam!" said Bianca, "now I guess.  As you are become his 
heiress, he is impatient to have you married:  he has always been 
raving for more sons; I warrant he is now impatient for grandsons.  As 
sure as I live, Madam, I shall see you a bride at last. - Good madam, 
you won't cast off your faithful Bianca:  you won't put Donna Rosara 
over me now you are a great Princess."

"My poor Bianca," said Matilda, "how fast your thoughts amble!  I a 
great princess!  What hast thou seen in Manfred's behaviour since my 
brother's death that bespeaks any increase of tenderness to me?  No, 
Bianca; his heart was ever a stranger to me - but he is my father, and 
I must not complain.  Nay, if Heaven shuts my father's heart against 
me, it overpays my little merit in the tenderness of my mother - O 
that dear mother! yes, Bianca, 'tis there I feel the rugged temper of 
Manfred.  I can support his harshness to me with patience; but it 
wounds my soul when I am witness to his causeless severity towards 
her."

"Oh! Madam," said Bianca, "all men use their wives so, when they are 
weary of them."

"And yet you congratulated me but now," said Matilda, "when you 
fancied my father intended to dispose of me!"

"I would have you a great Lady," replied Bianca, "come what will.  I 
do not wish to see you moped in a convent, as you would be if you had 
your will, and if my Lady, your mother, who knows that a bad husband 
is better than no husband at all, did not hinder you. - Bless me! what 
noise is that!  St. Nicholas forgive me!  I was but in jest."

"It is the wind," said Matilda, "whistling through the battlements in 
the tower above:  you have heard it a thousand times."

"Nay," said Bianca, "there was no harm neither in what I said:  it is 
no sin to talk of matrimony - and so, Madam, as I was saying, if my 
Lord Manfred should offer you a handsome young Prince for a 
bridegroom, you would drop him a curtsey, and tell him you would 
rather take the veil?"

"Thank Heaven!  I am in no such danger," said Matilda:  "you know how 
many proposals for me he has rejected - "

"And you thank him, like a dutiful daughter, do you, Madam?  But come, 
Madam; suppose, to-morrow morning, he was to send for you to the great 
council chamber, and there you should find at his elbow a lovely young 
Prince, with large black eyes, a smooth white forehead, and manly 
curling locks like jet; in short, Madam, a young hero resembling the 
picture of the good Alfonso in the gallery, which you sit and gaze at 
for hours together - "

"Do not speak lightly of that picture," interrupted Matilda sighing; 
"I know the adoration with which I look at that picture is uncommon - 
but I am not in love with a coloured panel.  The character of that 
virtuous Prince, the veneration with which my mother has inspired me 
for his memory, the orisons which, I know not why, she has enjoined me 
to pour forth at his tomb, all have concurred to persuade me that 
somehow or other my destiny is linked with something relating to him."

"Lord, Madam! how should that be?" said Bianca; "I have always heard 
that your family was in no way related to his:  and I am sure I cannot 
conceive why my Lady, the Princess, sends you in a cold morning or a 
damp evening to pray at his tomb:  he is no saint by the almanack.  If 
you must pray, why does she not bid you address yourself to our great 
St. Nicholas?  I am sure he is the saint I pray to for a husband."

"Perhaps my mind would be less affected," said Matilda, "if my mother 
would explain her reasons to me:  but it is the mystery she observes, 
that inspires me with this - I know not what to call it.  As she never 
acts from caprice, I am sure there is some fatal secret at bottom - 
nay, I know there is:  in her agony of grief for my brother's death 
she dropped some words that intimated as much."

"Oh! dear Madam," cried Bianca, "what were they?"

"No," said Matilda, "if a parent lets fall a word, and wishes it 
recalled, it is not for a child to utter it."

"What! was she sorry for what she had said?" asked Bianca; "I am sure, 
Madam, you may trust me - "

"With my own little secrets when I have any, I may," said Matilda; 
"but never with my mother's:  a child ought to have no ears or eyes 
but as a parent directs."

"Well! to be sure, Madam, you were born to be a saint," said Bianca, 
"and there is no resisting one's vocation:  you will end in a convent 
at last.  But there is my Lady Isabella would not be so reserved to 
me:  she will let me talk to her of young men:  and when a handsome 
cavalier has come to the castle, she has owned to me that she wished 
your brother Conrad resembled him."

"Bianca," said the Princess, "I do not allow you to mention my friend 
disrespectfully.  Isabella is of a cheerful disposition, but her soul 
is pure as virtue itself.  She knows your idle babbling humour, and 
perhaps has now and then encouraged it, to divert melancholy, and 
enliven the solitude in which my father keeps us - "

"Blessed Mary!" said Bianca, starting, "there it is again!  Dear 
Madam, do you hear nothing? this castle is certainly haunted!"

"Peace!" said Matilda, "and listen!  I did think I heard a voice - but 
it must be fancy:  your terrors, I suppose, have infected me."

"Indeed! indeed!  Madam," said Bianca, half-weeping with agony, "I am 
sure I heard a voice."

"Does anybody lie in the chamber beneath?" said the Princess.

"Nobody has dared to lie there," answered Bianca, "since the great 
astrologer, that was your brother's tutor, drowned himself.  For 
certain, Madam, his ghost and the young Prince's are now met in the 
chamber below - for Heaven's sake let us fly to your mother's 
apartment!"

"I charge you not to stir," said Matilda.  "If they are spirits in 
pain, we may ease their sufferings by questioning them.  They can mean 
no hurt to us, for we have not injured them - and if they should, 
shall we be more safe in one chamber than in another?  Reach me my 
beads; we will say a prayer, and then speak to them."

"Oh! dear Lady, I would not speak to a ghost for the world!" cried 
Bianca.  As she said those words they heard the casement of the little 
chamber below Matilda's open.  They listened attentively, and in a few 
minutes thought they heard a person sing, but could not distinguish 
the words.

"This can be no evil spirit," said the Princess, in a low voice; "it 
is undoubtedly one of the family - open the window, and we shall know 
the voice."

"I dare not, indeed, Madam," said Bianca.

"Thou art a very fool," said Matilda, opening the window gently 
herself.  The noise the Princess made was, however, heard by the 
person beneath, who stopped; and they concluded had heard the casement 
open.

"Is anybody below?" said the Princess; "if there is, speak."

"Yes," said an unknown voice.

"Who is it?" said Matilda.

"A stranger," replied the voice.

"What stranger?" said she; "and how didst thou come there at this 
unusual hour, when all the gates of the castle are locked?"

"I am not here willingly," answered the voice.  "But pardon me, Lady, 
if I have disturbed your rest; I knew not that I was overheard.  Sleep 
had forsaken me; I left a restless couch, and came to waste the 
irksome hours with gazing on the fair approach of morning, impatient 
to be dismissed from this castle."

"Thy words and accents," said Matilda, "are of melancholy cast; if 
thou art unhappy, I pity thee.  If poverty afflicts thee, let me know 
it; I will mention thee to the Princess, whose beneficent soul ever 
melts for the distressed, and she will relieve thee."

"I am indeed unhappy," said the stranger; "and I know not what wealth 
is.  But I do not complain of the lot which Heaven has cast for me; I 
am young and healthy, and am not ashamed of owing my support to myself 
- yet think me not proud, or that I disdain your generous offers.  I 
will remember you in my orisons, and will pray for blessings on your 
gracious self and your noble mistress - if I sigh, Lady, it is for 
others, not for myself."

"Now I have it, Madam," said Bianca, whispering the Princess; "this is 
certainly the young peasant; and, by my conscience, he is in love - 
Well! this is a charming adventure! - do, Madam, let us sift him.  He 
does not know you, but takes you for one of my Lady Hippolita's 
women."

"Art thou not ashamed, Bianca!" said the Princess.   "What right have 
we to pry into the secrets of this young man's heart?  He seems 
virtuous and frank, and tells us he is unhappy.  Are those 
circumstances that authorise us to make a property of him?  How are we 
entitled to his confidence?"

"Lord, Madam! how little you know of love!" replied Bianca; "why, 
lovers have no pleasure equal to talking of their mistress."

"And would you have ME become a peasant's confidante?" said the 
Princess.

"Well, then, let me talk to him," said Bianca; "though I have the 
honour of being your Highness's maid of honour, I was not always so 
great.  Besides, if love levels ranks, it raises them too; I have a 
respect for any young man in love."

"Peace, simpleton!" said the Princess.  "Though he said he was 
unhappy, it does not follow that he must be in love.  Think of all 
that has happened to-day, and tell me if there are no misfortunes but 
what love causes. - Stranger," resumed the Princess, "if thy 
misfortunes have not been occasioned by thy own fault, and are within 
the compass of the Princess Hippolita's power to redress, I will take 
upon me to answer that she will be thy protectress.  When thou art 
dismissed from this castle, repair to holy father Jerome, at the 
convent adjoining to the church of St. Nicholas, and make thy story 
known to him, as far as thou thinkest meet.  He will not fail to 
inform the Princess, who is the mother of all that want her 
assistance.  Farewell; it is not seemly for me to hold farther 
converse with a man at this unwonted hour."

"May the saints guard thee, gracious Lady!" replied the peasant; "but 
oh! if a poor and worthless stranger might presume to beg a minute's 
audience farther; am I so happy? the casement is not shut; might I 
venture to ask - "

"Speak quickly," said Matilda; "the morning dawns apace:  should the 
labourers come into the fields and perceive us - What wouldst thou 
ask?"

"I know not how, I know not if I dare," said the Young stranger, 
faltering; "yet the humanity with which you have spoken to me 
emboldens - Lady! dare I trust you?"

"Heavens!" said Matilda, "what dost thou mean?  With what wouldst thou 
trust me?  Speak boldly, if thy secret is fit to be entrusted to a 
virtuous breast."

"I would ask," said the peasant, recollecting himself, "whether what I 
have heard from the domestics is true, that the Princess is missing 
from the castle?"

"What imports it to thee to know?" replied Matilda.  "Thy first words 
bespoke a prudent and becoming gravity.  Dost thou come hither to pry 
into the secrets of Manfred?  Adieu.  I have been mistaken in thee."  
Saying these words she shut the casement hastily, without giving the 
young man time to reply.

"I had acted more wisely," said the Princess to Bianca, with some 
sharpness, "if I had let thee converse with this peasant; his 
inquisitiveness seems of a piece with thy own."

"It is not fit for me to argue with your Highness," replied Bianca; 
"but perhaps the questions I should have put to him would have been 
more to the purpose than those you have been pleased to ask him."

"Oh! no doubt," said Matilda; "you are a very discreet personage!  May 
I know what YOU would have asked him?"

"A bystander often sees more of the game than those that play," 
answered Bianca.  "Does your Highness think, Madam, that this question 
about my Lady Isabella was the result of mere curiosity?  No, no, 
Madam, there is more in it than you great folks are aware of.  Lopez 
told me that all the servants believe this young fellow contrived my 
Lady Isabella's escape; now, pray, Madam, observe you and I both know 
that my Lady Isabella never much fancied the Prince your brother.  
Well! he is killed just in a critical minute - I accuse nobody.  A 
helmet falls from the moon - so, my Lord, your father says; but Lopez 
and all the servants say that this young spark is a magician, and 
stole it from Alfonso's tomb - "

"Have done with this rhapsody of impertinence," said Matilda.

"Nay, Madam, as you please," cried Bianca; "yet it is very particular 
though, that my Lady Isabella should be missing the very same day, and 
that this young sorcerer should be found at the mouth of the trap-
door.  I accuse nobody; but if my young Lord came honestly by his 
death - "

"Dare not on thy duty," said Matilda, "to breathe a suspicion on the 
purity of my dear Isabella's fame."

"Purity, or not purity," said Bianca, "gone she is - a stranger is 
found that nobody knows; you question him yourself; he tells you he is 
in love, or unhappy, it is the same thing - nay, he owned he was 
unhappy about others; and is anybody unhappy about another, unless 
they are in love with them? and at the very next word, he asks 
innocently, pour soul! if my Lady Isabella is missing."

"To be sure," said Matilda, "thy observations are not totally without 
foundation - Isabella's flight amazes me.  The curiosity of the 
stranger is very particular; yet Isabella never concealed a thought 
from me."

"So she told you," said Bianca, "to fish out your secrets; but who 
knows, Madam, but this stranger may be some Prince in disguise?  Do, 
Madam, let me open the window, and ask him a few questions."

"No," replied Matilda, "I will ask him myself, if he knows aught of 
Isabella; he is not worthy I should converse farther with him."  She 
was going to open the casement, when they heard the bell ring at the 
postern-gate of the castle, which is on the right hand of the tower, 
where Matilda lay.  This prevented the Princess from renewing the 
conversation with the stranger.

After continuing silent for some time, "I am persuaded," said she to 
Bianca, "that whatever be the cause of Isabella's flight it had no 
unworthy motive.  If this stranger was accessory to it, she must be 
satisfied with his fidelity and worth.  I observed, did not you, 
Bianca? that his words were tinctured with an uncommon infusion of 
piety.  It was no ruffian's speech; his phrases were becoming a man of 
gentle birth."

"I told you, Madam," said Bianca, "that I was sure he was some Prince 
in disguise."

"Yet," said Matilda, "if he was privy to her escape, how will you 
account for his not accompanying her in her flight? why expose himself 
unnecessarily and rashly to my father's resentment?"

"As for that, Madam," replied she, "if he could get from under the 
helmet, he will find ways of eluding your father's anger.  I do not 
doubt but he has some talisman or other about him."

"You resolve everything into magic," said Matilda; "but a man who has 
any intercourse with infernal spirits, does not dare to make use of 
those tremendous and holy words which he uttered.  Didst thou not 
observe with what fervour he vowed to remember ME to heaven in his 
prayers?  Yes; Isabella was undoubtedly convinced of his piety."

"Commend me to the piety of a young fellow and a damsel that consult 
to elope!" said Bianca.  "No, no, Madam, my Lady Isabella is of 
another guess mould than you take her for.  She used indeed to sigh 
and lift up her eyes in your company, because she knows you are a 
saint; but when your back was turned - "

"You wrong her," said Matilda; "Isabella is no hypocrite; she has a 
due sense of devotion, but never affected a call she has not.  On the 
contrary, she always combated my inclination for the cloister; and 
though I own the mystery she has made to me of her flight confounds 
me; though it seems inconsistent with the friendship between us; I 
cannot forget the disinterested warmth with which she always opposed 
my taking the veil.  She wished to see me married, though my dower 
would have been a loss to her and my brother's children.  For her sake 
I will believe well of this young peasant."

"Then you do think there is some liking between them," said Bianca.  
While she was speaking, a servant came hastily into the chamber and 
told the Princess that the Lady Isabella was found.

"Where?" said Matilda.

"She has taken sanctuary in St. Nicholas's church," replied the 
servant; "Father Jerome has brought the news himself; he is below with 
his Highness."

"Where is my mother?" said Matilda.

"She is in her own chamber, Madam, and has asked for you."

Manfred had risen at the first dawn of light, and gone to Hippolita's 
apartment, to inquire if she knew aught of Isabella.  While he was 
questioning her, word was brought that Jerome demanded to speak with 
him.  Manfred, little suspecting the cause of the Friar's arrival, and 
knowing he was employed by Hippolita in her charities, ordered him to 
be admitted, intending to leave them together, while he pursued his 
search after Isabella.

"Is your business with me or the Princess?" said Manfred.

"With both," replied the holy man.  "The Lady Isabella - "

"What of her?" interrupted Manfred, eagerly.

"Is at St. Nicholas's altar," replied Jerome.

"That is no business of Hippolita," said Manfred with confusion; "let 
us retire to my chamber, Father, and inform me how she came thither."

"No, my Lord," replied the good man, with an air of firmness and 
authority, that daunted even the resolute Manfred, who could not help 
revering the saint-like virtues of Jerome; "my commission is to both, 
and with your Highness's good-liking, in the presence of both I shall 
deliver it; but first, my Lord, I must interrogate the Princess, 
whether she is acquainted with the cause of the Lady Isabella's 
retirement from your castle."

"No, on my soul," said Hippolita; "does Isabella charge me with being 
privy to it?"

"Father,"  interrupted Manfred, "I pay due reverence to your holy 
profession; but I am sovereign here, and will allow no meddling priest 
to interfere in the affairs of my domestic.  If you have aught to say 
attend me to my chamber; I do not use to let my wife be acquainted 
with the secret affairs of my state; they are not within a woman's 
province."

"My Lord," said the holy man, "I am no intruder into the secrets of 
families.  My office is to promote peace, to heal divisions, to preach 
repentance, and teach mankind to curb their headstrong passions.  I 
forgive your Highness's uncharitable apostrophe; I know my duty, and 
am the minister of a mightier prince than Manfred.  Hearken to him who 
speaks through my organs."

Manfred trembled with rage and shame.  Hippolita's countenance 
declared her astonishment and impatience to know where this would end.  
Her silence more strongly spoke her observance of Manfred.

"The Lady Isabella," resumed Jerome, "commends herself to both your 
Highnesses; she thanks both for the kindness with which she has been 
treated in your castle:  she deplores the loss of your son, and her 
own misfortune in not becoming the daughter of such wise and noble 
Princes, whom she shall always respect as Parents; she prays for 
uninterrupted union and felicity between you" [Manfred's colour 
changed]:  "but as it is no longer possible for her to be allied to 
you, she entreats your consent to remain in sanctuary, till she can 
learn news of her father, or, by the certainty of his death, be at 
liberty, with the approbation of her guardians, to dispose of herself 
in suitable marriage."

"I shall give no such consent," said the Prince, "but insist on her 
return to the castle without delay:  I am answerable for her person to 
her guardians, and will not brook her being in any hands but my own."

"Your Highness will recollect whether that can any longer be proper," 
replied the Friar.

"I want no monitor," said Manfred, colouring; "Isabella's conduct 
leaves room for strange suspicions - and that young villain, who was 
at least the accomplice of her flight, if not the cause of it - "

"The cause!" interrupted Jerome; "was a YOUNG man the cause?"

"This is not to be borne!" cried Manfred.  "Am I to be bearded in my 
own palace by an insolent Monk?  Thou art privy, I guess, to their 
amours."

"I would pray to heaven to clear up your uncharitable surmises," said 
Jerome, "if your Highness were not satisfied in your conscience how 
unjustly you accuse me.  I do pray to heaven to pardon that 
uncharitableness:  and I implore your Highness to leave the Princess 
at peace in that holy place, where she is not liable to be disturbed 
by such vain and worldly fantasies as discourses of love from any 
man."

"Cant not to me," said Manfred, "but return and bring the Princess to 
her duty."

"It is my duty to prevent her return hither," said Jerome.  "She is 
where orphans and virgins are safest from the snares and wiles of this 
world; and nothing but a parent's authority shall take her thence."

"I am her parent," cried Manfred, "and demand her."

"She wished to have you for her parent," said the Friar; "but Heaven 
that forbad that connection has for ever dissolved all ties betwixt 
you:  and I announce to your Highness - "

"Stop! audacious man," said Manfred, "and dread my displeasure."

"Holy farther," said Hippolita, "it is your office to be no respecter 
of persons:  you must speak as your duty prescribes:  but it is my 
duty to hear nothing that it pleases not my Lord I should hear.  
Attend the Prince to his chamber.  I will retire to my oratory, and 
pray to the blessed Virgin to inspire you with her holy counsels, and 
to restore the heart of my gracious Lord to its wonted peace and 
gentleness."

"Excellent woman!" said the Friar.  "My Lord, I attend your pleasure."

Manfred, accompanied by the Friar, passed to his own apartment, where 
shutting the door, "I perceive, Father," said he, "that Isabella has 
acquainted you with my purpose.  Now hear my resolve, and obey.  
Reasons of state, most urgent reasons, my own and the safety of my 
people, demand that I should have a son.  It is in vain to expect an 
heir from Hippolita.  I have made choice of Isabella.  You must bring 
her back; and you must do more.  I know the influence you have with 
Hippolita:  her conscience is in your hands.  She is, I allow, a 
faultless woman:  her soul is set on heaven, and scorns the little 
grandeur of this world:  you can withdraw her from it entirely.  
Persuade her to consent to the dissolution of our marriage, and to 
retire into a monastery - she shall endow one if she will; and she 
shall have the means of being as liberal to your order as she or you 
can wish.  Thus you will divert the calamities that are hanging over 
our heads, and have the merit of saying the principality of Otranto 
from destruction.  You are a prudent man, and though the warmth of my 
temper betrayed me into some unbecoming expressions, I honour your 
virtue, and wish to be indebted to you for the repose of my life and 
the preservation of my family."

"The will of heaven be done!" said the Friar.  "I am but its worthless 
instrument.  It makes use of my tongue to tell thee, Prince, of thy 
unwarrantable designs.  The injuries of the virtuous Hippolita have 
mounted to the throne of pity.  By me thou art reprimanded for thy 
adulterous intention of repudiating her:  by me thou art warned not to 
pursue the incestuous design on thy contracted daughter.  Heaven that 
delivered her from thy fury, when the judgments so recently fallen on 
thy house ought to have inspired thee with other thoughts, will 
continue to watch over her.  Even I, a poor and despised Friar, am 
able to protect her from thy violence - I, sinner as I am, and 
uncharitably reviled by your Highness as an accomplice of I know not 
what amours, scorn the allurements with which it has pleased thee to 
tempt mine honesty.  I love my order; I honour devout souls; I respect 
the piety of thy Princess - but I will not betray the confidence she 
reposes in me, nor serve even the cause of religion by foul and sinful 
compliances - but forsooth! the welfare of the state depends on your 
Highness having a son!  Heaven mocks the short-sighted views of man.  
But yester-morn, whose house was so great, so flourishing as 
Manfred's? - where is young Conrad now? - My Lord, I respect your 
tears - but I mean not to check them - let them flow, Prince!  They 
will weigh more with heaven toward the welfare of thy subjects, than a 
marriage, which, founded on lust or policy, could never prosper.  The 
sceptre, which passed from the race of Alfonso to thine, cannot be 
preserved by a match which the church will never allow.  If it is the 
will of the Most High that Manfred's name must perish, resign 
yourself, my Lord, to its decrees; and thus deserve a crown that can 
never pass away.  Come, my Lord; I like this sorrow - let us return to 
the Princess:  she is not apprised of your cruel intentions; nor did I 
mean more than to alarm you.  You saw with what gentle patience, with 
what efforts of love, she heard, she rejected hearing, the extent of 
your guilt.  I know she longs to fold you in her arms, and assure you 
of her unalterable affection."

"Father," said the Prince, "you mistake my compunction:  true, I 
honour Hippolita's virtues; I think her a Saint; and wish it were for 
my soul's health to tie faster the knot that has united us - but alas! 
Father, you know not the bitterest of my pangs! it is some time that I 
have had scruples on the legality of our union:  Hippolita is related 
to me in the fourth degree - it is true, we had a dispensation:  but I 
have been informed that she had also been contracted to another.  This 
it is that sits heavy at my heart:  to this state of unlawful wedlock 
I impute the visitation that has fallen on me in the death of Conrad! 
- ease my conscience of this burden:  dissolve our marriage, and 
accomplish the work of godliness - which your divine exhortations have 
commenced in my soul."

How cutting was the anguish which the good man felt, when he perceived 
this turn in the wily Prince!  He trembled for Hippolita, whose ruin 
he saw was determined; and he feared if Manfred had no hope of 
recovering Isabella, that his impatience for a son would direct him to 
some other object, who might not be equally proof against the 
temptation of Manfred's rank.  For some time the holy man remained 
absorbed in thought.  At length, conceiving some hopes from delay, he 
thought the wisest conduct would be to prevent the Prince from 
despairing of recovering Isabella.  Her the Friar knew he could 
dispose, from her affection to Hippolita, and from the aversion she 
had expressed to him for Manfred's addresses, to second his views, 
till the censures of the church could be fulminated against a divorce.  
With this intention, as if struck with the Prince's scruples, he at 
length said:

"My Lord, I have been pondering on what your Highness has said; and if 
in truth it is delicacy of conscience that is the real motive of your 
repugnance to your virtuous Lady, far be it from me to endeavour to 
harden your heart.  The church is an indulgent mother:  unfold your 
griefs to her:  she alone can administer comfort to your soul, either 
by satisfying your conscience, or upon examination of your scruples, 
by setting you at liberty, and indulging you in the lawful means of 
continuing your lineage.  In the latter case, if the Lady Isabella can 
be brought to consent - "

Manfred, who concluded that he had either over-reached the good man, 
or that his first warmth had been but a tribute paid to appearance, 
was overjoyed at this sudden turn, and repeated the most magnificent 
promises, if he should succeed by the Friar's mediation.  The well-
meaning priest suffered him to deceive himself, fully determined to 
traverse his views, instead of seconding them.

"Since we now understand one another," resumed the Prince, "I expect, 
Father, that you satisfy me in one point.  Who is the youth that I 
found in the vault?  He must have been privy to Isabella's flight:  
tell me truly, is he her lover? or is he an agent for another's 
passion?  I have often suspected Isabella's indifference to my son:  a 
thousand circumstances crowd on my mind that confirm that suspicion.  
She herself was so conscious of it, that while I discoursed her in the 
gallery, she outran my suspicious, and endeavoured to justify herself 
from coolness to Conrad."

The Friar, who knew nothing of the youth, but what he had learnt 
occasionally from the Princess, ignorant what was become of him, and 
not sufficiently reflecting on the impetuosity of Manfred's temper, 
conceived that it might not be amiss to sow the seeds of jealousy in 
his mind:  they might be turned to some use hereafter, either by 
prejudicing the Prince against Isabella, if he persisted in that union 
or by diverting his attention to a wrong scent, and employing his 
thoughts on a visionary intrigue, prevent his engaging in any new 
pursuit.  With this unhappy policy, he answered in a manner to confirm 
Manfred in the belief of some connection between Isabella and the 
youth.  The Prince, whose passions wanted little fuel to throw them 
into a blaze, fell into a rage at the idea of what the Friar 
suggested.

 "I will fathom to the bottom of this intrigue," cried he; and 
quitting Jerome abruptly, with a command to remain there till his 
return, he hastened to the great hall of the castle, and ordered the 
peasant to be brought before him.

"Thou hardened young impostor!" said the Prince, as soon as he saw the 
youth; "what becomes of thy boasted veracity now? it was Providence, 
was it, and the light of the moon, that discovered the lock of the 
trap-door to thee?  Tell me, audacious boy, who thou art, and how long 
thou hast been acquainted with the Princess - and take care to answer 
with less equivocation than thou didst last night, or tortures shall 
wring the truth from thee."

The young man, perceiving that his share in the flight of the Princess 
was discovered, and concluding that anything he should say could no 
longer be of any service or detriment to her, replied -

"I am no impostor, my Lord, nor have I deserved opprobrious language.  
I answered to every question your Highness put to me last night with 
the same veracity that I shall speak now:  and that will not be from 
fear of your tortures, but because my soul abhors a falsehood.  Please 
to repeat your questions, my Lord; I am ready to give you all the 
satisfaction in my power."

"You know my questions," replied the Prince, "and only want time to 
prepare an evasion.  Speak directly; who art thou? and how long hast 
thou been known to the Princess?"

"I am a labourer at the next village," said the peasant; "my name is 
Theodore.  The Princess found me in the vault last night:  before that 
hour I never was in her presence."

"I may believe as much or as little as I please of this," said 
Manfred; "but I will hear thy own story before I examine into the 
truth of it.  Tell me, what reason did the Princess give thee for 
making her escape? thy life depends on thy answer."

"She told me," replied Theodore, "that she was on the brink of 
destruction, and that if she could not escape from the castle, she was 
in danger in a few moments of being made miserable for ever."

"And on this slight foundation, on a silly girl's report," said 
Manfred, "thou didst hazard my displeasure?"

"I fear no man's displeasure," said Theodore, "when a woman in 
distress puts herself under my protection."

During this examination, Matilda was going to the apartment of 
Hippolita.  At the upper end of the hall, where Manfred sat, was a 
boarded gallery with latticed windows, through which Matilda and 
Bianca were to pass.  Hearing her father's voice, and seeing the 
servants assembled round him, she stopped to learn the occasion.  The 
prisoner soon drew her attention:  the steady and composed manner in 
which he answered, and the gallantry of his last reply, which were the 
first words she heard distinctly, interested her in his flavour.  His 
person was noble, handsome, and commanding, even in that situation:  
but his countenance soon engrossed her whole care.

"Heavens!  Bianca," said the Princess softly, "do I dream? or is not 
that youth the exact resemblance of Alfonso's picture in the gallery?"

She could say no more, for her father's voice grew louder at every 
word.

"This bravado," said he, "surpasses all thy former insolence.  Thou 
shalt experience the wrath with which thou darest to trifle.  Seize 
him," continued Manfred, "and 'bind him - the first news the Princess 
hears of her champion shall be, that he has lost his head for her 
sake."

"The injustice of which thou art guilty towards me," said Theodore, 
"convinces me that I have done a good deed in delivering the Princess 
from thy tyranny.  May she be happy, whatever becomes of me!"

"This is a lover!" cried Manfred in a rage:  "a peasant within sight 
of death is not animated by such sentiments.  Tell me, tell me, rash 
boy, who thou art, or the rack shall force thy secret from thee."

"Thou hast threatened me with death already," said the youth, "for the 
truth I have told thee:  if that is all the encouragement I am to 
expect for sincerity, I am not tempted to indulge thy vain curiosity 
farther."

"Then thou wilt not speak?" said Manfred.

"I will not," replied he.

"Bear him away into the courtyard," said Manfred; "I will see his head 
this instant severed from his body."

Matilda fainted at hearing those words.  Bianca shrieked, and cried -

"Help! help! the Princess is dead!"  Manfred started at this 
ejaculation, and demanded what was the matter!  The young peasant, who 
heard it too, was struck with horror, and asked eagerly the same 
question; but Manfred ordered him to be hurried into the court, and 
kept there for execution, till he had informed himself of the cause of 
Bianca's shrieks.  When he learned the meaning, he treated it as a 
womanish panic, and ordering Matilda to be carried to her apartment, 
he rushed into the court, and calling for one of his guards, bade 
Theodore kneel down, and prepare to receive the fatal blow.

The undaunted youth received the bitter sentence with a resignation 
that touched every heart but Manfred's.  He wished earnestly to know 
the meaning of the words he had heard relating to the Princess; but 
fearing to exasperate the tyrant more against her, he desisted.  The 
only boon he deigned to ask was, that he might be permitted to have a 
confessor, and make his peace with heaven.  Manfred, who hoped by the 
confessor's means to come at the youth's history, readily granted his 
request; and being convinced that Father Jerome was now in his 
interest, he ordered him to be called and shrive the prisoner.  The 
holy man, who had little foreseen the catastrophe that his imprudence 
occasioned, fell on his knees to the Prince, and adjured him in the 
most solemn manner not to shed innocent blood.  He accused himself in 
the bitterest terms for his indiscretion, endeavoured to disculpate 
the youth, and left no method untried to soften the tyrant's rage.  
Manfred, more incensed than appeased by Jerome's intercession, whose 
retraction now made him suspect he had been imposed upon by both, 
commanded the Friar to do his duty, telling him he would not allow the 
prisoner many minutes for confession.

"Nor do I ask many, my Lord," said the unhappy young man.  "My sins, 
thank heaven, have not been numerous; nor exceed what might be 
expected at my years.  Dry your tears, good Father, and let us 
despatch.  This is a bad world; nor have I had cause to leave it with 
regret."

"Oh wretched youth!" said Jerome; "how canst thou bear the sight of me 
with patience?  I am thy murderer! it is I have brought this dismal 
hour upon thee!"

"I forgive thee from my soul," said the youth, "as I hope heaven will 
pardon me.  Hear my confession, Father; and give me thy blessing."

"How can I prepare thee for thy passage as I ought?" said Jerome.  
"Thou canst not be saved without pardoning thy foes - and canst thou 
forgive that impious man there?"

"I can," said Theodore; "I do."

"And does not this touch thee, cruel Prince?" said the Friar.

"I sent for thee to confess him," said Manfred, sternly; "not to plead 
for him.  Thou didst first incense me against him - his blood be upon 
thy head!"

"It will! it will!" said the good main, in an agony of sorrow.  "Thou 
and I must never hope to go where this blessed youth is going!"

"Despatch!" said Manfred; "I am no more to be moved by the whining of 
priests than by the shrieks of women."

"What!" said the youth; "is it possible that my fate could have 
occasioned what I heard!  Is the Princess then again in thy power?"

"Thou dost but remember me of my wrath," said Manfred.  "Prepare thee, 
for this moment is thy last."

The youth, who felt his indignation rise, and who was touched with the 
sorrow which he saw he had infused into all the spectators, as well as 
into the Friar, suppressed his emotions, and putting off his doublet, 
and unbuttoning, his collar, knelt down to his prayers.  As he 
stooped, his shirt slipped down below his shoulder, and discovered the 
mark of a bloody arrow.

"Gracious heaven!" cried the holy man, starting; "what do I see?  It 
is my child! my Theodore!"

The passions that ensued must be conceived; they cannot be painted.  
The tears of the assistants were suspended by wonder, rather than 
stopped by joy.  They seemed to inquire in the eyes of their Lord what 
they ought to feel.  Surprise, doubt, tenderness, respect, succeeded 
each other in the countenance of the youth.  He received with modest 
submission the effusion of the old man's tears and embraces.  Yet 
afraid of giving a loose to hope, and suspecting from what had passed 
the inflexibility of Manfred's temper, he cast a glance towards the 
Prince, as if to say, canst thou be unmoved at such a scene as this?

Manfred's heart was capable of being touched.  He forgot his anger in 
his astonishment; yet his pride forbad his owning himself affected.  
He even doubted whether this discovery was not a contrivance of the 
Friar to save the youth.

"What may this mean?" said he.  "How can he be thy son?  Is it 
consistent with thy profession or reputed sanctity to avow a peasant's 
offspring for the fruit of thy irregular amours!"

"Oh, God!" said the holy man, "dost thou question his being mine?  
Could I feel the anguish I do if I were not his father?  Spare him! 
good Prince! spare him! and revile me as thou pleasest."

"Spare him! spare him!" cried the attendants; "for this good man's 
sake!"

"Peace!" said Manfred, sternly.  "I must know more ere I am disposed 
to pardon.  A Saint's bastard may be no saint himself."

"Injurious Lord!" said Theodore, "add not insult to cruelty.  If I am 
this venerable man's son, though no Prince, as thou art, know the 
blood that flows in my veins - "

"Yes," said the Friar, interrupting him, "his blood is noble; nor is 
he that abject thing, my Lord, you speak him.  He is my lawful son, 
and Sicily can boast of few houses more ancient than that of 
Falconara.  But alas! my Lord, what is blood! what is nobility!  We 
are all reptiles, miserable, sinful creatures.  It is piety alone that 
can distinguish us from the dust whence we sprung, and whither we must 
return."

"Truce to your sermon," said Manfred; "you forget you are no longer 
Friar Jerome, but the Count of Falconara.  Let me know your history; 
you will have time to moralise hereafter, if you should not happen to 
obtain the grace of that sturdy criminal there."

"Mother of God!" said the Friar, "is it possible my Lord can refuse a 
father the life of his only, his long-lost, child!  Trample me, my 
Lord, scorn, afflict me, accept my life for his, but spare my son!"

"Thou canst feel, then," said Manfred, "what it is to lose an only 
son!  A little hour ago thou didst preach up resignation to me:  MY 
house, if fate so pleased, must perish - but the Count of Falconara - 
"

"Alas! my Lord," said Jerome, "I confess I have offended; but 
aggravate not an old man's sufferings!  I boast not of my family, nor 
think of such vanities - it is nature, that pleads for this boy; it is 
the memory of the dear woman that bore him.  Is she, Theodore, is she 
dead?"

"Her soul has long been with the blessed," said Theodore.

"Oh! how?" cried Jerome, "tell me - no - she is happy!  Thou art all 
my care now! - Most dread Lord! will you - will you grant me my poor 
boy's life?"

"Return to thy convent," answered Manfred; "conduct the Princess 
hither; obey me in what else thou knowest; and I promise thee the life 
of thy son."

"Oh! my Lord," said Jerome, "is my honesty the price I must pay for 
this dear youth's safety?"

"For me!" cried Theodore.  "Let me die a thousand deaths, rather than 
stain thy conscience.  What is it the tyrant would exact of thee?  Is 
the Princess still safe from his power?  Protect her, thou venerable 
old man; and let all the weight of his wrath fall on me."

Jerome endeavoured to check the impetuosity of the youth; and ere 
Manfred could reply, the trampling of horses was heard, and a brazen 
trumpet, which hung without the gate of the castle, was suddenly 
sounded.  At the same instant the sable plumes on the enchanted 
helmet, which still remained at the other end of the court, were 
tempestuously agitated, and nodded thrice, as if bowed by some 
invisible wearer.



CHAPTER III.



MANFRED'S heart misgave him when he beheld the plumage on the 
miraculous casque shaken in concert with the sounding of the brazen 
trumpet.

"Father!" said he to Jerome, whom he now ceased to treat as Count of 
Falconara, "what mean these portents?  If I have offended - " the 
plumes were shaken with greater violence than before.

"Unhappy Prince that I am," cried Manfred.  "Holy Father! will you not 
assist me with your prayers?"

"My Lord," replied Jerome, "heaven is no doubt displeased with your 
mockery of its servants.  Submit yourself to the church; and cease to 
persecute her ministers.  Dismiss this innocent youth; and learn to 
respect the holy character I wear.  Heaven will not be trifled with:  
you see - " the trumpet sounded again.

"I acknowledge I have been too hasty," said Manfred.  "Father, do you 
go to the wicket, and demand who is at the gate."

"Do you grant me the life of Theodore?" replied the Friar.

"I do," said Manfred; "but inquire who is without!"

Jerome, falling on the neck of his son, discharged a flood of tears, 
that spoke the fulness of his soul.

"You promised to go to the gate," said Manfred.

"I thought," replied the Friar, "your Highness would excuse my 
thanking you first in this tribute of my heart."

"Go, dearest Sir," said Theodore; "obey the Prince.  I do not deserve 
that you should delay his satisfaction for me."

Jerome, inquiring who was without, was answered, "A Herald."

"From whom?" said he.

"From the Knight of the Gigantic Sabre," said the Herald; "and I must 
speak with the usurper of Otranto."

Jerome returned to the Prince, and did not fail to repeat the message 
in the very words it had been uttered.  The first sounds struck 
Manfred with terror; but when he heard himself styled usurper, his 
rage rekindled, and all his courage revived.

"Usurper! - insolent villain!" cried he; "who dares to question my 
title?  Retire, Father; this is no business for Monks:  I will meet 
this presumptuous man myself.  Go to your convent and prepare the 
Princess's return.  Your son shall be a hostage for your fidelity:  
his life depends on your obedience."

"Good heaven! my Lord," cried Jerome, "your Highness did but this 
instant freely pardon my child - have you so soon forgot the 
interposition of heaven?"

"Heaven," replied Manfred, "does not send Heralds to question the 
title of a lawful Prince.  I doubt whether it even notifies its will 
through Friars - but that is your affair, not mine.  At present you 
know my pleasure; and it is not a saucy Herald that shall save your 
son, if you do not return with the Princess."

It was in vain for the holy man to reply.  Manfred commanded him to be 
conducted to the postern-gate, and shut out from the castle.  And he 
ordered some of his attendants to carry Theodore to the top of the 
black tower, and guard him strictly; scarce permitting the father and 
son to exchange a hasty embrace at parting.  He then withdrew to the 
hall, and seating himself in princely state, ordered the Herald to be 
admitted to his presence.

"Well! thou insolent!" said the Prince, "what wouldst thou with me?"

"I come," replied he, "to thee, Manfred, usurper of the principality 
of Otranto, from the renowned and invincible Knight, the Knight of the 
Gigantic Sabre:  in the name of his Lord, Frederic, Marquis of 
Vicenza, he demands the Lady Isabella, daughter of that Prince, whom 
thou hast basely and traitorously got into thy power, by bribing her 
false guardians during his absence; and he requires thee to resign the 
principality of Otranto, which thou hast usurped from the said Lord 
Frederic, the nearest of blood to the last rightful Lord, Alfonso the 
Good.  If thou dost not instantly comply with these just demands, he 
defies thee to single combat to the last extremity."  And so saying 
the Herald cast down his warder.

"And where is this braggart who sends thee?" said Manfred.

"At the distance of a league," said the Herald:  "he comes to make 
good his Lord's claim against thee, as he is a true knight, and thou 
an usurper and ravisher."

Injurious as this challenge was, Manfred reflected that it was not his 
interest to provoke the Marquis.  He knew how well founded the claim 
of Frederic was; nor was this the first time he had heard of it.  
Frederic's ancestors had assumed the style of Princes of Otranto, from 
the death of Alfonso the Good without issue; but Manfred, his father, 
and grandfather, had been too powerful for the house of Vicenza to 
dispossess them.  Frederic, a martial and amorous young Prince, had 
married a beautiful young lady, of whom he was enamoured, and who had 
died in childbed of Isabella.  Her death affected him so much that he 
had taken the cross and gone to the Holy Land, where he was wounded in 
an engagement against the infidels, made prisoner, and reported to be 
dead.  When the news reached Manfred's ears, he bribed the guardians 
of the Lady Isabella to deliver her up to him as a bride for his son 
Conrad, by which alliance he had proposed to unite the claims of the 
two houses.  This motive, on Conrad's death, had co-operated to make 
him so suddenly resolve on espousing her himself; and the same 
reflection determined him now to endeavour at obtaining the consent of 
Frederic to this marriage.  A like policy inspired him with the 
thought of inviting Frederic's champion into the castle, lest he 
should be informed of Isabella's flight, which he strictly enjoined 
his domestics not to disclose to any of the Knight's retinue.

"Herald," said Manfred, as soon as he had digested these reflections, 
"return to thy master, and tell him, ere we liquidate our differences 
by the sword, Manfred would hold some converse with him.  Bid him 
welcome to my castle, where by my faith, as I am a true Knight, he 
shall have courteous reception, and full security for himself and 
followers.  If we cannot adjust our quarrel by amicable means, I swear 
he shall depart in safety, and shall have full satisfaction according 
to the laws of arms:  So help me God and His holy Trinity!"

The Herald made three obeisances and retired.

During this interview Jerome's mind was agitated by a thousand 
contrary passions.  He trembled for the life of his son, and his first 
thought was to persuade Isabella to return to the castle.  Yet he was 
scarce less alarmed at the thought of her union with Manfred.  He 
dreaded Hippolita's unbounded submission to the will of her Lord; and 
though he did not doubt but he could alarm her piety not to consent to 
a divorce, if he could get access to her; yet should Manfred discover 
that the obstruction came from him, it might be equally fatal to 
Theodore.  He was impatient to know whence came the Herald, who with 
so little management had questioned the title of Manfred:  yet he did 
not dare absent himself from the convent, lest Isabella should leave 
it, and her flight be imputed to him.  He returned disconsolately to 
the monastery, uncertain on what conduct to resolve.  A Monk, who met 
him in the porch and observed his melancholy air, said -

"Alas! brother, is it then true that we have lost our excellent 
Princess Hippolita?"

The holy man started, and cried, "What meanest thou, brother?  I come 
this instant from the castle, and left her in perfect health."

"Martelli," replied the other Friar, "passed by the convent but a 
quarter of an hour ago on his way from the castle, and reported that 
her Highness was dead.  All our brethren are gone to the chapel to 
pray for her happy transit to a better life, and willed me to wait thy 
arrival.  They know thy holy attachment to that good Lady, and are 
anxious for the affliction it will cause in thee - indeed we have all 
reason to weep; she was a mother to our house.  But this life is but a 
pilgrimage; we must not murmur - we shall all follow her!  May our end 
be like hers!"

 "Good brother, thou dreamest," said Jerome.  "I tell thee I come from 
the castle, and left the Princess well.  Where is the Lady Isabella?"

"Poor Gentlewoman!" replied the Friar; "I told her the sad news, and 
offered her spiritual comfort.  I reminded her of the transitory 
condition of mortality, and advised her to take the veil:  I quoted 
the example of the holy Princess Sanchia of Arragon."

"Thy zeal was laudable," said Jerome, impatiently; "but at present it 
was unnecessary:  Hippolita is well - at least I trust in the Lord she 
is; I heard nothing to the contrary - yet, methinks, the Prince's 
earnestness - Well, brother, but where is the Lady Isabella?"

"I know not," said the Friar; "she wept much, and said she would 
retire to her chamber."

Jerome left his comrade abruptly, and hastened to the Princess, but 
she was not in her chamber.  He inquired of the domestics of the 
convent, but could learn no news of her.  He searched in vain 
throughout the monastery and the church, and despatched messengers 
round the neighbourhood, to get intelligence if she had been seen; but 
to no purpose.  Nothing could equal the good man's perplexity.  He 
judged that Isabella, suspecting Manfred of having precipitated his 
wife's death, had taken the alarm, and withdrawn herself to some more 
secret place of concealment.  This new flight would probably carry the 
Prince's fury to the height.  The report of Hippolita's death, though 
it seemed almost incredible, increased his consternation; and though 
Isabella's escape bespoke her aversion of Manfred for a husband, 
Jerome could feel no comfort from it, while it endangered the life of 
his son.  He determined to return to the castle, and made several of 
his brethren accompany him to attest his innocence to Manfred, and, if 
necessary, join their intercession with his for Theodore.

The Prince, in the meantime, had passed into the court, and ordered 
the gates of the castle to be flung open for the reception of the 
stranger Knight and his train.  In a few minutes the cavalcade 
arrived.  First came two harbingers with wands.  Next a herald, 
followed by two pages and two trumpets.  Then a hundred foot-guards.  
These were attended by as many horse.  After them fifty footmen, 
clothed in scarlet and black, the colours of the Knight.  Then a led 
horse.  Two heralds on each side of a gentleman on horseback bearing a 
banner with the arms of Vicenza and Otranto quarterly - a circumstance 
that much offended Manfred - but he stifled his resentment.  Two more 
pages.  The Knight's confessor telling his beads.  Fifty more footmen 
clad as before.  Two Knights habited in complete armour, their beavers 
down, comrades to the principal Knight.  The squires of the two 
Knights, carrying their shields and devices.  The Knight's own squire.  
A hundred gentlemen bearing an enormous sword, and seeming to faint 
under the weight of it.  The Knight himself on a chestnut steed, in 
complete armour, his lance in the rest, his face entirely concealed by 
his vizor, which was surmounted by a large plume of scarlet and black 
feathers.  Fifty foot-guards with drums and trumpets closed the 
procession, which wheeled off to the right and left to make room for 
the principal Knight.

As soon as he approached the gate he stopped; and the herald 
advancing, read again the words of the challenge.  Manfred's eyes were 
fixed on the gigantic sword, and he scarce seemed to attend to the 
cartel:  but his attention was soon diverted by a tempest of wind that 
rose behind him.  He turned and beheld the Plumes of the enchanted 
helmet agitated in the same extraordinary manner as before.  It 
required intrepidity like Manfred's not to sink under a concurrence of 
circumstances that seemed to announce his fate.  Yet scorning in the 
presence of strangers to betray the courage he had always manifested, 
he said boldly -

"Sir Knight, whoever thou art, I bid thee welcome.  If thou art of 
mortal mould, thy valour shall meet its equal:  and if thou art a true 
Knight, thou wilt scorn to employ sorcery to carry thy point.  Be 
these omens from heaven or hell, Manfred trusts to the righteousness 
of his cause and to the aid of St. Nicholas, who has ever protected 
his house.  Alight, Sir Knight, and repose thyself.  To-morrow thou 
shalt have a fair field, and heaven befriend the juster side!"

The Knight made no reply, but dismounting, was conducted by Manfred to 
the great hall of the castle.  As they traversed the court, the Knight 
stopped to gaze on the miraculous casque; and kneeling down, seemed to 
pray inwardly for some minutes.  Rising, he made a sign to the Prince 
to lead on.  As soon as they entered the hall, Manfred proposed to the 
stranger to disarm, but the Knight shook his head in token of refusal.

"Sir Knight," said Manfred, "this is not courteous, but by my good 
faith I will not cross thee, nor shalt thou have cause to complain of 
the Prince of Otranto.  No treachery is designed on my part; I hope 
none is intended on thine; here take my gage" (giving him his ring):  
"your friends and you shall enjoy the laws of hospitality.  Rest here 
until refreshments are brought.  I will but give orders for the 
accommodation of your train, and return to you."  The three Knights 
bowed as accepting his courtesy.  Manfred directed the stranger's 
retinue to be conducted to an adjacent hospital, founded by the 
Princess Hippolita for the reception of pilgrims.  As they made the 
circuit of the court to return towards the gate, the gigantic sword 
burst from the supporters, and falling to the ground opposite to the 
helmet, remained immovable.  Manfred, almost hardened to preternatural 
appearances, surmounted the shock of this new prodigy; and returning 
to the hall, where by this time the feast was ready, he invited his 
silent guests to take their places.  Manfred, however ill his heart 
was at ease, endeavoured to inspire the company with mirth.  He put 
several questions to them, but was answered only by signs.  They 
raised their vizors but sufficiently to feed themselves, and that 
sparingly.

"Sirs" said the Prince, "ye are the first guests I ever treated within 
these walls who scorned to hold any intercourse with me:  nor has it 
oft been customary, I ween, for princes to hazard their state and 
dignity against strangers and mutes.  You say you come in the name of 
Frederic of Vicenza; I have ever heard that he was a gallant and 
courteous Knight; nor would he, I am bold to say, think it beneath him 
to mix in social converse with a Prince that is his equal, and not 
unknown by deeds in arms.  Still ye are silent - well! be it as it may 
- by the laws of hospitality and chivalry ye are masters under this 
roof:  ye shall do your pleasure.  But come, give me a goblet of wine; 
ye will not refuse to pledge me to the healths of your fair 
mistresses."

The principal Knight sighed and crossed himself, and was rising from 
the board.

"Sir Knight," said Manfred, "what I said was but in sport.  I shall 
constrain you in nothing:  use your good liking.  Since mirth is not 
your mood, let us be sad.  Business may hit your fancies better.  Let 
us withdraw, and hear if what I have to unfold may be better relished 
than the vain efforts I have made for your pastime."

Manfred then conducting the three Knights into an inner chamber, shut 
the door, and inviting them to be seated, began thus, addressing 
himself to the chief personage:-

"You come, Sir Knight, as I understand, in the name of the Marquis of 
Vicenza, to re-demand the Lady Isabella, his daughter, who has been 
contracted in the face of Holy Church to my son, by the consent of her 
legal guardians; and to require me to resign my dominions to your 
Lord, who gives himself for the nearest of blood to Prince Alfonso, 
whose soul God rest!  I shall speak to the latter article of your 
demands first.  You must know, your Lord knows, that I enjoy the 
principality of Otranto from my father, Don Manuel, as he received it 
from his father, Don Ricardo.  Alfonso, their predecessor, dying 
childless in the Holy Land, bequeathed his estates to my grandfather, 
Don Ricardo, in consideration of his faithful services."  The stranger 
shook his head.

"Sir Knight," said Manfred, warmly, "Ricardo was a valiant and upright 
man; he was a pious man; witness his munificent foundation of the 
adjoining church and two converts.  He was peculiarly patronised by 
St. Nicholas - my grandfather was incapable - I say, Sir, Don Ricardo 
was incapable - excuse me, your interruption has disordered me.  I 
venerate the memory of my grandfather.  Well, Sirs, he held this 
estate; he held it by his good sword and by the favour of St. Nicholas 
- so did my father; and so, Sirs, will I, come what come will.  But 
Frederic, your Lord, is nearest in blood.  I have consented to put my 
title to the issue of the sword.  Does that imply a vicious title?  I 
might have asked, where is Frederic your Lord?  Report speaks him dead 
in captivity.  You say, your actions say, he lives - I question it not 
- I might, Sirs, I might - but I do not.  Other Princes would bid 
Frederic take his inheritance by force, if he can:  they would not 
stake their dignity on a single combat:  they would not submit it to 
the decision of unknown mutes! - pardon me, gentlemen, I am too warm:  
but suppose yourselves in my situation:  as ye are stout Knights, 
would it not move your choler to have your own and the honour of your 
ancestors called in question?"

"But to the point.  Ye require me to deliver up the Lady Isabella.  
Sirs, I must ask if ye are authorised to receive her?"

The Knight nodded.

"Receive her," continued Manfred; "well, you are authorised to receive 
her, but, gentle Knight, may I ask if you have full powers?"

The Knight nodded.

"'Tis well," said Manfred; "then hear what I have to offer.  Ye see, 
gentlemen, before you, the most unhappy of men!" (he began to weep); 
"afford me your compassion; I am entitled to it, indeed I am.  Know, I 
have lost my only hope, my joy, the support of my house - Conrad died 
yester morning."

The Knights discovered signs of surprise.

"Yes, Sirs, fate has disposed of my son.  Isabella is at liberty."

"Do you then restore her?" cried the chief Knight, breaking silence.

"Afford me your patience," said Manfred.  "I rejoice to find, by this 
testimony of your goodwill, that this matter may be adjusted without 
blood.  It is no interest of mine dictates what little I have farther 
to say.  Ye behold in me a man disgusted with the world:  the loss of 
my son has weaned me from earthly cares.  Power and greatness have no 
longer any charms in my eyes.  I wished to transmit the sceptre I had 
received from my ancestors with honour to my son - but that is over!  
Life itself is so indifferent to me, that I accepted your defiance 
with joy.  A good Knight cannot go to the grave with more satisfaction 
than when falling in his vocation:  whatever is the will of heaven, I 
submit; for alas! Sirs, I am a man of many sorrows.  Manfred is no 
object of envy, but no doubt you are acquainted with my story."

The Knight made signs of ignorance, and seemed curious to have Manfred 
proceed.

"Is it possible, Sirs," continued the Prince, "that my story should be 
a secret to you?  Have you heard nothing relating to me and the 
Princess Hippolita?"

They shook their heads.

"No!  Thus, then, Sirs, it is.  You think me ambitious:  ambition, 
alas! is composed of more rugged materials.  If I were ambitious, I 
should not for so many years have been a prey to all the hell of 
conscientious scruples.  But I weary your patience:  I will be brief.  
Know, then, that I have long been troubled in mind on my union with 
the Princess Hippolita.  Oh! Sirs, if ye were acquainted with that 
excellent woman! if ye knew that I adore her like a mistress, and 
cherish her as a friend - but man was not born for perfect happiness!  
She shares my scruples, and with her consent I have brought this 
matter before the church, for we are related within the forbidden 
degrees.  I expect every hour the definitive sentence that must 
separate us for ever - I am sure you feel for me - I see you do - 
pardon these tears!"

The Knights gazed on each other, wondering where this would end.

Manfred continued -

"The death of my son betiding while my soul was under this anxiety, I 
thought of nothing but resigning my dominions, and retiring for ever 
from the sight of mankind.  My only difficulty was to fix on a 
successor, who would be tender of my people, and to dispose of the 
Lady Isabella, who is dear to me as my own blood.  I was willing to 
restore the line of Alfonso, even in his most distant kindred.  And 
though, pardon me, I am satisfied it was his will that Ricardo's 
lineage should take place of his own relations; yet where was I to 
search for those relations?  I knew of none but Frederic, your Lord; 
he was a captive to the infidels, or dead; and were he living, and at 
home, would he quit the flourishing State of Vicenza for the 
inconsiderable principality of Otranto?  If he would not, could I bear 
the thought of seeing a hard, unfeeling, Viceroy set over my poor 
faithful people? for, Sirs, I love my people, and thank heaven am 
beloved by them.  But ye will ask whither tends this long discourse?  
Briefly, then, thus, Sirs.  Heaven in your arrival seems to point out 
a remedy for these difficulties and my misfortunes.  The Lady Isabella 
is at liberty; I shall soon be so.  I would submit to anything for the 
good of my people.  Were it not the best, the only way to extinguish 
the feuds between our families, if I was to take the Lady Isabella to 
wife?  You start.  But though Hippolita's virtues will ever be dear to 
me, a Prince must not consider himself; he is born for his people."  A 
servant at that instant entering the chamber apprised Manfred that 
Jerome and several of his brethren demanded immediate access to him.

The Prince, provoked at this interruption, and fearing that the Friar 
would discover to the strangers that Isabella had taken sanctuary, was 
going to forbid Jerome's entrance.  But recollecting that he was 
certainly arrived to notify the Princess's return, Manfred began to 
excuse himself to the Knights for leaving them for a few moments, but 
was prevented by the arrival of the Friars.  Manfred angrily 
reprimanded them for their intrusion, and would have forced them back 
from the chamber; but Jerome was too much agitated to be repulsed.  He 
declared aloud the flight of Isabella, with protestations of his own 
innocence.

Manfred, distracted at the news, and not less at its coming to the 
knowledge of the strangers, uttered nothing but incoherent sentences, 
now upbraiding the Friar, now apologising to the Knights, earnest to 
know what was become of Isabella, yet equally afraid of their knowing; 
impatient to pursue her, yet dreading to have them join in the 
pursuit.  He offered to despatch messengers in quest of her, but the 
chief Knight, no longer keeping silence, reproached Manfred in bitter 
terms for his dark and ambiguous dealing, and demanded the cause of 
Isabella's first absence from the castle.  Manfred, casting a stern 
look at Jerome, implying a command of silence, pretended that on 
Conrad's death he had placed her in sanctuary until he could determine 
how to dispose of her.  Jerome, who trembled for his son's life, did 
not dare contradict this falsehood, but one of his brethren, not under 
the same anxiety, declared frankly that she had fled to their church 
in the preceding night.  The Prince in vain endeavoured to stop this 
discovery, which overwhelmed him with shame and confusion.  The 
principal stranger, amazed at the contradictions he heard, and more 
than half persuaded that Manfred had secreted the Princess, 
notwithstanding the concern he expressed at her flight, rushing to the 
door, said -

"Thou traitor Prince!  Isabella shall be found."

Manfred endeavoured to hold him, but the other Knights assisting their 
comrade, he broke from the Prince, and hastened into the court, 
demanding his attendants.  Manfred, finding it vain to divert him from 
the pursuit, offered to accompany him and summoning his attendants, 
and taking Jerome and some of the Friars to guide them, they issued 
from the castle; Manfred privately giving orders to have the Knight's 
company secured, while to the knight he affected to despatch a 
messenger to require their assistance.

The company had no sooner quitted the castle than Matilda, who felt 
herself deeply interested for the young peasant, since she had seen 
him condemned to death in the hall, and whose thoughts had been taken 
up with concerting measures to save him, was informed by some of the 
female attendants that Manfred had despatched all his men various ways 
in pursuit of Isabella.  He had in his hurry given this order in 
general terms, not meaning to extend it to the guard he had set upon 
Theodore, but forgetting it.  The domestics, officious to obey so 
peremptory a Prince, and urged by their own curiosity and love of 
novelty to join in any precipitate chase, had to a man left the 
castle.  Matilda disengaged herself from her women, stole up to the 
black tower, and unbolting the door, presented herself to the 
astonished Theodore.

"Young man," said she, "though filial duty and womanly modesty condemn 
the step I am taking, yet holy charity, surmounting all other ties, 
justifies this act.  Fly; the doors of thy prison are open:  my father 
and his domestics are absent; but they may soon return.  Be gone in 
safety; and may the angels of heaven direct thy course!"

"Thou art surely one of those angels!" said the enraptured Theodore:  
"none but a blessed saint could speak, could act - could look - like 
thee.  May I not know the name of my divine protectress?  Methought 
thou namedst thy father.  Is it possible?  Can Manfred's blood feel 
holy pity!  Lovely Lady, thou answerest not.  But how art thou here 
thyself?  Why dost thou neglect thy own safety, and waste a thought on 
a wretch like Theodore?  Let us fly together:  the life thou bestowest 
shall be dedicated to thy defence."

"Alas! thou mistakest," said Matilda, signing:  "I am Manfred's 
daughter, but no dangers await me."

"Amazement!" said Theodore; "but last night I blessed myself for 
yielding thee the service thy gracious compassion so charitably 
returns me now."

"Still thou art in an error," said the Princess; "but this is no time 
for explanation.  Fly, virtuous youth, while it is in my power to save 
thee:  should my father return, thou and I both should indeed have 
cause to tremble."

"How!" said Theodore; "thinkest thou, charming maid, that I will 
accept of life at the hazard of aught calamitous to thee?  Better I 
endured a thousand deaths."

"I run no risk," said Matilda, "but by thy delay.  Depart; it cannot 
be known that I have assisted thy flight."

"Swear by the saints above," said Theodore, "that thou canst not be 
suspected; else here I vow to await whatever can befall me."

"Oh! thou art too generous," said Matilda; "but rest assured that no 
suspicion can alight on me."

"Give me thy beauteous hand in token that thou dost not deceive me," 
said Theodore; "and let me bathe it with the warm tears of gratitude."

"Forbear!" said the Princess; "this must not be."

"Alas!" said Theodore, "I have never known but calamity until this 
hour - perhaps shall never know other fortune again:  suffer the 
chaste raptures of holy gratitude:  'tis my soul would print its 
effusions on thy hand."

"Forbear, and be gone," said Matilda.  "How would Isabella approve of 
seeing thee at my feet?"

"Who is Isabella?" said the young man with surprise.

"Ah, me!  I fear," said the Princess, "I am serving a deceitful one.  
Hast thou forgot thy curiosity this morning?"

"Thy looks, thy actions, all thy beauteous self seem an emanation of 
divinity," said Theodore; "but thy words are dark and mysterious.  
Speak, Lady; speak to thy servant's comprehension."

"Thou understandest but too well!" said Matilda; "but once more I 
command thee to be gone:  thy blood, which I may preserve, will be on 
my head, if I waste the time in vain discourse."

"I go, Lady," said Theodore, "because it is thy will, and because I 
would not bring the grey hairs of my father with sorrow to the grave.  
Say but, adored Lady, that I have thy gentle pity."

"Stay," said Matilda; "I will conduct thee to the subterraneous vault 
by which Isabella escaped; it will lead thee to the church of St. 
Nicholas, where thou mayst take sanctuary."

"What!" said Theodore, "was it another, and not thy lovely self that I 
assisted to find the subterraneous passage?"

"It was," said Matilda; "but ask no more; I tremble to see thee still 
abide here; fly to the sanctuary."

"To sanctuary," said Theodore; "no, Princess; sanctuaries are for 
helpless damsels, or for criminals.  Theodore's soul is free from 
guilt, nor will wear the appearance of it.  Give me a sword, Lady, and 
thy father shall learn that Theodore scorns an ignominious flight."

"Rash youth!" said Matilda; "thou wouldst not dare to lift thy 
presumptuous arm against the Prince of Otranto?"

"Not against thy father; indeed, I dare not," said Theodore.  "Excuse 
me, Lady; I had forgotten.  But could I gaze on thee, and remember 
thou art sprung from the tyrant Manfred!  But he is thy father, and 
from this moment my injuries are buried in oblivion."

A deep and hollow groan, which seemed to come from above, startled the 
Princess and Theodore.

"Good heaven! we are overheard!" said the Princess.  They listened; 
but perceiving no further noise, they both concluded it the effect of 
pent-up vapours.  And the Princess, preceding Theodore softly, carried 
him to her father's armoury, where, equipping him with a complete 
suit, he was conducted by Matilda to the postern-gate.

"Avoid the town," said the Princess, "and all the western side of the 
castle.  'Tis there the search must be making by Manfred and the 
strangers; but hie thee to the opposite quarter.  Yonder behind that 
forest to the east is a chain of rocks, hollowed into a labyrinth of 
caverns that reach to the sea coast.  There thou mayst lie concealed, 
till thou canst make signs to some vessel to put on shore, and take 
thee off.  Go! heaven be thy guide! - and sometimes in thy prayers 
remember - Matilda!"

Theodore flung himself at her feet, and seizing her lily hand, which 
with struggles she suffered him to kiss, he vowed on the earliest 
opportunity to get himself knighted, and fervently entreated her 
permission to swear himself eternally her knight.  Ere the Princess 
could reply, a clap of thunder was suddenly heard that shook the 
battlements.  Theodore, regardless of the tempest, would have urged 
his suit:  but the Princess, dismayed, retreated hastily into the 
castle, and commanded the youth to be gone with an air that would not 
be disobeyed.  He sighed, and retired, but with eyes fixed on the 
gate, until Matilda, closing it, put an end to an interview, in which 
the hearts of both had drunk so deeply of a passion, which both now 
tasted for the first time.

Theodore went pensively to the convent, to acquaint his father with 
his deliverance.  There he learned the absence of Jerome, and the 
pursuit that was making after the Lady Isabella, with some particulars 
of whose story he now first became acquainted.  The generous gallantry 
of his nature prompted him to wish to assist her; but the Monks could 
lend him no lights to guess at the route she had taken.  He was not 
tempted to wander far in search of her, for the idea of Matilda had 
imprinted itself so strongly on his heart, that he could not bear to 
absent himself at much distance from her abode.  The tenderness Jerome 
had expressed for him concurred to confirm this reluctance; and he 
even persuaded himself that filial affection was the chief cause of 
his hovering between the castle and monastery.

Until Jerome should return at night, Theodore at length determined to 
repair to the forest that Matilda had pointed out to him.  Arriving 
there, he sought the gloomiest shades, as best suited to the pleasing 
melancholy that reigned in his mind.  In this mood he roved insensibly 
to the caves which had formerly served as a retreat to hermits, and 
were now reported round the country to be haunted by evil spirits.  He 
recollected to have heard this tradition; and being of a brave and 
adventurous disposition, he willingly indulged his curiosity in 
exploring the secret recesses of this labyrinth.  He had not 
penetrated far before he thought he heard the steps of some person who 
seemed to retreat before him.

Theodore, though firmly grounded in all our holy faith enjoins to be 
believed, had no apprehension that good men were abandoned without 
cause to the malice of the powers of darkness.  He thought the place 
more likely to be infested by robbers than by those infernal agents 
who are reported to molest and bewilder travellers.  He had long 
burned with impatience to approve his valour.  Drawing his sabre, he 
marched sedately onwards, still directing his steps as the imperfect 
rustling sound before him led the way.  The armour he wore was a like 
indication to the person who avoided him.  Theodore, now convinced 
that he was not mistaken, redoubled his pace, and evidently gained on 
the person that fled, whose haste increasing, Theodore came up just as 
a woman fell breathless before him.  He hasted to raise her, but her 
terror was so great that he apprehended she would faint in his arms.  
He used every gentle word to dispel her alarms, and assured her that 
far from injuring, he would defend her at the peril of his life.  The 
Lady recovering her spirits from his courteous demeanour, and gazing 
on her protector, said -

"Sure, I have heard that voice before!"

"Not to my knowledge," replied Theodore; "unless, as I conjecture, 
thou art the Lady Isabella."

"Merciful heaven!" cried she.  "Thou art not sent in quest of me, art 
thou?"  And saying those words, she threw herself at his feet, and 
besought him not to deliver her up to Manfred.

"To Manfred!" cried Theodore - "no, Lady; I have once already 
delivered thee from his tyranny, and it shall fare hard with me now, 
but I will place thee out of the reach of his daring."

"Is it possible," said she, "that thou shouldst be the generous 
unknown whom I met last night in the vault of the castle?  Sure thou 
art not a mortal, but my guardian angel.  On my knees, let me thank - 
"

"Hold! gentle Princess," said Theodore, "nor demean thyself before a 
poor and friendless young man.  If heaven has selected me for thy 
deliverer, it will accomplish its work, and strengthen my arm in thy 
cause.  But come, Lady, we are too near the mouth of the cavern; let 
us seek its inmost recesses.  I can have no tranquillity till I have 
placed thee beyond the reach of danger."

"Alas! what mean you, sir?" said she.  "Though all your actions are 
noble, though your sentiments speak the purity of your soul, is it 
fitting that I should accompany you alone into these perplexed 
retreats?  Should we be found together, what would a censorious world 
think of my conduct?"

"I respect your virtuous delicacy," said Theodore; "nor do you harbour 
a suspicion that wounds my honour.  I meant to conduct you into the 
most private cavity of these rocks, and then at the hazard of my life 
to guard their entrance against every living thing.  Besides, Lady," 
continued he, drawing a deep sigh, "beauteous and all perfect as your 
form is, and though my wishes are not guiltless of aspiring, know, my 
soul is dedicated to another; and although - "  A sudden noise 
prevented Theodore from proceeding.  They soon distinguished these 
sounds -

"Isabella! what, ho! Isabella!"  The trembling Princess relapsed into 
her former agony of fear.  Theodore endeavoured to encourage her, but 
in vain.  He assured her he would die rather than suffer her to return 
under Manfred's power; and begging her to remain concealed, he went 
forth to prevent the person in search of her from approaching.

At the mouth of the cavern he found an armed Knight, discoursing with 
a peasant, who assured him he had seen a lady enter the passes of the 
rock.  The Knight was preparing to seek her, when Theodore, placing 
himself in his way, with his sword drawn, sternly forbad him at his 
peril to advance.

"And who art thou, who darest to cross my way?" said the Knight, 
haughtily.

"One who does not dare more than he will perform," said Theodore.

"I seek the Lady Isabella," said the Knight, "and understand she has 
taken refuge among these rocks.  Impede me not, or thou wilt repent 
having provoked my resentment."

"Thy purpose is as odious as thy resentment is contemptible," said 
Theodore.  "Return whence thou camest, or we shall soon know whose 
resentment is most terrible."

The stranger, who was the principal Knight that had arrived from the 
Marquis of Vicenza, had galloped from Manfred as he was busied in 
getting information of the Princess, and giving various orders to 
prevent her falling into the power of the three Knights.  Their chief 
had suspected Manfred of being privy to the Princess's absconding, and 
this insult from a man, who he concluded was stationed by that Prince 
to secrete her, confirming his suspicions, he made no reply, but 
discharging a blow with his sabre at Theodore, would soon have removed 
all obstruction, if Theodore, who took him for one of Manfred's 
captains, and who had no sooner given the provocation than prepared to 
support it, had not received the stroke on his shield.  The valour 
that had so long been smothered in his breast broke forth at once; he 
rushed impetuously on the Knight, whose pride and wrath were not less 
powerful incentives to hardy deeds.  The combat was furious, but not 
long.  Theodore wounded the Knight in three several places, and at 
last disarmed him as he fainted by the loss of blood.

The peasant, who had fled on the first onset, had given the alarm to 
some of Manfred's domestics, who, by his orders, were dispersed 
through the forest in pursuit of Isabella.  They came up as the Knight 
fell, whom they soon discovered to be the noble stranger.  Theodore, 
notwithstanding his hatred to Manfred, could not behold the victory he 
had gained without emotions of pity and generosity.  But he was more 
touched when he learned the quality of his adversary, and was informed 
that he was no retainer, but an enemy, of Manfred.  He assisted the 
servants of the latter in disarming the Knight, and in endeavouring to 
stanch the blood that flowed from his wounds.  The Knight recovering 
his speech, said, in a faint and faltering voice -

"Generous foe, we have both been in an error.  I took thee for an 
instrument of the tyrant; I perceive thou hast made the like mistake.  
It is too late for excuses.  I faint.  If Isabella is at hand - call 
her - I have important secrets to - "

"He is dying!" said one of the attendants; "has nobody a crucifix 
about them?  Andrea, do thou pray over him."

"Fetch some water," said Theodore, "and pour it down his throat, while 
I hasten to the Princess."

Saying this, he flew to Isabella, and in few words told her modestly 
that he had been so unfortunate by mistake as to wound a gentleman 
from her father's court, who wished, ere he died, to impart something 
of consequence to her.

The Princess, who had been transported at hearing the voice of 
Theodore, as he called to her to come forth, was astonished at what 
she heard.  Suffering herself to be conducted by Theodore, the new 
proof of whose valour recalled her dispersed spirits, she came where 
the bleeding Knight lay speechless on the ground.  But her fears 
returned when she beheld the domestics of Manfred.  She would again 
have fled if Theodore had not made her observe that they were unarmed, 
and had not threatened them with instant death if they should dare to 
seize the Princess.

The stranger, opening his eyes, and beholding a woman, said, "Art thou 
- pray tell me truly - art thou Isabella of Vicenza?"

"I am," said she:  "good heaven restore thee!"

 "Then thou - then thou" - said the Knight, struggling for utterance - 
"seest - thy father.  Give me one - "

"Oh! amazement! horror! what do I hear! what do I see!" cried 
Isabella.  "My father!  You my father!  How came you here, Sir?  For 
heaven's sake, speak!  Oh! run for help, or he will expire!"

"'Tis most true," said the wounded Knight, exerting all his force; "I 
am Frederic thy father.  Yes, I came to deliver thee.  It will not be.  
Give me a parting kiss, and take - "

"Sir," said Theodore, "do not exhaust yourself; suffer us to convey 
you to the castle."

"To the castle!" said Isabella.  "Is there no help nearer than the 
castle?  Would you expose my father to the tyrant?  If he goes 
thither, I dare not accompany him; and yet, can I leave him!"

"My child," said Frederic, "it matters not for me whither I am 
carried.  A few minutes will place me beyond danger; but while I have 
eyes to dote on thee, forsake me not, dear Isabella!  This brave 
Knight - I know not who he is - will protect thy innocence.  Sir, you 
will not abandon my child, will you?"

Theodore, shedding tears over his victim, and vowing to guard the 
Princess at the expense of his life, persuaded Frederic to suffer 
himself to be conducted to the castle.  They placed him on a horse 
belonging to one of the domestics, after binding up his wounds as well 
as they were able.  Theodore marched by his side; and the afflicted 
Isabella, who could not bear to quit him, followed mournfully behind.



CHAPTER IV.



THE sorrowful troop no sooner arrived at the castle, than they were 
met by Hippolita and Matilda, whom Isabella had sent one of the 
domestics before to advertise of their approach.  The ladies causing 
Frederic to be conveyed into the nearest chamber, retired, while the 
surgeons examined his wounds.  Matilda blushed at seeing Theodore and 
Isabella together; but endeavoured to conceal it by embracing the 
latter, and condoling with her on her father's mischance.  The 
surgeons soon came to acquaint Hippolita that none of the Marquis's 
wounds were dangerous; and that he was desirous of seeing his daughter 
and the Princesses.

Theodore, under pretence of expressing his joy at being freed from his 
apprehensions of the combat being fatal to Frederic, could not resist 
the impulse of following Matilda.  Her eyes were so often cast down on 
meeting his, that Isabella, who regarded Theodore as attentively as he 
gazed on Matilda, soon divined who the object was that he had told her 
in the cave engaged his affections.  While this mute scene passed, 
Hippolita demanded of Frederic the cause of his having taken that 
mysterious course for reclaiming his daughter; and threw in various 
apologies to excuse her Lord for the match contracted between their 
children.

Frederic, however incensed against Manfred, was not insensible to the 
courtesy and benevolence of Hippolita:  but he was still more struck 
with the lovely form of Matilda.  Wishing to detain them by his 
bedside, he informed Hippolita of his story.  He told her that, while 
prisoner to the infidels, he had dreamed that his daughter, of whom he 
had learned no news since his captivity, was detained in a castle, 
where she was in danger of the most dreadful misfortunes:  and that if 
he obtained his liberty, and repaired to a wood near Joppa, he would 
learn more.  Alarmed at this dream, and incapable of obeying the 
direction given by it, his chains became more grievous than ever.  But 
while his thoughts were occupied on the means of obtaining his 
liberty, he received the agreeable news that the confederate Princes 
who were warring in Palestine had paid his ransom.  He instantly set 
out for the wood that had been marked in his dream.

For three days he and his attendants had wandered in the forest 
without seeing a human form:  but on the evening of the third they 
came to a cell, in which they found a venerable hermit in the agonies 
of death.  Applying rich cordials, they brought the fainting man to 
his speech.

"My sons," said he, "I am bounden to your charity - but it is in vain 
- I am going to my eternal rest - yet I die with the satisfaction of 
performing the will of heaven.  When first I repaired to this 
solitude, after seeing my country become a prey to unbelievers - it is 
alas! above fifty years since I was witness to that dreadful scene!  
St. Nicholas appeared to me, and revealed a secret, which he bade me 
never disclose to mortal man, but on my death-bed.  This is that 
tremendous hour, and ye are no doubt the chosen warriors to whom I was 
ordered to reveal my trust.  As soon as ye have done the last offices 
to this wretched corse, dig under the seventh tree on the left hand of 
this poor cave, and your pains will - Oh! good heaven receive my 
soul!"  With those words the devout man breathed his last.

"By break of day," continued Frederic, "when we had committed the holy 
relics to earth, we dug according to direction.  But what was our 
astonishment when about the depth of six feet we discovered an 
enormous sabre - the very weapon yonder in the court.  On the blade, 
which was then partly out of the scabbard, though since closed by our 
efforts in removing it, were written the following lines - no; excuse 
me, Madam," added the Marquis, turning to Hippolita; "if I forbear to 
repeat them:  I respect your sex and rank, and would not be guilty of 
offending your ear with sounds injurious to aught that is dear to 
you."

He paused.  Hippolita trembled.  She did not doubt but Frederic was 
destined by heaven to accomplish the fate that seemed to threaten her 
house.  Looking with anxious fondness at Matilda, a silent tear stole 
down her cheek:  but recollecting herself, she said -

"Proceed, my Lord; heaven does nothing in vain; mortals must receive 
its divine behests with lowliness and submission.  It is our part to 
deprecate its wrath, or bow to its decrees.  Repeat the sentence, my 
Lord; we listen resigned."

Frederic was grieved that he had proceeded so far.  The dignity and 
patient firmness of Hippolita penetrated him with respect, and the 
tender silent affection with which the Princess and her daughter 
regarded each other, melted him almost to tears.  Yet apprehensive 
that his forbearance to obey would be more alarming, he repeated in a 
faltering and low voice the following lines:


"Where'er a casque that suits this sword is found,
With perils is thy daughter compass'd round;
ALFONSO'S blood alone can save the maid,
And quiet a long restless Prince's shade."


"What is there in these lines," said Theodore impatiently, "that 
affects these Princesses?  Why were they to be shocked by a mysterious 
delicacy, that has so little foundation?"

"Your words are rude, young man," said the Marquis; "and though 
fortune has favoured you once - "

"My honoured Lord," said Isabella, who resented Theodore's warmth, 
which she perceived was dictated by his sentiments for Matilda, 
"discompose not yourself for the glosing of a peasant's son:  he 
forgets the reverence he owes you; but he is not accustomed - "

Hippolita, concerned at the heat that had arisen, checked Theodore for 
his boldness, but with an air acknowledging his zeal; and changing the 
conversation, demanded of Frederic where he had left her Lord?  As the 
Marquis was going to reply, they heard a noise without, and rising to 
inquire the cause, Manfred, Jerome, and part of the troop, who had met 
an imperfect rumour of what had happened, entered the chamber.  
Manfred advanced hastily towards Frederic's bed to condole with him on 
his misfortune, and to learn the circumstances of the combat, when 
starting in an agony of terror and amazement, he cried -

"Ha! what art thou? thou dreadful spectre! is my hour come?"

"My dearest, gracious Lord," cried Hippolita, clasping him in her 
arms, "what is it you see!  Why do you fix your eye-balls thus?"

"What!" cried Manfred breathless; "dost thou see nothing, Hippolita?  
Is this ghastly phantom sent to me alone - to rue, who did not - "

"For mercy's sweetest self, my Lord," said Hippolita, "resume your 
soul, command your reason.  There is none here, but us, your friends."

"What, is not that Alfonso?" cried Manfred.  "Dost thou not see him? 
can it be my brain's delirium?"

"This! my Lord," said Hippolita; "this is Theodore, the youth who has 
been so unfortunate."

"Theodore!" said Manfred mournfully, and striking his forehead; 
"Theodore or a phantom, he has unhinged the soul of Manfred.  But how 
comes he here? and how comes he in armour?"

"I believe he went in search of Isabella," said Hippolita.

"Of Isabella!" said Manfred, relapsing into rage; "yes, yes, that is 
not doubtful -.  But how did he escape from durance in which I left 
him?  Was it Isabella, or this hypocritical old Friar, that procured 
his enlargement?"

"And would a parent be criminal, my Lord," said Theodore, "if he 
meditated the deliverance of his child?"

Jerome, amazed to hear himself in a manner accused by his son, and 
without foundation, knew not what to think.  He could not comprehend 
how Theodore had escaped, how he came to be armed, and to encounter 
Frederic.  Still he would not venture to ask any questions that might 
tend to inflame Manfred's wrath against his son.  Jerome's silence 
convinced Manfred that he had contrived Theodore's release.

"And is it thus, thou ungrateful old man," said the Prince, addressing 
himself to the Friar, "that thou repayest mine and Hippolita's 
bounties?  And not content with traversing my heart's nearest wishes, 
thou armest thy bastard, and bringest him into my own castle to insult 
me!"

"My Lord," said Theodore, "you wrong my father:  neither he nor I are 
capable of harbouring a thought against your peace.  Is it insolence 
thus to surrender myself to your Highness's pleasure?" added he, 
laying his sword respectfully at Manfred's feet.  "Behold my bosom; 
strike, my Lord, if you suspect that a disloyal thought is lodged 
there.  There is not a sentiment engraven on my heart that does not 
venerate you and yours."

The grace and fervour with which Theodore uttered these words 
interested every person present in his favour.  Even Manfred was 
touched - yet still possessed with his resemblance to Alfonso, his 
admiration was dashed with secret horror.

"Rise," said he; "thy life is not my present purpose.  But tell me thy 
history, and how thou camest connected with this old traitor here."

"My Lord," said Jerome eagerly.

"Peace! impostor!" said Manfred; "I will not have him prompted."

"My Lord," said Theodore, "I want no assistance; my story is very 
brief.  I was carried at five years of age to Algiers with my mother, 
who had been taken by corsairs from the coast of Sicily.  She died of 
grief in less than a twelvemonth;" the tears gushed from Jerome's 
eyes, on whose countenance a thousand anxious passions stood 
expressed.  "Before she died," continued Theodore, "she bound a 
writing about my arm under my garments, which told me I was the son of 
the Count Falconara."

"It is most true," said Jerome; "I am that wretched father."

"Again I enjoin thee silence," said Manfred:  "proceed."

"I remained in slavery," said Theodore, "until within these two years, 
when attending on my master in his cruises, I was delivered by a 
Christian vessel, which overpowered the pirate; and discovering myself 
to the captain, he generously put me on shore in Sicily; but alas! 
instead of finding a father, I learned that his estate, which was 
situated on the coast, had, during his absence, been laid waste by the 
Rover who had carried my mother and me into captivity:  that his 
castle had been burnt to the ground, and that my father on his return 
had sold what remained, and was retired into religion in the kingdom 
of Naples, but where no man could inform me.  Destitute and 
friendless, hopeless almost of attaining the transport of a parent's 
embrace, I took the first opportunity of setting sail for Naples, from 
whence, within these six days, I wandered into this province, still 
supporting myself by the labour of my hands; nor until yester-morn did 
I believe that heaven had reserved any lot for me but peace of mind 
and contented poverty.  This, my Lord, is Theodore's story.  I am 
blessed beyond my hope in finding a father; I am unfortunate beyond my 
desert in having incurred your Highness's displeasure."

He ceased.  A murmur of approbation gently arose from the audience.

"This is not all," said Frederic; "I am bound in honour to add what he 
suppresses.  Though he is modest, I must be generous; he is one of the 
bravest youths on Christian ground.  He is warm too; and from the 
short knowledge I have of him, I will pledge myself for his veracity:  
if what he reports of himself were not true, he would not utter it - 
and for me, youth, I honour a frankness which becomes thy birth; but 
now, and thou didst offend me:  yet the noble blood which flows in thy 
veins, may well be allowed to boil out, when it has so recently traced 
itself to its source.  Come, my Lord," (turning to Manfred), "if I can 
pardon him, surely you may; it is not the youth's fault, if you took 
him for a spectre."

This bitter taunt galled the soul of Manfred.

"If beings from another world," replied he haughtily, "have power to 
impress my mind with awe, it is more than living man can do; nor could 
a stripling's arm."

"My Lord," interrupted Hippolita, "your guest has occasion for repose:  
shall we not leave him to his rest?"  Saying this, and taking Manfred 
by the hand, she took leave of Frederic, and led the company forth.

The Prince, not sorry to quit a conversation which recalled to mind 
the discovery he had made of his most secret sensations, suffered 
himself to be conducted to his own apartment, after permitting 
Theodore, though under engagement to return to the castle on the 
morrow (a condition the young man gladly accepted), to retire with his 
father to the convent.  Matilda and Isabella were too much occupied 
with their own reflections, and too little content with each other, to 
wish for farther converse that night.  They separated each to her 
chamber, with more expressions of ceremony and fewer of affection thou 
had passed between them since their childhood.

If they parted with small cordiality, they did but meet with greater 
impatience, as soon as the sun was risen.  Their minds were in a 
situation that excluded sleep, and each recollected a thousand 
questions which she wished she had put to the other overnight.  
Matilda reflected that Isabella had been twice delivered by Theodore 
in very critical situations, which she could not believe accidental.  
His eyes, it was true, had been fixed on her in Frederic's chamber; 
but that might have been to disguise his passion for Isabella from the 
fathers of both.  It were better to clear this up.  She wished to know 
the truth, lest she should wrong her friend by entertaining a passion 
for Isabella's lover.  Thus jealousy prompted, and at the same time 
borrowed an excuse from friendship to justify its curiosity.

Isabella, not less restless, had better foundation for her suspicions.  
Both Theodore's tongue and eyes had told her his heart was engaged; it 
was true - yet, perhaps, Matilda might not correspond to his passion; 
she had ever appeared insensible to love:  all her thoughts were set 
on heaven.

"Why did I dissuade her?" said Isabella to herself; "I am punished for 
my generosity; but when did they meet? where?  It cannot be; I have 
deceived myself; perhaps last night was the first time they ever 
beheld each other; it must be some other object that has prepossessed 
his affections - if it is, I am not so unhappy as I thought; if it is 
not my friend Matilda - how!  Can I stoop to wish for the affection of 
a man, who rudely and unnecessarily acquainted me with his 
indifference? and that at the very moment in which common courtesy 
demanded at least expressions of civility.  I will go to my dear 
Matilda, who will confirm me in this becoming pride.  Man is false - I 
will advise with her on taking the veil:  she will rejoice to find me 
in this disposition; and I will acquaint her that I no longer oppose 
her inclination for the cloister."

In this frame of mind, and determined to open her heart entirely to 
Matilda, she went to that Princess's chamber, whom she found already 
dressed, and leaning pensively on her arm.  This attitude, so 
correspondent to what she felt herself, revived Isabella's suspicions, 
and destroyed the confidence she had purposed to place in her friend.  
They blushed at meeting, and were too much novices to disguise their 
sensations with address.  After some unmeaning questions and replies, 
Matilda demanded of Isabella the cause of her flight?  The latter, who 
had almost forgotten Manfred's passion, so entirely was she occupied 
by her own, concluding that Matilda referred to her last escape from 
the convent, which had occasioned the events of the preceding evening, 
replied -

"Martelli brought word to the convent that your mother was dead."

"Oh!" said Matilda, interrupting her, "Bianca has explained that 
mistake to me:  on seeing me faint, she cried out, 'The Princess is 
dead!' and Martelli, who had come for the usual dole to the castle - "

"And what made you faint?" said Isabella, indifferent to the rest.  
Matilda blushed and stammered -

"My father - he was sitting in judgment on a criminal - "

"What criminal?" said Isabella eagerly.

"A young man," said Matilda; "I believe - "

"I think it was that young man that - "

"What, Theodore?" said Isabella.

"Yes," answered she; "I never saw him before; I do not know how he had 
offended my father, but as he has been of service to you, I am glad my 
Lord has pardoned him."

"Served me!" replied Isabella; "do you term it serving me, to wound my 
father, and almost occasion his death?  Though it is but since 
yesterday that I am blessed with knowing a parent, I hope Matilda does 
not think I am such a stranger to filial tenderness as not to resent 
the boldness of that audacious youth, and that it is impossible for me 
ever to feel any affection for one who dared to lift his arm against 
the author of my being.  No, Matilda, my heart abhors him; and if you 
still retain the friendship for me that you have vowed from your 
infancy, you will detest a man who has been on the point of making me 
miserable for ever."

Matilda held down her head and replied:  "I hope my dearest Isabella 
does not doubt her Matilda's friendship:  I never beheld that youth 
until yesterday; he is almost a stranger to me:  but as the surgeons 
have pronounced your father out of danger, you ought not to harbour 
uncharitable resentment against one, who I am persuaded did not know 
the Marquis was related to you."

"You plead his cause very pathetically," said Isabella, "considering 
he is so much a stranger to you!  I am mistaken, or he returns your 
charity."

"What mean you?" said Matilda.

"Nothing," said Isabella, repenting that she had given Matilda a hint 
of Theodore's inclination for her.  Then changing the discourse, she 
asked Matilda what occasioned Manfred to take Theodore for a spectre?

"Bless me," said Matilda, "did not you observe his extreme resemblance 
to the portrait of Alfonso in the gallery?  I took notice of it to 
Bianca even before I saw him in armour; but with the helmet on, he is 
the very image of that picture."

"I do not much observe pictures," said Isabella:  "much less have I 
examined this young man so attentively as you seem to have done.  Ah?  
Matilda, your heart is in danger, but let me warn you as a friend, he 
has owned to me that he is in love; it cannot be with you, for 
yesterday was the first time you ever met - was it not?"

"Certainly," replied Matilda; "but why does my dearest Isabella 
conclude from anything I have said, that" - she paused - then 
continuing:  "he saw you first, and I am far from having the vanity to 
think that my little portion of charms could engage a heart devoted to 
you; may you be happy, Isabella, whatever is the fate of Matilda!"

"My lovely friend," said Isabella, whose heart was too honest to 
resist a kind expression, "it is you that Theodore admires; I saw it; 
I am persuaded of it; nor shall a thought of my own happiness suffer 
me to interfere with yours."

This frankness drew tears from the gentle Matilda; and jealousy that 
for a moment had raised a coolness between these amiable maidens soon 
gave way to the natural sincerity and candour of their souls.  Each 
confessed to the other the impression that Theodore had made on her; 
and this confidence was followed by a struggle of generosity, each 
insisting on yielding her claim to her friend.  At length the dignity 
of Isabella's virtue reminding her of the preference which Theodore 
had almost declared for her rival, made her determine to conquer her 
passion, and cede the beloved object to her friend.

During this contest of amity, Hippolita entered her daughter's 
chamber.

"Madam," said she to Isabella, "you have so much tenderness for 
Matilda, and interest yourself so kindly in whatever affects our 
wretched house, that I can have no secrets with my child which are not 
proper for you to hear."

The princesses were all attention and anxiety.

"Know then, Madam," continued Hippolita, "and you my dearest Matilda, 
that being convinced by all the events of these two last ominous days, 
that heaven purposes the sceptre of Otranto should pass from Manfred's 
hands into those of the Marquis Frederic, I have been perhaps inspired 
with the thought of averting our total destruction by the union of our 
rival houses.  With this view I have been proposing to Manfred, my 
lord, to tender this dear, dear child to Frederic, your father."

"Me to Lord Frederic!" cried Matilda; "good heavens! my gracious 
mother - and have you named it to my father?"

"I have," said Hippolita; "he listened benignly to my proposal, and is 
gone to break it to the Marquis."

"Ah! wretched princess!" cried Isabella; "what hast thou done! what 
ruin has thy inadvertent goodness been preparing for thyself, for me, 
and for Matilda!"

"Ruin from me to you and to my child!" said Hippolita "what can this 
mean?"

"Alas!" said Isabella, "the purity of your own heart prevents your 
seeing the depravity of others.  Manfred, your lord, that impious man 
- "

"Hold," said Hippolita; "you must not in my presence, young lady, 
mention Manfred with disrespect:  he is my lord and husband, and - "

"Will not long be so," said Isabella, "if his wicked purposes can be 
carried into execution."

"This language amazes me," said Hippolita.  "Your feeling, Isabella, 
is warm; but until this hour I never knew it betray you into 
intemperance.  What deed of Manfred authorises you to treat him as a 
murderer, an assassin?"

"Thou virtuous, and too credulous Princess!" replied Isabella; "it is 
not thy life he aims at - it is to separate himself from thee! to 
divorce thee! to - "

"To divorce me!"  "To divorce my mother!" cried Hippolita and Matilda 
at once.

"Yes," said Isabella; "and to complete his crime, he meditates - I 
cannot speak it!"

"What can surpass what thou hast already uttered?" said Matilda.

Hippolita was silent.  Grief choked her speech; and the recollection 
of Manfred's late ambiguous discourses confirmed what she heard.

"Excellent, dear lady! madam! mother!" cried Isabella, flinging 
herself at Hippolita's feet in a transport of passion; "trust me, 
believe me, I will die a thousand deaths sooner than consent to injure 
you, than yield to so odious - oh! - "

"This is too much!" cried Hippolita:  "What crimes does one crime 
suggest!  Rise, dear Isabella; I do not doubt your virtue.  Oh! 
Matilda, this stroke is too heavy for thee! weep not, my child; and 
not a murmur, I charge thee.  Remember, he is thy father still!"

"But you are my mother too," said Matilda fervently; "and you are 
virtuous, you are guiltless! - Oh! must not I, must not I complain?"

"You must not," said Hippolita - "come, all will yet be well.  
Manfred, in the agony for the loss of thy brother, knew not what he 
said; perhaps Isabella misunderstood him; his heart is good - and, my 
child, thou knowest not all!  There is a destiny hangs over us; the 
hand of Providence is stretched out; oh! could I but save thee from 
the wreck!  Yes," continued she in a firmer tone, "perhaps the 
sacrifice of myself may atone for all; I will go and offer myself to 
this divorce - it boots not what becomes of me.  I will withdraw into 
the neighbouring monastery, and waste the remainder of life in prayers 
and tears for my child and - the Prince!"

"Thou art as much too good for this world," said Isabella, "as Manfred 
is execrable; but think not, lady, that thy weakness shall determine 
for me.  I swear, hear me all ye angels - "

"Stop, I adjure thee," cried Hippolita:  "remember thou dost not 
depend on thyself; thou hast a father."

"My father is too pious, too noble," interrupted Isabella, "to command 
an impious deed.  But should he command it; can a father enjoin a 
cursed act?  I was contracted to the son, can I wed the father?  No, 
madam, no; force should not drag me to Manfred's hated bed.  I loathe 
him, I abhor him:  divine and human laws forbid - and my friend, my 
dearest Matilda! would I wound her tender soul by injuring her adored 
mother? my own mother - I never have known another" -

"Oh! she is the mother of both!" cried Matilda:  "can we, can we, 
Isabella, adore her too much?"

"My lovely children," said the touched Hippolita, "your tenderness 
overpowers me - but I must not give way to it.  It is not ours to make 
election for ourselves:  heaven, our fathers, and our husbands must 
decide for us.  Have patience until you hear what Manfred and Frederic 
have determined.  If the Marquis accepts Matilda's hand, I know she 
will readily obey.  Heaven may interpose and prevent the rest.  What 
means my child?" continued she, seeing Matilda fall at her feet with a 
flood of speechless tears - "But no; answer me not, my daughter:  I 
must not hear a word against the pleasure of thy father."

"Oh! doubt not my obedience, my dreadful obedience to him and to you!" 
said Matilda.  "But can I, most respected of women, can I experience 
all this tenderness, this world of goodness, and conceal a thought 
from the best of mothers?"

"What art thou going to utter?" said Isabella trembling.  "Recollect 
thyself, Matilda."

"No, Isabella," said the Princess, "I should not deserve this 
incomparable parent, if the inmost recesses of my soul harboured a 
thought without her permission - nay, I have offended her; I have 
suffered a passion to enter my heart without her avowal - but here I 
disclaim it; here I vow to heaven and her - "

"My child! my child;" said Hippolita, "what words are these! what new 
calamities has fate in store for us!  Thou, a passion?  Thou, in this 
hour of destruction - "

"Oh! I see all my guilt!" said Matilda.  "I abhor myself, if I cost my 
mother a pang.  She is the dearest thing I have on earth - Oh! I will 
never, never behold him more!"

"Isabella," said Hippolita, "thou art conscious to this unhappy 
secret, whatever it is.  Speak!"

"What!" cried Matilda, "have I so forfeited my mother's love, that she 
will not permit me even to speak my own guilt? oh! wretched, wretched 
Matilda!"

"Thou art too cruel," said Isabella to Hippolita:  "canst thou behold 
this anguish of a virtuous mind, and not commiserate it?"

"Not pity my child!" said Hippolita, catching Matilda in her arms - 
"Oh! I know she is good, she is all virtue, all tenderness, and duty.  
I do forgive thee, my excellent, my only hope!"

The princesses then revealed to Hippolita their mutual inclination for 
Theodore, and the purpose of Isabella to resign him to Matilda.  
Hippolita blamed their imprudence, and showed them the improbability 
that either father would consent to bestow his heiress on so poor a 
man, though nobly born.  Some comfort it gave her to find their 
passion of so recent a date, and that Theodore had had but little 
cause to suspect it in either.  She strictly enjoined them to avoid 
all correspondence with him.  This Matilda fervently promised:  but 
Isabella, who flattered herself that she meant no more than to promote 
his union with her friend, could not determine to avoid him; and made 
no reply.

"I will go to the convent," said Hippolita, "and order new masses to 
be said for a deliverance from these calamities."

"Oh! my mother," said Matilda, "you mean to quit us:  you mean to take 
sanctuary, and to give my father an opportunity of pursuing his fatal 
intention.  Alas! on my knees I supplicate you to forbear; will you 
leave me a prey to Frederic?  I will follow you to the convent."

"Be at peace, my child," said Hippolita:  "I will return instantly.  I 
will never abandon thee, until I know it is the will of heaven, and 
for thy benefit."

"Do not deceive me," said Matilda.  "I will not marry Frederic until 
thou commandest it.  Alas! what will become of me?"

"Why that exclamation?" said Hippolita.  "I have promised thee to 
return - "

"Ah! my mother," replied Matilda, "stay and save me from myself.  A 
frown from thee can do more than all my father's severity.  I have 
given away my heart, and you alone can make me recall it."

"No more," said Hippolita; "thou must not relapse, Matilda."

"I can quit Theodore," said she, "but must I wed another? let me 
attend thee to the altar, and shut myself from the world for ever."

"Thy fate depends on thy father," said Hippolita; "I have ill-bestowed 
my tenderness, if it has taught thee to revere aught beyond him.  
Adieu! my child:  I go to pray for thee."

Hippolita's real purpose was to demand of Jerome, whether in 
conscience she might not consent to the divorce.  She had oft urged 
Manfred to resign the principality, which the delicacy of her 
conscience rendered an hourly burthen to her.  These scruples 
concurred to make the separation from her husband appear less dreadful 
to her than it would have seemed in any other situation.

Jerome, at quitting the castle overnight, had questioned Theodore 
severely why he had accused him to Manfred of being privy to his 
escape.  Theodore owned it had been with design to prevent Manfred's 
suspicion from alighting on Matilda; and added, the holiness of 
Jerome's life and character secured him from the tyrant's wrath.  
Jerome was heartily grieved to discover his son's inclination for that 
princess; and leaving him to his rest, promised in the morning to 
acquaint him with important reasons for conquering his passion.

Theodore, like Isabella, was too recently acquainted with parental 
authority to submit to its decisions against the impulse of his heart.  
He had little curiosity to learn the Friar's reasons, and less 
disposition to obey them.  The lovely Matilda had made stronger 
impressions on him than filial affection.  All night he pleased 
himself with visions of love; and it was not till late after the 
morning-office, that he recollected the Friar's commands to attend him 
at Alfonso's tomb.

"Young man," said Jerome, when he saw him, "this tardiness does not 
please me.  Have a father's commands already so little weight?"

Theodore made awkward excuses, and attributed his delay to having 
overslept himself.

"And on whom were thy dreams employed?" said the Friar sternly.  His 
son blushed.  "Come, come," resumed the Friar, "inconsiderate youth, 
this must not be; eradicate this guilty passion from thy breast - "

"Guilty passion!" cried Theodore:  "Can guilt dwell with innocent 
beauty and virtuous modesty?"

"It is sinful," replied the Friar, "to cherish those whom heaven has 
doomed to destruction.  A tyrant's race must be swept from the earth 
to the third and fourth generation."

"Will heaven visit the innocent for the crimes of the guilty?" said 
Theodore.  "The fair Matilda has virtues enough - "

"To undo thee:" interrupted Jerome.  "Hast thou so soon forgotten that 
twice the savage Manfred has pronounced thy sentence?"

"Nor have I forgotten, sir," said Theodore, "that the charity of his 
daughter delivered me from his power.  I can forget injuries, but 
never benefits."

"The injuries thou hast received from Manfred's race," said the Friar, 
"are beyond what thou canst conceive.  Reply not, but view this holy 
image!  Beneath this marble monument rest the ashes of the good 
Alfonso; a prince adorned with every virtue:  the father of his 
people! the delight of mankind!  Kneel, headstrong boy, and list, 
while a father unfolds a tale of horror that will expel every 
sentiment from thy soul, but sensations of sacred vengeance - Alfonso! 
much injured prince! let thy unsatisfied shade sit awful on the 
troubled air, while these trembling lips - Ha! who comes there? - "

"The most wretched of women!" said Hippolita, entering the choir.  
"Good Father, art thou at leisure? - but why this kneeling youth? what 
means the horror imprinted on each countenance? why at this venerable 
tomb - alas! hast thou seen aught?"

"We were pouring forth our orisons to heaven," replied the Friar, with 
some confusion, "to put an end to the woes of this deplorable 
province.  Join with us, Lady! thy spotless soul may obtain an 
exemption from the judgments which the portents of these days but too 
speakingly denounce against thy house."

"I pray fervently to heaven to divert them," said the pious Princess.  
"Thou knowest it has been the occupation of my life to wrest a 
blessing for my Lord and my harmless children. - One alas! is taken 
from me! would heaven but hear me for my poor Matilda!  Father! 
intercede for her!"

"Every heart will bless her," cried Theodore with rapture.

"Be dumb, rash youth!" said Jerome.  "And thou, fond Princess, contend 
not with the Powers above! the Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away:  
bless His holy name, and submit to his decrees."

"I do most devoutly," said Hippolita; "but will He not spare my only 
comfort? must Matilda perish too? - ah!  Father, I came - but dismiss 
thy son.  No ear but thine must hear what I have to utter."

"May heaven grant thy every wish, most excellent Princess!" said 
Theodore retiring.  Jerome frowned.

Hippolita then acquainted the Friar with the proposal she had 
suggested to Manfred, his approbation of it, and the tender of Matilda 
that he was gone to make to Frederic.  Jerome could not conceal his 
dislike of the notion, which he covered under pretence of the 
improbability that Frederic, the nearest of blood to Alfonso, and who 
was come to claim his succession, would yield to an alliance with the 
usurper of his right.  But nothing could equal the perplexity of the 
Friar, when Hippolita confessed her readiness not to oppose the 
separation, and demanded his opinion on the legality of her 
acquiescence.  The Friar caught eagerly at her request of his advice, 
and without explaining his aversion to the proposed marriage of 
Manfred and Isabella, he painted to Hippolita in the most alarming 
colours the sinfulness of her consent, denounced judgments against her 
if she complied, and enjoined her in the severest terms to treat any 
such proposition with every mark of indignation and refusal.

Manfred, in the meantime, had broken his purpose to Frederic, and 
proposed the double marriage.  That weak Prince, who had been struck 
with the charms of Matilda, listened but too eagerly to the offer.  He 
forgot his enmity to Manfred, whom he saw but little hope of 
dispossessing by force; and flattering himself that no issue might 
succeed from the union of his daughter with the tyrant, he looked upon 
his own succession to the principality as facilitated by wedding 
Matilda.  He made faint opposition to the proposal; affecting, for 
form only, not to acquiesce unless Hippolita should consent to the 
divorce.  Manfred took that upon himself.

Transported with his success, and impatient to see himself in a 
situation to expect sons, he hastened to his wife's apartment, 
determined to extort her compliance.  He learned with indignation that 
she was absent at the convent.  His guilt suggested to him that she 
had probably been informed by Isabella of his purpose.  He doubted 
whether her retirement to the convent did not import an intention of 
remaining there, until she could raise obstacles to their divorce; and 
the suspicions he had already entertained of Jerome, made him 
apprehend that the Friar would not only traverse his views, but might 
have inspired Hippolita with the resolution of talking sanctuary.  
Impatient to unravel this clue, and to defeat its success, Manfred 
hastened to the convent, and arrived there as the Friar was earnestly 
exhorting the Princess never to yield to the divorce.

"Madam," said Manfred, "what business drew you hither? why did you not 
await my return from the Marquis?"

"I came to implore a blessing on your councils," replied Hippolita.

"My councils do not need a Friar's intervention," said Manfred; "and 
of all men living is that hoary traitor the only one whom you delight 
to confer with?"

"Profane Prince!" said Jerome; "is it at the altar that thou choosest 
to insult the servants of the altar? - but, Manfred, thy impious 
schemes are known.  Heaven and this virtuous lady know them - nay, 
frown not, Prince.  The Church despises thy menaces.  Her thunders 
will be heard above thy wrath.  Dare to proceed in thy cursed purpose 
of a divorce, until her sentence be known, and here I lance her 
anathema at thy head."

"Audacious rebel!" said Manfred, endeavouring to conceal the awe with 
which the Friar's words inspired him.  "Dost thou presume to threaten 
thy lawful Prince?"

"Thou art no lawful Prince," said Jerome; "thou art no Prince - go, 
discuss thy claim with Frederic; and when that is done - "

"It is done," replied Manfred; "Frederic accepts Matilda's hand, and 
is content to waive his claim, unless I have no male issue" - as he 
spoke those words three drops of blood fell from the nose of Alfonso's 
statue.  Manfred turned pale, and the Princess sank on her knees.

"Behold!" said the Friar; "mark this miraculous indication that the 
blood of Alfonso will never mix with that of Manfred!"

"My gracious Lord," said Hippolita, "let us submit ourselves to 
heaven.  Think not thy ever obedient wife rebels against thy 
authority.  I have no will but that of my Lord and the Church.  To 
that revered tribunal let us appeal.  It does not depend on us to 
burst the bonds that unite us.  If the Church shall approve the 
dissolution of our marriage, be it so - I have but few years, and 
those of sorrow, to pass.  Where can they be worn away so well as at 
the foot of this altar, in prayers for thine and Matilda's safety?"

"But thou shalt not remain here until then," said Manfred.  "Repair 
with me to the castle, and there I will advise on the proper measures 
for a divorce; - but this meddling Friar comes not thither; my 
hospitable roof shall never more harbour a traitor - and for thy 
Reverence's off-spring," continued he, "I banish him from my 
dominions.  He, I ween, is no sacred personage, nor under the 
protection of the Church.  Whoever weds Isabella, it shall not be 
Father Falconara's started-up son."

"They start up," said the Friar, "who are suddenly beheld in the seat 
of lawful Princes; but they wither away like the grass, and their 
place knows them no more."

Manfred, casting a look of scorn at the Friar, led Hippolita forth; 
but at the door of the church whispered one of his attendants to 
remain concealed about the convent, and bring him instant notice, if 
any one from the castle should repair thither.



CHAPTER V.



EVERY reflection which Manfred made on the Friar's behaviour, 
conspired to persuade him that Jerome was privy to an amour between 
Isabella and Theodore.  But Jerome's new presumption, so dissonant 
from his former meekness, suggested still deeper apprehensions.  The 
Prince even suspected that the Friar depended on some secret support 
from Frederic, whose arrival, coinciding with the novel appearance of 
Theodore, seemed to bespeak a correspondence.  Still more was he 
troubled with the resemblance of Theodore to Alfonso's portrait.  The 
latter he knew had unquestionably died without issue.  Frederic had 
consented to bestow Isabella on him.  These contradictions agitated 
his mind with numberless pangs.

He saw but two methods of extricating himself from his difficulties.  
The one was to resign his dominions to the Marquis - pride, ambition, 
and his reliance on ancient prophecies, which had pointed out a 
possibility of his preserving them to his posterity, combated that 
thought.  The other was to press his marriage with Isabella.  After 
long ruminating on these anxious thoughts, as he marched silently with 
Hippolita to the castle, he at last discoursed with that Princess on 
the subject of his disquiet, and used every insinuating and plausible 
argument to extract her consent to, even her promise of promoting the 
divorce.  Hippolita needed little persuasions to bend her to his 
pleasure.  She endeavoured to win him over to the measure of resigning 
his dominions; but finding her exhortations fruitless, she assured 
him, that as far as her conscience would allow, she would raise no 
opposition to a separation, though without better founded scruples 
than what he yet alleged, she would not engage to be active in 
demanding it.

This compliance, though inadequate, was sufficient to raise Manfred's 
hopes.  He trusted that his power and wealth would easily advance his 
suit at the court of Rome, whither he resolved to engage Frederic to 
take a journey on purpose.  That Prince had discovered so much passion 
for Matilda, that Manfred hoped to obtain all he wished by holding out 
or withdrawing his daughter's charms, according as the Marquis should 
appear more or less disposed to co-operate in his views.  Even the 
absence of Frederic would be a material point gained, until he could 
take further measures for his security.

Dismissing Hippolita to her apartment, he repaired to that of the 
Marquis; but crossing the great hall through which he was to pass he 
met Bianca.  The damsel he knew was in the confidence of both the 
young ladies.  It immediately occurred to him to sift her on the 
subject of Isabella and Theodore.  Calling her aside into the recess 
of the oriel window of the hall, and soothing her with many fair words 
and promises, he demanded of her whether she knew aught of the state 
of Isabella's affections.

"I! my Lord! no my Lord - yes my Lord - poor Lady! she is wonderfully 
alarmed about her father's wounds; but I tell her he will do well; 
don't your Highness think so?"

"I do not ask you," replied Manfred, "what she thinks about her 
father; but you are in her secrets.  Come, be a good girl and tell me; 
is there any young man - ha! - you understand me."

"Lord bless me! understand your Highness? no, not I.  I told her a few 
vulnerary herbs and repose - "

"I am not talking," replied the Prince, impatiently, "about her 
father; I know he will do well."

"Bless me, I rejoice to hear your Highness say so; for though I 
thought it not right to let my young Lady despond, methought his 
greatness had a wan look, and a something - I remember when young 
Ferdinand was wounded by the Venetian - "

 "Thou answerest from the point," interrupted Manfred; "but here, take 
this jewel, perhaps that may fix thy attention - nay, no reverences; 
my favour shall not stop here - come, tell me truly; how stands 
Isabella's heart?"

"Well! your Highness has such a way!" said Bianca, "to be sure - but 
can your Highness keep a secret? if it should ever come out of your 
lips - "

"It shall not, it shall not," cried Manfred.

"Nay, but swear, your Highness."

"By my halidame, if it should ever be known that I said it - "

"Why, truth is truth, I do not think my Lady Isabella ever much 
affectioned my young Lord your son; yet he was a sweet youth as one 
should see; I am sure, if I had been a Princess - but bless me!  I 
must attend my Lady Matilda; she will marvel what is become of me."

"Stay," cried Manfred; "thou hast not satisfied my question.  Hast 
thou ever carried any message, any letter?"

"I! good gracious!" cried Bianca; "I carry a letter?  I would not to 
be a Queen.  I hope your Highness thinks, though I am poor, I am 
honest.  Did your Highness never hear what Count Marsigli offered me, 
when he came a wooing to my Lady Matilda?"

"I have not leisure," said Manfred, "to listen to thy tale.  I do not 
question thy honesty.  But it is thy duty to conceal nothing from me.  
How long has Isabella been acquainted with Theodore?"

"Nay, there is nothing can escape your Highness!" said Bianca; "not 
that I know any thing of the matter.  Theodore, to be sure, is a 
proper young man, and, as my Lady Matilda says, the very image of good 
Alfonso.  Has not your Highness remarked it?"

"Yes, yes, - No - thou torturest me," said Manfred.  "Where did they 
meet? when?"

"Who! my Lady Matilda?" said Bianca.

"No, no, not Matilda:  Isabella; when did Isabella first become 
acquainted with this Theodore!"

"Virgin Mary!" said Bianca, "how should I know?"

"Thou dost know," said Manfred; "and I must know; I will - "

"Lord! your Highness is not jealous of young Theodore!" said Bianca.

"Jealous! no, no.  Why should I be jealous? perhaps I mean to unite 
them - If I were sure Isabella would have no repugnance."

"Repugnance! no, I'll warrant her," said Bianca; "he is as comely a 
youth as ever trod on Christian ground.  We are all in love with him; 
there is not a soul in the castle but would be rejoiced to have him 
for our Prince - I mean, when it shall please heaven to call your 
Highness to itself."

"Indeed!" said Manfred, "has it gone so far! oh! this cursed Friar! - 
but I must not lose time - go, Bianca, attend Isabella; but I charge 
thee, not a word of what has passed.  Find out how she is affected 
towards Theodore; bring me good news, and that ring has a companion.  
Wait at the foot of the winding staircase:  I am going to visit the 
Marquis, and will talk further with thee at my return."

Manfred, after some general conversation, desired Frederic to dismiss 
the two Knights, his companions, having to talk with him on urgent 
affairs.

As soon as they were alone, he began in artful guise to sound the 
Marquis on the subject of Matilda; and finding him disposed to his 
wish, he let drop hints on the difficulties that would attend the 
celebration of their marriage, unless - At that instant Bianca burst 
into the room with a wildness in her look and gestures that spoke the 
utmost terror.

"Oh! my Lord, my Lord!" cried she; "we are all undone! it is come 
again! it is come again!"

"What is come again?" cried Manfred amazed.

"Oh! the hand! the Giant! the hand! - support me! I am terrified out 
of my senses," cried Bianca.  "I will not sleep in the castle to-
night.  Where shall I go? my things may come after me to-morrow - 
would I had been content to wed Francesco! this comes of ambition!"

"What has terrified thee thus, young woman?" said the Marquis.  "Thou 
art safe here; be not alarmed."

"Oh! your Greatness is wonderfully good," said Bianca, "but I dare not 
- no, pray let me go - I had rather leave everything behind me, than 
stay another hour under this roof."

"Go to, thou hast lost thy senses," said Manfred.  "Interrupt us not; 
we were communing on important matters - My Lord, this wench is 
subject to fits - Come with me, Bianca."

"Oh! the Saints!  No," said Bianca, "for certain it comes to warn your 
Highness; why should it appear to me else?  I say my prayers morning 
and evening - oh! if your Highness had believed Diego!  'Tis the same 
hand that he saw the foot to in the gallery-chamber - Father Jerome 
has often told us the prophecy would be out one of these days - 
'Bianca,' said he, 'mark my words - '"

"Thou ravest," said Manfred, in a rage; "be gone, and keep these 
fooleries to frighten thy companions."

"What! my Lord," cried Bianca, "do you think I have seen nothing? go 
to the foot of the great stairs yourself - as I live I saw it."

"Saw what? tell us, fair maid, what thou hast seen," said Frederic.

"Can your Highness listen," said Manfred, "to the delirium of a silly 
wench, who has heard stories of apparitions until she believes them?"

"This is more than fancy," said the Marquis; "her terror is too 
natural and too strongly impressed to be the work of imagination.  
Tell us, fair maiden, what it is has moved thee thus?"

"Yes, my Lord, thank your Greatness," said Bianca; "I believe I look 
very pale; I shall be better when I have recovered myself - I was 
going to my Lady Isabella's chamber, by his Highness's order - "

"We do not want the circumstances," interrupted Manfred.  "Since his 
Highness will have it so, proceed; but be brief."

"Lord! your Highness thwarts one so!" replied Bianca; "I fear my hair 
- I am sure I never in my life - well! as I was telling your 
Greatness, I was going by his Highness's order to my Lady Isabella's 
chamber; she lies in the watchet-coloured chamber, on the right hand, 
one pair of stairs:  so when I came to the great stairs - I was 
looking on his Highness's present here - "

"Grant me patience! " said Manfred, "will this wench never come to the 
point? what imports it to the Marquis, that I gave thee a bauble for 
thy faithful attendance on my daughter? we want to know what thou 
sawest."

"I was going to tell your Highness," said Bianca, "if you would permit 
me.  So as I was rubbing the ring - I am sure I had not gone up three 
steps, but I heard the rattling of armour; for all the world such a 
clatter as Diego says he heard when the Giant turned him about in the 
gallery-chamber."

"What Giant is this, my Lord?" said the Marquis; "is your castle 
haunted by giants and goblins?"

"Lord! what, has not your Greatness heard the story of the Giant in 
the gallery-chamber?" cried Bianca.  "I marvel his Highness has not 
told you; mayhap you do not know there is a prophecy - "

"This trifling is intolerable," interrupted Manfred.  "Let us dismiss 
this silly wench, my Lord! we have more important affairs to discuss."

"By your favour," said Frederic, "these are no trifles.  The enormous 
sabre I was directed to in the wood, yon casque, its fellow - are 
these visions of this poor maiden's brain?"

"So Jaquez thinks, may it please your Greatness," said Bianca.  "He 
says this moon will not be out without our seeing some strange 
revolution.  For my part, I should not be surprised if it was to 
happen to-morrow; for, as I was saying, when I heard the clattering of 
armour, I was all in a cold sweat.  I looked up, and, if your 
Greatness will believe me, I saw upon the uppermost banister of the 
great stairs a hand in armour as big as big.  I thought I should have 
swooned.  I never stopped until I came hither - would I were well out 
of this castle.  My Lady Matilda told me but yester-morning that her 
Highness Hippolita knows something."

"Thou art an insolent!" cried Manfred.  "Lord Marquis, it much 
misgives me that this scene is concerted to affront me.  Are my own 
domestics suborned to spread tales injurious to my honour?  Pursue 
your claim by manly daring; or let us bury our feuds, as was proposed, 
by the intermarriage of our children.  But trust me, it ill becomes a 
Prince of your bearing to practise on mercenary wenches."

"I scorn your imputation," said Frederic.  "Until this hour I never 
set eyes on this damsel:  I have given her no jewel.  My Lord, my 
Lord, your conscience, your guilt accuses you, and would throw the 
suspicion on me; but keep your daughter, and think no more of 
Isabella.  The judgments already fallen on your house forbid me 
matching into it."

Manfred, alarmed at the resolute tone in which Frederic delivered 
these words, endeavoured to pacify him.  Dismissing Bianca, he made 
such submissions to the Marquis, and threw in such artful encomiums on 
Matilda, that Frederic was once more staggered.  However, as his 
passion was of so recent a date, it could not at once surmount the 
scruples he had conceived.  He had gathered enough from Bianca's 
discourse to persuade him that heaven declared itself against Manfred.  
The proposed marriages too removed his claim to a distance; and the 
principality of Otranto was a stronger temptation than the contingent 
reversion of it with Matilda.  Still he would not absolutely recede 
from his engagements; but purposing to gain time, he demanded of 
Manfred if it was true in fact that Hippolita consented to the 
divorce.  The Prince, transported to find no other obstacle, and 
depending on his influence over his wife, assured the Marquis it was 
so, and that he might satisfy himself of the truth from her own mouth.

As they were thus discoursing, word was brought that the banquet was 
prepared.  Manfred conducted Frederic to the great hall, where they 
were received by Hippolita and the young Princesses.  Manfred placed 
the Marquis next to Matilda, and seated himself between his wife and 
Isabella.  Hippolita comported herself with an easy gravity; but the 
young ladies were silent and melancholy.  Manfred, who was determined 
to pursue his point with the Marquis in the remainder of the evening, 
pushed on the feast until it waxed late; affecting unrestrained 
gaiety, and plying Frederic with repeated goblets of wine.  The 
latter, more upon his guard than Manfred wished, declined his frequent 
challenges, on pretence of his late loss of blood; while the Prince, 
to raise his own disordered spirits, and to counterfeit unconcern, 
indulged himself in plentiful draughts, though not to the intoxication 
of his senses.

The evening being far advanced, the banquet concluded.  Manfred would 
have withdrawn with Frederic; but the latter pleading weakness and 
want of repose, retired to his chamber, gallantly telling the Prince 
that his daughter should amuse his Highness until himself could attend 
him.  Manfred accepted the party, and to the no small grief of 
Isabella, accompanied her to her apartment.  Matilda waited on her 
mother to enjoy the freshness of the evening on the ramparts of the 
castle.

Soon as the company were dispersed their several ways, Frederic, 
quitting his chamber, inquired if Hippolita was alone, and was told by 
one of her attendants, who had not noticed her going forth, that at 
that hour she generally withdrew to her oratory, where he probably 
would find her.  The Marquis, during the repast, had beheld Matilda 
with increase of passion.  He now wished to find Hippolita in the 
disposition her Lord had promised.  The portents that had alarmed him 
were forgotten in his desires.  Stealing softly and unobserved to the 
apartment of Hippolita, he entered it with a resolution to encourage 
her acquiescence to the divorce, having perceived that Manfred was 
resolved to make the possession of Isabella an unalterable condition, 
before he would grant Matilda to his wishes.

The Marquis was not surprised at the silence that reigned in the 
Princess's apartment.  Concluding her, as he had been advertised, in 
her oratory, he passed on.  The door was ajar; the evening gloomy and 
overcast.  Pushing open the door gently, he saw a person kneeling 
before the altar.  As he approached nearer, it seemed not a woman, but 
one in a long woollen weed, whose back was towards him.  The person 
seemed absorbed in prayer.  The Marquis was about to return, when the 
figure, rising, stood some moments fixed in meditation, without 
regarding him.  The Marquis, expecting the holy person to come forth, 
and meaning to excuse his uncivil interruption, said,

"Reverend Father, I sought the Lady Hippolita."

"Hippolita!" replied a hollow voice; "camest thou to this castle to 
seek Hippolita?" and then the figure, turning slowly round, discovered 
to Frederic the fleshless jaws and empty sockets of a skeleton, wrapt 
in a hermit's cowl.

"Angels of grace protect me!" cried Frederic, recoiling.

"Deserve their protection!" said the Spectre.  Frederic, falling on 
his knees, adjured the phantom to take pity on him.

"Dost thou not remember me?" said the apparition.  "Remember the wood 
of Joppa!"

"Art thou that holy hermit?" cried Frederic, trembling.  "Can I do 
aught for thy eternal peace?"

"Wast thou delivered from bondage," said the spectre, "to pursue 
carnal delights?  Hast thou forgotten the buried sabre, and the behest 
of Heaven engraven on it?"

"I have not, I have not," said Frederic; "but say, blest spirit, what 
is thy errand to me?  What remains to be done?"

"To forget Matilda!" said the apparition; and vanished.

Frederic's blood froze in his veins.  For some minutes he remained 
motionless.  Then falling prostrate on his face before the altar, he 
besought the intercession of every saint for pardon.  A flood of tears 
succeeded to this transport; and the image of the beauteous Matilda 
rushing in spite of him on his thoughts, he lay on the ground in a 
conflict of penitence and passion.  Ere he could recover from this 
agony of his spirits, the Princess Hippolita with a taper in her hand 
entered the oratory alone.  Seeing a man without motion on the floor, 
she gave a shriek, concluding him dead.  Her fright brought Frederic 
to himself.  Rising suddenly, his face bedewed with tears, he would 
have rushed from her presence; but Hippolita stopping him, conjured 
him in the most plaintive accents to explain the cause of his 
disorder, and by what strange chance she had found him there in that 
posture.

"Ah, virtuous Princess!" said the Marquis, penetrated with grief, and 
stopped.

"For the love of Heaven, my Lord," said Hippolita, "disclose the cause 
of this transport!  What mean these doleful sounds, this alarming 
exclamation on my name?  What woes has heaven still in store for the 
wretched Hippolita?  Yet silent!  By every pitying angel, I adjure 
thee, noble Prince," continued she, falling at his feet, "to disclose 
the purport of what lies at thy heart.  I see thou feelest for me; 
thou feelest the sharp pangs that thou inflictest - speak, for pity!  
Does aught thou knowest concern my child?"

"I cannot speak," cried Frederic, bursting from her.  "Oh, Matilda!"

Quitting the Princess thus abruptly, he hastened to his own apartment.  
At the door of it he was accosted by Manfred, who flushed by wine and 
love had come to seek him, and to propose to waste some hours of the 
night in music and revelling.  Frederic, offended at an invitation so 
dissonant from the mood of his soul, pushed him rudely aside, and 
entering his chamber, flung the door intemperately against Manfred, 
and bolted it inwards.  The haughty Prince, enraged at this 
unaccountable behaviour, withdrew in a frame of mind capable of the 
most fatal excesses.  As he crossed the court, he was met by the 
domestic whom he had planted at the convent as a spy on Jerome and 
Theodore.  This man, almost breathless with the haste he had made, 
informed his Lord that Theodore, and some lady from the castle were, 
at that instant, in private conference at the tomb of Alfonso in St. 
Nicholas's church.  He had dogged Theodore thither, but the gloominess 
of the night had prevented his discovering who the woman was.

Manfred, whose spirits were inflamed, and whom Isabella had driven 
from her on his urging his passion with too little reserve, did not 
doubt but the inquietude she had expressed had been occasioned by her 
impatience to meet Theodore.  Provoked by this conjecture, and enraged 
at her father, he hastened secretly to the great church.  Gliding 
softly between the aisles, and guided by an imperfect gleam of 
moonshine that shone faintly through the illuminated windows, he stole 
towards the tomb of Alfonso, to which he was directed by indistinct 
whispers of the persons he sought.  The first sounds he could 
distinguish were -

"Does it, alas! depend on me?  Manfred will never permit our union."

"No, this shall prevent it!" cried the tyrant, drawing his dagger, and 
plunging it over her shoulder into the bosom of the person that spoke.

"Ah, me, I am slain!" cried Matilda, sinking.  "Good heaven, receive 
my soul!"

"Savage, inhuman monster, what hast thou done!" cried Theodore, 
rushing on him, and wrenching his dagger from him.

"Stop, stop thy impious hand!" cried Matilda; "it is my father!"

Manfred, waking as from a trance, beat his breast, twisted his hands 
in his locks, and endeavoured to recover his dagger from Theodore to 
despatch himself.  Theodore, scarce less distracted, and only 
mastering the transports of his grief to assist Matilda, had now by 
his cries drawn some of the monks to his aid.  While part of them 
endeavoured, in concert with the afflicted Theodore, to stop the blood 
of the dying Princess, the rest prevented Manfred from laying violent 
hands on himself.

Matilda, resigning herself patiently to her fate, acknowledged with 
looks of grateful love the zeal of Theodore.  Yet oft as her faintness 
would permit her speech its way, she begged the assistants to comfort 
her father.  Jerome, by this time, had learnt the fatal news, and 
reached the church.  His looks seemed to reproach Theodore, but 
turning to Manfred, he said,

"Now, tyrant! behold the completion of woe fulfilled on thy impious 
and devoted head!  The blood of Alfonso cried to heaven for vengeance; 
and heaven has permitted its altar to be polluted by assassination, 
that thou mightest shed thy own blood at the foot of that Prince's 
sepulchre!"

"Cruel man!" cried Matilda, "to aggravate the woes of a parent; may 
heaven bless my father, and forgive him as I do!  My Lord, my gracious 
Sire, dost thou forgive thy child?  Indeed, I came not hither to meet 
Theodore.  I found him praying at this tomb, whither my mother sent me 
to intercede for thee, for her - dearest father, bless your child, and 
say you forgive her."

"Forgive thee!  Murderous monster!" cried Manfred, "can assassins 
forgive?  I took thee for Isabella; but heaven directed my bloody hand 
to the heart of my child.  Oh, Matilda! - I cannot utter it - canst 
thou forgive the blindness of my rage?"

"I can, I do; and may heaven confirm it!" said Matilda; "but while I 
have life to ask it - oh! my mother! what will she feel?  Will you 
comfort her, my Lord?  Will you not put her away?  Indeed she loves 
you!  Oh, I am faint! bear me to the castle.  Can I live to have her 
close my eyes?"

Theodore and the monks besought her earnestly to suffer herself to be 
borne into the convent; but her instances were so pressing to be 
carried to the castle, that placing her on a litter, they conveyed her 
thither as she requested.  Theodore, supporting her head with his arm, 
and hanging over her in an agony of despairing love, still endeavoured 
to inspire her with hopes of life.  Jerome, on the other side, 
comforted her with discourses of heaven, and holding a crucifix before 
her, which she bathed with innocent tears, prepared her for her 
passage to immortality.  Manfred, plunged in the deepest affliction, 
followed the litter in despair.

Ere they reached the castle, Hippolita, informed of the dreadful 
catastrophe, had flown to meet her murdered child; but when she saw 
the afflicted procession, the mightiness of her grief deprived her of 
her senses, and she fell lifeless to the earth in a swoon.  Isabella 
and Frederic, who attended her, were overwhelmed in almost equal 
sorrow.  Matilda alone seemed insensible to her own situation:  every 
thought was lost in tenderness for her mother.

Ordering the litter to stop, as soon as Hippolita was brought to 
herself, she asked for her father.  He approached, unable to speak.  
Matilda, seizing his hand and her mother's, locked them in her own, 
and then clasped them to her heart.  Manfred could not support this 
act of pathetic piety.  He dashed himself on the ground, and cursed 
the day he was born.  Isabella, apprehensive that these struggles of 
passion were more than Matilda could support, took upon herself to 
order Manfred to be borne to his apartment, while she caused Matilda 
to be conveyed to the nearest chamber.  Hippolita, scarce more alive 
than her daughter, was regardless of everything but her; but when the 
tender Isabella's care would have likewise removed her, while the 
surgeons examined Matilda's wound, she cried,

"Remove me! never, never!  I lived but in her, and will expire with 
her."

Matilda raised her eyes at her mother's voice, but closed them again 
without speaking.  Her sinking pulse and the damp coldness of her hand 
soon dispelled all hopes of recovery.  Theodore followed the surgeons 
into the outer chamber, and heard them pronounce the fatal sentence 
with a transport equal to frenzy.

"Since she cannot live mine," cried he, "at least she shall be mine in 
death!  Father!  Jerome! will you not join our hands?" cried he to the 
Friar, who, with the Marquis, had accompanied the surgeons.

"What means thy distracted rashness?" said Jerome.  "Is this an hour 
for marriage?"

"It is, it is," cried Theodore.  "Alas! there is no other!"

"Young man, thou art too unadvised," said Frederic.  "Dost thou think 
we are to listen to thy fond transports in this hour of fate?  What 
pretensions hast thou to the Princess?"

"Those of a Prince," said Theodore; "of the sovereign of Otranto.  
This reverend man, my father, has informed me who I am."

"Thou ravest," said the Marquis.  "There is no Prince of Otranto but 
myself, now Manfred, by murder, by sacrilegious murder, has forfeited 
all pretensions."

"My Lord," said Jerome, assuming an air of command, "he tells you 
true.  It was not my purpose the secret should have been divulged so 
soon, but fate presses onward to its work.  What his hot-headed 
passion has revealed, my tongue confirms.  Know, Prince, that when 
Alfonso set sail for the Holy Land - "

"Is this a season for explanations?" cried Theodore.  "Father, come 
and unite me to the Princess; she shall be mine!  In every other thing 
I will dutifully obey you.  My life! my adored Matilda!" continued 
Theodore, rushing back into the inner chamber, "will you not be mine?  
Will you not bless your - "

Isabella made signs to him to be silent, apprehending the Princess was 
near her end.

"What, is she dead?" cried Theodore; "is it possible!"

The violence of his exclamations brought Matilda to herself.  Lifting 
up her eyes, she looked round for her mother.

"Life of my soul, I am here!" cried Hippolita; "think not I will quit 
thee!"

"Oh! you are too good," said Matilda.  "But weep not for me, my 
mother!  I am going where sorrow never dwells - Isabella, thou hast 
loved me; wouldst thou not supply my fondness to this dear, dear 
woman?  Indeed I am faint!"

"Oh! my child! my child!" said Hippolita in a flood of tears, "can I 
not withhold thee a moment?"

"It will not be," said Matilda; "commend me to heaven - Where is my 
father? forgive him, dearest mother - forgive him my death; it was an 
error.  Oh!  I had forgotten - dearest mother, I vowed never to see 
Theodore more - perhaps that has drawn down this calamity - but it was 
not intentional - can you pardon me?"

"Oh! wound not my agonising soul!" said Hippolita; "thou never couldst 
offend me - Alas! she faints! help! help!"

"I would say something more," said Matilda, struggling, "but it cannot 
be - Isabella - Theodore - for my sake - Oh! - " she expired.

Isabella and her women tore Hippolita from the corse; but Theodore 
threatened destruction to all who attempted to remove him from it.  He 
printed a thousand kisses on her clay-cold hands, and uttered every 
expression that despairing love could dictate.

Isabella, in the meantime, was accompanying the afflicted Hippolita to 
her apartment; but, in the middle of the court, they were met by 
Manfred, who, distracted with his own thoughts, and anxious once more 
to behold his daughter, was advancing to the chamber where she lay.  
As the moon was now at its height, he read in the countenances of this 
unhappy company the event he dreaded.

"What! is she dead?" cried he in wild confusion.  A clap of thunder at 
that instant shook the castle to its foundations; the earth rocked, 
and the clank of more than mortal armour was heard behind.  Frederic 
and Jerome thought the last day was at hand.  The latter, forcing 
Theodore along with them, rushed into the court.  The moment Theodore 
appeared, the walls of the castle behind Manfred were thrown down with 
a mighty force, and the form of Alfonso, dilated to an immense 
magnitude, appeared in the centre of the ruins.

"Behold in Theodore the true heir of Alfonso!" said the vision:  And 
having pronounced those words, accompanied by a clap of thunder, it 
ascended solemnly towards heaven, where the clouds parting asunder, 
the form of St. Nicholas was seen, and receiving Alfonso's shade, they 
were soon wrapt from mortal eyes in a blaze of glory.

The beholders fell prostrate on their faces, acknowledging the divine 
will.  The first that broke silence was Hippolita.

"My Lord," said she to the desponding Manfred, "behold the vanity of 
human greatness!  Conrad is gone!  Matilda is no more!  In Theodore we 
view the true Prince of Otranto.  By what miracle he is so I know not 
- suffice it to us, our doom is pronounced! shall we not, can we but 
dedicate the few deplorable hours we have to live, in deprecating the 
further wrath of heaven? heaven ejects us - whither can we fly, but to 
yon holy cells that yet offer us a retreat."

"Thou guiltless but unhappy woman! unhappy by my crimes!" replied 
Manfred, "my heart at last is open to thy devout admonitions.  Oh! 
could - but it cannot be - ye are lost in wonder - let me at last do 
justice on myself!  To heap shame on my own head is all the 
satisfaction I have left to offer to offended heaven.  My story has 
drawn down these judgments:  Let my confession atone - but, ah! what 
can atone for usurpation and a murdered child? a child murdered in a 
consecrated place?  List, sirs, and may this bloody record be a 
warning to future tyrants!"

"Alfonso, ye all know, died in the Holy Land - ye would interrupt me; 
ye would say he came not fairly to his end - it is most true - why 
else this bitter cup which Manfred must drink to the dregs.  Ricardo, 
my grandfather, was his chamberlain - I would draw a veil over my 
ancestor's crimes - but it is in vain!  Alfonso died by poison.  A 
fictitious will declared Ricardo his heir.  His crimes pursued him - 
yet he lost no Conrad, no Matilda!  I pay the price of usurpation for 
all!  A storm overtook him.  Haunted by his guilt he vowed to St. 
Nicholas to found a church and two convents, if he lived to reach 
Otranto.  The sacrifice was accepted:  the saint appeared to him in a 
dream, and promised that Ricardo's posterity should reign in Otranto 
until the rightful owner should be grown too large to inhabit the 
castle, and as long as issue male from Ricardo's loins should remain 
to enjoy it - alas! alas! nor male nor female, except myself, remains 
of all his wretched race!  I have done - the woes of these three days 
speak the rest.  How this young man can be Alfonso's heir I know not - 
yet I do not doubt it.  His are these dominions; I resign them - yet I 
knew not Alfonso had an heir - I question not the will of heaven - 
poverty and prayer must fill up the woeful space, until Manfred shall 
be summoned to Ricardo."

"What remains is my part to declare," said Jerome.  "When Alfonso set 
sail for the Holy Land he was driven by a storm to the coast of 
Sicily.  The other vessel, which bore Ricardo and his train, as your 
Lordship must have heard, was separated from him."

"It is most true," said Manfred; "and the title you give me is more 
than an outcast can claim - well! be it so - proceed."

Jerome blushed, and continued.  "For three months Lord Alfonso was 
wind-bound in Sicily.  There he became enamoured of a fair virgin 
named Victoria.  He was too pious to tempt her to forbidden pleasures.  
They were married.  Yet deeming this amour incongruous with the holy 
vow of arms by which he was bound, he determined to conceal their 
nuptials until his return from the Crusade, when he purposed to seek 
and acknowledge her for his lawful wife.  He left her pregnant.  
During his absence she was delivered of a daughter.  But scarce had 
she felt a mother's pangs ere she heard the fatal rumour of her Lord's 
death, and the succession of Ricardo.  What could a friendless, 
helpless woman do?  Would her testimony avail? - yet, my lord, I have 
an authentic writing - "

"It needs not," said Manfred; "the horrors of these days, the vision 
we have but now seen, all corroborate thy evidence beyond a thousand 
parchments.  Matilda's death and my expulsion - "

"Be composed, my Lord," said Hippolita; "this holy man did not mean to 
recall your griefs."  Jerome proceeded.

"I shall not dwell on what is needless.  The daughter of which 
Victoria was delivered, was at her maturity bestowed in marriage on 
me.  Victoria died; and the secret remained locked in my breast.  
Theodore's narrative has told the rest."

The Friar ceased.  The disconsolate company retired to the remaining 
part of the castle.  In the morning Manfred signed his abdication of 
the principality, with the approbation of Hippolita, and each took on 
them the habit of religion in the neighbouring convents.  Frederic 
offered his daughter to the new Prince, which Hippolita's tenderness 
for Isabella concurred to promote.  But Theodore's grief was too fresh 
to admit the thought of another love; and it was not until after 
frequent discourses with Isabella of his dear Matilda, that he was 
persuaded he could know no happiness but in the society of one with 
whom he could for ever indulge the melancholy that had taken 
possession of his soul.




End of the Project Gutenberg eText The Castle of Otranto

