The Project Gutenberg Etext of Heimskringla, by Snorri Sturlson
The Chronicle of the Kings of Norway


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Heimskringla
The Chronicle of the Kings of Norway

by Snorri Sturlson

July, 1996  [Etext #598]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Heimskringla, by Snorri Sturlson
*****This file should be named hmskr10.txt or hmskr10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, hmskr11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, hmskr10a.txt.


This electronic edition was edited, proofed, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@AOL.COM), April 1996.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Heimskringla

or

The Chronicle of the Kings of Norway

by

Snorri Sturlson
(c.1179-1241)

Originally written in Old Norse, app. 1225 A.D., by the poet and
historian Snorri Sturlson.


This electronic edition was edited, proofed, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@AOL.COM), April 1996.

*****************************************************************

PREPARER'S NOTE:

The "Heimskringla" of Snorri Sturlason is a collection of sagas
concerning the various rulers of Norway, from about A.D. 850 to
the year A.D. 1177.

The Sagas covered in this work are the following:

1.  Halfdan the Black Saga
2.  Harald Harfager's Saga
3.  Hakon the Good's Saga
4.  Saga of King Harald Grafeld and of Earl Hakon Son of Sigurd
5.  King Olaf Trygvason's Saga
6.  Saga of Olaf Haraldson (St. Olaf)
7.  Saga of Magnus the Good
8.  Saga of Harald Hardrade
9.  Saga of Olaf Kyrre
10. Magnus Barefoot's Saga
11. Saga of Sigurd the Crusader and His Brothers Eystein and Olaf
12. Saga of Magnus the Blind and of Harald Gille
13. Saga of Sigurd, Inge, and Eystein, the Sons of Harald
14. Saga of Hakon Herdebreid ("Hakon the Broad-Shouldered")
15. Magnus Erlingson's Saga

While scholars and historians continue to debate the historical
accuracy of Sturlason's work, the "Heimskringla" is still
considered an important original source for information on the
Viking Age, a period which Sturlason covers almost in its
entirety.


*****************************************************************

PREFACE OF SNORRE STURLASON.

In this book I have had old stories written down, as I have heard
them told by intelligent people, concerning chiefs who have have
held dominion in the northern countries, and who spoke the Danish
tongue; and also concerning some of their family branches,
according to what has been told me.  Some of this is found in
ancient family registers, in which the pedigrees of kings and
other personages of high birth are reckoned up, and part is
written down after old songs and ballads which our forefathers
had for their amusement.  Now, although we cannot just say what
truth there may be in these, yet we have the certainty that old
and wise men held them to be true.

Thjodolf of Hvin was the skald of Harald Harfager, and he
composed a poem for King Rognvald the Mountain-high, which is
called "Ynglingatal."  This Rognvald was a son of Olaf
Geirstadalf, the brother of King Halfdan the Black.  In this
poem thirty of his forefathers are reckoned up, and the death and
burial-place of each are given.  He begins with Fjolner, a son of
Yngvefrey, whom the Swedes, long after his time, worshipped and
sacrificed to, and from whom the race or family of the Ynglings
take their name.

Eyvind Skaldaspiller also reckoned up the ancestors of Earl Hakon
the Great in a poem called "Haleygjatal", composed about Hakon;
and therein he mentions Saeming, a son of Yngvefrey, and he
likewise tells of the death and funeral rites of each.  The lives
and times of the Yngling race were written from Thjodolf's
relation enlarged afterwards by the accounts of intelligent
people.

As to funeral rites, the earliest age is called the Age of
Burning; because all the dead were consumed by fire, and over
their ashes were raised standing stones.  But after Frey was
buried under a cairn at Upsala, many chiefs raised cairns, as
commonly as stones, to the memory of their relatives.

The Age of Cairns began properly in Denmark after Dan Milkillate
had raised for himself a burial cairn, and ordered that he should
be buried in it on his death, with his royal ornaments and
armour, his horse and saddle-furniture, and other valuable goods;
and many of his descendants followed his example.  But the
burning of the dead continued, long after that time, to be the
custom of the Swedes and Northmen.  Iceland was occupied in the
time that Harald Harfager was the King of Norway.  There were
skalds in Harald's court whose poems the people know by heart
even at the present day, together with all the songs about the
kings who have ruled in Norway since his time; and we rest the
foundations of our story principally upon the songs which were
sung in the presence of the chiefs themselves or of their sons,
and take all to be true that is found in such poems about their
feats and battles: for although it be the fashion with skalds to
praise most those in whose presence they are standing, yet no one
would dare to relete to a chief what he, and all those who heard
it, knew to be a false and imaginary, not a true account of his
deeds; because that would be mockery, not praise.

OF THE PRIEST ARE FRODE

The priest Are Frode (the learned), a son of Thorgils the son of
Geller, was the first man in this country who wrote down in the
Norse language narratives of events both old and new.  In the
beginning of his book he wrote principally about the first
settlements in Iceland, the laws and government, and next of the
lagmen, and how long each had administered the law; and he
reckoned the years at first, until the time when Christianity was
introduced into Iceland, and afterwards reckoned from that to his
own times.  To this he added many other subjects, such as the
lives and times of kings of Norway and Denmark, and also of
England; beside accounts of great events which have taken place
in this country itself.  His narratives are considered by many
men of knowledge to be the most remarkable of all; because he was
a man of good understanding, and so old that his birth was as far
back as the year after Harald Sigurdson's fall.  He wrote, as he
himself says, the lives and times of the kings of Norway from the
report of Od Kolson, a grandson of Hal of Sida.  Od again took
his information from Thorgeir Afradskol, who was an intelligent
man, and so old that when Earl Hakon the Great was killed he was
dwelling at Nidarnes -- the same place at which King Olaf
Trygvason afterwards laid the foundation of the merchant town of
Nidaros (i.e., Throndhjem) which is now there.  The priest Are
came, when seven years old, to Haukadal to Hal Thorarinson, and
was there fourteen years.  Hal was a man of great knowledge and
of excellent memory; and he could even remember being baptized,
when he was three years old, by the priest Thanghrand, the year
before Christianity was established by law in Iceland.  Are was
twelve years of age when Bishop Isleif died, and at his death
eighty years had elapsed since the fall of Olaf Trygvason.  Hal
died nine years later than Bishop Isleif, and had attained nearly
the age of ninety-four years.  Hal had traded between the two
countries, and had enjoyed intercourse with King Olaf the Saint,
by which he had gained greatly in reputation, and he had become
well acquainted with the kingdom of Norway.  He had fixed his
residence in Haukadal when he was thirty years of age, and he had
dwelt there sixty-four years, as Are tells us.  Teit, a son of
Bishop Isleif, was fostered in the house of Hal at Haukadal, and
afterwards dwelt there himself.  He taught Are the priest, and
gave him information about many circumstances which Are
afterwards wrote down.  Are also got many a piece of information
from Thurid, a daughter of the gode Snorre.  She was wise and
intelligent, and remembered her father Snorre, who was nearly
thirty-five years of age when Christianity was introduced into
Iceland, and died a year after King Olaf the Saint's fall.  So it
is not wonderful that Are the priest had good information about
ancient events both here in Iceland, and abroad, being a man
anxious for information, intelligent and of excellent memory, and
having besides learned much from old intelligent persons.  But
the songs seem to me most reliable if they are sung correctly,
and judiciously interpreted.



HALFDAN THE BLACK SAGA.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Of this saga there are other versions found in "Fagrskinna" and
in "Flateyjarbok".  The "Flateyjarbok" version is to a great
extent a copy of Snorre.  The story about Halfdan's dream is
found both in "Fagrskinna" and in "Flateyjarbok".  The
probability is that both Snorre and the author of "Fagrskinna"
must have transcribed the same original text. -- Ed.



1. HALFDAN FIGHTS WITH GANDALF AND SIGTRYG.

Halfdan was a year old when his father was killed, and his mother
Asa set off immediately with him westwards to Agder, and set
herself there in the kingdom which her father Harald had
possessed.  Halfdan grew up there, and soon became stout and
strong; and, by reason of his black hair, was called Halfdan the
Black.  When he was eighteen years old he took his kingdom in
Agder, and went immediately to Vestfold, where he divided that
kingdom, as before related, with his brother Olaf.  The same
autumn he went with an army to Vingulmark against King Gandalf. 
They had many battles, and sometimes one, sometimes the other
gained the victory; but at last they agreed that Halfdan should
have half of Vingulmark, as his father Gudrod had had it before.
Then King Halfdan proceeded to Raumarike, and subdued it.  King
Sigtryg, son of King Eystein, who then had his residence in
Hedemark, and who had subdued Raumarike before, having heard of
this, came out with his army against King Halfdan, and there was
great battle, in which King Halfdan was victorious; and just as
King Sigtryg and his troops were turning about to fly, an arrow
struck him under the left arm, and he fell dead.  Halfdan then
laid the whole of Raumarike under his power.  King Eystein's
second son, King Sigtryg's brother, was also called Eystein, and
was then king in Hedemark.  As soon as Halfdan had returned to
Vestfold, King Eystein went out with his army to Raumarike, and
laid the whole country in subjection to him



2. BATTLE BETWEEN HALFDAN AND EYSTEIN.

When King Halfdan heard of these disturbances in Raumarike, he
again gathered his army together; and went out against King
Eystein.  A battle took place between them, and Halfdan gained
the victory, and Eystein fled up to Hedemark, pursued by Halfdan.
Another battle took place, in which Halfdan was again victorious;
and Eystein fled northwards, up into the Dales to the herse
Gudbrand.  There he was strengthened with new people, and in
winter he went towards Hedemark, and met Halfdan the Black upon a
large island which lies in the Mjosen lake.  There a great battle
was fought, and many people on both sides were slain, but Halfdan
won the victory.  There fell Guthorm, the son of the herse
Gudbrand, who was one of the finest men in the Uplands.  Then
Eystein fled north up the valley, and sent his relation Halvard
Skalk to King Halfdan to beg for peace. On consideration of their
relationship, King Halfdan gave King Eystein half of Hedemark,
which he and his relations had held before; but kept to himself
Thoten, and the district called Land.  He likewise appropriated
to himself Hadeland, and thus became a mighty king.



3. HALFDAN'S MARRIAGE

Halfdan the Black got a wife called Ragnhild, a daughter of
Harald Gulskeg (Goldbeard), who was a king in Sogn.  They had a
son, to whom Harald gave his own name; and the boy was brought up
in Sogn, by his mother's father, King Harald.  Now when this
Harald had lived out his days nearly, and was become weak, having
no son, he gave his dominions to his daughter's son Harald, and
gave him his title of king; and he died soon after.  The same
winter his daughter Ragnhild died; and the following spring the
young Harald fell sick and died at ten years of age.  As soon as
Halfdan the Black heard of his son's death, he took the road
northwards to Sogn with a great force, and was well received.  He
claimed the heritage and dominion after his son; and no
opposition being made, he took the whole kingdom.  Earl Atle
Mjove (the Slender), who was a friend of King Halfdan, came to
him from Gaular; and the king set him over the Sogn district, to
judge in the country according to the country's laws, and collect
scat upon the king's account.  Thereafter King Halfdan proceeded
to his kingdom in the Uplands.



4. HALFDAN'S STRIFE WITH GANDALF'S SONS. 

In autumn, King Halfdan proceeded to Vingulmark.  One night when
he was there in guest quarters, it happened that about midnight a
man came to him who had been on the watch on horseback, and told
him a war force was come near to the house.  The king instantly
got up, ordered his men to arm themselves, and went out of the
house and drew them up in battle order.  At the same moment,
Gandalf's sons, Hysing and Helsing, made their appearance with a
large army.  There was a great battle; but Halfdan being
overpowered by the numbers of people fled to the forest, leaving
many of his men on this spot.  His foster-father, Olver Spake
(the Wise), fell here.  The people now came in swarms to King
Halfdan, and he advanced to seek Gandalf's sons.  They met at
Eid, near Lake Oieren, and fought there.  Hysing and Helsing
fell, and their brother Hake saved himself by flight.  King
Halfdan then took possession of the whole of Vingulmark, and Hake
fled to Alfheimar.



5. HALFDAN'S MARRIAGE WITH HJORT'S DAUGHTER.

Sigurd Hjort was the name of a king in Ringerike, who was stouter
and stronger than any other man, and his equal could not be seen
for a handsome appearance.  His father was Helge Hvasse (the
Sharp); and his mother was Aslaug, a daughter of Sigurd the worm-
eyed, who again was a son of Ragnar Lodbrok.  It is told of
Sigurd that when he was only twelve years old he killed in single
combat the berserk Hildebrand, and eleven others of his comrades;
and many are the deeds of manhood told of him in a long saga
about his feats.  Sigurd had two children, one of whom was a
daughter, called Ragnhild, then twenty years of age, and an
excellent brisk girl.  Her brother Guthorm was a youth.  It is
related in regard to Sigurd's death that he had a custom of
riding out quite alone in the uninhabited forest to hunt the wild
beasts that are hurtful to man, and he was always very eager at
this sport.  One day he rode out into the forest as usual, and
when he had ridden a long way he came out at a piece of cleared
land near to Hadeland.  There the berserk Hake came against him
with thirty men, and they fought.  Sigurd Hjort fell there, after
killing twelve of Hake's men; and Hake himself lost one hand, and
had three other wounds.  Then Hake and his men rode to Sigurd's
house, where they took his daughter Ragnhild and her brother
Guthorm, and carried them, with much property and valuable
articles, home to Hadeland, where Hake had many great farms.  He
ordered a feast to be prepared, intending to hold his wedding
with Ragnhild; but the time passed on account of his wounds,
which healed slowly; and the berserk Hake of Hadeland had to keep
his bed, on account of his wounds, all the autumn and beginning
of winter.  Now King Halfdan was in Hedemark at the Yule
entertainments when he heard this news; and one morning early,
when the king was dressed, he called to him Harek Gand, and told
him to go over to Hadeland, and bring him Ragnhild, Sigurd
Hjort's daughter.  Harek got ready with a hundred men, and made
his journey so that they came over the lake to Hake's house in
the grey of the morning, and beset all the doors and stairs of
the places where the house-servants slept.  Then they broke into
the sleeping-room where Hake slept, took Ragnhild, with her
brother Guthorm, and all the goods that were there, and set fire
to the house-servants' place, and burnt all the people in it. 
Then they covered over a magnificent waggon, placed Ragnhild and
Guthorm in it, and drove down upon the ice.  Hake got up and went
after them a while; but when he came to the ice on the lake, he
turned his sword-hilt to the ground and let himself fall upon the
point, so that the sword went through him.  He was buried under a
mound on the banks of the lake.  When King Halfdan, who was very
quick of sight, saw the party returning over the frozen lake, and
with a covered waggon, he knew that their errand was accomplished
according to his desire.  Thereupon he ordered the tables to be
set out, and sent people all round in the neighbourhood to invite
plenty of guests; and the same day there was a good feast which
was also Halfdan's marriage-feast with Ragnhild, who became a
great queen.  Ragnhild's mother was Thorny, a daughter of
Klakharald king in Jutland, and a sister of Thrye Dannebod who
was married to the Danish king, Gorm the Old, who then ruled over
the Danish dominions.



6. OF RAGNHILD'S DREAM. 

Ragnhild, who was wise and intelligent, dreamt great dreams.  She
dreamt, for one, that she was standing out in her herb-garden,
and she took a thorn out of her shift; but while she was holding
the thorn in her hand it grew so that it became a great tree, one
end of which struck itself down into the earth, and it became
firmly rooted; and the other end of the tree raised itself so
high in the air that she could scarcely see over it, and it
became also wonderfully thick.  The under part of the tree was
red with blood, but the stem upwards was beautifully green and
the branches white as snow.  There were many and great limbs to
the tree, some high up, others low down; and so vast were the
tree's branches that they seemed to her to cover all Norway, and
even much more.



7. OF HALFDAN'S DREAM. 

King Halfdan never had dreams, which appeared to him an
extraordinary circumstance; and he told it to a man called
Thorleif Spake (the Wise), and asked him what his advice was
about it.  Thorleif said that what he himself did, when he wanted
to have any revelation by dream, was to take his sleep in a
swine-sty, and then it never failed that he had dreams.  The king
did so, and the following dream was revealed to him.  He thought
he had the most beautiful hair, which was all in ringlets; some
so long as to fall upon the ground, some reaching to the middle
of his legs, some to his knees, some to his loins or the middle
of his sides, some to his neck, and some were only as knots
springing from his head.  These ringlets were of various colours;
but one ringlet surpassed all the others in beauty, lustre, and
size.  This dream he told to Thorleif, who interpreted it thus:
-- There should be a great posterity from him, and his
descendants should rule over countries with great, but not all
with equally great, honour; but one of his race should be more
celebrated than all the others.  It was the opinion of people
that this ringlet betokened King Olaf the Saint.

King Halfdan was a wise man, a man of truth and uprightness --
who made laws, observed them himself, and obliged others to
observe them.  And that violence should not come in place of the
laws, he himself fixed the number of criminal acts in law, and
the compensations, mulcts, or penalties, for each case, according
to every one's birth and dignity (1).

Queen Ragnhild gave birth to a son, and water was poured over
him, and the name of Harald given him, and he soon grew stout and
remarkably handsome.  As he grew up he became very expert at all
feats, and showed also a good understanding.  He was much beloved
by his mother, but less so by his father.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  The penalty, compensation, or manbod for every injury, due
     the party injured, or to his family and next of kin if the
     injury was the death or premeditated murder of the party,
     appears to have been fixed for every rank and condition,
     from the murder of the king down to the maiming or beating a
     man's cattle or his slave.  A man for whom no compensation
     was due was a dishonored person, or an outlaw.  It appears
     to have been optional with the injured party, or his kin if
     he had been killed, to take the mulct or compensation, or to
     refuse it, and wait for an opportunity of taking vengeance
     for the injury on the party who inflicted it, or on his kin.
     A part of each mulct or compensation was due to the king;
     and, these fines or penalties appear to have constituted a
     great proportion of the king's revenues, and to have been
     settled in the Things held in every district for
     administering the law with the lagman. -- L.



8. HALFDAN'S MEAT VANISHES AT A FEAST

King Halfdan was at a Yule-feast in Hadeland, where a wonderful
thing happened one Yule evening.  When the great number of guests
assembled were going to sit down to table, all the meat and all
the ale disappeared from the table.  The king sat alone very
confused in mind; all the others set off, each to his home, in
consternation.  That the king might come to some certainty about
what had occasioned this event, he ordered a Fin to be seized who
was particularly knowing, and tried to force him to disclose the
truth; but however much he tortured the man, he got nothing out
of him.  The Fin sought help particularly from Harald, the king's
son, and Harald begged for mercy for him, but in vain.  Then
Harald let him escape against the king's will, and accompanied
the man himself.  On their journey they came to a place where the
man's chief had a great feast, and it appears they were well
received there.  When they had been there until spring, the chief
said, "Thy father took it much amiss that in winter I took some
provisions from him, -- now I will repay it to thee by a joyful
piece of news: thy father is dead; and now thou shalt return
home, and take possession of the whole kingdom which he had, and
with it thou shalt lay the whole kingdom of Norway under thee."



9. HALFDAN S DEATH. 

Halfdan the Black was driving from a feast in Hadeland, and it so
happened that his road lay over the lake called Rand.  It was in
spring, and there was a great thaw.  They drove across the bight
called Rykinsvik, where in winter there had been a pond broken in
the ice for cattle to drink at, and where the dung had fallen
upon the ice the thaw had eaten it into holes.  Now as the king
drove over it the ice broke, and King Halfdan and many with him
perished.  He was then forty years old.  He had been one of the
most fortunate kings in respect of good seasons.  The people
thought so much of him, that when his death was known and his
body was floated to Ringerike to bury it there, the people of
most consequence from Raumarike, Vestfold, and Hedemark came to
meet it.  All desired to take the body with them to bury it in
their own district, and they thought that those who got it would
have good crops to expect.  At last it was agreed to divide the
body into four parts.  The head was laid in a mound at Stein in
Ringerike, and each of the others took his part home and laid it
in a mound; and these have since been called Halfdan's Mounds.



HARALD HARFAGER'S SAGA.


1. HARALD'S STRIFE WITH HAKE AND HIS FATHER GANDALF. 

Harald (1) was but ten years old when he succeeded his father
(Halfdan the Black).  He became a stout, strong, and comely man,
and withal prudent and manly.  His mother's brother, Guthorm, was
leader of the hird, at the head of the government, and commander
(`hertogi') of the army.  After Halfdan the Black's death, many
chiefs coveted the dominions he had left.  Among these King
Gandalf was the first; then Hogne and Frode, sons of Eystein,
king of Hedemark; and also Hogne Karuson came from Ringerike. 
Hake, the son of Gandalf, began with an expedition of 300 men
against Vestfold, marched by the main road through some valleys,
and expected to come suddenly upon King Harald; while his father
Gandalf sat at home with his army, and prepared to cross over the
fiord into Vestfold.  When Duke Guthorm heard of this he gathered
an army, and marched up the country with King Harald against
Hake.  They met in a valley, in which they fought a great battle,
and King Harald was victorious; and there fell King Hake and most
of his people.  The place has since been called Hakadale.  Then
King Harald and Duke Guthorm turned back, but they found King
Gandalf had come to Vestfold.  The two armies marched against
each other, and met, and had a great battle; and it ended in King
Gandalf flying, after leaving most of his men dead on the spot,
and in that state he came back to his kingdom.  Now when the sons
of King Eystein in Hedemark heard the news, they expected the war
would come upon them, and they sent a message to Hogne Karuson
and to Herse Gudbrand, and appointed a meeting with them at
Ringsaker in Hedemark.

ENDNOTES:
(1)  The first twenty chapters of this saga refer to Harald's
     youth and his conquest of Norway.  This portion of the saga
     is of great importance to the Icelanders, as the settlement
     of their Isle was a result of Harald's wars.  The second
     part of the saga (chaps. 21-46) treats of the disputes
     between Harald's sons, of the jarls of Orkney, and of the
     jarls of More.  With this saga we enter the domain of
     history. -- Ed.



2. KING HARALD OVERCOMES FIVE KINGS.

After the battle King Harald and Guthorm turned back, and went
with all the men they could gather through the forests towards
the Uplands.  They found out where the Upland kings had appointed
their meeting-place, and came there about the time of midnight,
without the watchmen observing them until their army was before
the door of the house in which Hogne Karuson was, as well as that
in which Gudbrand slept.  They set fire to both houses; but King
Eystein's two sons slipped out with their men, and fought for a
while, until both Hogne and Frode fell.  After the fall of these
four chiefs, King Harald, by his relation Guthorm's success and
powers, subdued Hedemark, Ringerike, Gudbrandsdal, Hadeland,
Thoten, Raumarike, and the whole northern part of Vingulmark. 
King Harald and Guthorm had thereafter war with King Gandalf, and
fought several battles with him; and in the last of them King
Gandalf was slain, and King Harald took the whole of his kingdom
as far south as the river Raum.



3. OF GYDA, DAUGHTER OF EIRIE.

King Harald sent his men to a girl called Gyda, daughter of King
Eirik of Hordaland, who was brought up as foster-child in the
house of a great bonde in Valdres.  The king wanted her for his
concubine; for she was a remarkably handsome girl, but of high
spirit withal.  Now when the messengers came there, and delivered
their errand to the girl, she answered, that she would not throw
herself away even to take a king for her husband, who had no
greater kingdom to rule over than a few districts.  "And
methinks," said she, "it is wonderful that no king here in Norway
will make the whole country subject to him, in the same way as
Gorm the Old did in Denmark, or Eirik at Upsala."  The messengers
thought her answer was dreadfully haughty, and asked what she
thought would come of such an answer; for Harald was so mighty a
man, that his invitation was good enough for her.  But although
she had replied to their errand differently from what they
wished, they saw no chance, on this occasion, of taking her with
them against her will; so they prepared to return.  When they
were ready, and the people followed them out, Gyda said to the
messengers, "Now tell to King Harald these my words.  I will only
agree to be his 1awful wife upon the condition that he shall
first, for my sake, subject to himself the whole of Norway, so
that he may rule over that kingdom as freely and fully as King
Eirik over the Swedish dominions, or King Gorm over Denmark; for
only then, methinks, can he be called the king of a people."



4. KING HARALD'S VOW.

Now came the messengers back to King Harald, bringing him the
words of the girl, and saying she was so bold and foolish that
she well deserved that the king should send a greater troop of
people for her, and inflict on her some disgrace.  Then answered
the king, "This girl has not spoken or done so much amiss that
she should be punished, but rather she should be thanked for her
words.  She has reminded me," said he, "of something which it
appears to me wonderful I did not think of before.  And now,"
added he, "I make the solemn vow, and take God to witness, who
made me and rules over all things, that never shall I clip or
comb my hair until I have subdued the whole of Norway, with scat
(1), and duties, and domains; or if not, have died in the
attempt."  Guthorm thanked the king warmly for his vow; adding,
that it was royal work to fulfil royal words.

ENDNOTES:
(1)  Scat was a land-tax, paid to the king in money, malt, meal,
     or flesh-meat, from all lands, and was adjudged by the Thing
     to each king upon his accession, and being proposed and
     accepted as king.



5. THE BATTLE IN ORKADAL.

After this the two relations gather together a great force, and
prepare for an expedition to the Uplands, and northwards up the
valley (Gudbrandsdal), and north over Dovrefjeld; and when the
king came down to the inhabited land he ordered all the men to be
killed, and everything wide around to be delivered to the flames. 
And when the people came to know this, they fled every one where
he could; some down the country to Orkadal, some to Gaulardal,
some to the forests.  But some begged for peace, and obtained it,
on condition of joining the king and becoming his men.  He met no
opposition until he came to Orkadal.  There a crowd of people had
assembled, and he had his first battle with a king called
Gryting.  Harald won the victory, and King Gryting was made
prisoner, and most of his people killed.  He took service himself
under the king, and swore fidelity to him.  Thereafer all the
people in Orkadal district went under King Harald, and became his
men.



6. KING HARALD S LAWS FOR LAND PROPERTY. 

King Harald made this law over all the lands he conquered, that
all the udal property should belong to him; and that the bondes,
both great and small, should pay him land dues for their
possessions.  Over every district he set an earl to judge
according to the law of the land and to justice, and also to
collect the land dues and the fines; and for this each earl
received a third part of the dues, and services, and fines, for
the support of his table and other expenses.  Each earl had under
him four or more herses, each of whom had an estate of twenty
marks yearly income bestowed on him and was bound to support
twenty men-at-arms, and the earl sixty men, at their own
expenses.  The king had increased the land dues and burdens so
much, that each of his earls had greater power and income than
the kings had before; and when that became known at Throndhjem,
many great men joined the king and took his service. 



7. BATTLE IN GAULARDAL.

It is told that Earl Hakon Grjotgardson came to King Harald from
Yrjar, and brought a great crowd of men to his service.  Then
King Harald went into Gaulardal, and had a great battle, in which
he slew two kings, and conquered their dominions; and these were
Gaulardal district and Strind district.  He gave Earl Hakon
Strind district to rule over as earl.  King Harald then proceeded
to Stjoradal, and had a third battle, in which he gained the
victory, and took that district also.  There upon the Throndhjem
people assembled, and four kings met together with their troops. 
The one ruled over Veradal, the second over Skaun, third over the
Sparbyggja district, and the fourth over Eyin Idre (Inderoen);
and this latter had also Eyna district.  These four kings marched
with their men against King Harald, but he won the battle; and
some of these kings fell, and some fled.  In all, King Harald
fought at the least eight battles, and slew eight kings, in the
Throndhjem district, and laid the whole of it under him.



8. HARALD SEIZES NAUMUDAL DISTRICT.

North in Naumudal were two brothers, kings, -- Herlaug and
Hrollaug; and they had been for three summers raising a mound or
tomb of stone and lime and of wood.  Just as the work was
finished, the brothers got the news that King Harald was coming
upon them with his army.  Then King Herlaug had a great quantity
of meat and drink brought into the mound, and went into it
himself, with eleven companions, and ordered the mound to be
covered up.  King Hrollaug, on the contrary, went upon the summit
of the mound, on which the kings were wont to sit, and made a
throne to be erected, upon which he seated himself.  Then he
ordered feather-beds to be laid upon the bench below, on which
the earls were wont to be seated, and threw himself down from his
high seat or throne into the earl's seat, giving himself the
title of earl.  Now Hrollaug went to meet King Harald, gave up to
him his whole kingdom, offered to enter into his service, and
told him his whole proceeding.  Then took King Harald a sword,
fastened it to Hrollaug's belt, bound a shield to his neck, and
made him thereupon an earl, and led him to his earl's seat; and
therewith gave him the district Naumudal, and set him as earl
over it ((A.D. 866)). (1)

ENDNOTES:
(1)  Before writing was in general use, this symbolical way of
     performing all important legal acts appears to have entered
     into the jurisprudence of all savage nations; and according
     to Gibbon, chap. 44, "the jurisprudence of the first Romans
     exhibited the scenes of a pantomime; the words were adapted
     to the gestures, and the slightest error or neglect in the
     forms of proceeding was sufficient to annul the substance of
     the fairest claims." -- Ed.



9. KING HARALD'S HOME AFFAIRS.

King Harald then returned to Throndhjem, where he dwelt during
the winter, and always afterwards called it his home.  He fixed
here his head residence, which is called Lade.  This winter he
took to wife Asa, a daughter of Earl Hakon Grjotgardson, who then
stood in great favour and honour with the king.  In spring the
king fitted out his ships.  In winter he had caused a great
frigate (a dragon) to be built, and had it fitted-out in the most
splendid way, and brought his house-troops and his berserks on
board.  The forecastle men were picked men, for they had the
king's banner.  From the stem to the mid-hold was called rausn,
or the fore-defence; and there were the berserks.  Such men only
were received into King Harald's house-troop as were remarkable
for strength, courage, and all kinds of dexterity; and they alone
got place in his ship, for he had a good choice of house-troops
from the best men of every district.  King Harald had a great
army, many large ships, and many men of might followed him.
Hornklofe, in his poem called "Glymdrapa", tells of this; and
also that King Harald had a battle with the people of Orkadal, at
Opdal forest, before he went upon this expedition.

     "O'er the broad heath the bowstrings twang,
     While high in air the arrows sang.
     The iron shower drives to flight
     The foeman from the bloody fight.
     The warder of great Odin's shrine,
     The fair-haired son of Odin's line,
     Raises the voice which gives the cheer,
     First in the track of wolf or bear.
     His master voice drives them along
     To Hel -- a destined, trembling throng;
     And Nokve's ship, with glancing sides,
     Must fly to the wild ocean's tides. --
     Must fly before the king who leads
     Norse axe-men on their ocean steeds."



10. BATTLE AT SOLSKEL

King Harald moved out with his army from Throndhjem, and went
southwards to More.  Hunthiof was the name of the king who ruled
over the district of More.  Solve Klofe was the name of his son,
and both were great warriors.  King Nokve, who ruled over
Raumsdal, was the brother of Solve's mother.  Those chiefs
gathered a great force when they heard of King Harald, and came
against him.  They met at Solskel, and there was a great battle,
which was gained by King Harald (A.D. 867).  Hornklofe tells of
this battle: --

     "Thus did the hero known to fame,
     The leader of the shields, whose name
     Strikes every heart with dire dismay,
     Launch forth his war-ships to the fray.
     Two kings he fought; but little strife
     Was needed to cut short their life.
     A clang of arms by the sea-shore, --
     And the shields' sound was heard no more."

The two kings were slain, but Solve escaped by flight; and King
Harald laid both districts under his power.  He stayed here long
in summer to establish law and order for the country people, and
set men to rule them, and keep them faithful to him; and in
autumn he prepared to return northwards to Throndhjem.  Ragnvald
Earl of More, a son of Eystein Glumra, had the summer before
become one of Harald's men; and the king set him as chief over
these two districts, North More and Raumsdal; strengthened him
both with men of might and bondes, and gave him the help of
ships to defend the coast against enemies.  He was called
Ragnvald the Mighty, or the Wise; and people say both names
suited him well.  King Harald came back to Throndhjem about
winter.



11. FALL OF KINGS ARNVID AND AUDBJORN.

The following spring (A.D. 868) King Harald raised a great force
in Throndhjem, and gave out that he would proceed to South More.
Solve Klofe had passed the winter in his ships of war, plundering
in North More, and had killed many of King Harald's men;
pillaging some places, burning others, and making great ravage;
but sometimes he had been, during the winter, with his friend
King Arnvid in South More.  Now when he heard that King Harald
was come with ships and a great army, he gathered people, and was
strong in men-at-arms; for many thought they had to take
vengeance of King Harald.  Solve Klofe went southwards to
Firdafylke (the Fjord district), which King Audbjorn ruled over,
to ask him to help, and join his force to King Arnvid's and his
own.  "For," said he, "it is now clear that we all have but one
course to take; and that is to rise, all as one man, against King
Harald, for we have strength enough, and fate must decide the
victory; for as to the other condition of becoming his servants,
that is no condition for us, who are not less noble than Harald.
My father thought it better to fall in battle for his kingdom,
than to go willingly into King Harald's service, or not to abide
the chance of weapons like the Naumudal kings."  King Solve's
speech was such that King Audbjorn promised his help, and
gathered a great force together and went with it to King Arnvid,
and they had a great army.  Now, they got news that King Harald
was come from the north, and they met within Solskel.  And it was
the custom to lash the ships together, stem to stem; so it was
done now.  King Harald laid his ship against King Arnvid's, and
there was the sharpest fight, and many men fell on both sides. 
At last King Harald was raging with anger, and went forward to
the fore-deck, and slew so dreadfully that all the forecastle men
of Arnvid's ship were driven aft of the mast, and some fell.
Thereupon Harald boarded the ship, and King Arnvid's men tried to
save themselves by flight, and he himself was slain in his ship.
King Audbjorn also fell; but Solve fled.  So says Hornklofe: -- 

     "Against the hero's shield in vain
     The arrow-storm fierce pours its rain.
     The king stands on the blood-stained deck,
     Trampling on many a stout foe's neck;
     And high above the dinning stound
     Of helm and axe, and ringing sound
     Of blade and shield, and raven's cry,
     Is heard his shout of `Victory!'"

Of King Harald's men, fell his earls Asgaut and Asbjorn, together
with his brothers-in-law, Grjotgard and Herlaug, the sons of Earl
Hakon of Lade.  Solve became afterwards a great sea-king, and
often did great damage in King Harald's dominions.



12. KING VEMUND BURNT TO DEATH.

After this battle (A.D. 868) King Harald subdued South More; but
Vemund, King Audbjorn's brother, still had Firdafylke.  It was
now late in harvest, and King Harald's men gave him the counsel
not to proceed south-wards round Stad.  Then King Harald set Earl
Ragnvald over South and North More and also Raumsdal, and he had
many people about him.  King Harald returned to Throndhjem.  The
same winter (A.D. 869) Ragnvald went over Eid, and southwards to
the Fjord district.  There he heard news of King Vemund, and came
by night to a place called Naustdal, where King Vemund was living
in guest-quarters.  Earl Ragnvald surrounded the house in which
they were quartered, and burnt the king in it, together with
ninety men.  The came Berdlukare to Earl Ragnvald with a complete
armed long-ship, and they both returned to More.  The earl took
all the ships Vemund had, and all the goods he could get hold of.
Berdlukare proceeded north to Throndhjem to King Harald, and
became his man; and dreadful berserk he was.



13. DEATH OF EARLS HAKON, AND ATLE MJOVE.

The following spring (A.D. 869) King Harald went southwards with
his fleet along the coast, and subdued Firdafylke.  Then he
sailed eastward along the land until he came to Vik; but he left
Earl Hakon Grjotgardson behind, and set him over the Fjord
district.  Earl Hakon sent word to Earl Atle Mjove that he should
leave Sogn district, and be earl over Gaular district, as he had
been before, alleging that King Harald had given Sogn district to
him.  Earl Atle sent word that he would keep both Sogn district
and Gaular district, until he met King Harald.  The two earls
quarreled about this so long, that both gathered troops.  They
met at Fialar, in Stavanger fiord, and had a great battle, in
which Earl Hakon fell, and Earl Atle got a mortal wound, and his
men carried him to the island of Atley, where he died.  So says
Eyvind Skaldaspiller: --

     "He who stood a rooted oak,
     Unshaken by the swordsman's stroke,
     Amidst the whiz of arrows slain,
     Has fallen upon Fjalar's plain.
     There, by the ocean's rocky shore,
     The waves are stained with the red gore
     Of stout Earl Hakon Grjotgard's son,
     And of brave warriors many a one."



14. HARALD AND THE SWEDISH KING EIRIK.

King Harald came with his fleet eastward to Viken and landed at
Tunsberg, which was then a trading town.  He had then been four
years in Throndhjem, and in all that time had not been in Viken.
Here he heard the news that Eirik Eymundson, king of Sweden, had
laid under him Vermaland, and was taking scat or land-tax from
all the forest settlers; and also that he called the whole
country north to Svinasund, and west along the sea, West
Gautland; and which altogether he reckoned to his kingdom, and
took land-tax from it.  Over this country he had set an earl, by
name Hrane Gauzke, who had the earldom between Svinasund and the
Gaut river, and was a mighty earl.  And it was told to King
Harald that the Swedish king said he would not rest until he had
as great a kingdom in Viken as Sigurd Hring, or his son Ragnar
Lodbrok, had possessed; and that was Raumarike and Vestfold, all
the way to the isle Grenmar, and also Vingulmark, and all that
lay south of it.  In all these districts many chiefs, and many
other people, had given obedience to the Swedish king.  King
Harald was very angry at this, and summoned the bondes to a Thing
at Fold, where he laid an accusation against them for treason
towards him.  Some bondes defended themselves from the
accusation, some paid fines, some were punished.  He went thus
through the whole district during the summer, and in harvest he
did the same in Raumarike, and laid the two districts under his
power.  Towards winter he heard that Eirik king of Sweden was,
with his court, going about in Vermaland in guest-quarters.



15. HARALD AT A FEAST OF THE PEASANT AKE.

King Harald takes his way across the Eid forest eastward, and
comes out in Vermaland, where he also orders feasts to be
prepared for himself.  There was a man by name Ake, who was the
greatest of the bondes of Vermaland, very rich, and at that time
very aged.  He sent men to King Harald, and invited him to a
feast, and the king promised to come on the day appointed.  Ake
invited also King Eirik to a feast, and appointed the same day.
Ake had a great feasting hall, but it was old; and he made a new
hall, not less than the old one, and had it ornamented in the
most splendid way.  The new hall he had hung with new hangings,
but the old had only its old ornaments.  Now when the kings came
to the feast, King Eirik with his court was taken into the old
hall; but Harald with his followers into the new.  The same
difference was in all the table furniture, and King Eirik and his
men had the old-fashioned vessels and horns, but all gilded and
splendid; while King Harald and his men had entirely new vessels
and horns adorned with gold, all with carved figures, and shining
like glass; and both companies had the best of liquor.  Ake the
bonde had formerly been King Halfdan the Black s man.  Now when
daylight came, and the feast was quite ended, and the kings made
themselves ready for their journey, and the horses were saddled,
came Ake before King Harald, leading in his hand his son Ubbe, a
boy of twelve years of age, and said, "If the goodwill I have
shown to thee, sire, in my feast, be worth thy friendship, show
it hereafter to my son.  I give him to thee now for thy service."
The king thanked him with many agreeable words for his friendly
entertainment, and promised him his full friendship in return.
Then Ake brought out great presents, which he gave to the king,
and they gave each other thereafter the parting kiss.  Ake went
next to the Swedish king, who was dressed and ready for the road,
but not in the best humour.  Ake gave to him also good and
valuable gifts; but the king answered only with few words, and
mounted his horse.  Ake followed the king on the road and talked
with him.  The road led through a wood which was near to the
house; and when Ake came to the wood, the king said to him, "How
was it that thou madest such a difference between me and King
Harald as to give him the best of everything, although thou
knowest thou art my man?"  "I think" answered Ake, "that there
failed in it nothing, king, either to you or to your attendants,
in friendly entertainment at this feast.  But that all the
utensils for your drinking were old, was because you are now old;
but King Harald is in the bloom of youth, and therefore I gave
him the new things.  And as to my being thy man, thou art just as
much my man."  On this the king out with his sword, and gave Ake
his deathwound.  King Harald was ready now also to mount his
horse, and desired that Ake should be called.  The people went to
seek him; and some ran up the road that King Eirik had taken, and
found Ake there dead.  They came back, and told the news to King
Harald, and he bids his men to be up, and avenge Ake the bonde.
And away rode he and his men the way King Eirik had taken, until
they came in sight of each other.  Each for himself rode as hard
as he could, until Eirik came into the wood which divides
Gautland and Vermaland.  There King Harald wheels about, and
returns to Vermaland, and lays the country under him, and kills
King Eirik's men wheresoever he can find them.  In winter King
Harald returned to Raumarike, and dwelt there a while.



16. HARALD'S JOURNEY TO TUNSBERG.

King Harald went out in winter to his ships at Tunsberg, rigged
them, and sailed away eastward over the fiord, and subjected all
Vingulmark to his dominion.  All winter he was out with his
ships, and marauded in Ranrike; so says Thorbjorn Hornklofe: --

     "The Norseman's king is on the sea,
     Tho' bitter wintry cold it be. --
     On the wild waves his Yule keeps he.
     When our brisk king can get his way,
     He'll no more by the fireside stay
     Than the young sun; he makes us play
     The game of the bright sun-god Frey.
     But the soft Swede loves well the fire
     The well-stuffed couch, the doway glove,
     And from the hearth-seat will not move."

The Gautlanders gathered people together all over the country.



17. THE BATTLE IN GAUTLAND.

In spring, when the ice was breaking up, the Gautlanders drove
stakes into the Gaut river to hinder King Harald with his ships
from coming to the land.  But King Harald laid his ships
alongside the stakes, and plundered the country, and burnt all
around; so says Horn klofe: --

     "The king who finds a dainty feast,
     For battle-bird and prowling beast,
     Has won in war the southern land
     That lies along the ocean's strand.
     The leader of the helmets, he
     Who leads his ships o'er the dark sea,
     Harald, whose high-rigged masts appear
     Like antlered fronts of the wild deer,
     Has laid his ships close alongside
     Of the foe's piles with daring pride."

Afterwards the Gautlanders came down to the strand with a great
army, and gave battle to King Harald, and great was the fall of
men.  But it was King Harald who gained the day.  Thus says
Hornklofe: --

     "Whistles the battle-axe in its swing
     O'er head the whizzing javelins sing,
     Helmet and shield and hauberk ring;
     The air-song of the lance is loud,
     The arrows pipe in darkening cloud;
     Through helm and mail the foemen feel
     The blue edge of our king's good steel
     Who can withstand our gallant king?
     The Gautland men their flight must wing."



18. HRANE GAUZKE'S DEATH.

King Harald went far and wide through Gautland, and many were the
battles he fought there on both sides of the river, and in
general he was victorious.  In one of these battles fell Hrane
Gauzke; and then the king took his whole land north of the river
and west of the Veneren, and also Vermaland.  And after he turned
back there-from, he set Duke Guthorm as chief to defend the
country, and left a great force with him.  King Harald himself
went first to the Uplands, where he remained a while, and then
proceeded northwards over the Dovrefjeld to Throndhjem, where he
dwelt for a long time.  Harald began to have children.  By Asa he
had four sons.  The eldest was Guthorm.  Halfdan the Black and
Halfdan the White were twins.  Sigfrod was the fourth.  They were
all brought up in Throndhjem with all honour.



19. BATTLE IN HAFERSFJORD.

News came in from the south land that the people of Hordaland and
Rogaland, Agder and Thelemark, were gathering, and bringing
together ships and weapons, and a great body of men.  The leaders
of this were Eirik king of Hordaland; Sulke king of Rogaland, and
his brother Earl Sote: Kjotve the Rich, king of Agder, and his
son Thor Haklang; and from Thelemark two brothers, Hroald Hryg
and Had the Hard.  Now when Harald got certain news of this, he
assembled his forces, set his ships on the water, made himself
ready with his men, and set out southwards along the coast,
gathering many people from every district.  King Eirik heard of
this when he same south of Stad; and having assembled all the men
he could expect, he proceeded southwards to meet the force which
he knew was coming to his help from the east.  The whole met
together north of Jadar, and went into Hafersfjord, where King
Harald was waiting with his forces.  A great battle began, which
was both hard and long; but at last King Harald gained the day.
There King Eirik fell, and King Sulke, with his brother Earl
Sote.  Thor Haklang, who was a great berserk, had laid his ship
against King Harald's, and there was above all measure a
desperate attack, until Thor Haklang fell, and his whole ship was
cleared of men.  Then King Kjotve fled to a little isle outside,
on which there was a good place of strength.  Thereafter all his
men fled, some to their ships, some up to the land; and the
latter ran southwards over the country of Jadar.  So says
Hornklofe, viz.: --

     "Has the news reached you? -- have you heard
     Of the great fight at Hafersfjord,
     Between our noble king brave Harald
     And King Kjotve rich in gold?
     The foeman came from out the East,
     Keen for the fray as for a feast.
     A gallant sight it was to see
     Their fleet sweep o'er the dark-blue sea:
     Each war-ship, with its threatening throat
     Of dragon fierce or ravenous brute (1)
     Grim gaping from the prow; its wales
     Glittering with burnished shields, (2) like scales
     Its crew of udal men of war,
     Whose snow-white targets shone from far
     And many a mailed spearman stout
     From the West countries round about,
     English and Scotch, a foreign host,
     And swordamen from the far French coast.
     And as the foemen's ships drew near,
     The dreadful din you well might hear
     Savage berserks roaring mad,
     And champions fierce in wolf-skins clad, (3)
     Howling like wolves; and clanking jar
     Of many a mail-clad man of war.
     Thus the foe came; but our brave king
     Taught them to fly as fast again.
     For when he saw their force come o'er,
     He launched his war-ships from the shore.
     On the deep sea he launched his fleet
     And boldly rowed the foe to meet.
     Fierce was the shock, and loud the clang
     Of shields, until the fierce Haklang,
     The foeman's famous berserk, fell.
     Then from our men burst forth the yell
     Of victory, and the King of Gold
     Could not withstand our Harald bold,
     But fled before his flaky locks
     For shelter to the island rocks.
     All in the bottom of the ships
     The wounded lay, in ghastly heaps;
     Backs up and faces down they lay
     Under the row-seats stowed away;
     And many a warrior's shield, I ween
     Might on the warrior's back be seen,
     To shield him as he fled amain
     From the fierce stone-storm's pelting rain.
     The mountain-folk, as I've heard say,
     Ne'er stopped as they ran from the fray,
     Till they had crossed the Jadar sea,
     And reached their homes -- so keen each soul
     To drown his fright in the mead bowl."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The war-ships were called dragons, from being decorated with
     the head of a dragon, serpent, or other wild animal; and the
     word "draco" was adopted in the Latin of the Middle Ages to
     denote a ship of war of the larger class.  The snekke was
     the cutter or smaller war-ship. -- L.
(2)  The shields were hung over the side-rails of the ships. --
     L.
(3)  The wolf-skin pelts were nearly as good as armour against
     the sword.



20. HARALD SUPREME SOVEREIGN IN NORWAY.

After this battle King Harald met no opposition in Norway, for
all his opponents and greatest enemies were cut off.  But some,
and they were a great multitude, fled out of the country, and
thereby great districts were peopled.  Jemtaland and
Helsingjaland were peopled then, although some Norwegians had
already set up their habitation there.  In the discontent that
King Harald seized on the lands of Norway, the out-countries of
Iceland and the Farey Isles were discovered and peopled.  The
Northmen had also a great resort to Hjaltland (Shetland Isles)
and many men left Norway, flying the country on account of King
Harald, and went on viking cruises into the West sea.  In winter
they were in the Orkney Islands and Hebrides; but marauded in
summer in Norway, and did great damage.  Many, however, were the
mighty men who took service under King Harald, and became his
men, and dwelt in the land with him.



21. HARALD'S MARRIAGE AND HIS CHILDREN.

When King Harald had now become sole king over all Norway, he
remembered what that proud girl had said to him; so he sent men
to her, and had her brought to him, and took her to his bed.  And
these were their children: Alof -- she was the eldest; then was
their son Hrorek; then Sigtryg, Frode, and Thorgils.  King Harald
had many wives and many children.  Among them he had one wife,
who was called Ragnhild the Mighty, a daughter of King Eirik,
from Jutland; and by her he had a son, Eirik Blood-axe.  He was
also married to Svanhild, a daughter of Earl Eystein; and their
sons were Olaf Geirstadaalf, Bjorn and Ragnar Rykkil.  Lastly,
King Harald married Ashild, a daughter of Hring Dagson, up in
Ringerike; and their children were, Dag, Hring, Gudrod Skiria,
and Ingigerd.  It is told that King Harald put away nine wives
when he married Ragnhild the Mighty.  So says Hornklofe: --

     "Harald, of noblest race the head,
     A Danish wife took to his bed;
     And out of doors nine wives he thrust, --
     The mothers of the princes first.
     Who 'mong Holmrygians hold command,
     And those who rule in Hordaland.
     And then he packed from out the place
     The children born of Holge's race."

King Harald's children were all fostered and brought up by their
relations on the mother's side.  Guthorm the Duke had poured
water over King Harald's eldest son and had given him his own
name.  He set the child upon his knee, and was his foster-father,
and took him with himself eastward to Viken, and there he was
brought up in the house of Guthorm.  Guthorm ruled the whole land
in Viken and the Uplands, when King Harald was absent.



22. KING HARALD'S VOYAGE TO THE WEST.

King Harald heard that the vikings, who were in the West sea in
winter, plundered far and wide in the middle part of Norway; and
therefore every summer he made an expedition to search the isles
and out-skerries (1) on the coast.  Wheresoever the vikings heard
of him they all took to flight, and most of them out into the
open ocean.  At last the king grew weary of this work, and
therefore one summer he sailed with his fleet right out into the
West sea.  First he came to Hjaltland (Shetland), and he slew all
the vikings who could not save themselves by flight.  Then King
Harald sailed southwards, to the Orkney Islands, and cleared them
all of vikings.  Thereafter he proceeded to the Sudreys
(Hebrides), plundered there, and slew many vikings who formerly
had had men-at-arms under them.  Many a battle was fought, and
King Harald was always victorious.  He then plundered far and
wide in Scotland itself, and had a battle there.  When he was
come westward as far as the Isle of Man, the report of his
exploits on the land had gone before him; for all the inhabitants
had fled over to Scotland, and the island was left entirely bare
both of people and goods, so that King Harald and his men made no
booty when they landed.  So says Hornklofe: --

     "The wise, the noble king, great
     Whose hand so freely scatters gold,
     Led many a northern shield to war
     Against the town upon the shore.
     The wolves soon gathered on the sand
     Of that sea-shore; for Harald's hand
     The Scottish army drove away,
     And on the coast left wolves a prey."

In this war fell Ivar, a son of Ragnvald, Earl of More; and King
Harald gave Ragnvald, as a compensation for the loss, the Orkney
and Shetland isles, when he sailed from the West; but Ragnvald
immediately gave both these countries to his brother Sigurd, who
remained behind them; and King Harald, before sailing eastward,
gave Sigurd the earldom of them.  Thorstein the Red, a son of
Olaf the White and of Aud the Wealthy, entered into partnership
with him; and after plundering in Scotland, they subdued
Caithness and Sutherland, as far as Ekkjalsbakke.  Earl Sigurd
killed Melbridge Tooth, a Scotch earl, and hung his head to his
stirrup-leather; but the calf of his leg were scratched by the
teeth, which were sticking out from the head, and the wound
caused inflammation in his leg, of which the earl died, and he
was laid in a mound at Ekkjalsbakke.  His son Guthorm ruled over
these countries for about a year thereafter, and died without
children.  Many vikings, both Danes and Northmen, set themselves
down then in those countries.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Skerries are the uninhabited dry or halt-tide rocks of a
     coast. -- L.



23. HARALD HAS HIS HAIR CLIPPED.

After King Harald had subdued the whole land, he was one day at
a feast in More, given by Earl Ragnvald.  Then King Harald went
into a bath, and had his hair dressed.  Earl Ragnvald now cut his
hair, which had been uncut and uncombed for ten years; and
therefore the king had been called Lufa (i.e., with rough matted
hair).  But then Earl Ragnvald gave him the distinguishing name
-- Harald Harfager (i.e., fair hair); and all who saw him agreed
that there was the greatest truth in the surname, for he had the
most beautiful and abundant head of hair.



24. ROLF GANGER DRIVEN INTO BANISHMENT.

Earl Ragnvald was King Harald's dearest friend, and the king had
the greatest regard for him.  He was married to Hild, a daughter
of Rolf Nefia, and their sons were Rolf and Thorer.  Earl
Ragnvald had also three sons by concubines, -- the one called
Hallad, the second Einar, the third Hrollaug; and all three were
grown men when their brothers born in marriage were still
children Rolf became a great viking, and was of so stout a growth
that no horse could carry him, and wheresoever he went he must go
on foot; and therefore he was called Rolf Ganger.  He plundered
much in the East sea.  One summer, as he was coming from the
eastward on a viking's expedition to the coast of Viken, he
landed there and made a cattle foray.  As King Harald happened,
just at that time, to be in Viken, he heard of it, and was in a
great rage; for he had forbid, by the greatest punishment, the
plundering within the bounds of the country.  The king assembled
a Thing, and had Rolf declared an outlaw over all Norway.  When
Rolf's mother, Hild heard of it she hastened to the king, and
entreated peace for Rolf; but the king was so enraged that here
entreaty was of no avail.  Then Hild spake these lines: --

     "Think'st thou, King Harald, in thy anger,
     To drive away my brave Rolf Ganger
     Like a mad wolf, from out the land?
     Why, Harald, raise thy mighty hand?
     Why banish Nefia's gallant name-son,
     The brother of brave udal-men?
     Why is thy cruelty so fell?
     Bethink thee, monarch, it is ill
     With such a wolf at wolf to play,
     Who, driven to the wild woods away
     May make the king's best deer his prey."

Rolf Ganger went afterwards over sea to the West to the Hebrides,
or Sudreys; and at last farther west to Valland, where he
plundered and subdued for himself a great earldom, which he
peopled with Northmen, from which that land is called Normandy.
Rolf Ganger's son was William, father to Richard, and grandfather
to another Richard, who was the father of Robert Longspear, and
grandfather of William the Bastard, from whom all the following
English kings are descended.  From Rolf Ganger also are descended
the earls in Normandy.  Queen Ragnhild the Mighty lived three
years after she came to Norway; and, after her death, her son and
King Harald's was taken to the herse Thorer Hroaldson, and Eirik
was fostered by him.



25. OF THE FIN SVASE AND KING HARALD.

King Harald, one winter, went about in guest-quarters in the
Uplands, and had ordered a Christmas feast to be prepared for him
at the farm Thoptar.  On Christmas eve came Svase to the door,
just as the king went to table, and sent a message to the king to
ask if he would go out with him.  The king was angry at such a
message, and the man who had brought it in took out with him a
reply of the king's displeasure.  But Svase, notwithstanding,
desired that his message should be delivered a second time;
adding to it, that he was the Fin whose hut the king had promised
to visit, and which stood on the other side of the ridge.  Now
the king went out, and promised to go with him, and went over the
ridge to his hut, although some of his men dissuaded him.  There
stood Snaefrid, the daughter of Svase, a most beautiful girl; and
she filled a cup of mead for the king.  But he took hold both of
the cup and of her hand.  Immediately it was as if a hot fire
went through his body; and he wanted that very night to take her
to his bed.  But Svase said that should not be unless by main
force, if he did not first make her his lawful wife.  Now King
Harald made Snaefrid his lawful wife, and loved her so
passionately that he forgot his kingdom, and all that belonged to
his high dignity.  They had four sons: the one was Sigurd Hrise;
the others Halfdan Haleg, Gudrod Ljome and Ragnvald Rettilbeine.
Thereafter Snaefrid died; but her corpse never changed, but was
as fresh and red as when she lived.  The king sat always beside
her, and thought she would come to life again.  And so it went on
for three years that he was sorrowing over her death, and the
people over his delusion.  At last Thorleif the Wise succeeded,
by his prudence, in curing him of his delusion by accosting him
thus: -- "It is nowise wonderful, king, that thou grievest over
so beautiful and noble a wife, and bestowest costly coverlets and
beds of down on her corpse, as she desired; but these honours
fall short of what is due, as she still lies in the same clothes.
It would be more suitable to raise her, and change her dress." 
As soon as the body was raised in the bed all sorts of corruption
and foul smells came from it, and it was necessary in all haste
to gather a pile of wood and burn it; but before this could be
done the body turned blue, and worms, toads, newts, paddocks, and
all sorts of ugly reptiles came out of it, and it sank into
ashes.  Now the king came to his understanding again, threw the
madness out of his mind, and after that day ruled his kingdom as
before.  He was strengthened and made joyful by his subjects, and
his subjects by him and the country by both.



26. OF THJODOLF OF HVIN, THE SKALD.

After King Harald had experienced the cunning of the Fin woman,
he was so angry that he drove from him the sons he had with her,
and would not suffer them before his eyes.  But one of them,
Gudrod Ljome, went to his foster-father Thjodolf of Hvin, and
asked him to go to the king, who was then in the Uplands; for
Thjodolf was a great friend of the king.  And so they went, and
came to the king's house late in the evening, and sat down
together unnoticed near the door.  The king walked up and down
the floor casting his eye along the benches; for he had a feast
in the house, and the mead was just mixed.  The king then
murmured out these lines: --

     "Tell me, ye aged gray-haired heroes,
     Who have come here to seek repose,
     Wherefore must I so many keep
     Of such a set, who, one and all,
     Right dearly love their souls to steep,
     From morn till night, in the mead-bowl?"

Then Thjodolf replies: --

     "A certain wealthy chief, I think,
     Would gladly have had more to drink
     With him, upon one bloody day,
     When crowns were cracked in our sword-play."

Thjodolf then took off his hat, and the king recognised him, and
gave him a friendly reception.  Thjodolf then begged the king not
to cast off his sons; "for they would with great pleasure have
taken a better family descent upon the mother's side, if the king
had given it to them."  The king assented, and told him to take
Gudrod with him as formerly; and he sent Halfdan and Sigurd to
Ringerike, and Ragnvald to Hadaland, and all was done as the king
ordered.  They grew up to be very clever men, very expert in all
exercises.  In these times King Harald sat in peace in the land,
and the land enjoyed quietness and good crops.



27. OF EARL TORFEINAR'S OBTAINING ORKNEY.

When Earl Ragnvald in More heard of the death of his brother Earl
Sigurd, and that the vikings were in possession of the country,
he sent his son Hallad westward, who took the title of earl to
begin with, and had many men-at-arms with him.  When he arrived
at the Orkney Islands, he established himself in the country; but
both in harvest, winter, and spring, the vikings cruised about
the isles plundering the headlands, and committing depredations
on the coast.  Then Earl Hallad grew tired of the business,
resigned his earldom, took up again his rights as an allodial
owner, and afterwards returned eastward into Norway.  When Earl
Ragnvald heard of this he was ill pleased with Hallad, and said
his son were very unlike their ancestors.  Then said Einar, "I
have enjoyed but little honour among you, and have little
affection here to lose: now if you will give me force enough, I
will go west to the islands, and promise you what at any rate
will please you -- that you shall never see me again."  Earl
Ragnvald replied, that he would be glad if he never came back;
"For there is little hope," said he, "that thou will ever be an
honour to thy friends, as all thy kin on thy mother's side are
born slaves."  Earl Ragnvald gave Einar a vessel completely
equipped, and he sailed with it into the West sea in harvest.
When he came to the Orkney Isles, two vikings, Thorer Treskeg and
Kalf Skurfa, were in his way with two vessels.  He attacked them
instantly, gained the battle, and slew the two vikings.  Then
this was sung: --

     "Then gave he Treskeg to the trolls,
     Torfeinar slew Skurfa."

He was called Torfeinar, because he cut peat for fuel, there
being no firewood, as in Orkney there are no woods.  He
afterwards was earl over the islands, and was a mighty man.  He
was ugly, and blind of an eye, yet very sharp-sighted withal.



28. KING EIRIK EYMUNDSON'S DEATH.

Duke Guthorm dwelt principally at Tunsberg, and governed the
whole of Viken when the king was not there.  He defended the
land, which, at that time, was much plundered by the vikings.
There were disturbances also up in Gautland as long as King Eirik
Eymundson lived; but he died when King Harald Harfager had been
ten years king of all Norway.



29.GUTHORM'S DEATH IN TUNSBERG.

After Eirik, his son Bjorn was king of Svithjod for fifty years.
He was father of Eirik the Victorious, and of Olaf the father of
Styrbjorn.  Guthorm died on a bed of sickness at Tunsberg, and
King Harald gave his son Guthorm the government of that part of
his dominions and made him chief of it.



30. EARL RAGNVALD BURNT IN HIS HOUSE.

When King Harald was forty years of age many of his sons were
well advanced, and indeed they all came early to strength and
manhood.  And now they began to take it ill that the king would
not give them any part of the kingdom,  but put earls into every
district; for they thought earls were of inferior birth to them.
Then Halfdan Haleg and Gudrod Ljome set off one spring with a
great force, and came suddenly upon Earl Ragnvald, earl of More,
and surrounded the house in which he was, and burnt him and sixty
men in it.  Thereafter Halfdan took three long-ships, and fitted
them out, and sailed into the West sea; but Gudrod set himself
down in the land which Ragnvald formerly had.  Now when King
Harald heard this he set out with a great force against Gudrod,
who had no other way left but to surrender, and he was sent to
Agder.  King Harald then set Earl Ragnvald's son Thorer over
More, and gave him his daughter Alof, called Arbot, in marriage.
Earl Thorer, called the Silent, got the same territory his father
Earl Ragnvald had possessed.



31. HALFDAN HALEG'S DEATH.

Halfdan Haleg came very unexpectedly to Orkney, and Earl Einar
immediately fled; but came back soon after about harvest time,
unnoticed by Halfdan.  They met and after a short battle Halfdan
fled the same night.  Einar and his men lay all night without
tents, and when it was light in the morning they searched the
whole island and killed every man they could lay hold of.  Then
Einar said "What is that I see upon the isle of Rinansey?  Is it
a man or a bird?  Sometimes it raises itself up, and sometimes
lies down again."  They went to it, and found it was Halfdan
Haleg, and took him prisoner.

Earl Einar sang the following song the evening before he went
into this battle: --

     "Where is the spear of Hrollaug?  where
     Is stout Rolf Ganger's bloody spear!
     I see them not; yet never fear,
     For Einar will not vengeance spare
     Against his father's murderers, though
     Hrollaug and Rolf are somewhat slow,
     And silent Thorer sits add dreams
     At home, beside the mead-bowl's streams."

Thereafter Earl Einar went up to Halfdan, and cut a spread eagle
upon his back, by striking his sword through his back into his
belly, dividing his ribs from the backbone down to his loins, and
tearing out his lungs; and so Halfdan was killed.  Einar then
sang: --

     "For Ragnvald's death my sword is red:
     Of vengeance it cannot be said
     That Einar's share is left unsped.
     So now, brave boys, let's raise a mound, --
     Heap stones and gravel on the ground
     O'er Halfdan's corpse: this is the way
     We Norsemen our scat duties pay."

Then Earl Einar took possession of the Orkney Isles as before.
Now when these tidings came to Norway, Halfdan's brothers took it
much to heart, and thought that his death demanded vengeance; and
many were of the same opinion.  When Einar heard this, he sang:
--

     "Many a stout udal-man, I know,
     Has cause to wish my head laid low;
     And many an angry udal knife
     Would gladly drink of Eina's life.
     But ere they lay Earl Einar low, --
     Ere this stout heart betrays its cause,
     Full many a heart will writhe, we know,
     In the wolf's fangs, or eagle's claws."



32. HARALD AND EINAR RECONCILED.

King Harald now ordered a levy, and gathered a great force, with
which he proceeded westward to Orkney; and when Earl Einar heard
that King Harald was come, he fled over to Caithness.  He made
the following verses on this occasion: --

     "Many a bearded man must roam,
     An exile from his house and home,
     For cow or horse; but Halfdan's gore
     Is red on Rinansey's wild shore.
     A nobler deed -- on Harald's shield
     The arm of one who ne'er will yield
     Has left a scar.  Let peasants dread
     The vengeance of the Norsemen's head:
     I reck not of his wrath, but sing,
     `Do thy worst! -- I defy thee, king! --'"

Men and messages, however, passed between the king and the earl,
and at last it came to a conference; and when they met the earl
submitted the case altogether to the king's decision, and the
king condemned the earl Einar and the Orkney people to pay a fine
of sixty marks of gold.  As the bondes thought this was too heavy
for them to pay, the earl offered to pay the whole if they would
surrender their udal lands to him.  This they all agreed to do:
the poor because they had but little pieces of land; the rich
because they could redeem their udal rights again when they
liked.  Thus the earl paid the whole fine to the king, who
returned in harvest to Norway.  The earls for a long time
afterwards possessed all the udal lands in Orkney, until Sigurd
son of Hlodver gave back the udal rights.



33. DEATH OF GUTHORM AND HALFDAN THE WHITE.

While King Harald's son Guthorm had the defence of Viken, he
sailed outside of the islands on the coast, and came in by one
of the mouths of the tributaries of the Gaut river.  When he lay
there Solve Klofe came upon him, and immediately gave him battle,
and Guthorm fell.  Halfdan the White and Halfdan the Black went
out on an expedition, and plundered in the East sea, and had a
battle in Eistland, where Halfdan the White fell.



34. MARRIAGE OF EIRIK.

Eirik, Harald's son, was fostered in the house of the herse
Thorer, son of Hroald, in the Fjord district.  He was the most
beloved and honoured by King Harald of all his sons.  When Eirik
was twelve years old, King Harald gave him five long-ships, with
which he went on an expedition, -- first in the Baltic; then
southwards to Denmark, Friesland, and Saxland; on which
expedition he passed four years.  He then sailed out into the
West sea and plundered in Scotland, Bretland, Ireland, and
Valland, and passed four years more in this way.  Then he sailed
north to Finmark, and all the way to Bjarmaland, where he had
many a battle, and won many a victory.  When he came back to
Finmark, his men found a girl in a Lapland hut, whose equal for
beauty they never had seen.  She said her name was Gunhild, and
that her father dwelt in Halogaland, and was called Ozur Tote. 
"I am here," she said, "to learn sorcery from two of the most
knowing Fins in all Finmark, who are now out hunting.  They both
want me in marriage.  They are so skilful that they can hunt out
traces either upon the frozen or the thawed earth, like dogs; and
they can run so swiftly on skees that neither man nor beast can
come near them in speed.  They hit whatever they take aim at, and
thus kill every man who comes near them.  When they are angry the
very earth turns away in terror, and whatever living thing they
look upon then falls dead.  Now ye must not come in their way;
but I will hide you here in the hut, and ye must try to get them
killed."  They agreed to it, and she hid them, and then took a
leather bag, in which they thought there were ashes which she
took in her hand, and strewed both outside and inside of the hut.
Shortly after the Fins came home, and asked who had been there;
and she answered, "Nobody has been here."  "That is wonderful,"
said they, "we followed the traces close to the hut, and can find
none after that."  Then they kindled a fire, and made ready their
meat, and Gunhild prepared her bed.  It had so happened that
Gunhild had slept the three nights before,  but the Fins had
watched the one upon the other, being jealous of each other.
"Now," she said to the Fins, "come here, and lie down one on each
side of me."  On which they were very glad to do so.  She laid an
arm round the neck of each and they went to sleep directly.  She
roused them up; but they fell to sleep again instantly, and so
soundly the she scarcely could waken them.  She even raised them
up in the bed, and still they slept.  Thereupon she too two great
seal-skin bags, and put their heads in them, and tied them fast
under their arms; and then she gave a wink to the king~s men.
They run forth with their weapons, kill the two Fins, and drag
them out of the hut.  That same night came such a dreadful
thunder-storm that the could not stir.  Next morning they came to
the ship, taking Gunhild with them, and presented her to Eirik.
Eirik and his followers then sailed southwards to Halogaland and
he sent word to Ozur Tote, the girl's father, to meet him.  Eirik
said he would take his daughter in marriage, to which Ozur Tote
consented, and Eirik took Gunhild and went southwards with her
(A.D. 922).



35. HARALD DIVIDES HIS KINGDOM.

When King Harald was fifty years of age many of his sons were
grown up, and some were dead.  Many of them committed acts of
great violence in the country, and were in discord among
themselves.  They drove some of the king's earls out of their
properties, and even killed some of them.  Then the king called
together a numerous Thing in the south part of the country, and
summoned to it all the people of the Uplands.  At this Thing he
gave to all his sons the title of king, and made a law that his
descendants in the male line should each succeed to the kingly
title and dignity; but his descendants by the female side only to
that of earl.  And he divided the country among them thus: --
Vingulmark, Raumarike, Vestfold and Thelamark, he bestowed on
Olaf, Bjorn, Sigtryg, Frode, and Thorgils.  Hedemark and
Gudbrandsdal he gave to Dag, Hring, and Ragnar.  To Snaefrid's
sons he gave Ringerike, Hadeland, Thoten, and the lands thereto
belonging.  His son Guthorm, as before mentioned, he had set over
the country from Glommen to Svinasund and Ranrike.  He had set
him to defend the country to the East, as before has been
written.  King Harald himself generally dwelt in the middle of
the country, and Hrorek and Gudrod were generally with his court,
and had great estates in Hordaland and in Sogn.  King Eirik was
also with his father King Harald; and the king loved and regarded
him the most of all his sons, and gave him Halogaland and North
More, and Raumsdal.  North in Throndhjem he gave Halfdan the
Black, Halfdan the White, and Sigrod land to rule over.  In each
of these districts he gave his sons the one half of his revenues,
together with the right to sit on a high-seat, -- a step higher
than earls, but a step lower than his own high-seat.  His king's
seat each of his sons wanted for himself after his death, but he
himself destined it for Eirik.  The Throndhjem people wanted
Halfdan the Black to succeed to it.  The people of Viken, and the
Uplands, wanted those under whom they lived.  And thereupon new
quarrels arose among the brothers; and because they thought their
dominions too little, they drove about in piratical expeditions.
In this way, as before related, Guthorm fell at the mouth of the
Gaut river, slain by Solve Klofe; upon which Olaf took the
kingdom he had possessed.  Halfdan the White fell in Eistland,
Halfdan Haleg in Orkney.  King Harald gave ships of war to
Thorgils and Frode, with which they went westward on a viking
cruise, and plundered in Scotland, Ireland, and Bretland.  They
were the first of the Northmen who took Dublin.  It is said that
Frode got poisoned drink there; but Thorgils was a long time king
over Dublin, until he fell into a snare of the Irish, and was
killed.



36. DEATH OF RAGNVALD RETTILBEINE.

Eirik Blood-axe expected to be head king over all his brothers
and King Harald intended he should be so; and the father and son
lived long together.  Ragnvald Rettilbeine governed Hadaland, and
allowed himself to be instructed in the arts of witchcraft, and
became an area warlock.  Now King Harald was a hater of all
witchcraft.  There was a warlock in Hordaland called Vitgeir; and
when the king sent a message to him that he should give up his
art of witchcraft, he replied in this verse: --

     "The danger surely is not great
     From wizards born of mean estate,
     When Harald's son in Hadeland,
     King Ragnvald, to the art lays hand."

But when King Harald heard this, King Eirik Blood-axe went by his
orders to the Uplands, and came to Hadeland and burned his
brother Ragnvald in a house, along with eighty other warlocks;
which work was much praised.



37. DEATH OF GUDROD LJOME.

Gudrod Ljome was in winter on a friendly visit to his foster-
father Thjodolf in Hvin, and had a well-manned ship, with which
he wanted to go north to Rogaland.  It was blowing a heavy storm
at the time; but Gudrod was bent on sailing, and would not
consent to wait.  Thjodolf sang thus: --

     "Wait, Gudrod, till the storm is past, --
     Loose not thy long-ship while the blast
     Howls over-head so furiously, --
     Trust not thy long-ship to the sea, --
     Loose not thy long-ship from the shore;
     Hark to the ocean's angry roar!
     See how the very stones are tost
     By raging waves high on the coast!
     Stay, Gudrod, till the tempest's o'er --
     Deep runs the sea off the Jadar's shore."

Gudrod set off in spite of what Thjodolf could say: and when they
came off the Jadar the vessel sunk with them, and all on board
were lost.



38. KING BJORN KAUPMAN'S DEATH.

King Harald's son, Bjorn, ruled over Vestfold at that time, and
generally lived at Tunsberg, and went but little on war
expeditions.  Tunsberg at that time was much frequented by
merchant vessels, both from Viken and the north country, and also
from the south, from Denmark, and Saxland.  King Bjorn had also
merchant ships on voyages to other lands, by which he procured
for himself costly articles, and such things as he thought
needful; and therefore his brothers called him Farman (the
Seaman), and Kaupman (the Chapman).  Bjorn was a man of sense and
understanding, and promised to become a good ruler.  He made a
good and suitable marriage, and had a son by his wife, who was
named Gudrod.  Eirik Blood-axe came from his Baltic cruise with
ships of war, and a great force, and required his brother Bjorn
to deliver to him King Harald's share of the scat and incomes of
Vestfold.  But it had always been the custom before, that Bjorn
himself either delivered the money into the king's hands, or sent
men of his own with it; and therefore he would continue with the
old custom, and would not deliver the money.  Eirik again wanted
provisions, tents, and liquor.  The brothers quarrelled about
this; but Eirik got nothing and left the town.  Bjorn went also
out of the town towards evening up to Saeheim.  In the night
Eirik came back after Bjorn, and came to Saeheim just as Bjorn
and his men were seated at table drinking.  Eirik surrounded the
house in which they were; but Bjorn with his men went out and
fought.  Bjorn, and many men with him, fell.  Eirik, on the other
hand, got a great booty, and proceeded northwards.  But this work
was taken very ill by the people of Viken, and Eirik was much
disliked for it; and the report went that King Olaf would avenge
his brother Bjorn, whenever opportunity offered.  King Bjorn lies
in the mound of Farmanshaug at Saeheim.



39. RECONCILIATION OF THE KINGS.

King Eirik went in winter northwards to More, and was at a feast
in Solve, within the point Agdanes; and when Halfdan the Black
heard of it he set out with his men, and surrounded the house in
which they were.  Eirik slept in a room which stood detached by
itself, and he escaped into the forest with four others; but
Halfdan and his men burnt the main house, with all the people who
were in it.  With this news Eirik came to King Harald, who was
very wroth at it, and assembled a great force against the
Throndhjem people.  When Halfdan the Black heard this he levied
ships and men, so that he had a great force, and proceeded with
it to Stad, within Thorsbjerg.  King Harald lay with his men at
Reinsletta.  Now people went between them, and among others a
clever man called Guthorm Sindre, who was then in Halfdan the
Black's army, but had been formerly in the service of King
Harald, and was a great friend of both.  Guthorm was a great
skald, and had once composed a song both about the father and the
son, for which they had offered him a reward.  But he would take
nothing; but only asked that, some day or other, they should
grant him any request he should make, which they promised to do.
Now he presented himself to King Harald, brought words of peace
between them, and made the request to them both that they shou1d
be reconciled.  So highly did the king esteem him, that in
consequence of his request they were reconciled.  Many other able
men promoted this business as well as he; and it was so settled
that Halfdan should retain the whole of his kingdom as he had it
before, and should let his brother Eirik sit in peace.  After
this event Jorun, the skald-maid, composed some verses in
"Sendibit" ("The Biting Message"): --

     "I know that Harald Fairhair
     Knew the dark deed of Halfdan.
     To Harald Halfdan seemed
     Angry and cruel."



40. BIRTH OF HAKON THE GOOD.

Earl Hakon Grjotgardson of Hlader had the whole rule over
Throndhjem when King Harald was anywhere away in the country; and
Hakon stood higher with the king than any in the country of
Throndhjem.  After Hakon's death his son Sigurd succeeded to his
power in Throndhjem, and was the earl, and had his mansion at
Hlader.  King Harald's sons, Halfdan the Black and Sigrod, who
had been before in the house of his father Earl Hakon, continued
to be brought up in his house.  The sons of Harald and Sigurd
were about the same age.  Earl Sigurd was one of the wisest men
of his time, and married Bergljot, a daughter of Earl Thorer the
Silent; and her mother was Alof Arbot, a daughter of Harald
Harfager.  When King Harald began to grow old he generally dwelt
on some of his great farms in Hordaland; namely, Alreksstader or
Saeheim, Fitjar, Utstein, or Ogvaldsnes in the island Kormt.
When Harald was seventy years of age he begat a son with a girl
called Thora Mosterstang, because her family came from Moster.
She was descended from good people, being connected with Kare
(Aslakson) of Hordaland; and was moreover a very stout and
remarkably handsome girl.  She was called the king's servant-
girl; for at that time many were subject to service to the
king who were of good birth, both men and women.  Then it was the
custom, with people of consideration, to choose with great care
the man who should pour water over their children, and give them
a name.  Now when the time came that Thora, who was then at
Moster, expected her confinement, she would to King Harald, who
was then living at Saeheim; and she went northwards in a ship
belonging to Earl Sigurd.  They lay at night close to the land;
and there Thora brought forth a child upon the land, up among the
rocks, close to the ship's gangway, and it was a man child.  Earl
Sigurd poured water over him, and called him Hakon, after his own
father, Hakon earl of Hlader.  The boy soon grew handsome, large
in size, and very like his father King Harald.  King Harald let
him follow his mother, and they were both in the king's house as
long as he was an infant.



41. KING ATHELSTAN'S MESSAGE

At this time a king called Aethelstan had taken the Kingdom of
England.  He was called victorious and faithful.  He sent men to
Norway to King Harald, with the errand that the messengers should
present him with a sword, with the hilt and handle gilt, and also
the whole sheath adorned with gold and silver, and set with
precious jewels.  The ambassador presented the sword-hilt to the
king, saying, "Here is a sword which King Athelstan sends thee,
with the request that thou wilt accept it."  The king took the
sword by the handle; whereupon the ambassador said, "Now thou
hast taken the sword according to our king's desire, and
therefore art thou his subject as thou hast taken his sword."
King Harald saw now that this was an insult, for he would be
subject to no man.  But he remembered it was his rule, whenever
anything raised his anger, to collect himself, and let his
passion run off, and then take the matter into consideration
coolly.  Now he did so, and consulted his friends, who all gave
him the advice to let the ambassadors, in the first place, go
home in safety.



42. HAUK'S JOURNEY TO ENGLAND.

The following summer King Harald sent a ship westward to England,
and gave the command of it to Hauk Habrok.  He was a great
warrior, and very dear to the king.  Into his hands he gave his
son Hakon.  Hank proceeded westward tn England, and found King
Athelstan in London, where there was just at the time a great
feast and entertainment.  When they came to the hall, Hauk told
his men how they should conduct themselves; namely, that he who
went first in should go last out, and all should stand in a row
at the table, at equal distance from each other; and each should
have his sword at his left side, but should fasten his cloak so
that his sword should not be seen.  Then they went into the hall,
thirty in number.  Hauk went up to the king and saluted him, and
the king bade him welcome.  Then Hauk took the child Hakon, and
set it on the king's knee.  The king looks at the boy, and asks
Hauk what the meaning of this is.  Hauk replies, "Herald the king
bids thee foster his servant-girl's child."  The king was in
great anger, and seized a sword which lay beside him, and drew
it, as if he was going to kill the child.  Hauk says, "Thou hast
borne him on thy knee, and thou canst murder him if thou wilt;
but thou wilt not make an end of all King Harald's sons by so
doing."  On that Hauk went out with all his men, and took the way
direct to his ship, and put to sea, -- for they were ready, --
and came back to King Harald.  The king was highly pleased with
this; for it is the common observation of all people, that the
man who fosters another's children is of less consideration than
the other.  From these transactions between the two kings, it
appears that each wanted to be held greater than the other; but
in truth there was no injury, to the dignity of either, for each
was the upper king in his own kingdom till his dying day.



43. HAKON, THE FOSTER-SON OF ATHELSTAN, IS BAPTIZED.

King Athelstan had Hakon baptized, and brought up in the right
faith, and in good habits, and all sorts of good manners, and he
loved Hakon above all his relations; and Hakon was beloved by all
men.  He was henceforth called Athelstan's foster-son.  He was an
accomplished skald, and he was larger, stronger and more
beautiful than other men; he was a man of understanding and
eloquence, and also a good Christian.  King Athelstan gave Hakon
a sword, of which the hilt and handle were gold, and the blade
still better; for with it Hakon cut down a mill-stone to the
centre eye, and the sword thereafter was called the Quernbite
(1).  Better sword never came into Norway, and Hakon carried it
to his dying day.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Quern is the name of the small hand mill-stones still found
     in use among the cottars in Orkney, Shetland, and the
     Hebrides.  This sword is mentioned in the Younger Edda.
     There were many excellent swords in the olden time, and many
     of them had proper names.



44. EIRIK BROUGHT TO THE SOVEREIGNTY.

When King Harald was eighty years of age (A.D. 930) he became
very heavy, and unable to travel through the country, or do the
business of a king.  Then he brought his son Eirik to his
high-seat, and gave him the power and command over the whole
land.  Now when King Harald's other sons heard this, King Halfdan
the Black also took a king's high-seat, and took all Throndhjem
land, with the consent of all the people, under his rule as upper
king.  After the death of Bjorn the Chapman, his brother Olaf
took the command over Vestfold, and took Bjorn's son, Gudrod, as
his foster-child.  Olaf's son was called Trygve; and the two
foster-brothers were about the same age, and were hopeful and
clever.  Trygve, especially, was remarkable as a stout and strong
man.  Now when the people of Viken heard that those of Hordaland
had taken Eirik as upper king, they did the same, and made Olaf
the upper king in Viken, which kingdom he retained.  Eirik did
not like this at all.  Two years after this, Halfdan the Black
died suddenly at a feast in Throndhjem and the general report was
that Gunhild had bribed a witch to give him a death-drink.
Thereafter the Throndhjem people took Sigrod to be their king.



45. KING HARALD'S DEATH.

King Harald lived three years after he gave Eirik the supreme
authority over his kingdom, and lived mostly on his great farms
which he possessed, some in Rogaland, and some in Hordaland.
Eirik and Gunhild had a son on whom King Harald poured water, and
gave him his own name, and the promise that he should be king
after his father Eirik.  King Harald married most of his
daughters within the country to his earls, and from them many
great families are descended.  Harald died on a bed of sickness
in Hogaland (A.D. 933), and was buried under a mound at Haugar in
Karmtsund.  In Haugesund is a church, now standing; and not far
from the churchyard, at the north-west side, is King Harald
Harfager's mound; but his grave-stone stands west of the church,
and is thirteen feet and a half high, and two ells broad.  One
stone was set at head and one at the feet; on the top lay the
slab, and below on both sides were laid small stones.  The grave,
mound, and stone, are there to the present day.  Harald Harfager
was, according to the report of men~of knowledge, or remarkably
handsome appearance, great and strong, and very generous and
affable to his men.  He was a great warrior in his youth; and
people think that this was foretold by his mother's dream before
his birth, as the lowest part of the tree she dreamt of was red
as blood.  The stem again was green and beautiful, which
betokened his flourishing kingdom; and that the tree was white at
the top showed that he should reach a grey-haired old age.  The
branches and twigs showed forth his posterity, spread over the
whole land; for of his race, ever since.  Norway has always had
kings.



46. THE DEATH OF OLAF AND OF SIGROD.

King Eirik took all the revenues (A.D. 934), which the king had
in the middle of the country, the next winter after King Harald's
decease.  But Olaf took all the revenues eastward in Viken, and
their brother Sigrod all that of the Throndhjem country.  Eirik
was very ill pleased with this; and the report went that he would
attempt with force to get the sole sovereignty over the country,
in the same way as his father had given it to him.  Now when Olaf
and Sigrod heard this, messengers passed between them; and after
appointing a meeting place, Sigrod went eastward in spring to
Viken, and he and his brother Olaf met at Tunsberg, and remained
there a while.  The same spring (A.D. 934), King Eirik levied a 
great force, and ships and steered towards Viken.  He got such a
strong steady gale that he sailed night and day, and came faster
than the news of him.  When he came to Tunsberg, Olaf and Sigrod,
with their forces, went out of the town a little eastward to a
ridge, where they drew up their men in battle order; but as Eirik
had many more men he won the battle.  Both brothers, Olaf and
Sigrod, fell there; and both their grave-mounds are upon the
ridge where they fell.  Then King Eirik went through Viken, and
subdued it, and remained far into summer.  Gudrod and Trygve fled
to the Uplands.  Eirik was a stout handsome man, strong, and very
manly, -- a great and fortunate man of war; but bad-minded,
gruff, unfriendly, and silent.  Gunhild, his wife, was the most
beautiful of women, -- clever, with much knowledge, and lively;
but a very false person, and very cruel in disposition.  The
children of King Eirik and Gunhild were, Gamle, the oldest; then
Guthorm, Harald, Ragnfrod, Ragnhild, Erling, Gudrod, and Sigurd
Sleva.  All were handsome, and of manly appearance (1).


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Of Eirik, his wife, and children, see the following sagas.



HAKON THE GOOD'S SAGA.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Of Eirik Blood-axe's five years' reign Snorre has no separate
saga.  He appears not to have been beloved by the people and his
queen Gunhild seems to have had a bad influence on him.

Other accounts of Hakon may be found in "Fagrskinna" (chaps.
25-34), "Agrip", "Historia", "Norvegiae", and in "Thjodrek"
(chap. 4).

The reader is also referred to "Saxo", "Egla", "Laxdaela",
"Kormaks Saga", "Gisle Surssons Saga", "Halfred's Saga",
"Floamanna Saga", "Viga Glum's Saga", and to "Landnamabok".

Skald mentioned in this Saga are: -- Glum Geirason, Thord
Sjarekson, Guthorm Sindre, Kormak Ogmundson, and Eyvind
Skaldaspiller.  In the "Egla" are found many poems belonging to
this epoch by Egil Skallagrimson.

In "Fagrskinna" is found a poem (not given by Snorre) which
Gunhild (his wife) had made on King Eirik after his death,
telling how Odin welcomed him to Valhal.  The author or skald who
composed it is not known, but it is considered to be one of the
gems of old Norse poetry, and we here quote it in Vigfusson's
translation in his "Corpus Poeticum", vol. i. pp. 260, 261.
Gudbrand Vigfusson has filled up a few gaps from "Hakonarmat",
the poem at the end of this Saga.  We have changed Vigfusson's
orthography of names, and brought them into harmony with the
spelling used in this work: -- Ed.

"Odin wakes in the morning and cries, as he opens his eyes, with
his dream still fresh in his mind: -- `What dreams are these?  I
thought I arose before daybreak to make Valhal ready for a host
of slain.  I woke up the host of the chosen.  I bade them ride up
to strew the benches, and to till up the beer-vats, and I bade
valkyries to bear the wine, as if a king were coming.  I look for
the coming of some noble chiefs from the earth, wherefore my
heart is glad.'

"Brage, Odin's counsellor, now wakes, as a great din is heard
without, and calls out: -- `What is that thundering?  as if a
thousand men or some great host were tramping on -- the walls and
the benches are creaking withal -- as if Balder was coming back
to the ball of Odin?'

"Odin answers: -- `Surely thou speakest foolishly, good Brage,
although thou art very wise.  It thunders for Eirik the king,
that is coming to the hall of Odin.'

"Then turning to his heroes, he cries: -- `Sigmund and Sinfjotle,
rise in haste and go forth to meet the prince!  Bid him in if it
be Eirik, for it is he whom I look for.'

"Sigmund answers: -- `Why lookest thou more for Eirik, the king,
to Odin's hall, than for other kings?'

"Odin answers: -- `Because he has reddened his brand, and borne
his bloody sword in many a land.'

"Quoth Sigmund: -- `Why didst thou rob him, the chosen king of
victory then, seeing thou thoughtest him so brave?'

"Odin answered: -- `Because it is not surely to be known, when
the grey wolf shall come upon the seat of the god.'

SECOND SCENE. -- Without Valhal.
Sigmund and Sinfjotle go outside the hall and meet Eirik.

"Quoth Sigmund: -- `Hail to thee, Eirik, be welcome here, and
come into the hall, thou gallant king!  Now I will ask thee, what
kings are these that follow thee from the clash of the sword
edges?'

"Eirik answers: -- `They are five kings; I will tell thee all
their names; I myself am the sixth (the names followed in the
song, whereof the rest is lost.)

"Fagrskinna" says "Hakonarmal" was the model of this poem.



1. HAKON CHOSEN KING.

Hakon, Athelstan's foster-son, was in England at the time (A.D.
934) he heard of his father King Harald's death, and he
immediately made himself ready to depart.  King Athelstan gave
him men, and a choice of good ships, and fitted him out for his
journey most excellently.  In harvest time he came to Norway,
where he heard of the death of his brothers, and that King Eirik
was then in Viken.  Then Hakon sailed northwards to Throndhjem,
where he went to Sigurd earl of Hlader who was the ablest man in
Norway.  He gave Hakon a good reception; and they made a league
with each other, by which Hakon promised great power to Sigurd if
he was made king.  They assembled then a numerous Thing, and
Sigurd the earl recommended Hakon's cause to the Thing, and
proposed him to the bondes as king.  Then Hakon himself stood up
and spoke; and the people said to each other, two and two, as
they heard him, "Herald Harfager is come again, grown and young."
The beginning of Hakon's speech was, that he offered himself to
the bondes as king, and desired from them the title of king, and
aid and forces to defend the kingdom.  He promised, on the other
hand, to make all the bondes udal-holders, and give every man
udal rights to the land he lived on.  This speech met such joyful
applause, that the whole public cried and shouted that they would
take him to be king.  And so it was that the Throndhjem people
took Hakon, who was then fifteen years old, for king; and he took
a court or bodyguard, and servants, and proceeded through the
country.  The news reached the Uplands that the people in
Throndhjem had taken to themselves a king, who in every respect
was like King Harald Harfager, -- with the difference, that
Harald had made all the people of the land vassals, and unfree;
but this Hakon wished well to every man, and offered the bondes
to give them their udal rights again, which Harald had taken from
them.  All were rejoiced at this news, and it passed from mouth
to mouth, -- it flew, like fire in dry grass, through the whole
land, and eastward to the land's end.  Many bondes came from the
Uplands to meet King Hakon.  Some sent messengers, some tokens;
and all to the same effect -- that his men they would be: and the
king received all thankfully.



2. KING HAKON'S PROGRESS THROUGH THE COUNTRY.

Early in winter (935), the king went to the Uplands, and summoned
the people to a Thing; and there streamed all to him who could
come.  He was proclaimed king at every Thing; and then he
proceeded eastward to Viken, where his brother's sons, Trygve and
Gudrod, and many others, came unto him, and complained of the
sorrow and evil his brother Eirik had wrought.  The hatred to
King Eirik grew more and more, the more liking all men took to
King Hakon; and they got more boldness to say what they thought.
King Hakon gave Trygve and Gudrod the title of kings, and the
dominions which King Harald had bestowed on their fathers. 
Trygve got Ranrike and Vingulmark, and Gudrod, Vestfold; but as
they were young, and in the years of childhood, he appointed able
men to rule the land for them.  He gave them the country on the
same conditions as it had been given before, -- that they should
have half of the scat and revenues with him.  Towards spring King
Hakon returned north, over the Uplands, to Throndhjem.



3. EIRIK'S DEPARTURE FROM THE COUNTRY.

King Hakon, early in spring, collected a great army at
Throndhjem, and fitted out ships.  The people of Viken also had a
great force on foot, and intended to join Hakon.  King Eirik also
levied people in the middle of the country; but it went badly
with him to gather people, for the leading men left him, and went
over to Hakon.  As he saw himself not nearly strong enough to
oppose Hakon, he sailed (A.D. 935) out to the West sea with such
men as would follow him.  He first sailed to Orkney, and took
many people with him from that country; and then went south
towards England, plundering in Scotland, and in the north parts
of England, wherever he could land.  Athelstan, the king of
England, sent a message to Eirik, offering him dominions under
him in England; saying that King Harald his father was a good
friend of King Athelstan, and therefore he would do kindly
towards his sons.  Messengers passed between the two kings; and
it came to an agreement that King Eirik should take
Northumberland as a fief from King Athelstan, and which land he
should defend against the Danes or other vikings.  Eirik should
let himself be baptized, together with his wife and children, and
all the people who had followed him.  Eirik accepted this offer,
and was baptized, and adopted the right faith.  Northumberland is
called a fifth part of England.  Eirik had his residence at York,
where Lodbrok's sons, it was said, had formerly been, and
Northumberland was principally inhabited by Northmen. Since
Lodbrok's sons had taken the country, Danes and Northmen often
plundered there, when the power of the land was out of their
hands.  Many names of places in the country are Norwegian; as
Grimsby, Haukfliot, and many others.



4. EIRIK'S DEATH.

King Eirik had many people about him, for he kept many Northmen
who had come with him from the East; and also many of his friends
had joined him from Norway.  But as he had little land, he went
on a cruise every summer, and plundered in Scotland, the
Hebrides, Ireland, and Bretland, by which he gathered property.
King Athelstan died on a sick bed, after a reign of fourteen
years, eight weeds, and three days.  After him his brother
Jatmund was king of England, and he was no friend to the
Northmen.  King Eirik, also, was in no great favour with him; and
the word went about that King Jatmund would set another chief
over Northumberland.  Now when King Eirik heard this, he set off
on a viking cruise to the westward; and from the Orkneys took
with him the Earls Arnkel and Erlend, the sons of Earl Torfeinar.
Then he sailed to the Hebrides, where there were many vikings and
troop-kings, who joined their men to his.  With all this force he
steered to Ireland first, where he took with him all the men he
could, and then to Bretland, and plundered; and sailed thereafter
south to England, and marauded there as elsewhere.  The people
fled before him wherever he appeared.  As King Eirik was a bold
warrior, and had a great force, he trusted so much to his people
that he penetrated far inland in the country, following and
plundering the fugitives.  King Jatmund had set a king, who was
called Olaf, to defend the land; and he gathered an innumerable
mass of people, with whom he marched against King Eirik.  A
dreadfu1 battle ensued, in which many Englishmen fell; but for
one who fell came three in his place out of the country behind,
and when evening came on the loss of men turned on the side of
the Northmen, and many people fell.  Towards the end of the day,
King Eirik and five kings with him fell.  Three of them were
Guthorm and his two sons, Ivar and Harek: there fell, also,
Sigurd and Ragnvald; and with them Torfeinar's two sons, Arnkel
and Erlend.  Besides these, there was a great slaughter of
Northmen; and those who escaped went to Northumberland, and
brought the news to Gunhild and her sons (A.D. 941).



5. GUNHILD AND HER SONS.

When Gunhild and her sons knew for certain that King Eirik had
fallen, after having plundered the land of the King of England,
they thought there was no peace to be expected for them; and they
made themselves ready to depart from Northumberland, with all the
ships King Eirik had left, and all the men who would go with
them.  They took also all the loose property, and goods which
they had gathered partly as taxes in England, partly as booty on
their expeditions.  With their army they first steered northward
to Orkney, where Thorfin Hausakljufer was earl, a son of
Torfeinar, and took up their station there for a time.  Eirik's
sons subdued these islands and Hjaltland, took scat for
themselves, and staid there all the winter; but went on viking
cruises in summer to the West, and plundered in Scotland and
Ireland.  About this Glum Geirason sings: --

     "The hero who knows well to ride
     The sea-horse o'er the foamingtide, --
     He who in boyhood wild rode o'er
     The seaman's horse to Skanea's shore.
     And showed the Danes his galley's bow,
     Right nobly scours the ocean now.
     On Scotland's coast he lights the brand
     Of flaming war; with conquering hand
     Drives many a Scottish warrior tall
     To the bright seats in Odin's hall.
     The fire-spark, by the fiend of war
     Fanned to a flame, soon spreads afar.
     Crowds trembling fly, -- the southern foes
     Fall thick beneath the hero's blows:
     The hero's blade drips red with gore,
     Staining the green sward on the shore."



6. BATTLE IN JUTLAND.

When King Eirik had left the country, King Hakon, Athelstan's
foster-son, subdued the whole of Norway.  The first winter (A.D.
936) he visited the western parts, and then went north, and
settled in Throndhjem.  But as no peace could be reasonably
looked for so long as King Eirik with his forces could come to
Norway from the West sea, he set himself with his men-at-arms in
the middle of the country, -- in the Fjord district, or in Sogn,
or Hordaland, or Rogaland.  Hakon placed Sigurd earl of Hlader
over the whole Throradhjem district, as he and his father had
before had it under Harald Harfager.  When King Hakon heard of
his brother Eirik's death, and also that his sons had no footing
in England, he thought there was not much to fear from them, and
he went with his troops one summer eastward to Viken.  At that
time the Danes plundered often in Viken, and wrought much evil
there; but when they heard that King Hakon was come with a great
army, they got out of the way, to Halland; and those who were
nearest to King Hakon went out to sea, and over to Jotland
(Jutland).  When the king heard of this, he sailed after them
with all his army.  On arriving in Jutland he plundered all
round; and when the country people heard of it, they assembled in
a great body, and determined to defend their land, and fight.
There was a great battle; and King Hakon fought so boldly, that
he went forward before his banner without helmet or coat of mail.
King Hakon won the victory, and drove the fugitives far up the
country.  So says Guthorm Sindre, in his song of Hakon: --

     "Furrowing the deep-blue sea with oars,
     The king pursues to Jutland's shores.
     They met; and in the battle storm
     Of clashing shields, full many a form
     Of goodly warrior on the plain,
     Full many a corpse by Hakon slain,
     Glutted the ravens, who from far,
     Scenting the banquet-feast of war,
     Came in black flocks to Jutland's plains
     To drink the blood-wine from the veins."



7. BATTLE IN EYRARSUND (THE SOUND).

Then Hakon steered southwards with his fleet to seek the vikings,
and so on to Sealand.  He rowed with two cutters into the
Eyrarsund, where he found eleven viking ships, and instantly
attacked them.  It ended in his gaining the victory, and clearing
the viking ships of all their men.  So says Guthorm Sindre: -- 

     "Hakon the Brave, whose skill all know
     To bend in battle storm the bow,
     Rushed o'er the waves to Sealand's tongue,
     His two war-ships with gilt shields hung,
     And cleared the decks with his blue sword
     That rules the fate of war, on board
     Eleven ships of the Vindland men. --
     Famous is Hakon's name since then."



8. KING HAKON'S EXPEDITION TO DENMARK.

Thereafter King Hakon carried war far and wide in Sealand;
plundering some, slaying others, taking some prisoners of war,
taking ransom from others, and all without opposition.  Then
Hakon proceeded along the coast of Skane, pillaging everywhere,
levying taxes and ransome from the country, and killing all
vikings, both Danish and Vindish.  He then went eastwards to the
district of Gautland, marauded there, and took great ransom from
the country.  So says Guthorm Sindre: --

     "Hakon, who midst the battle shock
     Stands like a firmly-rooted oak,
     Subdued all Sealand with the sword:
     From Vindland vikings the sea-bord
     Of Scania swept; and, with the shield
     Of Odin clad, made Gautland yield
     A ransom of the ruddy gold,
     Which Hakon to his war-men bold
     Gave with free hand, who in his feud
     Against the arrow-storm had stood."

King Hakon returned back in autumn with his army and an immense
booty; and remained all the winter (A.D. 946) in Viken to defend
it against the Danes and Gautlanders, if they should attack it.



9. OF KING TRYGVE.

In the same winter King Trygve Olafson returned from a viking
cruise in the West sea, having before ravaged in Ireland and
Scotland.  In spring (A.D. 946) King Hakon went north, and set
his brother's son, King Trygve, over Viken to defend that country
against enemies.  He gave him also in property all that he could
reconquer of the country in Denmark, which the summer before
King Hakon had subjected to payment of scat to him.  So says
Guthorm: --

     "King Hakon, whose sharp sword dyes red
     The bright steel cap on many a head,
     Has set a warrior brave and stout
     The foreign foeman to keep out, --
     To keep that green land safe from war
     Which black Night bore to dwarf Annar (1).
     For many a carle whose trade's to wield
     The battle-axe, and swing the shield,
     On the swan's ocean-skates has come,
     In white-winged ships, across the foam, --
     Across the sea, from far Ireland,
     To war against the Norseman's land."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The dwarf Annar was the husband of Night, and Earth was
     their daughter. -- L.



10. OF GUNHILD S SONS.

King Harald Gormson ruled over Denmark at that time.  He took it
much amiss that King Hakon had made war in his dominions, and the
report went that he would take revenge; but this did not take
place so soon. When Gunhild and her sons heard there was enmity
between Denmark and Norway, they began to turn their course from
the West.  They married King Eirik's daughter, Ragnhild, to
Arnfin, a son of Thorfin Hausakljufer; and as soon as Eirik's
sons went away, Thorfin took the earldom again over the Orkney
Islands.  Gamle Eirikson was somewhat older than the other
brothers, but still he was not a grown man.  When Gunhild and her
sons came from the westward to Denmark, they were well received
by King Harald.  He gave them great fiefs in his kingdom, so that
they could maintain themselves and their men very well.  He also
took Harald Eirikson to be his foster-son, set him on his knee,
and thereafter he was brought up at the Danish king's court. 
Some of Eirik's sons went out on viking expeditions as soon as
they were old enough, and gathered property, ravaging all around
in the East sea.  They grew up quickly to be handsome men, and
far beyond their years in strength and perfection.  Glum Geirason
tells of one of them in the Grafeld song: --

     "I've heard that, on the Eastland coast,
     Great victories were won and lost.
     The king, whose hand is ever graced
     With gift to skald, his banner placed
     On, and still on; while, midst the play
     Of swords, sung sharp his good sword's sway
     As strong in arm as free of gold,
     He thinn'd the ranks of warriors bold."

Then Eirik's sons turned northwards with their troops to Viken
and marauded there; but King Trygve kept troops on foot with
which he met them, and they had many a battle, in which the
victory was sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other.
Sometimes Eirik's sons plundered in Viken, and sometimes Trygve
in Sealand and Halland.



11.  KING HAKON AS A LAW-GIVER.

As long as Hakon was king in Norway, there was good peace between
the bondes and merchants; so that none did harm either to the
life or goods of the other.  Good seasons also there were, both
by sea and land.  King Hakon was of a remarkably cheerful
disposition, clever in words, and very condescending.  He was a
man of great understanding also, and bestowed attention on law-
giving.  He gave out the Gula-thing's laws on the advice of
Thorleif Spake (the Wise); also the Frosta-thing's laws on the
advice of Earl Sigurd, and of other Throndhjem men of wisdom.
Eidsiva-thing laws were first established in the country by
Halfdan the Black, as has before been written.



12. THE BIRTH OF EARL HAKON THE GREAT.

King Hakon kept Yule at Throndhjem, and Earl Sigurd had made a
feast for him at Hlader.  The night of the first day of Yule the
earl's wife, Bergljot, was brought to bed of a boy-child, which
afterwards King Hakon poured water over, and gave him his own
name.  The boy grew up, and became in his day a mighty and able
man, and was earl after his father, who was King Hakon's dearest
friend.



13. OF EYSTEIN THE BAD.

Eystein, a king of the Uplands, whom some called the Great, and
some the Bad, once on a time made war in Throndhjem, and subdued
Eyna district and Sparbyggia district, and set his own son Onund
over them; but the Throndhjem people killed him.  Then King
Eystein made another inroad into Throndhjem, and ravaged the land
far and wide, and subdued it.  He then offered the people either
his slave, who was called Thorer Faxe, or his dog, whose name was
Saur, to be their king.  They preferred the dog, as they thought
they would sooner get rid of him.  Now the dog was, by
witchcraft, gifted with three men's wisdom; and when he barked,
he spoke one word and barked two.  A collar and chain of gold and
silver were made for him, and his courtiers carried him on their
shoulders when the weather or ways were foul.  A throne was
erected for him, and he sat upon a high place, as kings are used
to sit.  He dwelt on Eyin Idre (Idre Isle), and had his mansion
in a place now called Saurshaug.  It is told that the occasion of
his death was that the wolves one day broke into his fold, and
his courtiers stirred him up to defend his cattle; but when he
ran down from his mound, and attacked the wolves, they tore him
into pieces.  Many other extraordinary things were done by this
King Eystein against the Throndhjem people, and in consequence of
this persecution and trouble, many chiefs and people fled and
left their udal properties.



14. JAMTALAND AND HELSINGJALAND.

Ketil Jamte, a son of Earl Onund of Sparabu, went eastward across
the mountain ridge, and with him a great multitude, who took all
their farm-stock and goods with them.  They cleared the woods,
and established large farms, and settled the country afterwards
called Jamtaland.  Thorer Helsing, Ketil's grandson, on account
of a murder, ran away from Jamtaland and fled eastward through
the forest, and settled there.  Many people followed, and that
country, which extends eastward down to the seacoast, was called
Helsingjaland; and its eastern parts are inhabited by Swedes. 
Now when Harald Harfager took possession of the whole country
many people fled before him, both people of Throndhjem and of
Naumudal districts; and thus new settlers came to Jamtaland, and
some all the way to Helsingjaland.  The Helsingjaland people
travelled into Svithiod for their merchandise, and thus became
altogether subjects of that country.  The Jamtaland people,
again, were in a manner between the two countries; and nobody
cared about them, until Hakon entered into friendly intercourse
with Jamtaland, and made friends of the more powerful people.
Then they resorted to him, and promised him obedience and payment
of taxes, and became his subjects; for they saw nothing but what
was good in him, and being of Norwegian race they would rather
stand under his royal authority than under the king of Sweden:
and he gave them laws, and rights to their land.  All the people
of Helsingjaland did the same, -- that is, all who were of
Norwegian race, from the other side of the great mountain ridge.




15. HAKON SPREADS CHRISTIANITY.

King Hakon was a good Christian when he came to Norway; but as
the whole country was heathen, with much heathenish sacrifice,
and as many great people, as well as the favour of the common
people, were to be conciliated, he resolved to practice his
Christianity in private.  But he kept Sundays, and the Friday
fasts, and some token of the greatest holy-days.  He made a law
that the festival of Yule should begin at the same time as
Christian people held it, and that every man, under penalty,
should brew a meal of malt into ale, and therewith keep the Yule
holy as long as it lasted.  Before him, the beginning of Yule, or
the slaughter night, was the night of mid-winter (Dec. 14), and
Yule was kept for three days thereafter.  It was his intent, as
soon as he had set himself fast in the land, and had subjected
the whole to his power, to introduce Christianity.  He went to
work first by enticing to Christianity the men who were dearest
to him; and many, out of friendship to him, allowed themselves to
be baptized, and some laid aside sacrifices.  He dwelt long in
the Throndhjem district, for the strength of the country lay
there; and when he thought that, by the support of some powerful
people there, he could set up Christianity he sent a message to
England for a bishop and other teachers; and when they arrived in
Norway, Hakon made it known that he would proclaim Christianity
over all the land.  The people of More and Raumsdal referred the
matter to the people of Throndhjem.  King Hakon then had several
churches consecrated, and put priests into them; and when he came
to Throndhjem he summoned the bondes to a Thing, and invited them
to accept Christianity.  They gave an answer to the effect that
they would defer the matter until the Frosta-thing, at which
there would be men from every district of the Throndhjem country,
and then they would give their determination upon this difficult
matter.



16. ABOUT SACRIFICES.

Sigurd, earl of Hlader, was one of the greatest men for
sacrifices, and so had Hakon his father been; and Sigurd always
presided on account of the king at all the festivals of sacrifice
in the Throndhjem country.  It was an old custom, that when there
was to be sacrifice all the bondes should come to the spot where
the temple stood and bring with them all that they required while
the festival of the sacrifice lasted.  To this festival all the
men brought ale with them; and all kinds of cattle, as well as
horses, were slaughtered, and all the blood that came from them
was called "hlaut", and the vessels in which it was collected
were called hlaut-vessels.  Hlaut-staves were made, like
sprinkling brushes, with which the whole of the altars and the
temple walls, both outside and inside, were sprinkled over, and
also the people were sprinkled with the blood; but the flesh was
boiled into savoury meat for those present.  The fire was in the
middle of the floor of the temple, and over it hung the kettles,
and the full goblets were handed across the fire; and he who made
the feast, and was a chief, blessed the full goblets, and all the
meat of the sacrifice.  And first Odin's goblet was emptied for
victory and power to his king; thereafter, Niord's and Freyja's
goblets for peace and a good season.  Then it was the custom of
many to empty the brage-goblet (1); and then the guests emptied a
goblet to the memory of departed friends, called the remembrance
goblet.  Sigurd the earl was an open-handed man, who did what was
very much celebrated; namely, he made a great sacrifice festival
at Hlader of which he paid all the expenses.  Kormak Ogmundson
sings of it in his ballad of Sigurd: --

     "Of cup or platter need has none
     The guest who seeks the generous one, --
     Sigurd the Generous, who can trace
     His lineage from the giant race;
     For Sigurd's hand is bounteous, free, --
     The guardian of the temples he.
     He loves the gods, his liberal hand
     Scatters his sword's gains o'er the land-"


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The brage-goblet, over which vows were made. -- L.



17. THE FROSTA-THING.

King Hakon came to the Frosta-thing, at which a vast multitude of
people were assembled.  And when the Thing was seated, the king
spoke to the people, and began his speech with saying, -- it was
his message and entreaty to the bondes and householding men, both
great and small, and to the whole public in general, young and
old, rich and poor, women as well as men, that they should all
allow themselves to be baptized, and should believe in one God,
and in Christ the son of Mary and refrain from all sacrifices and
heathen gods; and should keep holy the seventh day, and abstain
from all work on it, and keep a fast on the seventh day.  As soon
as the king had proposed this to the bondes, great was the murmur
and noise among the crowd.  They complained that the king wanted
to take their labour and their old faith from them, and the land
could not be cultivated in that way.  The labouring men and
slaves thought that they could not work if they did not get meat;
and they said it was the character of King Hakon, and his father,
and all the family, to be generous enough with their money, but
sparing with their diet.  Asbjorn of Medalhus in the Gaulardal
stood up, and answered thus to the king's proposal: --

"We bondes, King Hakon, when we elected thee to be our king, and
got back our udal rights at the Thing held in Throndhjem, thought
we had got into heaven; but now we don't know whether we have
really got back our freedom, or whether thou wishest to make
vassa1s of us again by this extraordinary proposal that we should
abandon the ancient faith which our fathers and forefathers have
held from the oldest times, in the times when the dead were
burnt, as well as since that they are laid under mounds, and
which, although they were braver than the people of our days, has
served us as a faith to the present time.  We have also held thee
so dear, that we have allowed thee to rule and give law and right
to all the country.  And even now we bondes will unanimously hold
by the law which thou givest us here in the Frosta-thing, and to
which we have also given our assent; and we will follow thee, and
have thee for our king, as long as there is a living man among us
bondes here in this Thing assembled.  But thou, king, must use
some moderation towards us, and only require from us such things
as we can obey thee in, and are not impossible for us.  If,
however, thou wilt take up this matter with a high hand, and wilt
try thy power and strength against us, we bondes have resolved
among ourselves to part with thee, and to take to ourselves some
other chief, who will so conduct himself towards us that we can
freely and safely enjoy that faith that suits our own
inclinations.  Now, king, thou must choose one or other of these
conditions before the Thing is ended."

The bondes gave loud applause to this speech, and said it
expressed their will, and they would stand or fall by what had
been spoken.  When silence was again restored, Earl Sigurd said,
"It is King Hakon's will to give way to you, the bondes, and
never to separate himself from your friendship."  The bondes
replied, that it was their desire that the king should offer a
sacrifice for peace and a good year, as his father was want to
do; and thereupon the noise and tumult ceased, and the Thing was
concluded.  Earl Sigurd spoke to the king afterwards, and advised
him not to refuse altogether to do as the people desired, saying
there was nothing else for it but to give way to the will of the
bondes; "for it is, as thou hast heard thyself, the will and
earnest desire of the head-people, as well as of the multitude.
Hereafter we may find a good way to manage it."  And in this
resolution the king and earl agreed (A.D. 950).



18. KING HAKON OFFERS SACRIFICES.

The harvest thereafter, towards the winter season, there was a
festival of sacrifice at Hlader, and the king came to it.  It had
always been his custom before, when he was present at a place
where there was sacrifice, to take his meals in a little house by
himself, or with some few of his men; but the bondes grumbled
that he did not seat himself in his high-seat at these the most
joyous of the meetings of the people.  The earl said that the
king should do so this time.  The king accordingly sat upon his
high-seat.  Now when the first full goblet was filled, Earl
Sigurd spoke some words over it, blessed it in Odin's name, and
drank to the king out of the horn; and the king then took it, and
made the sign of the cross over it.  Then said Kar of Gryting,
"What does the king mean by doing so?  Will he not sacrifice?"
Earl Sigurd replies, "The king is doing what all of you do, who
trust to your power and strength.  He is blessing the full goblet
in the name of Thor, by making the sign of his hammer over it
before he drinks it."  On this there was quietness for the
evening.  The next day, when the people sat down to table, the
bondes pressed the king strongly to eat of horse-flesh (1); and
as he would on no account do so, they wanted him to drink of the
soup; and as he would not do this, they insisted he should at
least taste the gravy; and on his refusal they were going to lay
hands on him.  Earl Sigurd came and made peace among them, by
asking the king to hold his mouth over the handle of the kettle,
upon which the fat smoke of the boiled horse-flesh had settled
itself; and the king first laid a linen cloth over the handle,
and then gaped over it, and returned to the high-seat; but
neither party was satisfied with this.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This eating of horse-flesh at these religious festivals was
     considered the most direct proof of paganism in the
     following times, and was punished by death or mutilation by
     Saint Olaf.  It was a ceremony apparently commemorative of
     their Asiatic origin and ancestors.



19. FEAST OF THE SACRIFICE AT MORE.

The winter thereafter the king prepared a Yule feast in More, and
eight chiefs resolved with each other to meet at it.  Four of
them were from without the Throndhjem district -- namely, Kar of
Gryting, Asbjorn of Medalhus, Thorberg of Varnes, and Orm from
Ljoxa; and from the Throndhjem district, Botolf of Olvishaug,
Narfe of Staf in Veradal, Thrand Hak from Egg, and Thorer Skeg
from Husaby in Eyin Idre.  These eight men bound themselves, the
four first to root out Christianity in Norway, and the four
others to oblige the king to offer sacrifice to the gods.  The
four first went in four ships southwards to More, and killed
three priests, and burnt three churches, and then they returned.
Now, when King Hakon and Earl Sigurd came to More with their
court, the bondes assembled in great numbers; and immediately, on
the first day of the feast, the bondes insisted hard with the
king that he should offer sacrifice, and threatened him with
violence if he refused.  Earl Sigurd tried to make peace between
them, and brought it so far that the king took some bits of
horse-liver, and emptied all the goblets the bondes filled for
him without the sign of the cross; but as soon as the feast was
over, the king and the earl returned to Hlader.  The king was
very ill pleased, and made himself ready to leave Throndhjem
forthwith with all his people; saying that the next time he came
to Throndhjem, he would come with such strength of men-at-arms
that he would repay the bondes for their enmity towards him. 
Earl Sigurd entreated the king not to take it amiss of the
bondes; adding, that it was not wise to threaten them, or to make
war upon the people within the country, and especially in the
Throndhjem district, where the strength of the land lay; but the
king was so enraged that he would not listen to a word from
anybody.  He went out from Throndhjem, and proceeded south to
More, where he remained the rest of the winter, and on to the
spring season (A.D. 950); and when summer came he assembled men,
and the report was that he intended with this army to attack the
Throndhjem people.



20. BATTLE AT OGVALDSNES.

But just as the king had embarked with a great force of troops,
the news was brought him from the south of the country, that
King Eirik's sons had come from Denmark to Viken and had driven
King Trygve Olafson from his ships at Sotanes, and then had
plundered far and wide around in Viken, and that many had
submitted to them.  Now when King Hakon heard this news, he
thought that help was needed; and he sent word to Earl Sigurd,
and to the other chiefs from whom he could expect help, to hasten
to his assistance.  Sigurd the earl came accordingly with a great
body of men, among whom were all the Throndhjem people who had
set upon him the hardest to offer sacrifice; and all made their
peace with the king, by the earl's persuasion.  Now King Hakon
sailed south along the coast; and when he came south as far as
Stad, he heard that Eirik's sons were come to North Agder.  Then
they advanced against each other, and met at Kormt.  Both parties
left their ships there, and gave battle at Ogvaldsnes.  Both
parties had a great force, and it was a great battle.  King Hakon
went forward bravely, and King Guthorm Eirikson met him with his
troop, and they exchanged blows with each other.  Guthorm fell,
and his standard was cut down.  Many people fell around him.  The
army of Eirik's sons then took flight to their ships and rowed
away with the loss of many a man.  So says Guthorm Sindre: --


     "The king's voice waked the silent host
     Who slept beside the wild sea-coast,
     And bade the song of spear and sword
     Over the battle plain be heard.
     Where heroes' shields the loudest rang,
     Where loudest was the sword-blade's clang,
     By the sea-shore at Kormt Sound,
     Hakon felled Guthorm to the ground."

Now King Hakon returned to his ships, and pursued Gunhild's sons.
And both parties sailed all they could sail, until they came to
East Adger, from whence Eirik's sons set out to sea, and
southwards for Jutland (A.D. 950).  Guthorm Sindre speaks of it
in his song: --

     "And Guthorm's brothers too, who know
     So skilfully to bend the bow,
     The conquering hand must also feel
     Of Hakon, god of the bright steel, --
     The sun-god, whose bright rays, that dart
     Flame-like, are swords that pierce the heart.
     Well I remember how the King
     Hakon, the battle's life and spring,
     O'er the wide ocean cleared away
     Eirik's brave sons.  They durst not stay,
     But round their ships' sides hung their shields
     And fled across the blue sea-fields."

King Hakon returned then northwards to Norway, but Eirik's sons
remained a long time in Denmark.



21. KING HAKON'S LAWS.

King Hakon after this battle made a law, that all inhabited land
over the whole country along the sea-coast, and as far back from
it as the salmon swims up in the rivers, should be divided into
ship-raths according to the districts; and it was fixed by law
how many ships there should be from each district, and how great
each should be, when the whole people were called out on service.
For this outfit the whole inhabitants should be bound whenever a
foreign army came to the country.  With this came also the order
that beacons should be erected upon the hills, so that every man
could see from the one to the other; and it is told that a
war-signal could thus be given in seven days, from the most
southerly beacon to the most northerly Thing-seat in Halogaland



22. CONCERNING EIRIK'S SONS.

Eirik's sons plundered much on the Baltic coasts and sometimes,
as before related, in Norway; but so long as Hakon ruled over
Norway there was in general good peace, and good seasons, and he
was the most beloved of kings.  When Hakon had reigned about
twenty years in Norway (A.D. 954), Eirik's sons came from Denmark
with a powerful army, of which a great part consisted of the
people who had followed them on their expeditions; but a still
greater army of Danes had been placed at their disposal by King
Harald Gormson.  They sailed with a fair wind from Vendil, and
came to Agder; and then sailed northwards, night and day, along
the coast.  But the beacons were not fired, because it had been
usual to look for them lighted from the east onwards, and nobody
had observed them from the east coast; and besides King Hakon had
set heavy penalties for giving false alarm, by lighting the
beacons without occasion.  The reason of this was, that ships of
war and vikings cruised about and plundered among the outlying
islands, and the country people took them for Eirik's sons, and
lighted the beacons, and set the whole country in trouble and
dread of war.  Sometimes, no doubt, the sons of Eirik were there;
but having only their own troops, and no Danish army with them,
they returned to Denmark; and sometimes these were other vikings.
King Hakon was very angry at this, because it cost both trouble
and money to no purpose.  The bondes also suffered by these false
alarms when they were given uselessly; and thus it happened that
no news of this expedition of Eirik's sons circulated through the
land until they had come as far north as Ulfasund, where they lay
for seven days.  Then spies set off across Eid and northwards to
More.  King Hakon was at that time in the island Frede, in North
More, at a place called Birkistrand, where he had a dwelling-
house, and had no troops with him, only his bodyguard or court,
and the neighbouring bondes he had invited to his house.



23. OF EGIL ULSERK.

The spies came to King Hakon, and told him that Eirik's sons,
with a great army, lay just to the south of Stad.  Then he called
together the most understanding of the men about him, and asked
their opinion, whether he should fight with Eirik's sons,
although they had such a great multitude with them, or should set
off northwards to gather together more men.  Now there was a
bonde there, by name Egil Ulserk, who was a very old man, but in
former days had been strong and stout beyond most men, and a
hardy man-at-arms withal, having long carried King Harald
Harfager's banner.  Egil answered thus to the king's speech, --
"I was in several battles with thy father Harald the king, and he
gave battle sometimes with many, sometimes with few people; but
he always came off with victory.  Never did I hear him ask
counsel of his friends whether he should fly -- and neither shalt
thou get any such counsel from us, king; but as we know we have a
brave leader, thou shalt get a trusty following from us."  Many
others agreed with this speech, and the king himself declared he
was most inclined to fight with such strength as they could
gather.  It was so determined.  The king split up a war-arrow,
which he sent off in all directions, and by that token a number
of men was collected in all haste.  Then said Egil Ulserk, -- "At
one time the peace had lasted so long I was afraid I might come
to die the death of old age (1), within doors upon a bed of
straw, although I would rather fall in battle following my chief.
And now it may so turn out in the end as I wished it to be."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  In all the sagas of this pagan time, the dying on a bed of
     sickness is mentioned as a kind of derogatory end of a man
     of any celebrity. -- L.


24.  BATTLE AT FREDARBERG.

Eirik's sons sailed northwards around Stad; as soon as the wind
suited; and when they had passed it, and heard where King Hakon
was, they sailed to meet him.  King Hakon had nine ships, with
which he lay under Fredarberg in Feeysund; and Eirik's sons had
twenty ships, with which they brought up on the south side of the
same cape, in Feeysund.  King Hakon sent them a message, asking
them to go upon the land; and telling them that he had hedged in
with hazel boughs a place of combat at Rastarkalf, where there is
a flat large field, at the foot of a long and rather low ridge.
Then Eirik's sons left their ships, and went northwards over the
neck of land within Fredarberg, and onward to Rastarkalf.  Then
Egil asked King Hakon to give him ten men with ten banners, and
the king did so.  Then Egil went with his men under the ridge;
but King Hakon went out upon the open field with his army, and
set up his banner, and drew up his army, saying, "Let us draw up
in a long line, that they may not surround us, as they have the
most men."  And so it was done; and there was a severe battle,
and a very sharp attack.  Then Egil Ulserk set up the ten banners
he had with him, and placed the men who carried them so that they
should go as near the summit of the ridge as possible, and
leaving a space between each of them.  They went so near the
summit that the banners could be seen over it, and moved on as if
they were coming behind the army of Eirik's sons.  Now when the
men who stood uppermost in the line of the troops of Eirik's sons
saw so many flying banners advancing high over the edge of the
ridge, they supposed a great force must be following, who would
come behind their army, and between them and their ships.  They
made each other acquainted with what was going on in a loud
shout, and the whole took to flight; and when the king saw it,
they fled with the rest.  King Hakon now pushes on briskly with
his people, pursuing the flying, and killing many.



5. OF KING GAMLE.

When Gamle Eirikson came up the ridge of the hill he turned
round, and he observed that not more people were following than
his men had been engaged with already, and he saw it was but a
stratagem of war; so he ordered the war-horns to be blown, his
banner to be set up, and he put his men in battle order.  On
this, all his Northmen stood, and turned with him, but the Danes
fled to the ships; and when King Hakon and his men came thither,
there was again sharp conflict; but now Hakon had most people.
At last the Eirik's sons' force fled, and took the road south
about the hill; but a part of their army retreated upon the hill
southwards, followed by King Hakon.  There is a flat field east
of the ridge which runs westward along the range of hills, and is
bounded on its west side by a steep ridge.  Gamle's men retreated
towards this ground; but Hakon followed so closely that he killed
some, and others ran west over the ridge, and were killed on that
side of it.  King Hakon did not part with them till the last man
of them was killed.



26. KING GAMLE AND ULSERK FALL.

Gamle Eirikson fled from the ridge down upon the plain to the
south of the hill.  There he turned himself again, and waited
until more people gathered to him.  All his brothers, and many
troops of their men, assembled there.  Egil Ulserk was in front,
and in advance of Hakon's men, and made a stout attack.  He and
King Gamle exchanged blows with each other, and King Gamle got a
grievous wound; but Egil fell, and many people with him.  Then
came Hakon the king with the troops which had followed him, and a
new battle began.  King Hakon pushed on, cutting down men on both
sides of him, and killing the one upon the top of the other. So
sings Guthorm Sindre: --

     "Scared by the sharp sword's singing sound,
     Brandished in air, the foe gave ground.
     The boldest warrior cannot stand
     Before King Hakon's conqueringhand;
     And the king's banner ever dies
     Where the spear-forests thickest rise.
     Altho' the king had gained of old
     Enough of Freyja's tears of gold (1),
     He spared himself no more than tho'
     He'd had no well-filled purse to show."

When Eirik's sons saw their men falling all round, they turned
and fled to their ships; but those who had sought the ships
before had pushed off some of them from the land, while some of
them were still hauled up and on the strand.  Now the sons of
Eirik and their men plunged into the sea, and betook themselves
to swimming.  Gamle Eirikson was drowned; but the other sons of
Eirik reached their ships, and set sail with what men remained.
They steered southwards to Denmark, where they stopped a while,
very ill satisfied with their expedition.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Freyja's husband was Od; and her tears, when she wept at the
     long absence of her husband, were tears of gold.  Od's
     wife's tears is the skald's expression here for gold --
     understood, no doubt, as readily as any allusion to Plutus
     would convey the equivalent meaning in modern poetry. -- L.



27. EGIL ULSERK'S BURIAL-GROUND.

King Hakon took all the ships of the sons of Eirik that had been
left upon the strand, and had them drawn quite up, and brought on
the land.  Then he ordered that Egil Ulserk, and all the men of
his army who had fallen, should be laid in the ships, and covered
entirely over with earth and stones.  King Hakon made many of the
ships to be drawn up to the field of battle, and the hillocks
over them are to be seen to the present day a little to the south
of Fredarberg.  At the time when King Hakon was killed, when Glum
Geirason, in his song, boasted of King Hakon's fall, Eyvind
Skaldaspiller composed these verses on this battle: --

     "Our dauntless king with Gamle's gore
     Sprinkled his bright sword o'er and o'er:
     Sprinkled the gag that holds the mouth
     Of the fell demon Fenriswolf (1).
     Proud swelled our warriors' hearts when he
     Drove Eirik's sons out to the sea,
     With all their Guatland host: but now
     Our warriors weep -- Hakon lies low!"

High standing stones mark Egil Uslerk s grave.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The Fenriswolf. one of the children of Loke. begotten with a
     giantess, was chained to a rock, and gagged by a sword
     placed in his mouth, to prevent him devouring mankind.
     Fenriswolf's gag is a skaldic expression for a sword. -- L.



28. NEWS OF WAR COMES TO KING HAKON.

When King Hakon, Athelstan's foster-son, had been king for
twenty-six years after his brother Eirik had left the country, it
happened (A.D. 960) that he was at a feast in Hordaland in the
house at Fitjar on the island Stord, and he had with him at the
feast his court and many of the peasants.  And just as the king
was seated at the supper-table, his watchmen who were outside
observed many ships coming sailing along from the south, and not
very far from the island.  Now, said the one to the other, they
should inform the king that they thought an armed force was
coming against them; but none thought it advisable to be the
bearer of an alarm of war to the king, as he had set heavy
penalties on those who raised such alarms falsely, yet they
thought it unsuitable that the king should remain in ignorance of
what they saw.  Then one of them went into the room and asked
Eyvind Finson to come out as fast as possible, for it was very
needful.  Eyvind immediately came out and went to where he could
see the ships, and saw directly that a great army was on the way;
and he returned in all haste into the room, and, placing himself
before the kind, said, "Short is the hour for acting, and long
the hour for feasting."  The king cast his eyes upon him, and
said, "What now is in the way?"  Eyvind said --

     "Up king!  the avengers are at hand!
     Eirik's bold sons approach the land!
     The Judgment of the sword they crave
     Against their foe.  Thy wrath I brave;
     Tho' well I know 'tis no light thing
     To bring war-tidings to the king
     And tell him 'tis no time to rest.
     Up!  gird your armour to your breast:
     Thy honour's dearer than my life;
     Therefore I say, up to the strife!"

Then said the king, "Thou art too brave a fellow, Eyvind, to
bring us any false alarm of war."  The others all said it was a
true report.  The king ordered the tables to be removed, and then
he went out to look at the ships; and when it could be clearly
seen that these were ships of war, the king asked his men what
resolution they should take -- whether to give battle with the
men they had, or go on board ship and sail away northwards along
the land.  "For it is easy to see," said he, "that we must now
fight against a much greater force than we ever had against us
before; although we thought just the same the last time we fought
against Gunhild's sons."  No one was in a hurry to give an answer
to the king; but at last Eyvind replied to the king's speech: --

     "Thou who in the battle-plain
     Hast often poured the sharp spear-rain!
     Ill it beseems our warriors brave
     To fly upon the ocean wave:
     To fly upon the blue wave north,
     When Harald from the south comes forth,
     With many a ship riding in pride
     Upon the foaming ocean-tide;
     With many a ship and southern viking, --
     Let us take shield in hand, brave king!"

The king replied, "Thy counsel, Eyvind, is manly, and after my
own heart; but I will hear the opinion of others upon this
matter."  Now as the king's men thought they discerned what way
the king was inclined to take, they answered that they would
rather fall bravely and like men, than fly before the Danes;
adding, that they had often gained the victory against greater
odds of numbers.  The king thanked them for their resolution, and
bade them arm themselves; and all the men did so.  The king put
on his armour, and girded on his sword Kvernbit, and put a gilt
helmet upon his head, and took a spear (Kesja) in his hand, and a
shield by his side.  He then drew up his courtmen and the bondes
in one body, and set up his banner.



29. THE ARMAMENT OF EIRIK'S SONS.

After Gamle's death King Harald, Eirik's son, was the chief of
the brothers, and he had a great army with him from Denmark.  In
their army were also their mother's brothers, -- Eyvind Skreyja,
and Alf Askman, both strong and able men, and great man slayers.
The sons of Eirik brought up with their ships off the island, and
it is said that their force was not less than six to one, -- so
much stronger in men were Eirik's sons.



30. KING HAKON'S BATTLE ARRAY.

When King Hakon had drawn up his men, it is told of him that he
threw off his armour before the battle began.  So sings Eyvind
Skaldaspiller, in Hakmarmal: --

     "They found Blorn's brother bold
     Under his banner as of old,
     Ready for battle.  Foes advance, --
     The front rank raise the shining lance:
     And now begins the bloody fray!
     Now!  now begins Hild's wild play!
     Our noble king, whose name strikes fear
     Into each Danish heart, -- whose spear
     Has single-handed spilt the blood
     Of many a Danish noble, -- stood
     Beneath his helmet's eagle wing
     Amidst his guards; but the brave king
     Scorned to wear armour, while his men
     Bared naked breasts against the rain
     Of spear and arrow, his breast-plate rung
     Against the stones; and, blithe and gay,
     He rushed into the thickest fray.
     With golden helm, and naked breast,
     Brave Hakon played at slaughter's feast."

King Hakon selected willingly such men for his guard or court-men
as were distinguished for their strength and bravery, as his
father King Harald also used to do; and among these was Thoralf
Skolmson the Strong, who went on one side of the king.  He had
helmet and shield, spear and sword; and his sword was called by
the name of Footbreadth.  It was said that Thoralf and King Hakon
were equal in strength.  Thord Sjarekson speaks of it in the poem
he composed concerning Thoralf: --

     "The king's men went with merry words
     To the sharp clash of shields and flame swords,
     When these wild rovers of the sea
     At Fitlar fought.  Stout Thoralf he
     Next to the Northmen's hero came,
     Scattering wide round the battle flame
     For in the storm of shields not one
     Ventured like him with brave Hakon."

When both lines met there was a hard combat, and much bloodshed.
The combatants threw their spears and then drew their swords.
Then King Hakon, and Thoralf with him, went in advance of the
banner, cutting down on both sides of them.  So says Eyvind
Skaldaspiller: --

     "The body-coats of naked steel,
     The woven iron coats of mail,
     Like water fly before the swing
     Of Hakon's sword -- the champion-king.
     About each Gotland war-man's head
     Helm splits, like ice beneath the tread,
     Cloven by the axe or sharp swordblade,
     The brave king, foremost in the fight,
     Dyes crimson-red the spotless white
     Of his bright shield with foemen's gore. --
     Amidst the battle's wild uproar,
     Wild pealing round from shore to shore."



31. FALL OF SKREYJA AND ASKMAN.

King Hakon was very conspicuous among other men, and also when
the sun shone his helmet glanced, and thereby many weapons were
directed at him.  Then Eyvind Finson took a hat and put it over
the king's helmet.  Now Eyvind Skreyja called out, "Does the king
of the Norsemen hide himself, or has he fled?  Where is now the
golden helmet?"  Then Eyvind, and his brother Alf with him,
pushed on like fools or madmen.  King Hakon shouted to Eyvind,
"Come on as thou art coming, and thou shalt find the king of the
Norsemen."  So says Eyvind Skaldaspiller: --

     "The raiser of the storm of shields,
     The conqueror in battle fields, --
     Hakon the brave, the warrior's friend,
     Who scatters gold with liberal hand,
     Heard Skreyja's taunt, and saw him rush,
     Amidst the sharp spears' thickest push,
     And loudly shouted in reply --
     `If thou wilt for the victory try,
     The Norseman's king thou soon shall find!
     Hold onwards, friend!  Hast thou a mind!"

It was also but a short space of time before Eyvind did come up
swinging his sword, and made a cut at the king; but Thoralf
thrust his shield so hard against Eyvind that he tottered with
the shock.  Now the king takes his sword Kvernbit with both
hands, and hewed Eyvind through helm and head, and clove him down
to the shoulders.  Thoralf also slew Alf Askman.  So says Eyvind
Skaldaspiller: --

     "With both his hands the gallant king
     Swung round his sword, and to the chin
     Clove Eyvind down: his faithless mail
     Against it could no more avail,
     Than the thin plank against the shock
     When the ship's side beats on the rock.
     By his bright sword with golden haft
     Thro' helm, and head, and hair, was cleft
     The Danish champion; and amain,
     With terror smitten, fled his men."

After this fall of the two brothers, King Hakon pressed on so
hard that all men gave way before his assault.  Now fear came
over the army of Eirik's sons, and the men began to fly; and King
Hakon, who was at the head of his men, pressed on the flying, and
hewed down oft and hard.  Then flew an arrow, one of the kind
called "flein", into Hakon's arm, into the muscles below the
shoulder; and it is said by many people that Gunhild's shoe-boy,
whose name was Kisping, ran out and forwards amidst the confusion
of arms, called out "Make room for the king-killer," and shot
King Hakon with the flein.  Others again say that nobody could
tell who shot the king, which is indeed the most likely; for
spears, arrows, and all kinds of missiles flew as thick as a
snow-drift.  Many of the people of Eirik's sons were killed, both
on the field of battle and on the way to the ships, and also on
the strand, and many threw themselves into the water.  Many also,
among whom were Eirik's sons, got on board their ships, and rowed
away as fast as they could, and Hakon's men after them.  So says
Thord Sjarekson: --

     "The wolf. the murderer, and the thief,
     Fled from before the people's chief:
     Few breakers of the peace grew old
     Under the Northmen's king so bold.
     When gallant Hakon lost his life
     Black was the day, and dire the strife.
     It was bad work for Gunhild's sons,
     Leading their pack of Hungry Danes
     From out the south, to have to fly,
     And many a bonde leave to die,
     Leaning his heavy wounded head
     On the oar-bench for feather-bed.
     Thoralf was nearest to the side
     Of gallant Hakon in the tide
     Of battle; his the sword that best
     Carved out the raven's bloody feast:
     Amidst the heaps of foemen slain
     He was named bravest on the plain."



32. HAKON'S DEATH.

When King Hakon came out to his ship he had his wound bound up;
but the blood ran from it so much and so constantly, that it
could not be stopped; and when the day was drawing to an end his
strength began to leave him.  Then he told his men that he wanted
to go northwards to his house at Alreksstader; but when he came
north, as far as Hakonarhella Hill, they put in towards the land,
for by this time the king was almost lifeless.  Then he called
his friends around him, and told them what he wished to be done
with regard to his kingdom.  He had only one child, a daughter,
called Thora, and had no son.  Now he told them to send a message
to Eirik's sons, that they should be kings over the country; but
asked them to hold his friends in respect and honour.  "And if
fate," added he, "should prolong my life, I will, at any rate,
leave the country, and go to a Christian land, and do penance for
what I have done against God; but should I die in heathen land,
give me any burial you think fit."  Shortly afterwards Hakon
expired, at the little hill on the shore-side at which he was
born.  So great was the sorrow over Hakon's death, that he was
lamented both by friends and enemies; and they said that never
again would Norway see such a king.  His friends removed his body
to Saeheim, in North Hordaland, and made a great mound, in which
they laid the king in full armour and in his best clothes, but
with no other goods.  They spoke over his grave, as heathen
people are used to do, and wished him in Valhal.  Eyvind
Skaldaspiller composed a poem on the death of King Hakon, and on
how well he was received in Valhal.  The poem is called
"Hakonarmal": --

     "In Odin's hall an empty place
     Stands for a king of Yngve's race;
     `Go, my valkyries,' Odin said,
     `Go forth, my angels of the dead,
     Gondul and Skogul, to the plain
     Drenched with the battle's bloody rain,
     And to the dying Hakon tell,
     Here in Valhal shall he dwell.'

     "At Stord, so late a lonely shore,
     Was heard the battle's wild uproar;
     The lightning of the flashing sword
     Burned fiercely at the shore of Stord.
     From levelled halberd and spearhead
     Life-blood was dropping fast and red;
     And the keen arrows' biting sleet
     Upon the shore at Stord fast beat.

     "Upon the thundering cloud of shield
     Flashed bright the sword-storm o'er the field;
     And on the plate-mail rattled loud
     The arrow-shower's rushing cloud,
     In Odin's tempest-weather, there
     Swift whistling through the angry air;
     And the spear-torrents swept away
     Ranks of brave men from light of day.

     "With batter'd shield, and blood-smear'd sword
     Slits one beside the shore of Stord,
     With armour crushed and gashed sits he,
     A grim and ghastly sight to see;
     And round about in sorrow stand
     The warriors of his gallant band:
     Because the king of Dags' old race
     In Odin's hall must fill a place.

     "Then up spake Gondul, standing near
     Resting upon her long ash spear, --
     `Hakon!  the gods' cause prospers well,
     And thou in Odin's halls shalt dwell!'
     The king beside the shore of Stord
     The speech of the valkyrie heard,
     Who sat there on his coal-black steed,
     With shield on arm and helm on head.

     "Thoughtful, said Hakon, `Tell me why
     Ruler of battles, victory
     Is so dealt out on Stord's red plain?
     Have we not well deserved to gain?'
     `And is it not as well dealt out?'
     Said Gondul. `Hearest thou not the shout?
     The field is cleared -- the foemen run --
     The day is ours -- the battle won!'

     "Then Skogul said, `My coal-black steed,
     Home to the gods I now must speed,
     To their green home, to tell the tiding
     That Hakon's self is thither riding.'
     To Hermod and to Brage then
     Said Odin, `Here, the first of men,
     Brave Hakon comes, the Norsemen's king, --
     Go forth, my welcome to him bring.'

     "Fresh from the battle-field came in,
     Dripping with blood, the Norsemen'a king.
     `Methinks,' said he, great Odin's will
     Is harsh, and bodes me further ill;
     Thy son from off the field to-day
     From victory to snatch away!'
     But Odin said, `Be thine the joy
     Valhal gives, my own brave boy!'

     "And Brage said, `Eight brothers here
     Welcome thee to Valhal's cheer,
     To drain the cup, or fights repeat
     Where Hakon Eirik's earls beat.'
     Quoth the stout king, 'And shall my gear,
     Helm, sword, and mail-coat, axe and spear,
     Be still at hand!  'Tis good to hold
     Fast by our trusty friends of old.'

     "Well was it seen that Hakon still
     Had saved the temples from all ill (1);
     For the whole council of the gods
     Welcomed the king to their abodes.
     Happy the day when men are born
     Like Hakon, who all base things scorn. --
     Win from the brave and honoured name,
     And die amidst an endless fame.

     "Sooner shall Fenriswolf devour
     The race of man from shore to shore,
     Than such a grace to kingly crown
     As gallant Hakon want renown.
     Life, land, friends, riches, all will fly,
     And we in slavery shall sigh.
     But Hakon in the blessed abodes
     For ever lives with the bright gods."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hakon, although a Christian, appears to have favoured the
     old religion, and spared the temples of Odin, and therefore
     a place in Valhal is assigned him. -- L.



SAGA OF KING HARALD GRAFELD AND OF EARL HAKON SON OF SIGURD.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS

This saga might be called Gunhild's Saga, as she is the chief
person in it.  The reign of King Harald and Earl Hakon is more
fully described in the next saga, that is, Olaf Trygvason's.
Other literature on this epoch:

"Agrip" (chap. 8), "Historia Norvegia", (p. 12), "Thjodrek"
(chap. 5), "Saxo" (pp. 479-482), "Egla" (chaps. 81, 82),
"Floamanna" (chap. 12), "Fareyinga" (chaps. 2, 4, 10), "Halfred's
Saga" (chap. 2), "Hord Grimkelsons Saga" (chaps. 13, 18),
"Kormak" (chaps. 19-27), "Laxdaela" (chaps. 19-21), "Njala"
(chaps, 3-6).

The skalds of this saga are: -- Glum Geirason, Kormak Agmundson,
Eyvind Skaldaspiller, and Einar Helgason Skalaglam.



1. GOVERNMENT OF THE SONS OF EIRIK.

When King Hakon was killed, the sons of Eirik took the
sovereignty of Norway.  Harald, who was the oldest of the living
brothers, was over them in dignity.  Their mother Gunhild, who
was called the King-mother, mixed herself much in the affairs of
the country.  There were many chiefs in the land at that time.
There was Trygve Olafson in the Eastland, Gudrod Bjornson in
Vestfold, Sigurd earl of Hlader in the Throndhjem land; but
Gunhild's sons held the middle of the country the first winter.
There went messages and ambassadors between Gunhild's sons and
Trygve and Gudrod, and all was settled upon the footing that they
should hold from Gunhild's sons the same part of the country
which they formerly had held under King Hakon.  A man called Glum
Geirason, who was King Harald's skald, and was a very brave man,
made this song upon King Hakon's death: --

     "Gamle is avenged by Harald!
     Great is thy deed, thou champion bold!
     The rumour of it came to me
     In distant lands beyond the sea,
     How Harald gave King Hakon's blood
     To Odin's ravens for their food."

This song was much favoured.  When Eyvind Finson heard of it he
composed the song which was given before, viz.: --

     "Our dauntless king with Gamle's gore
     Sprinkled his bright sword o'er and o'er," &c.

This song also was much favoured, and was spread widely abroad;
and when King Harald came to hear of it, he laid a charge against
Evyind affecting his life; but friends made up the quarrel, on
the condition that Eyvind should in future be Harald's skald, as
he had formerly been King Hakon's.  There was also some
relationship between them, as Gunhild, Eyvind's mother, was a
daughter of Earl Halfdan, and her mother was Ingibjorg, a
daughter of Harald Harfager.  Thereafter Eyvind made a song about
King Harald: --

     "Guardian of Norway, well we know
     Thy heart failed not when from the bow
     The piercing arrow-hail sharp rang
     On shield and breast-plate, and the clang
     Of sword resounded in the press
     Of battle, like the splitting ice;
     For Harald, wild wolf of the wood,
     Must drink his fill of foeman's blood."

Gunhild's sons resided mostly in the middle of the country, for
they did not think it safe for them to dwell among the people of
Throndhjem or of Viken, where King Hakon's best friends lived;
and also in both places there were many powerful men.  Proposals
of agreement then passed between Gunhild~s sons and Earl Sigurd,
or they got no scat from the Throndhjem country; and at last an
agreement was concluded between the kings and the earl, and
confirmed by oath.  Earl Sigurd was to get the same power in the
Throndhjem land which he had possessed under King Hakon, and on
that they considered themselves at peace.  All Gunhild's sons had
the character of being penurious; and it was said they hid their
money in the ground.  Eyvind Skaldaspiller made a song about
this: --

     "Main-mast of battle!  Harald bold!
     In Hakon's days the skald wore gold
     Upon his falcon's seat; he wore
     Rolf Krake's seed, the yellow ore
     Sown by him as he fled away,
     The avenger Adils' speed to stay.
     The gold crop grows upon the plain;
     But Frode's girls so gay (1) in vain
     Grind out the golden meal, while those
     Who rule o'er Norway's realm like foes,
     In mother earth's old bosom hide
     The wealth which Hakon far and wide
     Scattered with generous hand: the sun
     Shone in the days of that great one,
     On the gold band of Fulla's brow,(2)
     On gold-ringed hands that bend the bow,
     On the skald's hand; but of the ray
     Of bright gold, glancing like the spray
     Of sun-lit waves, no skald now sings --
     Buried are golden chains and rings."

Now when King Harald heard this song, he sent a message to Eyvind
to come to him, and when Eyvind came made a charge against him of
being unfaithful.  "And it ill becomes thee," said the king, "to
be my enemy, as thou hast entered into my service."  Eyvind then
made these verses: --

     "One lord I had before thee, Harald!
     One dear-loved lord!  Now am I old,
     And do not wish to change again, --
     To that loved lord, through strife and pain,
     Faithful I stood; still true to Hakon, --
     To my good king, and him alone.
     But now I'm old and useless grown,
     My hands are empty, wealth is flown;
     I am but fir for a short space
     In thy court-hall to fill a place."

But King Harald forced Eyvind to submit himself to his clemency.
Eyvind had a great gold ring, which was called Molde, that had
been dug up out of the earth long since.  This ring the King said
he must have as the mulet for the offence; and there was no help
for it.  Then Eyvind sang: --

     "I go across the ocean-foam,
     Swift skating to my Iceland home
     Upon the ocean-skates, fast driven
     By gales by Thurse's witch fire given.
     For from the falcon-bearing hand
     Harald has plucked the gold snake band
     My father wore -- by lawless might
     Has taken what is mine by right."

Eyvind went home; but it is not told that he ever came near the
king again.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Menja and Fenja were strong girls of the giant race, whom
     Frode bought in Sweden to grind gold and good luck to him;
     and their meal means gold. -- L.
(2)  Fulla was one of Frig's attendants, who wore a gold band on
     the forehead, and the figure means gold, -- that the sun
     shone on gold rings on the hands of the skalds in Hakon's
     days. -- L.



2. CHRISTIANITY OF GUNHILD'S SONS.

Gunhild's sons embraced Christianity in England, as told before;
but when they came to rule over Norway they made no progress in
spreading Christianity -- only they pulled down the temples of
the idols, and cast away the sacrifices where they had it in
their power, and raised great animosity by doing so.  The good
crops of the country were soon wasted in their days, because
there were many kings, and each had his court about him.  They
had therefore great expenses, and were very greedy.  Besides,
they only observed those laws of King Hakon which suited
themselves.  They were, however, all of them remarkably handsome
men -- stout, strong, and expert in all exercises.  So says Glum
Geirason, in the verses he composed about Harald, Gunhild's son:
--

     "The foeman's terror, Harald bold,
     Had gained enough of yellow gold;
     Had Heimdal's teeth (1) enough in store,
     And understood twelve arts or more."

The brothers sometimes went out on expeditions together, and
sometimes each on his own account.  They were fierce, but brave
and active; and great warriors, and very successful.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Heimdal was one of the gods, whose horse was called Gold-
     top; and the horse's teeth were of gold.



3. COUNCILS BY GUNHILD AND HER SONS.

Gunhild the King-mother, and her sons, often met, and talked
together upon the government of the country.  Once Gunhild asked
her sons what they intended to do with their kingdom of
Throndhjem.  "Ye have the title of king, as your forefathers had
before you; but ye have little land or people, and there are many
to divide with.  In the East, at Viken, there are Trygve and
Gudrod; and they have some right, from relationship, to their
governments.  There is besides Earl Sigurd ruling over the whole
Throndhjem country; and no reason can I see why ye let so large a
kingdom be ruled by an earl, and not by yourselves.  It appears
wonderful to me that ye go every summer upon viking cruises
against other lands, and allow an earl within the country to take
your father's heritage from you.  Your grandfather, whose name
you bear, King Harald, thought it but a small matter to take an
earl's life and land when he subdued all Norway, and held it
under him to old age."

Harald replied, "It is not so easy, mother, to cut off Earl
Sigurd as to slay a kid or a calf.  Earl Sigurd is of high birth,
powerful in relations, popular, and prudent; and I think if the
Throndhjem people knew for certain there was enmity between us,
they would all take his side, and we could expect only evil from
them.  I don't think it would be safe for any of us brothers to
fall into the hands of the Throndhjem people."

Then said Gunhild, "We shall go to work another way, and not put
ourselves forward.  Harald and Erling shall come in harvest to
North More, and there I shall meet you, and we shall consult
together what is to be done."  This was done.



4. GUNHILD'S SONS AND GRJOTGARD.

Earl Sigurd had a brother called Grjotgard, who was much younger,
and much less respected; in fact, was held in no title of honour. 
He had many people, however, about him, and in summer went on
viking cruises, and gathered to himself property.  Now King
Harald sent messengers to Throndhjem with offers of friendship,
and with presents.  The messengers declared that King Harald was
willing to be on the same friendly terms with the earl that King
Hakon had been; adding, that they wished the earl to come to King
Harald, that their friendship might be put on a firm footing. 
The Earl Sigurd received well the king's messengers and friendly
message, but said that on account of his many affairs he could
not come to the king.  He sent many friendly gifts, and many glad
and grateful words to the king, in return for his friendship. 
With this reply the messengers set off, and went to Grjotgard,
for whom they had the same message, and brought him good
presents, and offered him King Harald's friendship, and invited
him to visit the king.  Grjotgard promised to come and at the
appointed time he paid a visit to King Harald and Gunhild, and
was received in the most friendly manner.  They treated him on
the most intimate footing, so that Grjotgard had access to their
private consultations and secret councils.  At last the
conversation, by an understanding between the king and queen, was
turned upon Earl Sigurd; and they spoke to Grjotgard about the
earl having kept him so long in obscurity, and asked him if he
would not join the king's brothers in an attack on the earl.  If
he would join with them, the king promised Grjotgard that he
should be his earl, and have the same government that Sigurd had.
It came so far that a secret agreement was made between them,
that Grjotgard should spy out the most favourable opportunity of
attacking by surprise Earl Sigurd, and should give King Harald
notice of it.  After this agreement Grjotgard returned home with
many good presents from the king.



5. SIGURD BURNT IN A HOUSE IN STJORADAL

Earl Sigurd went in harvest into Stjoradal to guest-quarters, and
from thence went to Oglo to a feast.  The earl usually had many
people about him, for he did not trust the king; but now, after
friendly messages had passed between the king and him, he had no
great following of people with him.  Then Grjotgard sent word to
the king that he could never expect a better opportunity to fall
upon Earl Sigurd; and immediately, that very evening, Harald and
Erling sailed into Throndhjem fjord with several ships and many
people.  They sailed all night by starlight, and Grjotgard came
out to meet them.  Late in the night they came to Oglo, where
Earl Sigurd was at the feast, and set fire to the house; and
burnt the house, the earl, and all his men.  As soon as it was
daylight, they set out through the fjord, and south to More,
where they remained a long time.



6. HISTORY OF HAKON, SIGURD'S SON.

Hakon, the son of Earl Sigurd, was up in the interior of the
Throndhjem country when he heard this news.  Great was the tumult
through all the Throndhjem land, and every vessel that could swim
was put into the water; and as soon as the people were gathered
together they took Earl Sigurd's son Hakon to be their earl and
the leader of the troops, and the whole body steered out of
Throndhjem fjord.  When Gunhild's sons heard of this, they set
off southwards to Raumsdal and South More; and both parties kept
eye on each other by their spies.  Earl Sigurd was killed two
years after the fall of King Hakon (A.D. 962).  So says Eyvind
Skaldaspiller in the "Haleygjatal": --

     "At Oglo. as I've heard, Earl Sigurd
     Was burnt to death by Norway's lord, --
     Sigurd, who once on Hadding's grave
     A feast to Odin's ravens gave.
     In Oglo's hall, amidst the feast,
     When bowls went round and ale flowed fast,
     He perished: Harald lit the fire
     Which burnt to death the son of Tyr."

Earl Hakan, with the help of his friends, maintained himself in
the Throndhjem country for three years; and during that time
(A.D. 963-965) Gunhild's sons got no revenues from it.  Hakon had
many a battle with Gunhild's sons, and many a man lost his life
on both sides.  Of this Einar Skalaglam speaks in his lay, called
"Vellekla," which he composed about Earl Hakon: --

     "The sharp bow-shooter on the sea
     Spread wide his fleet, for well loved he
     The battle storm: well loved the earl
     His battle-banner to unfurl,
     O'er the well-trampled battle-field
     He raised the red-moon of his shield;
     And often dared King Eirik's son
     To try the fray with the Earl Hakon."

And he also says-

     "Who is the man who'll dare to say
     That Sigurd's son avoids the fray?
     He gluts the raven -- he ne'er fears
     The arrow's song or flight of spears,
     With thundering sword he storms in war,
     As Odin dreadful; or from far
     He makes the arrow-shower fly
     To swell the sail of victory.
     The victory was dearly bought,
     And many a viking-fight was fought
     Before the swinger of the sword
     Was of the eastern country lord."

And Einar tells also how Earl Hakon avenged his father's
murderer: --

     "I praise the man, my hero he,
     Who in his good ship roves the sea,
     Like bird of prey, intent to win
     Red vengeance for his slaughtered kin.
     From his blue sword the iron rain
     That freezes life poured down amain
     On him who took his father's life,
     On him and his men in the strife.
     To Odin many a soul was driven, --
     To Odin many a rich gift given.
     Loud raged the storm on battle-field --
     Axe rang on helm, and sword on shield."

The friends on both sides at last laid themselves between, and
brought proposals of peace; for the bondes suffered by this
strife and war in the land.  At last it was brought to this, by
the advice of prudent men, that Earl Hakon should have the same
power in the Throndhjem land which his father Earl Sigurd had
enjoyed; and the kings, on the other hand, should have the same
dominion as King Hakon had: and this agreement was settled with
the fullest promises of fidelity to it.  Afterwards a great
friendship arose between Earl Hakon and Gunhild, although they
sometimes attempted to deceive each other.  And thus matters
stood for three years longer (A.D. 966-968), in which time Earl
Hakon sat quietly in his dominions.



7. OF HARALD GRAFELD.

King Hakon had generally his seat in Hordaland and Rogaland, and
also his brothers; but very often, also, they went to Hardanger.
One summer it happened that a vessel came from Iceland belonging
to Icelanders, and loaded with skins and peltry.  They sailed to
Hardanger, where they heard the greatest number of people
assembled; but when the folks came to deal with them, nobody
would buy their skins.  Then the steersman went to King Harald,
whom he had been acquainted with before, and complained of his
ill luck.  The king promised to visit him, and did so.  King
Harald was very condescending, and full of fun.  He came with a
fully manned boat, looked at the skins, and then said to the
steersman, "Wilt thou give me a present of one of these gray-
skins?"  "Willingly," said the steersman, "if it were ever so
many."  On this the king wrapped himself up in a gray-skin, and
went back to his boat; but before they rowed away from the ship,
every man in his suite bought such another skin as the king wore
for himself.  In a few days so many people came to buy skins,
that not half of them could be served with what they wanted; and
thereafter the king was called Harald Grafeld (Grayskin).



8. EARL EIRIK'S BIRTH.

Earl Hakon came one winter to the Uplands to a feast, and it so
happened that he had intercourse with a girl of mean birth.  Some
time after the girl had to prepare for her confinement, and she
bore a child, a boy, who had water poured on him, and was named
Eirik.  The mother carried the boy to Earl Hakon, and said that
he was the father.  The earl placed him to be brought up with a
man called Thorleif the Wise, who dwelt in Medaldal, and was a
rich and powerful man, and a great friend of the earl.  Eirik
gave hopes very early that he would become an able man, was
handsome in countenance, and stout and strong for a child; but
the earl did not pay much attention to him.  The earl himself was
one of the handsomest men in countenance, -- not tall, but very
strong, and well practised in all kinds of exercises; and witha1
prudent, of good understanding, and a deadly man at arms.



9. KING TRYGVE OLAFSON'S MURDER.

It happened one harvest (A.D. 962) that Earl Hakon, on a journey
in the Uplands, came to Hedemark; and King Trygve Olafson and
King Gudrod Bjornson met him there, and Dale-Gudbrand also came
to the meeting.  They had agreed to meet, and they talked
together long by themselves; but so much only was known of their
business, that they were to be friends of each other.  They
parted, and each went home to his own kingdom.  Gunhild and her
sons came to hear of this meeting, and they suspected it must
have been to lay a treasonable plot against the kings; and they
often talked of this among themselves.  When spring (A.D. 963)
began to set in, King Harald and his brother King Gudrod
proclaimed that they were to make a viking cruise, as usual,
either in the West sea, or the Baltic.  The people accordingly
assembled, launched the ships into the sea, and made themselves
ready to sail.  When they were drinking the farewell ale, -- and
they drank bravely, -- much and many things were talked over at
the drink-table, and, among other things, were comparisons
between different men, and at last between the kings themselves. 
One said that King Harald excelled his brothers by far, and in
every way.  On this King Gudrod was very angry, and said that he
was in no respect behind Harald, and was ready to prove it. 
Instantly both parties were so inflamed that they challenged each
other to battle, and ran to their arms.  But some of the guests
who were less drunk, and had more understanding, came between
them, and quieted them; and each went to his ship, but nobody
expected that they would all sail together.  Gudrod sailed east
ward along the land, and Harald went out to sea, saying he would
go to the westward; but when he came outside of the islands he
steered east along the coast, outside of the rocks and isles.
Gudrod, again, sailed inside, through the usual channel, to
Viken, and eastwards to Folden.  He then sent a message to King
Trygve to meet him, that they might make a cruise together in
summer in the Baltic to plunder.  Trygve accepted willingly, and
as a friend, the invitation; and as heard King Gudrod had but few
people with him, he came to meet him with a single boat.  They
met at Veggen, to the east of Sotanes; but just as they were come
to the meeting place, Gudrod's men ran up and killed King Trygve
and twelve men.  He lies buried at a place called Trygve's Cairn
(A.D. 963).



10. KING GUDROD'S FALL.

King Harald sailed far outside of the rocks and isles; but set
his course to Viken, and came in the night-time to Tunsberg, and
heard that Gudrod Bjornson was at a feast a little way up the
country.  Then King Harald set out immediately with his
followers, came in the night, and surrounded the house.  King
Gudrod Bjornson went out with his people; but after a short
resistance he fell, and many men with him.  Then King Harald
joined his brother King Gudrod, and they subdued all Viken.



11. OF HARALD GRENSKE.

King Gudrod Bjornson had made a good and suitable marriage, and
had by his wife a son called Harald, who had been sent to be
fostered to Grenland to a lenderman called Hroe the White. 
Hroe's son, called Hrane Vidforle (the Far-travelled), was
Harald's foster-brother, and about the same age.  After his
father Gudrod's fall, Harald, who was called Grenske, fled to the
Uplands, and with him his foster-brother Hrane, and a few people.
Harald staid a while there among his relations; but as Eirik's
sons sought after every man who interfered with them, and
especially those who might oppose them, Harald Grenske's friends
and relations advised him to leave the country.  Harald therefore
went eastward into Svithjod, and sought shipmates, that he might
enter into company with those who went out a cruising to gather
property.  Harald became in this way a remarkably able man. 
There was a man in Svithjod at that time called Toste, one of the
most powerful and clever in the land among those who had no high
name or dignity; and he was a great warrior, who had been often
in battle, and was therefore called Skoglar-Toste.  Harald
Grenske came into his company, and cruised with Toste in summer;
and wherever Harald came he was well thought of by every one.  In
the winter Harald, after passing two years in the Uplands, took
up his abode with Toste, and lived five years with him.  Toste
had a daughter, who was both young and handsome, but she was
proud and high-minded.  She was called Sigrid, and was afterwards
married to the Swedish king, Eirik the Victorious, and had a son
by him, called Olaf the Swede, who was afterwards king of
Svithjod.  King Eirik died in a sick-bed at Upsala ten years
after the death of Styrbjorn.



12. EARL HAKON'S FEUDS.

Gunhild's sons levied a great army in Viken (A.D. 963), and
sailed along the land northwards, collecting people and ships on
the way out of every district.  They then made known their
intent, to proceed northwards with their army against Earl Hakon
in Throndhjem.  When Earl Hakon heard this news, he also
collected men, and fitted out ships; and when he heard what an
overwhelming force Gunhild's sons had with them, he steered south
with his fleet to More, pillaging wherever he came, and killing
many people.  He then sent the whole of the bonde army back to
Throndhjem; but he himself, with his men-at-arms, proceeded by
both the districts of More and Raumsdal, and had his spies out to
the south of Stad to spy the army of Gunhild's sons; and when he
heard they were come into the Fjords, and were waiting for a fair
wind to sail northwards round Stad, Earl Hakon set out to sea
from the north side of Stad, so far that his sails could not be
seen from the land, and then sailed eastward on a line with the
coast, and came to Denmark, from whence he sailed into the
Baltic, and pillaged there during the summer.  Gunhild's sons
conducted their army north to Throndhjem, and remained there the
whole summer collecting the scat and duties.  But when summer was
advanced they left Sigurd Slefa and Gudron behind; and the other
brothers returned eastward with the levied army they had taken up
in summer.



13. OF EARL HAKON AND GUNHILD'S SONS.

Earl Hakon, towards harvest (A.D. 963), sailed into the Bothnian
Gulf to Helsingjaland, drew his ships up there on the beach, and
took the land-ways through Helsingjaland and Jamtaland, and so
eastwards round the dividing ridge (the Kjol, or keel of the
country), and down into the Throndhjem district.  Many people
streamed towards him, and he fitted out ships.  When the sons of
Gunhild heard of this they got on board their ships, and sailed
out of the Fjord; and Earl Hakon came to his seat at Hlader, and
remained there all winter.  The sons of Gunhild, on the other
hand, occupied More; and they and the earl attacked each other in
turns, killing each other's people. Earl Hakon kept his dominions
of Throndhjem, and was there generally in the winter; but in
summer he sometimes went to Helsingjaland, where he went on board
of his ships and sailed with them down into the Baltic, and
plundered there; and sometimes he remained in Throndhjem, and
kept an army on foot, so that Gunhild's sons could get no hold
northwards of Stad.



14. SIGURD SLEFA'S MURDER.

One summer Harald Grayskin with his troops went north to
Bjarmaland, where be forayed, and fought a great battle with the
inhabitants on the banks of the Vina (Dwina).  King Harald gained
the victory, killed many people, plundered and wasted and burned
far and wide in the land, and made enormous booty.  Glum Geirason
tells of it thus: --

     "I saw the hero Harald chase
     With bloody sword Bjarme's race:
     They fly before him through the night,
     All by their burning city's light.
     On Dwina's bank, at Harald's word,
     Arose the storm of spear and sword.
     In such a wild war-cruise as this,
     Great would he be who could bring peace."

King Sigurd Slefa came to the Herse Klyp's house.  Klyp was a son
of Thord, and a grandson of Hordakare, and was a man of power and
great family.  He was not at home; but his wife Alof give a good
reception to the king, and made a great feast at which there was
much drinking.  Alof was a daughter of Asbjorn, and sister to
Jarnskegge, north in Yrjar.  Asbjorn's brother was called
Hreidar, who was father to Styrkar, whose son was Eindride,
father of Einar Tambaskielfer.  In the night the king went to bed
to Alof against her will, and then set out on his journey.  The
harvest thereafter, King Harald and his brother King Sigurd Slefa
went to Vors, and summoned the bondes to a Thing.  There the
bondes fell on them, and would have killed them, but they escaped
and took different roads.  King Harald went to Hardanger, but
King Sigurd to Alrekstader.  Now when the Herse Klyp heard of
this, he and his relations assembled to attack the king; and
Vemund Volubrjot (1) was chief of their troop.  Now when they
came to the house they attacked the king, and Herse Klyp, it is
said, ran him through with his sword and killed him; but
instantly Klyp was killed on the spot by Erling Gamle (A.D. 965).


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Volubrjotr. -- Literally "the one who breaks the vala", that
     is, breaks the skulls of witches.



15. GRJOTGARD'S FALL.

King Harald Grafeld and his brother King Gudrod gathered together
a great army in the east country, with which they set out
northwards to Throndhjem (A.D. 968).  When Earl Hakon heard of it
he collected men, and set out to More, where he plundered.  There
his father's brother, Grjotgard, had the command and defence of
the country on account of Gunhild's sons, and he assembled an
army by order of the kings.  Earl Hakon advanced to meet him, and
gave him battle; and there fell Grjotgard and two other earls,
and many a man besides.  So says Einar Skalaglam: --

     "The helm-crown'd Hakon, brave as stout,
     Again has put his foes to rout.
     The bowl runs o'er with Odin's mead, (1)
     That fires the skald when mighty deed
     Has to be sung.  Earl Hakon's sword,
     In single combat, as I've heard,
     Three sons of earls from this one fray
     To dwell with Odin drove away." (2)

Thereafter Earl Hakon went out to sea, and sailed outside the
coast, and came to Denmark.  He went to the Danish King, Harald
Gormson, and was well received by him, and staid with him all
winter (A.D. 969).  At that time there was also with the Danish
king a man called Harald, a son of Knut Gormson, and a brother's
son of King Harald.  He was lately come home from a long viking
cruise, on which he had gathered great riches, and therefore he
was called Gold Harald.  He thought he had a good chance of
coming to the Danish kingdom.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Odin's mead, called Bodn, was the blood or mead the sons of
     Brage, the god of poets, drank to inspire them. -- L.
(2)  To dwell with Odin, -- viz. slew them. -- L.



16. KING ERLING'S FALL.

King Harald Grafeld and his brothers proceeded northwards to
Throndhjem, where they met no opposition.  They levied the
scat-duties, and all other revenues, and laid heavy penalties
upon the bondes; for the kings had for a long time received but
little income from Throndhjem, because Earl Hakon was there with
many troops, and was at variance with these kings.  In autumn
(A.D. 968) King Harald went south with the greater part of the
men-at-arms, but King Erlin remained behind with his men.  He
raised great contributions from the bondes, and pressed severely
on them; at which the bondes murmured greatly, and submitted to
their losses with impatience.  In winter they gathered together
in a great force to go against King Erling, just as he was at a
feast; and they gave battle to him, and he with the most of his
men fell (A.D. 969).



17. THE SEASONS IN NORWAY AT THIS TIME.

While Gunhild's sons reigned in Norway the seasons were always
bad, and the longer they reigned the worse were the crops; and
the bondes laid the blame on them. They were very greedy, and
used the bondes harshly.  It came at length to be so bad that
fish, as well as corn, were wanting.  In Halogaland there was the
greatest famine and distress; for scarcely any corn grew, and
even snow was lying, and the cattle were bound in the byres (1)
all over the country until midsummer.  Eyvind Skaldaspiller
describes it in his poem, as he came outside of his house and
found a thick snowdrift at that season: --

     "Tis midsummer, yet deep snows rest
     On Odin's mother's frozen breast:
     Like Laplanders, our cattle-kind
     In stall or stable we must bind."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Byres = gards or farms.



18. THE ICELANDERS AND EYVIND THE SKALD.

Eyvind composed a poem about the people of Iceland, for which
they rewarded him by each bonde giving him three silver pennies,
of full weight and white in the fracture.  And when the silver
was brought together at the Althing, the people resolved to have
it purified, and made into a row of clasps; and after the
workmanship of the silver was paid, the row of clasps was valued
at fifty marks.  This they sent to Eyvind; but Eyvind was obliged
to separate the clasps from each other, and sell them to buy food
for his household.  But the same spring a shoal of herrings set
in upon the fishing ground beyond the coast-side, and Eyvind
manned a ship's boat with his house servants and cottars, and
rowed to where the herrings were come, and sang: --

     "Now let the steed of ocean bound
     O'er the North Sea with dashing sound:
     Let nimble tern and screaming gull
     Fly round and round -- our net is full.
     Fain would I know if Fortune sends
     A like provision to my friends.
     Welcome provision 'tis, I wot,
     That the whale drives to our cook's pot."

So entirely were his movable goods exhausted, that he was obliged
to sell his arrows to buy herrings, or other meat for his table:
--

     "Our arms and ornaments of gold
     To buy us food we gladly sold:
     The arrows of the bow gave we
     For the bright arrows of the sea." (1)


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Herrings, from their swift darting along, are called the
     arrows of the sea.



KING OLAF TRYGVASON'S SAGA.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Hitherto the narrative has been more or less fragmentary.  With
Olaf Trygvason's Saga reliable history begins, and the narration
is full and connected.  The story of Hakon the earl is
incorporated in this saga.

Accounts of Olaf Trygvason may be found in Od the Monk's
legendary saga, in parts of "Agrip", "Historia Norvegiae", and in
Thjodrek.  Icelandic works on this epoch are:

"Egla", "Eyrbyggja", "Finboga", "Floamanna", "Faereyinga",
"Hallfredar Saga", "Havardar Saga", "Are's Islendinga-bok",
"Kristni Saga", "Laxdaela", "Ljosvetninga", "Njala",
"Orkneyinga", "Viga Glums Saga", and "Viga Styrs Saga".

The skalds quoted are: Glum Geirason, Eyvind Finson,
Skaldaspiller, Einar Skalaglam, Tind Halkelson, Eyjolf Dadaskald,
Hallarstein, Halfred Vandraedaskald, Haldor Ukristne, Skule
Thorsteinson, and Thord Kolbeinson.



1. OLAF TRYGVASON'S BIRTH.

King Trygve Olafson had married a wife who was called Astrid. 
She was a daughter of Eirik Bjodaskalle, a great man, who dwelt
at Oprustader.  But after Trygve's death (A.D. 963) Astrid fled,
and privately took with her all the loose property she could. 
Her foster-father, Thorolf Lusarskeg, followed her, and never
left her; and others of her faithful followers spied about to
discover her enemies, and where they were.  Astrid was pregnant
with a child of King Trygve, and she went to a lake, and
concealed herself in a holm or small island in it with a few men.
Here her child was born, and it was a boy; and water was poured
over it, and it was called Olaf after the grandfather.  Astrid
remained all summer here in concealment; but when the nights
became dark, and the day began to shorten and the weather to be
cold, she was obliged to take to the land, along with Thorolf and
a few other men.  They did not seek for houses unless in the
night-time, when they came to them secretly; and they spoke to
nobody.  One evening, towards dark, they came to Oprustader,
where Astrid's father Eirik dwelt, and privately sent a man to
Eirik to tell him; and Eirik took them to an out-house, and
spread a table for them with the best of food.  When Astrid had
been here a short time her travelling attendants left her, and
none remained, behind with her but two servant girls, her child
Olaf, Thorolf Lusarskeg, and his son Thorgils, who was six years
old; and they remained all winter (A.D. 964).



2. OF GUNHILD S SONS.

After Trygve Olafson's murder, Harald Grafeld and his brother
Gudrod went to the farm which he owned; but Astrid was gone, and
they could learn no tidings of her.  A loose report came to their
ears that she was pregnant to King Trygve; but they soon went
away northwards, as before related.  As soon as they met their
mother Gunhild they told her all that had taken place.  She
inquired particularly about Astrid, and they told her the report
they had heard; but as Gunhild's sons the same harvest and winter
after had bickerings with Earl Hakon, as before related, they did
not seek after Astrid and her son that winter.



3. ASTRID'S JOURNEY.

The spring after (A.D. 964) Gunhild sent spies to the Uplands,
and all the way down to Viken, to spy what they could about
Astrid; and her men came back, and could only tell her that
Astrid must be with her father Eirik, and it was probable was
bringing up her infant, the son of Trygve.  Then Gunhild, without
delay, sent off men well furnished with arms and horses, and in
all a troop of thirty; and as their leader she sent a particular
friend of her own, a powerful man called Hakon.  Her orders were
to go to Oprustader, to Eirik, and take King Trygve's son from
thence, and bring the child to her; and with these orders the men
went out.  Now when they were come to the neighbourhood of
Oprustader, some of Eirik's friends observed the troop of
travellers, and about the close of the day brought him word of
their approach.  Eirik immediately, in the night, made
preparation for Astrid's flight, gave her good guides, and send
her away eastward to Svithjod, to his good friend Hakon Gamle,
who was a powerful man there.  Long before day they departed, and
towards evening they reached a domain called Skaun.  Here they
saw a large mansion, towards which they went, and begged a
night's lodging.  For the sake of concealment they were clad in
mean clothing.  There dwelt here a bonde called Bjorn
Eiterkveisa, who was very rich, but very inhospitable.  He drove
them away; and therefore, towards dark, they went to another
domain close by that was called Vidar.  Thorstein was the name of
the bonde; and he gave them lodging, and took good care of them,
so that they slept well, and were well entertained.  Early that
morning Gunhild's men had come to Oprustader, and inquired for
Astrid and her son.  As Eirik told them she was not there, they
searched the whole house, and remained till late in the day
before they got any news of Astrid.  Then they rode after her the
way she had taken, and late at night they came to Bjorn
Eiterkveisa in Skaun, and took up their quarters there.  Hakon
asked Bjorn if he knew anything about Astrid, and he said some
people had been there in the evening wanting lodgings; "but I
drove them away, and I suppose they have gone to some of the
neighbouring houses."  Thorstein's labourer was coming from the
forest, having left his work at nightfall, and called in at
Bjorn's house because it was in his way; and finding there were
guests come to the house, and learning their business, he comes
to Thorstein and tells him of it.  As about a third part of the
night was still remaining, Thorstein wakens his guests and orders
them in an angry voice to go about their business; but as soon as
they were out of the house upon the road, Thorstein tells them
that Gunhild's messengers were at Bjorn's house, and are upon the
trace of them.  They entreat of him to help them, and he gave
them a guide and some provisions.  He conducted them through a
forest to a lake, in which there was an islet overgrown with
reeds.  They waded out to the islet, and hid themselves among the
reeds.  Early in the morning Hakon rode away from Bjorn's into
the township, and wherever he came he asked after Astrid; and
when he came to Thorstein's he asked if she had been there.  He
said that some people had been there; but as soon as it was
daylight they had set off again, eastwards, to the forest.  Hakon
made Thorstein go along with them, as he knew all the roads and
hiding-places.  Thorstein went with them; but when they were come
into the woods, he led them right across the way Astrid had
taken.  They went about and about the whole day to no purpose, as
they could find no trace of her, so they turned back to tell
Gunhild the end of their travel.  Astrid and her friends
proceeded on their journey, and came to Svithjod, to Hakon Gamle
(the Old), where she and her son remained a long time, and had
friendly welcome.



4. HAKON'S EMBASSY TO SWEDEN.

When Gunhild, the mother of the kings, heard that Astrid and her
son Olaf were in the kingdom of Svithjod, she again sent Hakon,
with a good attendance, eastward, to Eirik king of Sweden, with
presents and messages of friendship.  The ambassadors were well
received and well treated.  Hakon, after a time, disclosed his
errand to the king, saying that Gunhild had sent him with the 
request that the king would assist him in getting hold of Olaf
Trygvason, to conduct him to Norway, where Gunhild would bring
him up.  The king gave Hakon people with him, and he rode with
them to Hakon the Old, where Hakon desired, with many friendly
expressions, that Olaf should go with him.  Hakon the Old
returned a friendly answer, saying that it depended entirely upon
Olaf's mother.  But Astrid would on no account listen to the
proposal; and the messengers had to return as they came, and to
tell King Eirik how the matter stood.  The ambassadors then
prepared to return home, and asked the king for some assistance
to take the boy, whether Hakon the Old would or not.  The king
gave them again some attendants; and when they came to Hakon the
Old, they again asked for the boy, and on his refusal to deliver
him they used high words and threatened violence.  But one of the
slaves, Buste by name, attacked Hakon, and was going to kill him;
and they barely escaped from the thralls without a cudgelling,
and proceeded home to Norway to tell Gunhild their ill success,
and that they had only seen Olaf.



5. OF SIGURD EIRIKSON.

Astrid had a brother called Sigurd, a son of Eirik Bjodaskalle,
who had long been abroad in Gardarike (Russia) with King
Valdemar, and was there in great consideration.  Astrid had now a
great inclination to travel to her brother there.  Hakon the Old
gave her good attendants, and what was needful for the journey,
and she set out with some merchants.  She had then been two years
(A.D. 965-966) with Hakon the Old, and Olaf was three years of
age.  As they sailed out into the Baltic, they were captured by
vikings of Eistland, who made booty both of the people and goods,
killing some, and dividing others as slaves.  Olaf was separated
from his mother, and an Eistland man called Klerkon got him as
his share along with Thorolf and Thorgils.  Klerkon thought that
Thorolf was too old for a slave, and that there was not much work
to be got out of him, so he killed him; but took the boys with
him, and sold them to a man called Klerk for a stout and good
ram.  A third man, called Reas, bought Olaf for a good cloak. 
Reas had a wife called Rekon, and a son by her whose name was
Rekone.  Olaf was long with them, was treated well, and was much
beloved by the people.  Olaf was six years in Eistland in this
banishment (A.D. 987-972).



6. OLAF IS SET FREE IN EISTLAND.

Sigurd, the son of Eirik (Astrid's brother), came into Eistland
from Novgorod, on King Valdemar's business to collect the king's
taxes and rents.  Sigurd came as a man of consequence, with many
followers and great magnificence.  In the market-place he
happened to observe a remarkably handsome boy; and as he could
distinguish that he was a foreigner, he asked him his name and
family.  He answered him, that his name was Olaf; that he was a
son of Trygve Olafson; and Astrid, a daughter of Eirik
Bjodaskalle, was his mother.  Then Sigurd knew that the boy was
his sister's son, and asked him how he came there.  Olaf told him
minutely all his adventures, and Sigurd told him to follow him to
the peasant Reas.  When he came there he bought both the boys,
Olaf and Thorgils, and took them with him to Holmgard.  But, for
the first, he made nothing known of Olaf's relationship to him,
but treated him well.



7. KLERKON KILLED BY OLAF.

Olaf Trygvason was one day in the market-place, where there was a
great number of people.  He recognized Klerkon again, who had
killed his foster-father Thorolf Lusarskeg.  Olaf had a little
axe in his hand, and with it he clove Klerkon's skull down to the
brain, and ran home to his lodging, and told his friend Sigurd
what he had done.  Sigurd immediately took Olaf to Queen
Allogia's house, told her what had happened, and begged her to
protect the boy.  She replied, that the boy appeared far too
comely to allow him to be slain; and she ordered her people to be
drawn out fully armed.  In Holmgard the sacredness of peace is so
respected, that it is law there to slay whoever puts a man to
death except by judgment of law; and, according to this law and
usage, the whole people stormed and sought after the boy.  It was
reported that he was in the Queen's house, and that there was a
number of armed men there.  When this was told to the king, he
went there with his people, but would allow no bloodshed.  It was
settled at last in peace, that the king should name the fine for
the murder; and the queen paid it.  Olaf remained afterwards with
the queen, and was much beloved.  It is a law at Holmgard, that
no man of royal descent shall stay there without the king's
permission.  Sigurd therefore told the queen of what family Olaf
was, and for what reason he had come to Russia; namely, that he
could not remain with safety in his own country: and begged her
to speak to the king about it.  She did so, and begged the king
to help a king's son whose fate had been so hard; and in
consequence of her entreaty the king promised to assist him, and
accordingly he received Olaf into his court, and treated him
nobly, and as a king's son.  Olaf was nine years old when he came
to Russia, and he remained nine years more (A.D. 978-981) with
King Valdemar.  Olaf was the handsomest of men, very stout and
strong, and in all bodily exercises he excelled every Northman
that ever was heard of.



8. OF HAKON EARL OF HLADER.

Earl Hakon, Sigurd's son, was with the Danish king, Harald
Gormson, the winter after he had fled from Norway before
Gunhild's sons.  During the winter (A.D. 969) the earl had so
much care and sorrow that he took to bed, and passed many
sleepless nights, and ate and drank no more than was needful to
support his strength.  Then he sent a private message to his
friends north in Throndhjem, and proposed to them that they
should kill King Erling, if they had an opportunity; adding, that
he would come to them in summer.  The same winter the Throndhjem
people accordingly, as before related, killed King Erling.  There
was great friendship between Earl Hakon and Gold Harald, and
Harald told Hakon all his intentions.  He told him that he was
tired of a ship-life, and wanted to settle on the land; and asked
Hakon if he thought his brother King Harald would agree to divide
the kingdom with him if he asked it.  "I think," replied Hakon,
"that the Danish king would not deny thy right; but the best way
to know is to speak to the king himself.  I know for certain so
much, that you will not get a kingdom if you don't ask for it." 
Soon after this conversation Gold Harald spoke to the king about
the matter, in the presence of many great men who were friends to
both; and Gold Harald asked King Harald to divide the kingdom
with him in two equal parts, to which his royal birth and the
custom of the Danish monarchy gave him right.  The king was
highly incensed at this demand, and said that no man had asked
his father Gorm to be king over half of Denmark, nor yet his
grandfather King Hordaknut, or Sigurd Orm, or Ragnar Lodbrok; and
he was so exasperated and angry, that nobody ventured to speak of
it to him.



9. OF GOLD HARALD.

Gold Harald was now worse off than before; for he had got no
kingdom, and had got the king's anger by proposing it.  He went
as usual to his friend Hakon, and complained to him of his fate,
and asked for good advice, and if he could help him to get his
share of the kingdom; saying that he would rather try force, and
the chance of war, than give it up.

Hakon advised him not to speak to any man so that this should be
known; "for," said he, "it concerns thy life: and rather consider
with thyself what thou art man enough to undertake; for to
accomplish such a purpose requires a bold and firm man, who will
neither stick at good nor evil to do that which is intended; for
to take up great resolutions, and then to lay them aside, would
only end in dishonour."

Go1d Harald replies -- "I will so carry on what I begin, that I
will not hesitate to kill Harald with my own hands, if I can come
thereby to the kingdom he denies me, and which is mine by right."
And so they separated.

Now King Harald comes also to Earl Hakon, and tells him the
demand on his kingdom which Gold Harald had made, and also his
answer, and that he would upon no account consent to diminish his
kingdom.  "And if Gold Harald persists in his demand, I will have
no hesitation in having him killed; for I will not trust him if
he does not renounce it."

The earl answered, -- "My thoughts are, that Harald has carried
his demand so far that he cannot now let it drop, and I expect
nothing but war in the land; and that he will be able to gather a
great force, because his father was so beloved.  And then it
would be a great enormity if you were to kill your relation; for,
as things now stand, all men would say that he was innocent.  But
I am far from saying, or advising, that you should make yourself
a smaller king than your father Gorm was, who in many ways
enlarged, but never diminished his kingdom."

The king replies, -- "What then is your advice, -- if I am
neither to divide my kingdom, nor to get rid of my fright and
danger?"

"Let us meet again in a few days," said Earl Hakon, "and I will
then have considered the matter well, and will give you my advice
upon it."

The king then went away with his people.



10. COUNCILS HELD BY HAKON AND HARALD.

Earl Hakon had now great reflection, and many opinions to weigh,
and he let only very few be in the house with him.  In a few days
King Harald came again to the earl to speak with him, and ask if
he had yet considered fully the matter they had been talking of.

"I have," said the earl, "considered it night and day ever since,
and find it most advisable that you retain and rule over the
whole of your kingdom just as your father left it; but that you
obtain for your relation Harald another kingdom, that he also may
enjoy honour and dignity."

"What kind of kingdom is that," said the king, "which I can give
to Harald, that I may possess Denmark entire?"

"It is Norway," said the earl. "The kings who are there are
oppressive to the people of the country, so that every man is
against them who has tax or service to pay."

The king replies, -- "Norway is a large country, and the people
fierce, and not good to attack with a foreign army.  We found
that sufficiently when Hakon defended that country; for we lost
many people, and gained no victory.  Besides, Harald the son of
Eirik is my foster-son, and has sat on my knee."

The earl answers, "I have long known that you have helped
Gunhild's sons with your force, and a bad return you have got for
it; but we shall get at Norway much more easily than by fighting
for it with all the Danish force.  Send a message to your foster-
son Harald, Eirik's son, and offer him the lands and fiefs which
Gunhild's sons held before in Denmark.  Appoint him a meeting,
and Gold Harald will soon conquer for himself a kingdom in Norway
from Harald Grafeld."

The king replies, that it would be called a bad business to
deceive his own foster-son.

"The Danes," answered the earl, "will rather say that it was
better to kill a Norwegian viking than a Danish, and your own
brother's son."

They spoke so long over the matter, that they agreed on it.



11. HARALD GORMSON'S MESSAGE TO NORWAY.

Thereafter Gold Harald had a conference with Earl Hakon; and the
earl told him he had now advanced his business so far, that there
was hope a kingdom might stand open for him in Norway.  "We can
then continue," said he, "our ancient friendship, and I can be of
the greatest use to you in Norway.  Take first that kingdom. 
King Harald is now very old, and has but one son, and cares but
little about him, as he is but the son of a concubine."

The Earl talked so long to Gold Harald that the project pleased
him well; and the king, the earl, and Gold Harald often talked
over the business together.  The Danish king then sent messengers
north to Norway to Harald Grafeld, and fitted them out
magnificently for their journey.  They were well received by
Harald.  The messengers told him that Earl Hakon was in Denmark,
but was lying dangerously sick, and almost out of his senses. 
They then delivered from Harald, the Danish king, the invitation
to Harald Grafeld, his foster-son, to come to him and receive
investiture of the fiefs he and his brothers before him had
formerly held in Denmark; and appointing a meeting in Jutland.
Harald Grafeld laid the matter before his mother and other
friends.  Their opinions were divided.  Some thought that the
expedition was not without its danger, on account of the men with
whom they had to deal; but the most were in haste to begin the
journey, for at that time there was such a famine in Norway that
the kings could scarcely feed their men-at-arms; and on this
account the Fjord, on which the kings resided, usually got the
name of Hardanger (Hardacre).  In Denmark, on the other hand,
there had been tolerably good crops; so that people thought that
if King Harald got fiefs, and something to rule over there they
would get some assistance.  It was therefore concluded, before
the messengers returned, that Harald should travel to Denmark to
the Danish king in summer, and accept the conditions King Harald
offered.



12. TREACHERY OF HARALD AND HAKON.

Harald Grafeld went to Denmark in the summer (A.D. 969) with
three long-ships; and Herse Arinbjorn, from the Fjord district,
commanded one of them.  King Harald sailed from Viken over to
Limfjord in Jutland, and landed at the narrow neck of land where
the Danish king was expected.  Now when Gold Harald heard of
this, he sailed there with nine ships which he had fitted out
before for a viking cruise.  Earl Hakon had also his war force on
foot; namely, twelve large ships, all ready, with which he
proposed to make an expedition.  When Gold Harald had departed
Earl Hakon says to the king, "Now I don't know if we are not
sailing on an expedition, and yet are to pay the penalty of not
having joined it.  Gold Harald may kill Harald Grafeld, and get
the kingdom of Norway; but you must not think he will be true to
you, although you do help him to so much power, for he told me in
winter that he would take your life if he could find opportunity
to do so.  Now I will win Norway for you, and kill Gold Harald,
if you will promise me a good condition under you.  I will be
your earl; swear an oath of fidelity to you, and, with your help,
conquer all Norway for you; hold the country under your rule; pay
you the scat and taxes; and you will be a greater king than your
father, as you will have two kingdoms under you."  The king and
the earl agreed upon this, and Hakon set off to seek Gold Harald.



13. DEATH OF HARALD GRAFELD.

Gold Harald came to the neck of land at Limfjord, and immediately
challenged Harald Grafeld to battle; and although Harald had
fewer men, he went immediately on the land, prepared for battle,
and drew up his troops.  Before the lines came together Harald
Grafeld urged on his men, and told them to draw their swords.  He
himself advanced the foremost of the troop, hewing down on each 
side.  So says Glum Geirason, in Grafeld's lay: --

     "Brave were thy words in battlefield,
     Thou stainer of the snow-white shield! --
     Thou gallant war-god!  With thy voice
     Thou couldst the dying man rejoice:
     The cheer of Harald could impart
     Courage and life to every heart.
     While swinging high the blood-smeared sword,
     By arm and voice we knew our lord."

There fell Harald Grafeld.  So says Glum Geirason: --

     "On Limfjord's strand, by the tide's flow,
     Stern Fate has laid King Harald low;
     The gallant viking-cruiser -- he
     Who loved the isle-encircling sea.
     The generous ruler of the land
     Fell at the narrow Limfjord strand.
     Enticed by Hakon's cunning speech
     To his death-bed on Limfjord's beach."

The most of King Harald's men fell with him.  There also fell
Herse Arinbjorn.

This happened fifteen years after the death of Hakon, Athelstan's
foster-son, and thirteen years after that of Sigurd earl of
Hlader.  The priest Are Frode says that Earl Hakon was thirteen
years earl over his father's dominions in Throndhjem district
before the fall of Harald Grafeld; but, for the last six years of
Harald Grafeld's life, Are Frode says the Earl Hakon and
Gunhild's sons fought against each other, and drove each other
out of the land by turns.



14. GOLD HARALD'S DEATH.

Soon after Harald Grafeld's fall, Earl Hakon came up to Gold
Harald, and the earl immediately gave battle to Harald.  Hakon
gained the victory, and Harald was made prisoner; but Hakon had
him immediately hanged on a gallows.  Hakon then went to the
Danish king, and no doubt easily settled with him for the killing
his relative Gold Harald.



15. DIVISION OF THE COUNTRY.

Soon after King Harald Gormson ordered a levy of men over all his
kingdom, and sailed with 600 ships (1).  There were with him Earl
Hakon, Harald Grenske, a son of King Gudrod, and many other great
men who had fled from their udal estates in Norway on account of
Gunhild's sons.  The Danish king sailed with his fleet from the
south to Viken, where all the people of the country surrendered
to him.  When he came to Tunsberg swarms of people joined him;
and King Harald gave to Earl Hakon the command of all the men who
came to him in Norway, and gave him the government over Rogaland,
Hordaland, Sogn, Fjord-district, South More, Raumsdal, and North
More.  These seven districts gave King Harald to Earl Hakon to
rule over, with the same rights as Harald Harfager gave with them
to his sons; only with the difference, that Hakon should there,
as well as in Throndhjem, have the king's land-estates and land-
tax, and use the king's money and goods according to his
necessities whenever there was war in the country.  King Harald
also gave Harald Grenske Vingulmark, Vestfold, and Agder all the
way to Lidandisnes (the Naze), together with the title of king;
and let him have these dominions with the same rights as his
family in former times had held them, and as Harald Harfager had
given with them to his sons.  Harald Grenske was then eighteen
years old, and he became afterwards a celebrated man.  Harald
king of Denmark returned home thereafter with all his army.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  i.e., 720 ships, as they were counted by long hundreds,
     100=120.



16. GUNHILD'S SONS LEAVE THE COUNTRY.

Earl Hakon proceeded northwards along the coast with his force;
and when Gunhild and her sons got the tidings they proceeded to
gather troops, but were ill off for men.  Then they took the same
resolution as before, to sail out to sea with such men as would
follow them away to the westward (A.D. 969).  They came first to
the Orkney Islands, and remained there a while.  There were in
Orkney then the Earls Hlodver.  Arnfid, Ljot, and Skule, the sons
of Thorfin Hausakljufer.

Earl Hakon now brought all the country under him, and remained
all winter (A.D. 970) in Throndhjem.  Einar Skalaglam speaks of
his conquests in "Vellekla": --

     "Norway's great watchman, Harald, now
     May bind the silk snood on his brow --
     Seven provinces he seized.  The realm
     Prospers with Hakon at the helm."

As Hakon the earl proceeded this summer along the coast
subjecting all the people to him, he ordered that over all his
dominions the temples and sacrifices should be restored, and
continued as of old.  So it is said in the "Vellekla": --

     "Hakon the earl, so good and wise,
     Let all the ancient temples rise; --
     Thor's temples raised with fostering hand
     That had been ruined through the land.
     His valiant champions, who were slain
     On battle-fields across the main,
     To Thor, the thunder-god, may tell
     How for the gods all turns out well.
     The hardy warrior now once more
     Offers the sacrifice of gore;
     The shield-bearer in Loke's game
     Invokes once more great Odin's name.
     The green earth gladly yields her store,
     As she was wont in days of yore,
     Since the brave breaker of the spears
     The holy shrines again uprears.
     The earl has conquered with strong hand
     All that lies north of Viken land:
     In battle storm, and iron rain
     Hakon spreads wide his sword's domain."

The first winter that Hakon ruled over Norway the herrings set in
everywhere through the fjords to the land, and the seasons
ripened to a good crop all that had been sown.  The people,
therefore, laid in seed for the next year, and got their lands
sowed, and had hope of good times.


17. HAKON'S BATTLE WITH RAGNFRED.

King Ragnfred and King Gudrod, both sons of Gunhild and Eirik,
were now the only sons of Gunhild remaining in life.  So says
Glum Geirason in Grafeld's lay: --

     "When in the battle's bloody strife
     The sword took noble Harald's life,
     Half of my fortunes with him fell:
     But his two brothers, I know well,
     My loss would soon repair, should they
     Again in Norway bear the sway,
     And to their promises should stand,
     If they return to rule the land."

Ragnfred began his course in the spring after he had been a year
in the Orkney Islands.  He sailed from thence to Norway, and had
with him fine troops, and large ships.  When he came to Norway he
learnt that Earl Hakon was in Throndhjem; therefore he steered
northwards around Stad, and plundered in South More.  Some people
submitted to him; for it often happens, when parties of armed men
scour over a country, that those who are nearest the danger seek
help where they think it may be expected.  As soon as Earl Hakon
heard the news of disturbance in More, he fitted out ships, sent
the war-token through the land, made ready in all haste, and
proceeded out of the fjord.  He had no difficulty in assembling
men.  Ragnfred and Earl Hakon met at the north corner of More;
and Hakon, who had most men, but fewer ships, began the battle.
The combat was severe, but heaviest on Hakon's side; and as the
custom then was, they fought bow to bow, and there was a current
in the sound which drove all the ships in upon the land.  The
earl ordered to row with the oars to the land where landing
seemed easiest.  When the ships were all grounded, the earl with
all his men left them, and drew them up so far that the enemy
might not launch them down again, and then drew up his men on a
grass-field, and challenged Ragnfred to land.  Ragnfred and his
men laid their vessels in along the land, and they shot at each
other a long time; but upon the land Ragnfred would not venture:
and so they separated.  Ragnfred sailed with his fleet southwards
around Stad; for he was much afraid the whole forces of the
country would swarm around Hakon.  Hakon, on his part, was not
inclined to try again a battle, for he thought the difference
between their ships in size was too great; so in harvest he went
north to Throndhjem, and staid there all winter (A.D. 971).  King
Ragnfred consequently had all the country south of Stad at his
mercy; namely, Fjord district, Hordaland, Sogn, Rogaland; and he
had many people about him all winter.  When spring approached he
ordered out the people and collected a large force.  By going
about the districts he got many men, ships, and warlike stores
sent as he required.



18. BATTLE BETWEEN HAKON AND RAGNFRED.

Towards spring Earl Hakon ordered out all the men north in the
country; and got many people from Halogaland and Naumudal; so
that from Bryda to Stad he had men from all the sea-coast. 
People flocked to him from all the Throndhjem district and from
Raumsdal.  It was said for certain that he had men from four
great districts, and that seven earls followed him, and a
matchless number of men.  So it is said in the "Vellekla": --

     "Hakon, defender of the land,
     Armed in the North his warrior-band
     To Sogn's old shore his force he led,
     And from all quarters thither sped
     War-ships and men; and haste was made
     By the young god of the sword-blade,
     The hero-viking of the wave,
     His wide domain from foes to save.
     With shining keels seven kings sailed on
     To meet this raven-feeding one.
     When the clash came, the stunning sound
     Was heard in Norway's farthest bound;
     And sea-borne corpses, floating far,
     Brought round the Naze news from the war."

Earl Hakon sailed then with his fleet southwards around Stad; and
when he heard that King Ragnfred with his army had gone towards
Sogn, he turned there also with his men to meet him: and there
Ragnfred and Hakon met.  Hakon came to the land with his ships,
marked out a battle-field with hazel branches for King Ragnfred,
and took ground for his own men in it.  So it is told in the
"Vellekla": --

     "In the fierce battle Ragnfred then
     Met the grim foe of Vindland men;
     And many a hero of great name
     Fell in the sharp sword's bloody game.
     The wielder of fell Narve's weapon,
     The conquering hero, valiant Hakon
     Had laid his war-ships on the strand,
     And ranged his warriors on the land."

There was a great battle; but Earl Hakon, having by far the most
people, gained the victory.  It took place on the Thinganes,
where Sogn and Hordaland meet.

King Rangfred fled to his ships, after 300 of his men had fallen.
So it is said in the "Vellekla":-

     "Sharp was the battle-strife, I ween, --
     Deadly and close it must have been,
     Before, upon the bloody plain,
     Three hundred corpses of the slain
     Were stretched for the black raven's prey;
     And when the conquerors took their way
     To the sea-shore, they had to tread
     O'er piled-up heaps of foemen dead."

After this battle King Ragnfred fled from Norway; but Earl Hakon
restored peace to the country, and allowed the great army which
had followed him in summer to return home to the north country,
and he himself remained in the south that harvest and winter
(A.D. 972).



19. EARL HAKON'S MARRIAGE.

Earl Hakon married a girl called Thora, a daughter of the
powerful Skage Skoptason, and very beautiful she was.  They had
two sons, Svein and Heming, and a daughter called Bergljot who
was afterwards married to Einar Tambaskielfer.  Earl Hakon was
much addicted to women, and had many children; among others a
daughter Ragnhild, whom he married to Skopte Skagason, a brother
of Thora.  The Earl loved Thora so much that he held Thora's
family in higher respect than any other people, and Skopte his
brother-in-law in particular; and he gave him many great fiefs in
More.  Whenever they were on a cruise together, Skopte must lay
his ship nearest to the earl's, and no other ship was allowed to
come in between.



20. DEATH OF SKOPTE.

One summer that Earl Hakon was on a cruise, there was a ship with
him of which Thorleif Spake (the Wise) was steersman.  In it was
also Eirik, Earl Hakon's son, then about ten or eleven years old.
Now in the evenings, as they came into harbour, Eirik would not
allow any ship but his to lie nearest to the earl's.  But when
they came to the south, to More, they met Skopte the earl's
brother-in-law, with a well-manned ship; and as they rowed
towards the fleet, Skopte called out that Thorleif should move
out of the harbour to make room for him, and should go to the
roadstead.  Eirik in haste took up the matter, and ordered Skopte
to go himself to the roadstead.  When Earl Hakon heard that his
son thought himself too great to give place to Skopte, he called
to them immediately that they should haul out from their berth,
threatening them with chastisement if they did not.  When
Thorleif heard this, he ordered his men to slip their land-cable,
and they did so; and Skopte laid his vessel next to the earl's as
he used to do.  When they came together, Skopte brought the earl
all the news he had gathered, and the earl communicated to Skopte
all the news he had heard; and Skopte was therefore called
Tidindaskopte (the Newsman Skopte).  The winter after (A.D. 973)
Eirik was with his foster-father Thorleif, and early in spring he
gathered a crew of followers, and Thorleif gave him a boat of
fifteen benches of rowers, with ship furniture, tents, and ship
provisions; and Eirik set out from the fjord, and southwards to
More.  Tidindaskopte happened also to be going with a fully
manned boat of fifteen rowers' benches from one of his farms to
another, and Eirik went against him to have a battle.  Skopte was
slain, but Eirik granted life to those of his men who were still
on their legs.  So says Eyjolf Dadaskald in the "Banda Lay": --

     "At eve the youth went out
     To meet the warrior stout --
     To meet stout Skopte -- he
     Whose war-ship roves the sea
     Like force was on each side,
     But in the whirling tide
     The young wolf Eirik slew
     Skopte, and all his crew
     And he was a gallant one,
     Dear to the Earl Hakon.
     Up, youth of steel-hard breast --
     No time hast thou to rest!
     Thy ocean wings spread wide --
     Speed o'er the foaming tide!
     Speed on -- speed on thy way!
     For here thou canst not stay."

Eirik sailed along the land and came to Denmark, and went to King
Harald Gormson, and staid with him all winter (A.D. 974).  In
spring the Danish king sent him north to Norway, and gave him an
earldom, and the government of Vingulmark and Raumarike, on the
same terms as the small scat-paying kings had formerly held these
domains.  So says Eyjolf Dadaskald: --

     "South through ocean's spray
     His dragon flew away
     To Gormson's hall renowned.
     Where the bowl goes bravely round.
     And the Danish king did place
     This youth of noble race
     Where, shield and sword in hand,
     He would aye defend his land."

Eirik became afterwards a great chief.



21. OLAF TRYGVASON'S JOURNEY FROM RUSSIA.

All this time Olaf Trygvason was in Gardarike (Russia), and
highly esteemed by King Valdemar, and beloved by the queen.  King
Valdemar made him chief over the men-at-arms whom he sent out to
defend the land.  So says Hallarsteid-

     "The hater of the niggard band,
     The chief who loves the Northman's land,
     Was only twelve years old when he
     His Russian war-ships put to sea.
     The wain that ploughs the sea was then
     Loaded with war-gear by his men --
     With swords, and spears, and helms: and deep
     Out to the sea his good ships sweep."

Olaf had several battles, and was lucky as a leader of troops. 
He himself kept a great many men-at-arms at his own expense out
of the pay the king gave him.  Olaf was very generous to his men,
and therefore very popular.  But then it came to pass, what so
often happens when a foreigner is raised to higher power and
dignity than men of the country, that many envied him because he
was so favoured by the king, and also not less so by the queen.
They hinted to the king that he should take care not to make Olaf
too powerful, -- "for such a man may be dangerous to you, if he
were to allow himself to be used for the purpose of doing you or
your kingdom harm; for he is extremely expert in all exercises
and feats, and very popular.  We do not, indeed, know what it is
he can have to talk of so often with the queen."  It was then the
custom among great monarchs that the queen should have half of
the court attendants, and she supported them at her own expense
out of the scat and revenue provided for her for that purpose. 
It was so also at the court of King Valdemar that the queen had
an attendance as large as the king, and they vied with each other
about the finest men, each wanting to have such in their own
service.  It so fell out that the king listened to such speeches,
and became somewhat silent and blunt towards Olaf.  When Olaf
observed this, he told it to the queen; and also that he had a
great desire to travel to the Northern land, where his family
formerly had power and kingdoms, and where it was most likely he
would advance himself.  The queen wished him a prosperous
journey, and said he would be found a brave man wherever he might
be.  Olaf then made ready, went on board, and set out to sea in
the Baltic.

As he was coming from the east he made the island of
Borgundarholm (Bornholm), where he landed and plundered.  The
country people hastened down to the strand, and gave him battle;
but Olaf gained the victory, and a large booty.



22. OLAF TRYGVASON'S MARRIAGE.

While Olaf lay at Borgundarholm there came on bad weather, storm,
and a heavy sea, so that his ships could not lie there; and he
sailed southwards under Vindland, where they found a good
harbour.  They conducted themselves very peacefully, and remained
some time.  In Vindland there was then a king called Burizleif,
who had three daughters, -- Geira, Gunhild, and Astrid.  The
king's daughter Geira had the power and government in that part
where Olaf and his people landed, and Dixen was the name of the
man who most usually advised Queen Geira.  Now when they heard
that unknown people were came to the country, who were of
distinguished appearance, and conducted themselves peaceably,
Dixen repaired to them with a message from Queen Geira, inviting
the strangers to take up their winter abode with her; for the
summer was almost spent, and the weather was severe and stormy.
Now when Dixen came to the place he soon saw that the leader was
a distinguished man, both from family and personal appearance,
and he told Olaf the queen's invitation with the most kindly
message.  Olaf willingly accepted the invitation, and went in
harvest (A.D. 982) to Queen Geira.  They liked each other
exceedingly, and Olaf courted Queen Geira; and it was so settled
that Olaf married her the same winter, and was ruler, along
with Queen Geira, over her dominions.  Halfred Vandredaskald
tells of these matters in the lay he composed about King Olaf: --

     "Why should the deeds the hero did
     In Bornholm and the East he hid?
     His deadly weapon Olaf bold
     Dyed red: why should not this be told?"



23. EARL HAKON PAYS NO SCAT.

Earl Hakon ruled over Norway, and paid no scat; because the
Danish king gave him all the scat revenue that belonged to the
king in Norway, for the expense and trouble he had in defending
the country against Gunhild's sons.



24. HARALD OPPOSES CHRISTIANITY.

The Emperor Otta (Otto) was at that time in the Saxon country,
and sent a message to King Harald, the Danish king, that he must
take on the true faith and be baptized, he and all his people
whom he ruled; "otherwise," says the emperor, "we will march
against him with an army."  The Danish king ordered the land
defence to be fitted out, Danavirke (1) (the Danish wall) to be
well fortified, and his ships of war rigged out.  He sent a
message also to Earl Hakon in Norway to come to him early in
spring, and with as many men as he could possibly raise.  In
spring (A.D. 975) Earl Hakon levied an army over the whole
country which was very numerous, and with it he sailed to meet
the Danish king.  The king received him in the most honourable
manner.  Many other chiefs also joined the Danish king with their
men, so that he had gathered a very large army.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Danavirke.  The Danish work was a wall of earth, stones, and
     wood, with a deep ditch in front, and a castle at every
     hundred fathoms, between the rivers Eider and Slien,
     constructed by Harald Blatand (Bluetooth) to oppose the
     progress of Charlemagne.  Some traces of it still exist.
     -- L.



25. OLAF TRYGVASON'S WAR EXPEDITION.

Olaf Trygvason had been all winter (A.D. 980) in Vindland, as
before related, and went the same winter to the baronies in
Vindland which had formerly been under Queen Geira, but had
withdrawn themselves from obedience and payment of taxes.  There
Olaf made war, killed many people, burnt out others, took much
property, and laid all of them under subjection to him, and then
went back to his castle.  Early in spring Olaf rigged out his
ships and set off to sea.  He sailed to Skane and made a landing.
The people of the country assembled, and gave him battle; but
King Olaf conquered, and made a great booty.  He then sailed
eastward to the island of Gotland, where he captured a merchant
vessel belonging to the people of Jamtaland.  They made a brave
defence; but the end of it was that Olaf cleared the deck, killed
many of the men, and took all the goods.  He had a third battle
in Gotland, in which he also gained the victory, and made a great
booty.  So says Halfred Vandredaskald: --

     "The king, so fierce in battle-fray,
     First made the Vindland men give way:
     The Gotlanders must tremble next;
     And Scania's shores are sorely vexed
     By the sharp pelting arrow shower
     The hero and his warriors pour;
     And then the Jamtaland men must fly,
     Scared by his well-known battle-cry."



26. OTTA AND HAKON IN BATTLE.

The Emperor Otta assembled a great army from Saxland, Frakland,
Frisland, and Vindland.  King Burizleif followed him with a large
army, and in it was his son-in-law, Olaf Trygvason.  The emperor
had a great body of horsemen, and still greater of foot people,
and a great army from Holstein.  Harald, the Danish king, sent
Earl Hakon with the army of Northmen that followed him southwards
to Danavirke, to defend his kingdom on that side.  So it is told
in the "Vellekla": --

     "Over the foaming salt sea spray
     The Norse sea-horses took their way,
     Racing across the ocean-plain
     Southwards to Denmark's green domain.
     The gallant chief of Hordaland
     Sat at the helm with steady hand,
     In casque and shield, his men to bring
     From Dovre to his friend the king.
     He steered his war-ships o'er the wave
     To help the Danish king to save
     Mordalf, who, with a gallant band
     Was hastening from the Jutes' wild land,
     Across the forest frontier rude,
     With toil and pain through the thick wood.
     Glad was the Danish king, I trow,
     When he saw Hakon's galley's prow.
     The monarch straightway gave command
     To Hakon, with a steel-clad band,
     To man the Dane-work's rampart stout,
     And keep the foreign foemen out."

The Emperor Otta came with his army from the south to Danavirke,
but Earl Hakon defended the rampart with his men.  The Dane-work
(Danavirke) was constructed in this way: -- Two fjords run into
the land, one on each side; and in the farthest bight of these
fjords the Danes had made a great wall of stone, turf, and
timber, and dug a deep and broad ditch in front of it, and had
also built a castle over each gate of it.  There was a hard
battle there, of which the "Vellekla" speaks: --

     "Thick the storm of arrows flew,
     Loud was the din, black was the view
     Of close array of shield and spear
     Of Vind, and Frank, and Saxon there.
     But little recked our gallant men;
     And loud the cry might be heard then
     Of Norway's brave sea-roving son --
     'On 'gainst the foe!  On!  Lead us on!"

Earl Hakon drew up his people in ranks upon all the gate-towers
of the wall, but the greater part of them he kept marching along
the wall to make a defence wheresoever an attack was threatened.
Many of the emperor's people fell without making any impression
on the fortification, so the emperor turned back without farther 
attempt at an assault on it.  So it is said in the "Vellekla": --

     "They who the eagle's feast provide
     In ranked line fought side by side,
     'Gainst lines of war-men under shields\
     Close packed together on the fields,
     Earl Hakon drive by daring deeds
     The Saxons to their ocean-steeds;
     And the young hero saves from fall
     The Danavirke -- the people's wall."

After this battle Earl Hakon went back to his ships, and intended
to sail home to Norway; but he did not get a favourable wind, and
lay for some time outside at Limafjord.



27. HARALD AND HAKON ARE BAPTIZED.

The Emperor Otta turned back with his troops to Slesvik,
collected his ships of war, and crossed the fjord of Sle into
Jutland.  As soon as the Danish king heard of this he marched his
army against him, and there was a battle, in which the emperor at
last got the victory.  The Danish king fled to Limafjord and took
refuge in the island Marsey.  By the help of mediators who went
between the king and the emperor, a truce and a meeting between
them were agreed on.  The Emperor Otta and the Danish king met
upon Marsey.  There Bishop Poppo instructed King Harald in the
holy faith; he bore red hot irons in his hands, and exhibited his
unscorched hands to the king.  Thereafter King Harald allowed
himself to be baptized, and also the whole Danish army.  King
Harald, while he was in Marsey, had sent a message to Hakon that
he should come to his succour; and the earl had just reached the
island when the king had received baptism.  The king sends word
to the earl to come to him, and when they met the king forced the
earl to allow himself also to be baptized.  So Earl Hakon and all
the men who were with him were baptized; and the king gave them
priests and other learned men with them, and ordered that the
earl should make all the people in Norway be baptized.  On that
they separated; and the earl went out to sea, there to wait for a
wind.



28. HAKON RENOUNCES CHRISTIANITY.

When a wind came with which he thought he could get clear out to
sea, he put all the learned men on shore again, and set off to
the ocean; but as the wind came round to the south-west, and at
last to west, he sailed eastward, out through Eyrarsund, ravaging
the land on both sides.  He then sailed eastward along Skane,
plundering the country wherever he came.  When he got east to the
skerries of East Gautland, he ran in and landed, and made a great
blood-sacrifice.  There came two ravens flying which croaked
loudly; and now, thought the earl, the blood-offering has been
accepted by Odin, and he thought good luck would be with him any
day he liked to go to battle.  Then he set fire to his ships,
landed his men, and went over all the country with armed hand.
Earl Ottar, who ruled over Gautland, came against him, and they
held a great battle with each other; but Earl Hakon gained the
day, and Earl Ottar and a great part of his men were killed. 
Earl Hakon now drove with fire and sword over both the Gautlands,
until he came into Norway; and then he proceeded by land all the
way north to Throndhjem.  The "Vellekla" tells about this: --

     "On the silent battle-field,
     In viking garb, with axe and shield,
     The warrior, striding o'er the slain,
     Asks of the gods `What days will gain?'
     Two ravens, flying from the east,
     Come croaking to the bloody feast:
     The warrior knows what they foreshow --
     The days when Gautland blood will flow.
     A viking-feast Earl Hakon kept,
     The land with viking fury swept,
     Harrying the land far from the shore
     Where foray ne'er was known before.
     Leaving the barren cold coast side,
     He raged through Gautland far and wide, --
     Led many a gold-decked viking shield
     O'er many a peaceful inland field.
     Bodies on bodies Odin found
     Heaped high upon each battle ground:
     The moor, as if by witchcraft's power,
     Grows green, enriched by bloody shower.
     No wonder that the gods delight
     To give such luck in every fight
     To Hakon's men -- for he restores
     Their temples on our Norway shores."



29. THE EMPEROR OTTA RETURNS HOME.

The Emperor Otta went back to his kingdom in the Saxon land, and
parted in friendship with the Danish king.  It is said that the
Emperor Otta stood godfather to Svein, King Harald's son, and
gave him his name; so that he was baptized Otta Svein.  King
Harald held fast by his Christianity to his dying day.

King Burizleif went to Vindland, and his son-in-law King Olaf
went with him. This battle is related also by Halfred
Vandredaskald in his song on Olaf: --

     "He who through the foaming surges
     His white-winged ocean-coursers urges,
     Hewed from the Danes, in armour dressed,
     The iron bark off mail-clad breast."



30. OLAF'S JOURNEY FROM VINDLAND.

Olaf Trygvason was three years in Vindland (A.D. 982-984) when
Geira his queen fell sick, and she died of her illness.  Olaf
felt his loss so great that he had no pleasure in Vindland after
it.  He provided himself, therefore, with warships, and went out
again a plundering, and plundered first in Frisland, next in
Saxland, and then all the way to Flaemingjaland (Flanders).  So
says Halfred Vandredaskald: --

     "Olaf's broad axe of shining steel
     For the shy wolf left many a meal.
     The ill-shaped Saxon corpses lay
     Heaped up, the witch-wife's horses' (1) prey.
     She rides by night: at pools of blood.
     Where Frisland men in daylight stood,
     Her horses slake their thirst, and fly
     On to the field where Flemings lie.
     The raven-friend in Odin's dress --
     Olaf, who foes can well repress,
     Left Flemish flesh for many a meal
     With his broad axe of shining steel."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Ravens were the witches' horses. -- L.



31. KING OLAF'S FORAYS.

Thereafter Olaf Trygvason sailed to England, and ravaged wide
around in the land.  He sailed all the way north to
Northumberland, where he plundered; and thence to Scotland,
where he marauded far and wide.  Then he went to the Hebrides,
where he fought some battles; and then southwards to Man, where
he also fought.  He ravaged far around in Ireland, and thence
steered to Bretland, which he laid waste with fire and sword, and
all the district called Cumberland.  He sailed westward from
thence to Valland, and marauded there.  When he left the west,
intending to sail to England, he came to the islands called the
Scilly Isles, lying westward from England in the ocean.  Thus
tells Halfred Vandraskald of these events: --

     The brave young king, who ne'er retreats,
     The Englishman in England beats.
     Death through Northumberland is spread
     From battleaxe and broad spearhead.
     Through Scotland with his spears he rides;
     To Man his glancing ships he guides:
     Feeding the wolves where'er he came,
     The young king drove a bloody game.
     The gallant bowmen in the isles
     Slew foemen, who lay heaped in piles.
     The Irish fled at Olaf's name --
     Fled from a young king seeking fame.
     In Bretland, and in Cumberland,
     People against him could not stand:
     Thick on the fields their corpses lay,
     To ravens and howling wolves a prey."

Olaf Trygvason had been four years on this cruise (A.D. 985-988),
from the time he left Vindland till he came to the Scilly
Islands.



32. KING OLAF IS BAPTIZED.

While Olaf Trygvason lay in the Scilly Isles he heard of a seer,
or fortune-teller, on the islands, who could tell beforehand
things not yet done, and what he foretold many believed was
really fulfilled.  Olaf became curious to try this man's gift of
prophecy.  He therefore sent one of his men, who was the
handsomest and strongest, clothed him magnificently, and bade him
say he was the king; for Olaf was known in all countries as
handsomer, stronger, and braver than all others, although, after
he had left Russia, he retained no more of his name than that he
was called Ole, and was Russian.  Now when the messenger came to
the fortune-teller, and gave himself out for the king, he got the
answer, "Thou art not the king, but I advise thee to be faithful
to thy king."  And more he would not say to that man.  The man
returned, and told Olaf, and his desire to meet the fortune-
teller was increased; and now he had no doubt of his being really
a fortune-teller.  Olaf repaired himself to him, and, entering
into conversation, asked him if he could foresee how it would go
with him with regard to his kingdom, or of any other fortune he
was to have.  The hermit replies in a holy spirit of prophecy,
"Thou wilt become a renowned king, and do celebrated deeds.  Many
men wilt thou bring to faith and baptism, and both to thy own and
others' good; and that thou mayst have no doubt of the truth of
this answer, listen to these tokens: When thou comest to thy
ships many of thy people will conspire against thee, and then a
battle will follow in which many of thy men will fall, and thou
wilt be wounded almost to death, and carried upon a shield to thy
ship; yet after seven days thou shalt be well of thy wounds, and
immediately thou shalt let thyself be baptized."  Soon after Olaf
went down to his ships, where he met some mutineers and people
who would destroy him and his men.  A fight took place, and the
result was what the hermit had predicted, that Olaf was wounded,
and carried upon a shield to his ship, and that his wound was
healed in seven days.  Then Olaf perceived that the man had
spoken truth, that he was a true fortune-teller, and had the gift
of prophecy.  Olaf went once more to the hermit, and asked
particularly how he came to have such wisdom in foreseeing things
to be.  The hermit replied, that the Christian God himself let
him know all that he desired; and he brought before Olaf many
great proofs of the power of the Almighty.  In consequence of
this encouragement Olaf agreed to let himself be baptized, and he
and all his followers were baptized forthwith.  He remained here
a long time, took the true faith, and got with him priests and
other learned men.



33. OLAF MARRIES GYDA.

In autumn (A.D. 988) Olaf sailed from Scilly to England, where he
put into a harbour, but proceeded in a friendly way; for England
was Christian, and he himself had become Christian.  At this time
a summons to a Thing went through the country, that all men
should come to hold a Thing.  Now when the Thing was assembled a
queen called Gyda came to it, a sister of Olaf Kvaran, who was
king of Dublin in Ireland.  She had been married to a great earl
in England, and after his death she was at the head of his
dominions.  In her territory there was a man called Alfvine, who
was a great champion and single-combat man.  He had paid his
addresses to her; but she gave for answer, that she herself would
choose whom of the men in her dominions she would take in
marriage; and on that account the Thing was assembled, that she
might choose a husband.  Alfvine came there dressed out in his
best clothes, and there were many well-dressed men at the
meeting.  Olaf had come there also; but had on his bad-weather
clothes, and a coarse over-garment, and stood with his people
apart from the rest of the crowd.  Gyda went round and looked at
each, to see if any appeared to her a suitable man.  Now when she
came to where Olaf stood she looked at him straight in the face,
and asked "what sort of man he was?"

He said, "I am called Ole; and I am a stranger here."

Gyda replies, "Wilt thou have me if I choose thee?"

"I will not say no to that," answered he; and he asked what her
name was, and her family, and descent.

"I am called Gyda," said she; "and am daughter of the king of
Ireland, and was married in this country to an earl who ruled
over this territory.  Since his death I have ruled over it, and
many have courted me, but none to whom I would choose to be
married."

She was a young and handsome woman.  They afterwards talked over
the matter together, and agreed, and Olaf and Gyda were
betrothed.



34. KING OLAF AND ALFVINE'S DUEL.

Alfvine was very ill pleased with this.  It was the custom then
in England, if two strove for anything, to settle the matter by
single combat (1); and now Alfvine challenges Olaf Trygvason to
fight about this business.  The time and place for the combat
were settled, and that each should have twelve men with him. 
When they met, Olaf told his men to do exactly as they saw him
do.  He had a large axe; and when Alfvine was going to cut at him
with his sword he hewed away the sword out of his hand, and with
the next blow struck down Alfvine himself.  He then bound him
fast.  It went in the same way with all Alfvine's men.  They were
beaten down, bound, and carried to Olaf's lodging.  Thereupon he
ordered Alfvine to quit the country, and never appear in it
again; and Olaf took all his property.  Olaf in this way got Gyda
in marriage, and lived sometimes in England, and sometimes in
Ireland.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Holm-gang: so called because the combatants went to a holm
     or uninhabited isle to fight in Norway. -- L.



35. KING OLAF GETS HIS DOG VIGE.

While Olaf was in Ireland he was once on an expedition which went
by sea.  As they required to make a foray for provisions on the
coast, some of his men landed, and drove down a large herd of
cattle to the strand.  Now a peasant came up, and entreated Olaf
to give him back the cows that belonged to him.  Olaf told him to
take his cows, if he could distinguish them; "but don't delay our
march."  The peasant had with him a large house-dog, which he put
in among the herd of cattle, in which many hundred head of beasts
were driven together.  The dog ran into the herd, and drove out
exactly the number which the peasant had said he wanted; and all
were marked with the same mark, which showed that the dog knew
the right beasts, and was very sagacious.  Olaf then asked the
peasant if he would sell him the dog.  "I would rather give him
to you," said the peasant.  Olaf immediately presented him with a
gold ring in return, and promised him his friendship in future.
This dog was called Vige, and was the very best of dogs, and Olaf 
owned him long afterwards.



36. HARALD GORMSON SAILS AGAINST ICELAND.

The Danish king, Harald Gormson, heard that Earl Hakon had thrown
off Christianity, and had plundered far and wide in the Danish
land.  The Danish king levied an army, with which he went to
Norway; and when he came to the country which Earl Hakon had to
rule over he laid waste the whole land, and came with his fleet
to some islands called Solunder.  Only five houses were left
standing in Laeradal; but all the people fled up to the
mountains, and into the forest, taking with them all the moveable
goods they could carry with them.  Then the Danish king proposed
to sail with his fleet to Iceland, to avenge the mockery and
scorn all the Icelanders had shown towards him; for they had made
a law in Iceland, that they should make as many lampoons against
the Danish king as there were headlands in his country; and the
reason was, because a vessel which belonged to certain Icelanders
was stranded in Denmark, and the Danes took all the property, and
called it wreck.  One of the king's bailiffs called Birger was to
blame for this; but the lampoons were made against both.  In the
lampoons were the following lines: --

     "The gallant Harald in the field
     Between his legs lets drop his shield;
     Into a pony he was changed.
     And kicked his shield, and safely ranged.
     And Birger, he who dwells in halls
     For safety built with four stone walls,
     That these might be a worthy pair,
     Was changed into a pony mare."



37. HARALD SENDS A WARLOCK TO ICELAND.

King Harald told a warlock to hie to Iceland in some altered
shape, and to try what he could learn there to tell him: and he
set out in the shape of a whale.  And when he came near to the
land he went to the west side of Iceland, north around the land,
where he saw all the mountains and hills full of guardian-
spirits, some great, some small.  When he came to Vapnafjord he
went in towards the land, intending to go on shore; but a huge
dragon rushed down the dale against him with a train of serpents,
paddocks, and toads, that blew poison towards him.  Then he
turned to go westward around the land as far as Eyjafjord, and he
went into the fjord.  Then a bird flew against him, which was so
great that its wings stretched over the mountains on either side
of the fjord, and many birds, great and small, with it.  Then he
swam farther west, and then south into Breidafjord.  When he came
into the fjord a large grey bull ran against him, wading into the
sea, and bellowing fearfully, and he was followed by a crowd of
land-spirits.  From thence he went round by Reykjanes, and wanted
to land at Vikarsskeid, but there came down a hill-giant against
him with an iron staff in his hands.  He was a head higher than
the mountains, and many other giants followed him.  He then swam
eastward along the land, and there was nothing to see, he said,
but sand and vast deserts, and, without the skerries, high-
breaking surf; and the ocean between the countries was so wide
that a long-ship could not cross it.  At that time Brodhelge
dwelt in Vapnafjord, Eyjolf Valgerdson in Eyjafjord, Thord Geller
in Breidafjord, and Thorod Gode in Olfus.  Then the Danish king
turned about with his fleet, and sailed back to Denmark.

Hakon the earl settled habitations again in the country that had
been laid waste, and paid no scat as long as he lived to Denmark.



38. HARALD GORMSON'S DEATH.

Svein, King Harald's son, who afterwards was called Tjuguskeg
(forked beard), asked his father King Harald for a part of his
kingdom; but now, as before, Harald would not listen to dividing
the Danish dominions, and giving him a kingdom.  Svein collected
ships of war, and gave out that he was going on a viking cruise;
but when all his men were assembled, and the Jomsborg viking
Palnatoke had come to his assistance he ran into Sealand to
Isafjord, where his father had been for some time with his ships
ready to proceed on an expedition.  Svein instantly gave battle,
and the combat was severe.  So many people flew to assist King
Harald, that Svein was overpowered by numbers, and fled.  But
King Harald received a wound which ended in his death: and Svein
was chosen King of Denmark.  At this time Sigvalde was earl over
Jomsborg in Vindland.  He was a son of King Strutharald, who had
ruled over Skane.  Heming, and Thorkel the Tall, were Sigvalde's
brothers.  Bue the Thick from Bornholm, and Sigurd his brother,
were also chiefs among the Jomsborg vikings: and also Vagn, a son
of Ake and Thorgunna, and a sister's son of Bue and Sigurd.  Earl
Sigvalde had taken King Svein prisoner, and carried him to
Vindland, to Jomsborg, where he had forced him to make peace with
Burizleif, the king of the Vinds, and to take him as the peace-
maker between them.  Earl Sigvalde was married to Astrid, a
daughter of King Burizleif; and told King Svein that if he did
not accept of his terms, he would deliver him into the hands of
the Vinds.  The king knew that they would torture him to death,
and therefore agreed to accept the earl's mediation.  The earl
delivered this judgment between them -- that King Svein should
marry Gunhild, King Burizleif's daughter; and King Burizleif
again Thyre, a daughter of Harald, and King Svein's sister; but
that each party should retain their own dominions, and there
should be peace between the countries.  Then King Svein returned
home to Denmark with his wife Gunhild.  Their sons were Harald
and Knut (Canute) the Great.  At that time the Danes threatened
much to bring an army into Norway against Earl Hakon.



39. VOW OF THE JOMSBORG VIKINGS.

King Svein made a magnificent feast, to which he invited all the
chiefs in his dominions; for he would give the succession-feast,
or the heirship-ale, after his father Harald.  A short time
before, Strutharald in Skane, and Vesete in Bornholm, father to
Bue the Thick and to Sigurd, had died; and King Svein sent word
to the Jomsborg vikings that Earl Sigvalde and Bue, and their
brothers, should come to him, and drink the funeral-ale for their
fathers in the same feast the king was giving.  The Jomsborg
vikings came to the festival with their bravest men, forty ships
of them from Vindland, and twenty ships from Skane.  Great was
the multitude of people assembled.  The first day of the feast,
before King Svein went up into his father's high-seat, he drank
the bowl to his father's memory, and made the solemn vow, that
before three winters were past he would go over with his army to
England, and either kill King Adalrad (Ethelred), or chase him
out of the country.  This heirship bowl all who were at the feast
drank.  Thereafter for the chiefs of the Jomsborg vikings was
filled and drunk the largest horn to be found, and of the
strongest drink.  When that bowl was emptied, all men drank
Christ's health; and again the fullest measure and the strongest
drink were handed to the Jomsborg vikings.  The third bowl was to
the memory of Saint Michael, which was drunk by all.  Thereafter
Earl Sigvalde emptied a remembrance bowl to his father's honour,
and made the solemn vow, that before three winters came to an end
he would go to Norway, and either kill Earl Hakon, or chase him
out of the country.  Thereupon Thorkel the Tall, his brother,
made a solemn vow to follow his brother Sigvalde to Norway, and
not flinch from the battle so long as Sigvalde would fight there.
Then Bue the Thick vowed to follow them to Norway, and not flinch
so long as the other Jomsborg vikings fought.  At last Vagn
Akason vowed that he would go with them to Norway, and not return
until he had slain Thorkel Leira, and gone to bed to his daughter
Ingebjorg without her friends' consent.  Many other chiefs made
solemn vows about different things.  Thus was the heirship-ale
drunk that day, but the next morning, when the Jomsborg vikings
had slept off their drink, they thought they had spoken more than
enough.  They held a meeting to consult how they should proceed
with their undertaking, and they determined to fit out as
speedily as possible for the expedition; and without delay ships
and men-at-arms were prepared, and the news spread quickly.



40. EIRIK AND HAKON MAKE A WAR LEVY.

When Earl Eirik, the son of Hakon, who at that time was in
Raumarike, heard the tidings, he immediately gathered troops, and
went to the Uplands, and thence over the mountains to Throndhjem,
and joined his father Earl Hakon.  Thord Kolbeinson speaks of
this in the lay of Eirik: --

     "News from the south are flying round;
     The bonde comes with look profound,
     Bad news of bloody battles bringing,
     Of steel-clad men, of weapons ringing.
     I hear that in the Danish land
     Long-sided ships slide down the strand,
     And, floating with the rising tide,
     The ocean-coursers soon will ride."

The earls Hakon and Eirik had war-arrows split up and sent round
the Throndhjem country; and despatched messages to both the
Mores, North More and South More, and to Raumsdal, and also north
to Naumudal and Halogaland.  They summoned all the country to
provide both men and ships.  So it is said in Eirik's lay:

     "The skald must now a war-song raise,
     The gallant active youth must praise,
     Who o'er the ocean's field spreads forth
     Ships, cutters, boats, from the far north.
     His mighty fleet comes sailing by, --
     The people run to see them glide,
     Mast after mast, by the coast-side."

Earl Hakon set out immediately to the south, to More, to
reconnoitre and gather people; and Earl Eirik gathered an army
from the north to follow.



41. EXPEDITION OF THE JOMSBORG VIKINGS.

The Jomsborg vikings assembled their fleet in Limafjord, from
whence they went to sea with sixty sail of vessels.  When they
came under the coast of Agder, they steered northwards to
Rogaland with their fleet, and began to plunder when they came
into the earl's territory; and so they sailed north along the
coast, plundering and burning.  A man, by name Geirmund, sailed
in a light boat with a few men northwards to More, and there he
fell in with Earl Hakon, stood before his dinner table, and told
the earl the tidings of an army from Denmark having come to the
south end of the land.  The earl asked if he had any certainty of
it.  Then Geirmund stretched forth one arm, from which the hand
was cut off, and said, "Here is the token that the enemy is in
the land."  Then the earl questioned him particularly about this
army.  Geirmund says it consists of Jomsborg vikings, who have
killed many people, and plundered all around.  "And hastily and
hotly they pushed on," says he "and I expect it will not be long
before they are upon you."  On this the earl rode into every
fjord, going in along the one side of the land and out at the
other, collecting men; and thus he drove along night and day.  He
sent spies out upon the upper ridges, and also southwards into
the Fjords; and he proceeded north to meet Eirik with his men.
This appears from Eirik's lay: --

     "The earl, well skilled in war to speed
     O'er the wild wave the viking-steed,
     Now launched the high stems from the shore,
     Which death to Sigvalde's vikings bore.
     Rollers beneath the ships' keels crash,
     Oar-blades loud in the grey sea splash,
     And they who give the ravens food
     Row fearless through the curling flood."

Eirik hastened southwards with his forces the shortest way he
could.



42. OF THE JOMSBORG VIKINGS.

Earl Sigvalde steered with his fleet northwards around Stad, and
came to the land at the Herey Isles.  Although the vikings fell
in with the country people, the people never told the truth about
what the earl was doing; and the vikings went on pillaging and
laying waste.  They laid to their vessels at the outer end of Hod
Island, landed, plundered, and drove both men and cattle down to
the ships, killing all the men able to bear arms.

As they were going back to their ships, came a bonde, walking
near to Bue's troop, who said to them, "Ye are not doing like
true warriors, to be driving cows and calves down to the strand,
while ye should be giving chase to the bear, since ye are coming
near to the bear's den."

"What says the old man?" asked some.  "Can he tell us anything
about Earl Hakon?"

The peasant replies, "The earl went yesterday into the
Hjorundarfjord with one or two ships, certainly not more than
three, and then he had no news about you."

Bue ran now with his people in all haste down to the ships,
leaving all the booty behind.  Bue said, "Let us avail ourselves
now of this news we have got of the earl, and be the first to the
victory."  When they came to their ships they rode off from the
land.  Earl Sigvalde called to them, and asked what they were
about.  They replied, "The earl is in the fjord;" on which Earl
Sigvalde with the whole fleet set off, and rowed north about the
island Hod.



43. BATTLE WITH THE JOMSBORG VIKINGS.

The earls Hakon and Eirik lay in Halkelsvik, where all their
forces were assembled.  They had 150 ships, and they had heard
that the Jomsborg vikings had come in from sea, and lay at the
island Hod; and they, in consequence, rowed out to seek them. 
When they reached a place called Hjorungavag they met each other,
and both sides drew up their ships in line for an attack.  Earl
Sigvalde's banner was displayed in the midst of his army, and
right against it Earl Hakon arranged his force for attack.  Earl
Sigvalde himself had 20 ships, but Earl Hakon had 60.  In Earl's
army were these chiefs, -- Thorer Hjort from Halogaland, and
Styrkar from Gimsar.  In the wing of the opposite array of the
Jomsborg vikings was Bue the Thick, and his brother Sigurd, with
20 ships.  Against him Earl Eirik laid himself with 60 ships; and
with him were these chiefs, -- Gudbrand Hvite from the Uplands,
and Thorkel Leira from Viken.  In the other wing of the Jomsborg
vikings' array was Vagn Akason with 20 ships; and against him
stood Svein the son of Hakon, in whose division was Skegge of
Yrjar at Uphaug, and Rognvald of Aervik at Stad, with 60 ships.
It is told in the Eirik's lay thus: --

     "The bonde's ships along the coast
     Sailed on to meet the foemen's host;
     The stout earl's ships, with eagle flight,
     Rushed on the Danes in bloody fight.
     The Danish ships, of court-men full,
     Were cleared of men, -- and many a hull
     Was driving empty on the main,
     With the warm corpses of the slain."

Eyvind Skaldaspiller says also in the "Haleygja-tal": --

     "Twas at the peep of day, --
     Our brave earl led the way;
     His ocean horses bounding --
     His war-horns loudly sounding!
     No joyful morn arose
     For Yngve Frey's base foes
     These Christian island-men
     Wished themselves home again."

Then the fleets came together, and one of the sharpest of
conflicts began.  Many fell on both sides, but the most by far on
Hakon's side; for the Jomsborg vikings fought desperately,
sharply, and murderously, and shot right through the shields.  So
many spears were thrown against Earl Hakon that his armour was
altogether split asunder, and he threw it off.  So says Tind
Halkelson: --

     "The ring-linked coat of strongest mail
     Could not withstand the iron hail,
     Though sewed with care and elbow bent,
     By Norn (1), on its strength intent.
     The fire of battle raged around, --
     Odin's steel shirt flew all unbound!
     The earl his ring-mail from him flung,
     Its steel rings on the wet deck rung;
     Part of it fell into the sea, --
     A part was kept, a proof to be
     How sharp and thick the arrow-flight
     Among the sea-steeds in this fight."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Norn, one of the Fates, stands here for women, whose
     business it was to sew the rings of iron upon the cloth
     which made these ring-mail coats or shirts.  The needles,
     although some of them were of gold, appear to have been
     without eyes, and used like shoemaker's awls. -- L.



44. EARL SIGVALDE'S FLIGHT.

The Jomsborg vikings had larger and higher-sided ships; and both
parties fought desperately.  Vagn Akason laid his ship on board
of Svein Earl Hakon's son's ship, and Svein allowed his ship to
give way, and was on the point of flying.  Then Earl Eirik came
up, and laid his ship alongside of Vagn, and then Vagn gave way,
and the ships came to lie in the same position as before. 
Thereupon Eirik goes to the other wing, which had gone back a
little, and Bue had cut the ropes, intending to pursue them. 
Then Eirik laid himself, board to board, alongside of Bue's ship,
and there was a severe combat hand to hand.  Two or three of
Eirik's ships then laid themselves upon Bue's single vessel.  A
thunder-storm came on at this moment, and such a heavy hail-storm
that every hailstone weighed a pennyweight.  The Earl Sigvalde
cut his cable, turned his ship round, and took flight.  Vagn
Akason called to him not to fly; but as Earl Sigvalde paid no
attention to what he said, Vagn threw his spear at him, and hit
the man at the helm.  Earl Sigvalde rowed away with 35 ships,
leaving 25 of his fleet behind.



45. BUE THROWS HIMSELF OVERBOARD.

Then Earl Hakon laid his ship on the other side of Bue's ship,
and now came heavy blows on Bue's men.  Vigfus, a son of
Vigaglum, took up an anvil with a sharp end, which lay upon
the deck, and on which a man had welded the hilt to his sword
just before, and being a very strong man cast the anvil with both
hands at the head of Aslak Holmskalle, and the end of it went
into his brains.  Before this no weapon could wound this Aslak,
who was Bue's foster-brother, and forecastle commander, although
he could wound right and left.  Another man among the strongest
and bravest was Havard Hoggande.  In this attack Eirik's men
boarded Bue's ship, and went aft to the quarter-deck where Bue
stood.  There Thorstein Midlang cut at Bue across his nose, so
that the nosepiece of his helmet was cut in two, and he got a
great wound; but Bue, in turn, cut at Thorstein's side, so that
the sword cut the man through.  Then Bue lifted up two chests
full of gold, and called aloud, "Overboard all Bue s men," and
threw himself overboard with his two chests.  Many of his people
sprang overboard with him.  Some fell in the ship, for it was of
no use to call for quarter.  Bue's ship was cleared of people
from stem to stern, and afterwards all the others, the one after
the other.



46. VIKINGS BOUND TOGETHER IN ONE CHAIN.

Earl Eirik then laid himself alongside of Vagn's ship, and there
was a brave defence; but at last this ship too was cleared, and
Vagn and thirty men were taken prisoners, and bound, and brought
to land.  Then came up Thorkel Leira, and said, "Thou madest a
solemn vow, Vagn, to kill me, but now it seems more likely that I
will kill thee."  Vagn and his men sat all upon a log of wood
together.  Thorkel had an axe in his hands, with which he cut
at him who sat outmost on the log.  Vagn and the other prisoners
were bound so that a rope was fastened on their feet, but they
had their hands free.  One of them said, "I will stick this
cloak-pin that I have in my hand into the earth, if it be so that
I know anything, after my head is cut off."  His head was cut
off, but the cloak-pin fell from his hand.  There sat also a very
handsome man with long hair, who twisted his hair over his head,
put out his neck, and said, "Don't make my hair bloody."  A man
took the hair in his hands and held it fast.  Thorkel hewed with
his axe; but the viking twitched his head so strongly that he who
was holding his hair fell forwards, and the axe cut off both his
hands, and stuck fast in the earth.  Then Earl Eirik came up, and
asked, "Who is that handsome man?"

He replies, "I am called Sigurd, and am Bue's son.  But are all
the Jomsborg vikings dead?"

Eirik says, "Thou art certainly Boe's son.  Wilt thou now take
life and peace?"

"That depends," says he, "upon who it is that offers it."

"He offers who has the power to do it -- Earl Eirik."

"That will I," says he, "from his hands."  And now the rope was
loosened from him.

Then said Thorkel Leira, "Although thou should give all these men
life and peace, earl, Vagn Akason shall never come from this with
life."  And he ran at him with uplifted axe; but the viking
Skarde swung himself in the rope, and let himself fall just
before Thorkel's feet, so that Thorkel ell over him, and Vagn
caught the axe and gave Thorkel a death-wound.  Then said the
earl, "Vagn, wilt thou accept life?"

"That I will," says he, "if you give it to all of us."

"Loose them from the rope," said the earl, and it was done.
Eighteen were killed, and twelve got their lives.



47. DEATH OF GISSUR OF VALDERS.

Earl Hakon, and many with him, were sitting upon a piece of wood,
and a bow-string twanged from Bue's ship, and the arrow struck
Gissur from Valders, who was sitting next the earl, and was
clothed splendidly.  Thereupon the people went on board, and
found Havard Hoggande standing on his knees at the ship's
railing, for his feet had been cut off (1), and he had a bow in
his hand.  When they came on board the ship Havard asked, "Who
fell by that shaft?"

They answered, "A man called Gissur."

"Then my luck was less than I thought," said he.

"Great enough was the misfortune," replied they; "but thou shalt
not make it greater."  And they killed him on the spot.

The dead were then ransacked, and the booty brought all together
to be divided; and there were twenty-five ships of the Jomsborg
vikings in the booty.  So says Tind:

     "Many a viking's body lay
     Dead on the deck this bloody day,
     Before they cut their sun-dried ropes,
     And in quick flight put all their hopes.
     He whom the ravens know afar
     Cleared five-and-twenty ships of war:
     A proof that in the furious fight
     None can withstand the Norsemen's might."

Then the army dispersed.  Earl Hakon went to Throndhjem, and was
much displeased that Earl Eirik had given quarter to Vagn Akason.
It was said that at this battle Earl Hakon had sacrificed for
victory his son, young Erling, to the gods; and instantly came
the hailstorm, and the defeat and slaughter of the Jomsborg
vikings.

Earl Eirik went to the Uplands, and eastward by that route to his
own kingdom,  taking Vagn Akason with him.  Earl Eirik married
Vagn to Ingebjorg, a daughter of Thorkel Leira, and gave him a
good ship of war and all belonging to it, and a crew; and they
parted the best of friends.  Then Vagn went home south to
Denmark, and became afterwards a man of great consideration, and
many great people are descended from him.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This traditionary tale of a warrior fighting on his knees
     after his legs were cut off, appears to have been a popular
     idea among the Northmen, and is related by their descendants
     in the ballad o Chevy Chase. -- L.



48. KING HARALD GRENSKE'S DEATH.

Harald Grenske, as before related, was king in Vestfold, and was
married to Asta, a daughter of Gudbrand Kula.  One summer (A.D.
994) Harald Grenske made an expedition to the Baltic to gather
property, and he came to Svithjod.  Olaf the Swede was king
there, a son of Eirik the Victorious, and Sigrid, a daughter of
Skoglartoste.  Sigrid was then a widow, and had many and great
estates in Svithjod.  When she heard that her foster-brother was
come to the country a short distance from her, she sent men to
him to invite him to a feast.  He did not neglect the invitation,
but came to her with a great attendance of his followers, and was
received in the most friendly way.  He and the queen sat in the
high-seat, and drank together towards the evening, and all his
men were entertained in the most hospitable manner.  At night,
when the king went to rest, a bed was put up for him with a
hanging of fine linen around it, and with costly bedclothes; but
in the lodging-house there were few men.  When the king was
undressed, and had gone to bed, the queen came to him, filled a
bowl herself for him to drink, and was very gay, and pressed to
drink.  The king was drunk above measure, and, indeed, so were
they both.  Then he slept, and the queen went away, and laid
herself down also.  Sigrid was a woman of the greatest
understanding, and clever in many things.  In the morning there 
was also the most excellent entertainment; but then it went on as
usual when people have drunk too much, that next day they take
care not to exceed.  The queen was very gay, and she and the king
talked of many things with each other; among other things she
valued her property, and the dominions she had in Svithjod, as
nothing less than his property in Norway.  With that observation
the king was nowise pleased, and he found no pleasure in anything
after that, but made himself ready for his journey in an ill
humor.  On the other hand, the queen was remarkably gay, and made
him many presents, and followed him out to the road.  Now Harald
returned about harvest to Norway, and was at home all winter; but
was very silent and cast down.  In summer he went once more to
the Baltic with his ships, and steered to Svithjod.  He sent a
message to Queen Sigrid that he wished to have a meeting with her
and she rode down to meet him.  They talked together and he soon
brought out the proposal that she should marry him.  She replied,
that this was foolish talk for him, who was so well married
already that he might think himself well off. Harald says, "Asta
is a good and clever woman; but she is not so well born as I am."
Sigrid replies, "It may be that thou art of higher birth, but I
think she is  now pregnant with both your fortunes."  They
exchanged but few words more before the queen rode away.  King
Harald was now depressed in mind, and prepared himself again to
ride up the country to meet Queen Sigrid.  Many of his people
dissuaded him; but nevertheless he set off with a great
attendance, and came to the house in which the queen dwelt.  The
same evening came another king, called Vissavald, from Gardarike
(Russia), likewise to pay his addresses to Queen Sigrid.  Lodging
was given to both the kings, and to all their people, in a great
old room of an out-building, and all the furniture was of the
same character; but there was no want of drink in the evening,
and that so strong that all were drunk, and the watch, both
inside and outside, fell fast asleep.  Then Queen Sigrid ordered
an attack on them in the night, both with fire and sword.  The
house was burnt, with all who were in it and those who slipped
out were put to the sword.  Sigrid said that she would make these
small kings tired of coming to court her.  She was afterwards
called Sigrid the Haughty (Storrada).



49. BIRTH OF OLAF, SON OF HARALD GRENSKE.

This happened the winter after the battle of the Jomsborg vikings
at Hjorungavag.  When Harald went up the country after Sigrid, he
left Hrane behind with the ships to look after the men.  Now when
Hrane heard that Harald was cut off, he returned to Norway the
shortest way he could, and told the news.  He repaired first to
Asta, and related to her all that had happened on the journey,
and also on what errand Harald had visited Queen Sigrid.  When
Asta got these tidings she set off directly to her father in the
Uplands, who received her well; but both were enraged at the
design which had been laid in Svithjod, and that King Harald had
intended to set her in a single condition.  In summer (A.D. 995)
Asta, Gudbrand's daughter, was confined, and had a boy child, who
had water poured over him, and was called Olaf.  Hrane himself
poured water over him, and the child was brought up at first in
the house of Gudbrand and his mother Asta.



50. ABOUT EARL HAKON.

Earl Hakon ruled over the whole outer part of Norway that lies on
the sea, and had thus sixteen districts under his sway.  The
arrangement introduced by Harald Harfager, that there should be
an earl in each district, was afterward continued for a long
time; and thus Earl Hakon had sixteen earls under him.  So says
the "Vellekla": --

     "Who before has ever known
     Sixteen earls subdued by one?
     Who has seen all Norway's land
     Conquered by one brave hero's hand?
     It will be long in memory held,
     How Hakon ruled by sword and shield.
     When tales at the viking's mast go round,
     His praise will every mouth resound."

While Earl Hakon ruled over Norway there were good crops in the
land, and peace was well preserved in the country among the
bondes.  The Earl, for the greater part of his lifetime, was
therefore much beloved by the bondes; but it happened, in the
longer course of time, that the earl became very intemperate in
his intercourse with women, and even carried it so far that he
made the daughters of people of consideration be carried away and
brought home to him; and after keeping them a week or two as
concubines, he sent them home.  He drew upon himself the
indignation of me relations of these girls; and the bondes began
to murmur loudly, as the Throndhjem people have the custom of
doing when anything goes against their judgment.



51. THORER KLAKKA'S JOURNEY.

Earl Hakon, in the mean time, hears some whisper that to the
westward, over the Norh sea, was a man called Ole, who was
looked upon as a king.  From the conversation of some people, he
fell upon the suspicion that he must be of the royal race of
Norway.  It was, indeed, said that this Ole was from Russia; but
the earl had heard that Trygve Olafson had had a son called Olaf,
who in his infancy had gone east to Gardarike, and had been
brought up by King Valdemar.  The earl had carefully inquired
about this man, and had his suspicion that he must be the same
person who had now come to these western countries.  The earl had
a very good friend called Thorer Klakka, who had been long upon
viking expeditions, sometimes also upon merchant voyages; so that
he was well acquainted all around.  This Thorer Earl Hakon sends
over the North sea, and told him to make a merchant voyage to
Dublin, many were in the habit of doing, and carefully to
discover who this Ole was.  Provided he got any certainty that he
was Olaf Trygvason, or any other of the Norwegian royal race,
then Thorer should endeavor to ensnare him by some deceit, and
bring him into the earl's power.



52. OLAF TRYGVASON COMES TO NORWAY.

On this Thorer sails westward to Ireland, and hears that Ole is
in Dublin with his wife's father King Olaf Kvaran.  Thorer, who
was a plausible man, immediately got acquainted with Ole; and as
they often met, and had long conversations together, Ole began to
inquire about news from Norway, and above all of the Upland kings
and great people, -- which of them were in life, and what
dominations they now had.  He asked also about Earl Hakon, and if
he was much liked in the country.  Thorer replies, that the earl
is such a powerful man that no one dares to speak otherwise than
he would like; but that comes from there being nobody else in the
country to look to.  "Yet, to say the truth, I know it to be the
mind of many brave men, and of whole communities, that they would
much rather see a king of Harald Harfager's race come to the
kingdom.  But we know of no one suited for this, especially now
that it is proved how vain every attack on Earl Hakon must be." 
As they often talked together in the same strain, Olaf disclosed
to Thorer his name and family, and asked him his opinion, and
whether he thought the bondes would take him for their king if he
were to appear in Norway.  Thorer encouraged him very eagerly to 
the enterprise, and praised him and his talents highly.  Then
Olaf's inclination to go to the heritage of his ancestors became
strong.  Olaf sailed accordingly, accompanied by Thorer, with
five ships; first to the Hebrides, and from thence to the
Orkneys.  At that time Earl Sigurd, Hlodver's son, lay in
Osmundswall, in the island South Ronaldsa, with a ship of war, on
his way to Caithness.  Just at the same time Olaf was sailing
with his fleet from the westward to the islands, and ran into the
same harbour, because Pentland Firth was not to be passed at that
tide.  When the king was informed that the earl was there, he
made him be called; and when the earl came on board to speak with
the king, after a few words only had passed between them, the
king says the earl must allow himself to be baptized, and all the
people of the country also, or he should be put to death
directly; and he assured the earl he would lay waste the islands
with fire and sword, if the people did not adopt Christianity. 
In the position the earl found himself, he preferred becoming
Christian, and he and all who were with him were baptized.
Afterwards the earl took an oath to the king, went into his
service, and gave him his son, whose name was Hvelp (Whelp), or
Hunde (Dog), as an hostage; and the king took Hvelp to Norway
with him.  Thereafter Olaf went out to sea to the eastward, and
made the land at Morster Island, where he first touched the
ground of Norway.  He had high mass sung in a tent, and
afterwards on the spot a church was built.  Thorer Klakka said
now to the king, that the best plan for him would be not to make
it known who he was, or to let any report about him get abroad;
but to seek out Earl Hakon as fast as possible and fall upon him
by surprise.  King Olaf did so, sailing northward day and night,
when wind permitted, and did not let the people of the country
know who it was that was sailing in such haste.  When he came
north to Agdanes, he heard that the earl was in the fjord, and
was in discord with the bondes.  On hearing this, Thorer saw that
things were going in a very different way from what he expected;
for after the battle with the Jomsborg vikings all men in Norway
were the most sincere friends of the earl on account of the
victory he had gained, and of the peace and security he had given
to the country; and now it unfortunately turns out that a great
chief has come to the country at a time when the bondes are in
arms against the earl.



53. EARL HAKON'S FLIGHT.

Earl Hakon was at a feast in Medalhus in Gaulardal and his ships
lay out by Viggja.  There was a powerful bonde, by name Orm
Lyrgja, who dwelt in Bunes, who had a wife called Gudrun, a
daughter of Bergthor of Lundar.  She was called the Lundasol; for
she was the most-beautiful of women.  The earl sent his slaves to
Orm, with the errand that they should bring Orm's wife, Gudrun,
to the earl.  The thralls tell their errand, and Orm bids them
first seat themselves to supper; but before they had done eating,
many people from the neighbourhood, to whom Orm had sent notice,
had gathered together: and now Orm declared he would not send
Gudrun with the messengers.  Gudrun told the thralls to tell the
earl that she would not come to him, unless he sent Thora of
Rimul after her.  Thora was a woman of great influence, and one
of the earl's best beloved.  The thralls say that they will come
another time, and both the bonde and his wife would be made to
repent of it; and they departed with many threats.  Orm, on the
other hand, sent out a message-token to all the neighbouring
country, and with it the message to attack Earl Hakon with
weapons and kill him.  He sent also a message to Haldor in
Skerdingsstedja, who also sent out his message-token.  A short
time before, the earl had taken away the wife of a man called
Brynjolf, and there had very nearly been an insurrection about
that business.  Having now again got this message-token, the
people made a general revolt, and set out all to Medalhus.  When
the earl heard of this, he left the house with his followers, and
concealed himself in a deep glen, now called Jarlsdal (Earl's
Dale).  Later in the day, the earl got news of the bondes' army.
They had beset all the roads; but believed the earl had escaped
to his ships, which his son Erlend, a remarkably handsome and
hopeful young man, had the command of.  When night came the earl
dispersed his people, and ordered them to go through the forest
roads into Orkadal; "for nobody will molest you," said he, "when
I am not with you.  Send a message to Erlend to sail out of the
fjord, and meet me in More.  In the mean time I will conceal
myself from the bondes."  Then the earl went his way with one
thrall or slave, called Kark, attending him.  There was ice upon
the Gaul (the river of Gaulardal), and the earl drove his horse
upon it, and left his coat lying upon the ice.  They then went to
a hole, since called Jarlshella (the Earl's Hole), where they
slept.  When Kark awoke he told his dream, -- that a black
threatening mad had come into the hole, and was angry that people
should have entered it; and that the man had said, "Ulle is
dead."  The earl said that his son Erlend must be killed.  Kark
slept again and was again disturbed in his sleep; and when he
awoke he told his dream, -- that the same man had again appeared
to him, and bade him tell the earl that all the sounds were
closed.  From this dream the earl began to suspect that it
betokened a short life to him.  They stood up, and went to the
house of Rimul.  The earl now sends Kark to Thora, and begs of
her to come secretly to him.  She did so and received the earl
kindly and he begged her to conceal him for a few nights until
the army of the bondes had dispersed.  "Here about my house,"
said she, "you will be hunted after, both inside and outside; for
many know that I would willingly help you if I can.  There is but
one place about the house where they could never expect to find
such a man as you, and that is the swine-stye."  When they came
there the earl said, "Well, let it be made ready for us; as to
save our life is the first and foremost concern."  The slave dug
a great hole in it, bore away the earth that he dug out, and laid
wood over it.  Thora brought the tidings to the earl that Olaf
Trygvason had come from sea into the fjord, and had killed his
son Erlend.  Then the earl and Kark both went into the hole. 
Thora covered it with wood, and threw earth and dung over it, and
drove the swine upon the top of it.  The swine-style was under a
great stone.



54. ERLEND'S DEATH.

Olaf Trygvason came from sea into the fjord with five long-ships,
and Erlend, Hakon's son, rowed towards him with three ships. 
When the vessels came near to each other, Erlend suspected they
might be enemies, and turned towards the land.  When Olaf and his
followers saw long-ships coming in haste out of the fjord, and
rowing towards them, they thought Earl Hakon must be here; and
they put out all oars to follow them.  As soon as Erlend and his
ships got near the land they rowed aground instantly, jumped
overboard, and took to the land; but at the same instant Olaf's
ship came up with them.  Olaf saw a remarkably handsome man
swimming in the water, and laid hold of a tiller and threw it at
him.  The tiller struck Erlend, the son of Hakon the earl, on the
head, and clove it to the brain; and there left Erlend his life.
Olaf and his people killed many; but some escaped, and some were
made prisoners, and got life and freedom that they might go and
tell what had happened.  They learned then that the bondes had
driven away Earl Hakon, and that he had fled, and his troops were
all dispersed.



55. EARL HAKON'S DEATH.

The bondes then met Olaf, to the joy of both, and they made an
agreement together.  The bondes took Olaf to be their king, and
resolved, one and all, to seek out Earl Hakon.  They went up
Gaulardal; for it seemed to them likely that if the earl was
concealed in any house it must be at Rimul, for Thora was his
dearest friend in that valley.  They come up, therefore, and
search everywhere, outside and inside the house, but could not
find him.  Then Olaf held a House Thing (trusting), or council
out in the yard, and stood upon a great stone which lay beside
the swine-stye, and made a speech to the people, in which he
promised to enrich the man with rewards and honours who should
kill the earl.  This speech was heard by the earl and the thrall
Kark.  They had a light in their room.

"Why art thou so pale," says the earl, "and now again black as
earth?  Thou hast not the intention to betray me?"

"By no means," replies Kark.

"We were born on the same night," says the earl, "and the time
will be short between our deaths."

King Olaf went away in the evening.  When night came the earl
kept himself awake but Kark slept, and was disturbed in his
sleep.  The earl woke him, and asked him "what he was dreaming
of?"

He answered, "I was at Hlader and Olaf Trygvason was laying a
gold ring about my neck."

The earl says, "It will be a red ring Olaf will lay about thy
neck if he catches thee.  Take care of that!  From me thou shalt
enjoy all that is good, therefore betray me not."

They then kept themselves awake both; the one, as it were,
watching upon the other.  But towards day the earl suddenly
dropped asleep; but his sleep was so unquiet that he drew his
heels under him, and raised his neck, as if going to rise, and
screamed dreadfully high.  On this Kark, dreadfully alarmed, drew
a large knife out of his belt, stuck it in the earl's throat, and
cut it across, and killed Earl Hakon.  Then Kark cut off the
earl's head, and ran away.  Late in the day he came to Hlader,
where he delivered the earl's head to King Olaf, and told all
these circumstances of his own and Earl Hakon's doings.  Olaf had
him taken out and beheaded.



56. EARL HAKON'S HEAD.

King Olaf, and a vast number of bondes with him, then went out to
Nidarholm, and had with him the heads of Earl Hakon and Kark.
This holm was used then for a place of execution of thieves and
ill-doers, and there stood a gallows on it.  He had the heads of
the earl and of Kark hung upon it, and the whole army of the
bondes cast stones at them, screaming and shouting that the one
worthless fellow had followed the other.  They then sent up to
Gaulardal for the earl's dead body.  So great was the enmity of
the Throndhjem people against Earl Hakon, that no man could
venture to call him by any other name than Hakon the Bad; and he
was so called long after those days.  Yet, sooth to say of Earl
Hakon, he was in many respects fitted to be a chief: first,
because he was descended from a high race; then because he had
understanding and knowledge to direct a government; also manly
courage in battle to gain victories, and good luck in killing his
enemies.  So says Thorleif Raudfeldson: --

     "In Norway's land was never known
     A braver earl than the brave Hakon.
     At sea, beneath the clear moon's light,
     No braver man e'er sought to fight.
     Nine kings to Odin's wide domain
     Were sent, by Hakon's right hand slain!
     So well the raven-flocks were fed --
     So well the wolves were filled with dead!"

Earl Hakon was very generous; but the greatest misfortunes
attended even such a chief at the end of his days: and the great
cause of this was that the time was come when heathen sacrifices
and idolatrous worship were doomed to fall, and the holy faith
and good customs to come in their place.



57. OLAF TRYGVASON ELECTED KING.

Olaf Trvgvason was chosen at Throndhjem by the General Thing to
be the king over the whole country, as Harald Harfager had been.
The whole public and the people throughout all the land would
listen to nothing else than that Olaf Trygvason should be king.
Then Olaf went round the whole country, and brought it under his
rule, and all the people of Norway gave in their submission; and
also the chiefs in the Uplands and in Viken, who before had held
their lands as fiefs from the Danish king, now became King Olaf's
men, and held their hands from him.  He went thus through the
whole country during the first winter (A.D. 996) and the
following summer.  Earl Eirik, the son of Earl Hakon, his brother
Svein, and their friends and relations, fled out of the country,
and went east to Sweden to King Olaf the Swede, who gave them a
good reception.  So says Thord Kolbeinson: --

     "O thou whom bad men drove away,
     After the bondes by foul play,
     Took Hakon's life!  Fate will pursue
     These bloody wolves, and make them rue.
     When the host came from out the West,
     Like some tall stately war-ship's mast,
     I saw the son of Trygve stand,
     Surveying proud his native land."

And again, --

     "Eirik has more upon his mind,
     Against the new Norse king designed,
     Than by his words he seems to show --
     And truly it may well be so.
     Stubborn and stiff are Throndhjem men,
     But Throndhjem's earl may come again;
     In Swedish land he knows no rest --
     Fierce wrath is gathering in his breast."



58. LODIN'S MARRIAGE

Lodin was the name of a man from Viken who was rich and of good
family.  He went often on merchant voyages, and sometimes on
viking cruises.  It happened one summer that he went on a
merchant voyage with much merchandise in a ship of his own.  He
directed his course first to Eistland, and was there at a market
in summer.  To the place at which the market was held many
merchant goods were brought, and also many thralls or slaves for
sale.  There Lodin saw a woman who was to be sold as a slave: and
on looking at her he knew her to be Astrid Eirik's daughter, who
had been married to King Trygve.  But now she was altogether
unlike what she had been when he last saw her; for now she was
pale, meagre in countenance, and ill clad.  He went up to her,
and asked her how matters stood with her.  She replied, "It is
heavy to be told; for I have been sold as a slave, and now again
I am brought here for sale."  After speaking together a little
Astrid knew him, and begged him to buy her; and bring her home to
her friends.  "On this condition," said he, "I will bring thee
home tn Norway, that thou wilt marry me."  Now as Astrid stood in
great need, and moreover knew that Lodin was a man of high birth,
rich, and brave, she promised to do so for her ransom.  Lodin
accordingly bought Astrid, took her home to Norway with him, and
married her with her friends' consent.  Their children were
Thorkel Nefia, Ingerid, and Ingegerd.  Ingebjorg and Astrid were
daughters of Astrid by King Trygve.  Eirik Bjodaskalle's sons
were Sigird, Karlshofud, Jostein, and Thorkel Dydril, who were
all rich and brave people who had estates east in the country. 
In Viken in the east dwelt two brothers, rich and of good
descent; one called Thorgeir, and the other Hyrning; and they
married Lodin and Astrid's daughters, Ingerid and Ingegerd.



59. OLAF BAPTIZES THE COUNTRY OF VIKEN.

When Harald Gormson, king of Denmark, had adopted Christianity,
he sent a message over all his kingdom that all people should be
baptized, and converted to the true faith.  He himself followed
his message, and used power and violence where nothing else would
do.  He sent two earls, Urguthrjot and Brimilskjar, with many
people to Norway, to proclaim Christianity there.  In Viken,
which stood directly under the king's power, this succeeded, and
many were baptized of the country folk.  But when Svein Forked-
beard, immediately after his father King Harald's death, went out
on war expeditions in Saxland, Frisland, and at last in England,
the Northmen who had taken up Christianity returned back to
heathen sacrifices, just as before; and the people in the north
of the country did the same.  But now that Olaf Trygvason was
king of Norway, he remained long during the summer (A.D. 996) in
Viken, where many of his relatives and some of his brothers-in-
law were settled, and also many who had been great friends of his
father; so that he was received with the greatest affection. 
Olaf called together his mother's brothers, his stepfather Lodin,
and his brothers-in-law Thorgeir and Hyrning, to speak with them,
and to disclose with the greatest care the business which he
desired they themselves should approve of, and support with all
their power; namely, the proclaiming Christianity over all his
kingdom.  He would, he declared, either bring it to this, that
all Norway should be Christian, or die.  "I shall make you all,"
said he, "great and mighty men in promoting this work; for I
trust to you most, as blood relations or brothers-in-law."  All
agreed to do what he asked, and to follow him in what he desired.
King Olaf immediately made it known to the public that he
recommended Christianity to all the people in his kingdom, which
message was well received and approved of by those who had before
given him their promise; and these being the most powerful among
the people assembled, the others followed their example, and
all the inhabitants of the east part of Viken allowed themselves
to be baptized.  The king then went to the north part of Viken
and invited every man to accept Christianity; and those who
opposed him he punished severely, killing some, mutilating
others, and driving some into banishment.  At length he brought
it so far, that all the kingdom which his father King Trvgve had
ruled over, and also that of his relation Harald Grenske,
accepted of Christianity; and during that summer (A.D. 996) and
the following winter (A.D. 997) all Viken was made Christian.



60. OF THE HORDALAND PEOPLE.

Early in spring (A.D. 997) King Olaf set out from Viken with a
great force northwards to Agder, and proclaimed that every man
should be baptized.  And thus the people received Christianity,
for nobody dared oppose the king's will, wheresoever he came.  In
Hordaland, however, were many bold and great men of Hordakare's
race.  He, namely, had left four sons, -- the first Thorleif
Spake; the second, Ogmund, father of Thorolf Skialg, who was
father of Erling of Sole; the third was Thord father of the Herse
Klyp who killed King Sigurd Slefa, Gunhild's son; and lastly,
Olmod, father of Askel, whose son was Aslak Fitjaskalle; and that
family branch was the greatest and most considered in Hordaland.
Now when this family heard the bad tidings, that the king was
coming along the country from the eastward with a great force,
and was breaking the ancient law of the people, and imposing
punishment and hard conditions on all who opposed him, the
relatives appointed a meeting to take counsel with each other,
for they knew the king would come down upon them at once: and
they all resolved to appear in force at the Gula-Thing, there to
hold a conference with King Olaf Trygvason.



61. ROGALAND BAPTIZED.

When King Olaf came to Rogaland, he immediately summoned the
people to a Thing; and when the bondes received the message-
token for a Thing, they assembled in great numbers well armed.
After they had come together, they resolved to choose three men,
the best speakers of the whole, who should answer King Olaf, and
argue with the king; and especially should decline to accept of
anything against the old law, even if the king should require it
of them.  Now when the bondes came to the Thing, and the Thing
was formed, King Olaf arose, and at first spoke good-humoredly to
the people; but they observed he wanted them to accept
Christianity, with all his fine words: and in the conclusion he
let them know that those who should speak against him, and not
submit to his proposal, must expect his displeasure and
punishment, and all the ill that it was in his power to inflict. 
When he had ended his speech, one of the bondes stood up, who was
considered the most eloquent, and who had been chosen as the
first who should reply to King Olaf.  But when he would begin to
speak such a cough seized him, and such a difficulty of
breathing, that he could not bring out a word, and had to sit
down again.  Then another bonde stood up, resolved not to let an
answer be wanting, although it had gone so ill with the former:
but he stammered so that he could not get a word uttered, and all
present set up a laughter, amid which the bonde sat down again.
And now the third stood up to make a speech against King Olaf's;
but when he began he became so hoarse and husky in his throat,
that nobody could hear a word he said, and he also had to sit
down.  There was none of the bondes now to speak against the
king, and as nobody answered him there was no opposition; and it
came to this, that all agreed to what the king had proposed.  All
the people of the Thing accordingly were baptized before the
Thing was dissolved.



62. ERLING SKJALGSON'S WOOING.

King Olaf went with his men-at-arms to the Gula-Thing; for the
bondes had sent him word that they would reply there to his
speech.  When both parties had come to the Thing, the king
desired first to have a conference with the chief people of the
country; and when the meeting was numerous the king set forth his
errand, -- that he desired them, according to his proposal, to
allow themselves to be baptized.  Then said Olmod the Old, "We
relations have considered together this matter, and have come to
one resolution.  If thou thinkest, king, to force us who are
related together to such things as to break our old law, or to
bring us under thyself by any sort of violence, then will we
stand against thee with all our might: and be the victory to him
to whom fate ordains it.  But if thou, king, wilt advance our
relations' fortunes, then thou shalt have leave to do as thou
desirest, and we will all serve thee with zeal in thy purpose."

The king replies, "What do you propose for obtaining this
agreement?"

Then answers Olmod, "The first is, that thou wilt give thy sister
Astrid in marriage to Erling Skjalgson, our relation, whom we
look upon as the most hopeful young man in all Norway."

King Olaf replied, that this marriage appeared to him also very
suitable; "as Erling is a man of good birth, and a good-looking
man in appearance: but Astrid herself must answer to this
proposal."

Thereupon the king spoke to his sister.  She said, "It is but of
little use that I am a king's sister, and a king~s daughter, if I
must marry a man who has no high dignity or office.  I will
rather wait a few years for a better match."  Thus ended this
conference.


63. HORDALAND BAPTIZED.

King Olaf took a falcon that belonged to Astrid, plucked off all
its feathers, and then sent it to her.  Then said Astrid, "Angry
is my brother."  And she stood up, and went to the king, who
received her kindly, and she said that she left it to the king to
determine her marriage.  "I think," said the king, "that I must
have power enough in this land to raise any man I please to high
dignity."  Then the king ordered Olmod and Erling to be called
to a conference, and all their relations; and the marriage was
determined upon, and Astrid betrothed to Erling.  Thereafter the
king held the Thing, and recommended Christianity to the bondes;
and as Olmod, and Erling, and all their relations, took upon
themselves the most active part in forwarding the king's desire,
nobody dared to speak against it; and all the people were
baptized, and adopted Christianity.



64. ERLING SKJALGSON'S WEDDING.

Erling Skjalgson had his wedding in summer, and a great many
people were assembled at it.  King Olaf was also there, and
offered Erling an earldom.  Erling replied thus: "All my
relations have been herses only, and I will take no higher title
than they have; but this I will accept from thee, king, that thou
makest me the greatest of that title in the country."  The king
consented; and at his departure the king invested his brother-in
law Erling with all the land north of the Sognefjord, and east to
the Lidandisnes, on the same terms as Harald Harfager had given
land to his sons, as before related.



65. RAUMSDAL AND FJORD-DISTRICTS BAPTIZED.

The same harvest King Olaf summoned the bondes to a Thing of the
four districts at Dragseid, in Stad: and there the people from
Sogn, the Fjord-districts, South More, and Raumsdal, were
summoned to meet.  King Olaf came there with a great many people
who had followed him from the eastward, and also with those who
had joined him from Rogaland and Hordaland.  When the king came
to the Thing, he proposed to them there, as elsewhere,
Christianity; and as the king had such a powerful host with him,
they were frightened.  The king offered them two conditions, --
either to accept Christianity, or to fight.  But the bondes saw
they were in no condition to fight the king, and resolved,
therefore, that all the people should agree to be baptized.  The
king proceeded afterwards to North More, and baptized all that
district.  He then sailed to Hlader, in Throndhjem; had the
temple there razed to the ground; took all the ornaments and all
property out of the temple, and from the gods in it; and among
other things the great gold ring which Earl Hakon had ordered to
be made, and which hung in the door of the temple; and then had
the temple burnt.  But when the bondes heard of this, they sent
out a war-arrow as a token through the whole district, ordering
out a warlike force, and intended to meet the king with it.  In
the meantime King Olaf sailed with a war force out of the fjord
along the coast northward, intending to proceed to Halogaland,
and baptize there.  When he came north to Bjarnaurar, he heard
from Halogaland that a force was assembled there to defend the
country against the king.  The chiefs of this force were Harek of
Thjotta, Thorer Hjort from Vagar, and Eyvind Kinrifa.  Now when
King Olaf heard this, he turned about and sailed southwards along
the land; and when he got south of Stad proceeded at his leisure,
and came early in winter (A.D. 998) all the way east to Viken.



66. OLAF PROPOSES MARRIAGE TO QUEEN SIGRID.

Queen Sigrid in Svithjod, who had for surname the Haughty, sat in
her mansion, and during the same winter messengers went between
King Olaf and Sigrid to propose his courtship to her, and she had
no objection; and the matter was fully and fast resolved upon.
Thereupon King Olaf sent to Queen Sigrid the great gold ring he
had taken from the temple door of Hlader, which was considered a
distinguished ornament.  The meeting for concluding the business
was appointed to be in spring on the frontier, at the Gaut river.
Now the ring which King Olaf had sent Queen Sigrid was highly
prized by all men; yet the queen's gold-smiths, two brothers, who
took the ring in their hands, and weighed it, spoke quietly to
each other about it, and in a manner that made the queen call
them to her, and ask "what they smiled at?"  But they would not
say a word, and she commanded them to say what it was they had
discovered.  Then they said the ring is false.  Upon this she
ordered the ring to be broken into pieces, and it was found to be
copper inside.  Then the queen was enraged, and said that Olaf
would deceive her in more ways than this one.  In the same year
(A.D. 998) King Olaf went into Ringenke, and there the people
also were baptized.



67. OLAF HARALDSON BAPTIZED.

Asta, the daughter of Gudbrand, soon after the fall of Harald
Grenske married again a man who was called Sigurd Syr, who was a
king in Ringerike.  Sigurd was a son of Halfdan, and grandson of
Sigurd Hrise, who was a son of Harald Harfager.  Olaf, the son of
Asta and Harald Grenske, lived with Asta, and was brought up from
childhood in the house of his stepfather, Sigurd Syr.  Now when
King Olaf Trygvason came to Ringerike to spread Christianity,
Sigurd Syr and his wife allowed themselves to be baptized, along
with Olaf her son; and Olaf Trygvason was godfather to Olaf, the
stepson of Harald Grenske.  Olaf was then three years old.  Olaf
returned from thence to Viken, where he remained all winter.  He
had now been three years king in Norway (A.D. 998).



68. MEETING OF OLAF AND SIGRID.

Early in spring (A.D. 998) King Olaf went eastwards to
Konungahella to the meeting with Queen Sigrid; and when they met
the business was considered about which the winter before they
had held communication, namely, their marriage; and the business
seemed likely to be concluded.  But when Olaf insisted that
Sigrid should let herself be baptized, she answered thus: -- "I
must not part from the faith which I have held, and my
forefathers before me; and, on the other hand, I shall make no
objection to your believing in the god that pleases you best."
Then King Olaf was enraged, and answered in a passion, "Why
should I care to have thee, an old faded woman, and a heathen
jade?" and therewith struck her in the face with his glove which
he held in his hands, rose up, and they parted.  Sigrid said,
"This may some day be thy death."  The king set off to Viken, the
queen to Svithjod.



69. THE BURNING OF WARLOCKS.

Then the king proceeded to Tunsberg, and held a Thing, at which
he declared in a speech that all the men of whom it should be
known to a certainty that they dealt with evil spirits, or in
witchcraft, or were sorcerers, should be banished forth of the
land.  Thereafter the king had all the neighborhood ransacked
after such people, and called them all before him; and when they
were brought to the Thing there was a man among them called
Eyvind Kelda, a grandson of Ragnvald Rettilbeine, Harald
Harfager's son.  Eyvind was a sorcerer, and particularly knowing
in witchcraft.  The king let all these men be seated in one room,
which was well adorned, and made a great feast for them, and gave
them strong drink in plenty.  Now when they were all very drunk,
he ordered the house be set on fire, and it and all the people
within it were consumed, all but Eyvind Kelda, who contrived to
escape by the smoke-hole in the roof.  And when he had got a long
way off, he met some people on the road going to the king, and he
told them to tell the king that Eyvind Kelda had slipped away
from the fire, and would never come again in King Olaf's power,
but would carry on his arts of witchcraft as much as ever.  When
the people came to the king with such a message from Eyvind, the
king was ill pleased that Eyvind had escaped death.



70. EYVIND KELDA'S DEATH.

When spring (A.D. 998) came King Olaf went out to Viken, and was
on visits to his great farms.  He sent notice over all Viken that
he would call out an army in summer, and proceed to the north
parts of the country.  Then he went north to Agder; and when
Easter was approaching he took the road to Rogaland with 300
(=360) men, and came on Easter evening north to Ogvaldsnes, in
Kormt Island, where an Easter feast was prepared for him.  That
same night came Eyvind Kelda to the island with a well-manned
long-ship, of which the whole crew consisted of sorcerers and
other dealers with evil spirits.  Eyvind went from his ship to
the land with his followers, and there they played many of their
pranks of witchcraft.  Eyvind clothed them with caps of darkness,
and so thick a mist that the king and his men could see nothing
of them; but when they came near to the house at Ogvaldsnes, it
became clear day.  Then it went differently from what Eyvind had
intended: for now there came just such a darkness over him and
his comrades in witchcraft as they had made before, so that they
could see no more from their eyes than from the back of their
heads but went round and round in a circle upon the island.  When
the king's watchman saw them going about, without knowing what
people these were, they told the king.  Thereupon he rose up with
his people, put on his clothes, and when he saw Eyvind with his
men wandering about he ordered his men to arm, and examine what
folk these were.  The king's men discovered it was Eyvind, took
him and all his company prisoners, and brought them to the king.
Eyvind now told all he had done on his journey.  Then the king
ordered these all to be taken out to a skerry which was under
water in flood tide, and there to be left bound.  Eyvind and all
with him left their lives on this rock, and the skerry is still
called Skrattasker.



71. OLAF AND ODIN'S APPARITION.

It is related that once on a time King Olaf was at a feast at
this Ogvaldsnes, and one eventide there came to him an old man
very gifted in words, and with a broad-brimmed hat upon his head.
He was one-eyed, and had something to tell of every land.  He
entered into conversation with the king; and as the king found
much pleasure in the guest's speech, he asked him concerning many
things, to which the guest gave good answers: and the king sat up
late in the evening.  Among other things, the king asked him if
he knew who the Ogvald had been who had given his name both to
the ness and to the house.  The guest replied, that this Ogvald
was a king, and a very valiant man, and that he made great
sacrifices to a cow which he had with him wherever he went, and
considered it good for his health to drink her milk.  This same
King Ogvald had a battle with a king called Varin, in which
battle Ogvald fell.  He was buried under a mound close to the
house; "and there stands his stone over him, and close to it his
cow also is laid."  Such and many other things, and ancient
events, the king inquired after.  Now, when the king had sat late
into the night, the bishop reminded him that it was time to go to
bed, and the king did so.  But after the king was undressed, and
had laid himself in bed, the guest sat upon the foot-stool before
the bed, and still spoke long with the king; for after one tale
was ended, he still wanted a new one.  Then the bishop observed
to the king, it was time to go to sleep, and the king did so; and
the guest went out.  Soon after the king awoke, asked for the
guest, and ordered him to be called, but the guest was not to be
found.  The morning after, the king ordered his cook and cellar-
master to be called, and asked if any strange person had been
with them.  They said, that as they were making ready the meat a
man came to them, and observed that they were cooking very poor
meat for the king's table; whereupon he gave them two thick and
fat pieces of beef, which they boiled with the rest of the meat.
Then the king ordered that all the meat should be thrown away,
and said this man can be no other than the Odin whom the heathens
have so long worshipped; and added, "but Odin shall not deceive
us."



72. THE THING IN THRONDHJEM.

King Olaf collected a great army in the east of the country
towards summer, and sailed with it north to Nidaros in the
Throndhjem country.  From thence he sent a message-token over all
the fjord, calling the people of eight different districts to a
Thing; but the bondes changed the Thing-token into a war-token;
and called together all men, free and unfree, in all the
Throndhjem land.  Now when the king met the Thing, the whole
people came fully armed.  After the Thing was seated, the king
spoke, and invited them to adopt Christianity; but he had only
spoken a short time when the bondes called out to him to be
silent, or they would attack him and drive him away.  "We did
so," said they, "with Hakon foster-son of Athelstan, when he
brought us the same message, and we held him in quite as much
respect as we hold thee."  When King Olaf saw how incensed the
bondes were, and that they had such a war force that he could
make no resistance, he turned his speech as if he would give way
to the bondes, and said, "I wish only to be in a good
understanding with you as of old; and I will come to where ye
hold your greatest sacrifice-festival, and see your customs, and
thereafter we shall consider which to hold by."  And in this all
agreed; and as the king spoke mildly and friendly with the
bondes, their answer was appeased, and their conference with the
king went off peacefully.  At the close of it a midsummer
sacrifice was fixed to take place in Maeren, and all chiefs and
great bondes to attend it as usual.  The king was to be at it.



73. JARNSKEGGE OR IRON BEARD.

There was a great bonde called Skegge, and sometimes Jarnskegge,
or Iron Beard, who dwelt in Uphaug in Yrjar.  He spoke first at
the Thing to Olaf; and was the foremost man of the bondes in
speaking against Christianity.  The Thing was concluded in this
way for that time, -- the bondes returned home, and the king went
to Hlader.


74. THE FEAST AT HLADER.

King Olaf lay with his ships in the river Nid, and had thirty
vessels, which were manned with many brave people; but the king
himself was often at Hlader, with his court attendants.  As the
time now was approaching at which the sacrifices should be made
at Maeren, the king prepared a great feast at Hlader, and sent a
message to the districts of Strind, Gaulardal, and out to
Orkadal, to invite the chiefs and other great bondes.  When the
feast was ready, and the chiefs assembled, there was a handsome
entertainment the first evening, at which plenty of liquor went
round. and the guests were made very drunk.  The night after they
all slept in peace.  The following morning, when the king was
dressed, he had the early mass sung before him; and when the mass
was over, ordered to sound the trumpets for a House Thing: upon
which all his men left the ships to come up to the Thing.  When
the Thing was seated, the king stood up, and spoke thus: "We held
a Thing at Frosta, and there I invited the bondes to allow
themselves to be baptized; but they, on the other hand, invited
me to offer sacrifice to their gods, as King Hakon, Athelstan's
foster-son, had done; and thereafter it was agreed upon between
us that we should meet at Maerin, and there make a great
sacrifice.  Now if I, along with you, shall turn again to making
sacrifice, then will I make the greatest of sacrifices that are
in use; and I will sacrifice men.  But I will not select slaves
or malefactors for this, but will take the greatest men only to
be offered to the gods; and for this I select Orm Lygra of
Medalhus, Styrkar of Gimsar, Kar of Gryting, Asbjorn Thorbergson
of Varnes, Orm of Lyxa, Haldor of Skerdingsstedja;" and besides
these he named five others of the principal men.  All these, he
said, he would offer in sacrifice to the gods for peace and a
fruitful season; and ordered them to be laid hold of immediately.
Now when the bondes saw that they were not strong enough to make
head against the king, they asked for peace, and submitted wholly
to the king's pleasure.  So it was settled that all the bondes
who had come there should be baptized, and should take an oath to
the king to hold by the right faith, and to renounce sacrifice to
the gods.  The king then kept all these men as hostages who came
to his feast, until they sent him their sons, brothers, or other
near relations.


75. OF THE THING IN THRONDHJEM.

King Olaf went in with all his forces into the Throndhjem
country; and when he came to Maeren all among the chiefs of the
Throndhjem people who were most opposed to Christianity were
assembled, and had with them all the great bondes who had before
made sacrifice at that place.  There was thus a greater multitude
of bondes than there had been at the Frosta-Thing.  Now the king
let the people be summoned to the Thing, where both parties met
armed; and when the Thing was seated the king made a speech, in
which he told the people to go over to Christianity.  Jarnskegge
replies on the part of the bondes, and says that the will of the
bondes is now, as formerly, that the king should not break their
laws.  "We want, king," said he, "that thou shouldst offer
sacrifice, as other kings before thee have done."  All the bondes
applauded his speech with a loud shout, and said they would have
all things according to what Skegge said.  Then the king said he
would go into the temple of their gods with them, and see what
the practices were when they sacrificed.  The bondes thought well
of this proceeding, and both parties went to the temple.



76. THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE BAPTIZED.

Now King Olaf entered into the temple with some few of his men
and a few bondes; and when the king came to where their gods
were, Thor, as the most considered among their gods, sat there
adorned with gold and silver.  The king lifted up his gold-inlaid
axe which he carried in his hands, and struck Thor so that the
image rolled down from its seat.  Then the king's men turned to
and threw down all the gods from their seats; and while the king
was in the temple, Jarnskegge was killed outside of the temple
doors, and the king's men did it.  When the king came forth out
of the temple he offered the bondes two conditions, -- that all
should accept of Christianity forthwith, or that they should
fight with him.  But as Skegge was killed, there was no leader in
the bondes' army to raise the banner against King Olaf; so they
took the other condition, to surrender to the king's will and
obey his order.  Then King Olaf had all the people present
baptized, and took hostages from them for their remaining true to
Christianity; and he sent his men round to every district, and no
man in the Throndhjem country opposed Christianity, but all
people took baptism.



77. A TOWN IN THE THRONDHJEM COUNTRY.

King Olaf with his people went out to Nidaros, and made houses on
the flat side of the river Nid, which he raised to be a merchant
town, and gave people ground to build houses upon.  The king's
house he had built just opposite Skipakrok; and he transported
thither, in harvest, all that was necessary for his winter
residence, and had many people about him there.



78. KING OLAF'S MARRIAGE.

King Olaf appointed a meeting with the relations of Jarnskegge,
and offered them the compensation or penalty for his bloodshed;
for there were many bold men who had an interest in that
business.  Jarnskegge had a daughter called Gudrun; and at last
it was agreed upon between the parties that the king should take
her in marriage.  When the wedding day came King Olaf and Gudrun
went to bed together.  As soon as Gudrun, the first night they
lay together, thought the king was asleep, she drew a knife, with
which she intended to run him through; but the king saw it, took
the knife from her, got out of bed, and went to his men, and told
them what had happened.  Gudrun also took her clothes, and went
away along with all her men who had followed her thither.  Gudrun
never came into the king's bed again.



79. BUILDING OF THE SHIP CRANE.

The same autumn (A.D. 998) King Olaf laid the keel of a great
long-ship out on the strand at the river Nid.  It was a snekkja;
and he employed many carpenters upon her, so that early in winter
the vessel was ready. It had thirty benches for rowers, was high
in stem and stern, but was not broad.  The king called this ship
Tranen (the Crane).  After Jarnskegge's death his body was
carried to Yrjar, and lies there in the Skegge mound on Austrat.



80. THANGBRAND THE PRIEST GOES TO ICELAND. 

When King Olaf Trygvason had been two years king of Norway (A.D.
997), there was a Saxon priest in his house who was called
Thangbrand, a passionate, ungovernable man, and a great man-
slayer; but he was a good scholar, and a clever man.  The king
would not have him in his house upon account of his misdeeds; but
gave him the errand to go to Iceland, and bring that land to the
Christian faith.  The king gave him a merchant vessel: and, as
far as we know of this voyage of his, he landed first in Iceland
at Austfjord in the southern Alptfjord, and passed the winter in
the house of Hal of Sida.  Thangbrand proclaimed Christianity in
Iceland, and on his persuasion Hal and all his house people, and
many other chiefs, allowed themselves to be baptized; but there
were many more who spoke against it.  Thorvald Veile and
Veterlide the skald composed a satire about Thangbrand; but he
killed them both outright.  Thangbrand was two years in Iceland,
and was the death of three men before he left it.



81. OF SIGURD AND HAUK.

There was a man called Sigurd, and another called Hauk, both of
Halogaland, who often made merchant voyages.  One summer (A.D.
998) they had made a voyage westward to England; and when they
came back to Norway they sailed northwards along the coast, and
at North More they met King Olaf's people.  When it was told the
king that some Halogaland people were come who were heathen, he
ordered the steersmen to be brought to him, and he asked them if
they would consent to be baptized; to which they replied, no. 
The king spoke with them in many ways, but to no purpose.  He
then threatened them with death and torture: but they would not
allow themselves to be moved.  He then had them laid in irons,
and kept them in chains in his house for some time, and often
conversed with them, but in vain.  At last one night they
disappeared, without any man being able to conjecture how they
got away.  But about harvest they came north to Harek of Thjotta,
who received them kindly, and with whom they stopped all winter
(A.D. 999), and were hospitably entertained.



82. OF HAREK OF THJOTTA.

It happened one good-weather day in spring (A.D. 999) that Harek
was at home in his house with only few people, and time hung
heavy on his hands.  Sigurd asked him if he would row a little
for amusement.  Harek was willing; and they went to the shore,
and drew down a six-oared skiff; and Sigurd took the mast and
rigging belonging to the boat out of the boat-house, for they
often used to sail when they went for amusement on the water.
Harek went out into the boat to hang the rudder.  The brothers
Sigurd and Hauk, who were very strong men, were fully armed, as
they were used to go about at home among the peasants.  Before
they went out to the boat they threw into her some butter-kits
and a bread-chest, and carried between them a great keg of ale.
When they had rowed a short way from the island the brothers
hoisted the sail, while Harek was seated at the helm; and they
sailed away from the island.  Then the two brothers went aft to
where Harek the bonde was sitting; and Sigurd says to him, "Now
thou must choose one of these  conditions, -- first, that we
brothers direct this voyage; or, if not, that we bind thee fast
and take the command; or, third, that we kill thee."  Harek saw
how matters stood with him.  As a single man, he was not better
than one of those brothers, even if he had been as well armed; so
it appeared to him wisest to let them determine the course to
steer, and bound himself by oath to abide by this condition.  On
this Sigurd took the helm, and steered south along the land, the
brothers taking particular care that they did not encounter
people.  The wind was very favourable; and they held on sailing
along until they came south to Throndhjem and to Nidaros, where
they found the king.  Then the king called Harek to him, and in a
conference desired him to be baptized.  Harek made objections;
and although the king and Harek talked over it many times,
sometimes in the presence of other people, and sometimes alone,
they could not agree upon it.  At last the king says to Harek,
"Now thou mayst return home, and I will do thee no injury; partly
because we are related together, and partly that thou mayst not
have it to say that I caught thee by a trick: but know for
certain that I intend to come north next summer to visit you
Halogalanders, and ye shall then see if I am not able to punish
those who reject Christianity."  Harek was well pleased to get
away as fast as he could.  King Olaf gave Harek a good boat of
ten or twelve pair of oars, and let it be fitted out with the
best of everything needful; and besides he gave Harek thirty men,
all lads of mettle, and well appointed.



83. EYVIND KINRIFA'S DEATH.

Harek of Thjotta went away from the town as fast as he could; but
Hauk and Sigurd remained in the king's house, and both took
baptism.  Harek pursued his voyage until he came to Thjotta.  He
sent immediately a message to his friend Eyvind Kinrifa, with the
word that he had been with King Olaf; but would not let himself
be cowed down to accept Christianity.  The message at the same
time informed him that King Olaf intended coming to the north in
summer against them, and they must be at their posts to defend
themselves; it also begged Eyvind to come and visit him, the
sooner the better.  When this message was delivered to Eyvind, he
saw how very necessary it was to devise some counsel to avoid
falling into the king's hands.  He set out, therefore, in a light
vessel with a few hands as fast as he could.  When he came to
Thjotta he was received by Harek in the most friendly way, and
they immediately entered into conversation with each other behind
the house.  When they had spoken together but a short time, King
Olaf's men, who had secretly followed Harek to the north, came
up, and took Eyvind prisoner, and carried him away to their ship.
They did not halt on their voyage until they came to Throndhjem,
and presented themselves to King Olaf at Nidaros.  Then Eyvind
was brought up to a conference with the king, who asked him to
allow himself to be baptized, like other people; but Eyvind
decidedly answered he would not.  The king still, with persuasive
words, urged him to accept Christianity, and both he and the
bishop used many suitable arguments; but Eyvind would not allow
himself to be moved.  The king offered him gifts and great fiefs,
but Eyvind refused all.  Then the king threatened him with
tortures and death, but Eyvind was steadfast.  Then the king
ordered a pan of glowing coals to be placed upon Eyvind's belly,
which burst asunder.  Eyvind cried, "Take away the pan, and I
will say something before I die," which also was done.  The king
said, "Wilt thou now, Eyvind, believe in Christ?"  "No," said
Eyvind, "I can take no baptism; for I am an evil spirit put into
a man's body by the sorcery of Fins because in no other way could
my father and mother have a child."  With that died Eyvind, who
had been one of the greatest sorcerers.



84. HALOGALAND MADE CHRISTIAN.

The spring after (A.D. 999) King Olaf fitted out and manned his
ships, and commanded himself his ship the Crane.  He had many and
smart people with him; and when he was ready, he sailed
northwards with his fleet past Bryda, and to Halogaland.
Wheresoever he came to the land, or to the islands, he held a
Thing, and told the people to accept the right faith, and to be
baptized.  No man dared to say anything against it, and the whole
country he passed through was made Christian.  King Olaf was a
guest in the house of Harek of Thjotta, who was baptized with all
his people.  At parting the king gave Harek good presents; and he
entered into the king's service, and got fiefs, and the
privileges of lendsman from the king.



85. THORER HJORT'S DEATH.

There was a bonde, by name Raud the Strong, who dwelt in Godey
in Salten fjord.  Raud was a very rich man, who had many house
servants; and likewise was a powerful man, who had many Fins in
his service when he wanted them.  Raud was a great idolater, and
very skillful in witchcraft, and was a great friend of Thorer
Hjort, before spoken of.  Both were great chiefs.  Now when they
heard that King Olaf was coming with a great force from the south
to Halogaland, they gathered together an army, ordered out ships,
and they too had a great force on foot.  Raud had a large ship
with a gilded head formed like a dragon, which ship had thirty
rowing benches, and even for that kind of ship was very large.
Thorer Hjort had also a large ship.  These men sailed southwards
with their ships against King Olaf, and as soon as they met gave
battle.  A great battle there was, and a great fall of men; but
principally on the side of the Halogalanders, whose ships were
cleared of men, so that a great terror came upon them.  Raud
rode with his dragon out to sea, and set sail.  Raud had always a
fair wind wheresoever he wished to sail, which came from his arts
of witchcraft; and, to make a short story, he came home to Godey.
Thorer Hjort fled from the ships up to the land: but King Olaf
landed people, followed those who fled, and killed them.  Usually
the king was the foremost in such skirmishes, and was so now.
When the king saw where Thorer Hjort, who was quicker on foot
than any man, was running to, he ran after him with his dog Vige.
The king said, "Vige!  Vige!  Catch the deer."  Vige ran straight
in upon him; on which Thorer halted, and the king threw a spear
at him.  Thorer struck with his sword at the dog, and gave him a
great wound; but at the same moment the king's spear flew under
Thorer's arm, and went through and through him, and came out at
his other-side.  There Thorer left his life; but Vige was carried
to the ships.



86. KING OLAF'S VOYAGE TO GODEY.

King Olaf gave life and freedom to all the men who asked it and
agreed to become Christian.  King Olaf sailed with his fleet
northwards along the coast, and baptized all the people among
whom he came; and when he came north to Salten fjord, he intended
to sail into it to look for Raud, but a dreadful tempest and
storm was raging in the fjord.  They lay there a whole week, in
which the same weather was raging within the fjord, while without
there was a fine brisk wind only, fair for proceeding north along
the land.  Then the king continued his voyage north to Omd, where
all the people submitted to Christianity.  Then the king turned
about and sailed to the south again; but when he came to the
north side of Salten fjord, the same tempest was blowing, and the
sea ran high out from the fjord, and the same kind of storm
prevailed for several days while the king was lying there.  Then
the king applied to Bishop Sigurd, and asked him if he knew any
counsel about it; and the bishop said he would try if God would
give him power to conquer these arts of the Devil.



87. OF RAUD'S BEING TORTURED.

Bishop Sigurd took all his mass robes and went forward to the bow
of the king's ship; ordered tapers to be lighted, and incense to
be brought out.  Then he set the crucifix upon the stem of the
vessel, read the Evangelist and many prayers, besprinkled the
whole ship with holy water, and then ordered the ship-tent to be
stowed away, and to row into the fjord.  The king ordered all the
other ships to follow him.  Now when all was ready on board the
Crane to row, she went into the fjord without the rowers finding
any wind; and the sea was curled about their keel track like as
in a calm, so quiet and still was the water; yet on each side of
them the waves were lashing up so high that they hid the sight of
the mountains.  And so the one ship followed the other in the
smooth sea track; and they proceeded this way the whole day and
night, until they reached Godey.  Now when they came to Raud's
house his great ship, the dragon, was afloat close to the land.
King Olaf went up to the house immediately with his people; made
an attack on the loft in which Raud was sleeping, and broke it
open.  The men rushed in: Raud was taken and bound, and of the
people with him some were killed and some made prisoners.  Then
the king's men went to a lodging in which Raud's house servants
slept, and killed some, bound others, and beat others.  Then the
king ordered Raud to be brought before him, and offered him
baptism.  "And," says the king, "I will not take thy property
from thee, but rather be thy friend, if thou wilt make thyself
worthy to be so."  Raud exclaimed with all his might against the
proposal, saying he would never believe in Christ, and making his
scoff of God.  Then the king was wroth, and said Raud should die
the worst of deaths.  And the king ordered him to be bound to a
beam of wood, with his face uppermost, and a round pin of wood
set between his teeth to force his mouth open.  Then the king
ordered an adder to be stuck into the mouth of him; but the
serpent would not go into his mouth, but shrunk back when Raud
breathed against it.  Now the king ordered a hollow branch of an
angelica root to be stuck into Raud's mouth; others say the king
put his horn into his mouth, and forced the serpent to go in by
holding a red-hot iron before the opening.  So the serpent crept
into the mouth of Raud and down his throat, and gnawed its way
out of his side; and thus Raud perished.  King Olaf took here
much gold and silver, and other property of weapons, and many
sorts of precious effects; and all the men who were with Raud he
either had baptized, or if they refused had them killed or
tortured.  Then the king took the dragonship which Raud had
owned, and steered it himself; for it was a much larger and
handsomer vessel than the Crane.  In front it had a dragon's
head, and aft a crook, which turned up, and ended with the figure
of the dragon's tail.  The carved work on each side of the stem
and stern was gilded.  This ship the king called the Serpent.
When the sails were hoisted they represented, as it were, the
dragon's wings; and the ship was the handsomest in all Norway.
The islands on which Raud dwelt were called Gylling and Haering;
but the whole islands together were called Godey Isles, and the
current between the isles and the mainland the Godey Stream. 
King Olaf baptized the whole people of the fjord, and then sailed
southwards along the land; and on this voyage happened much and
various things, which are set down in tales and sagas, -- namely,
how witches and evil spirits tormented his men, and sometimes
himself; but we will rather write about what occurred when King
Olaf made Norway Christian, or in the other countries in which he
advanced Christianity.  The same autumn Olaf with his fleet
returned to Throndhjem, and landed at Nidaros, where he took up
his winter abode.  What I am now going to write about concerns
the Icelanders.



88. OF THE ICELANDERS.

Kjartan Olafson, a son's son of Hoskuld, and a daughter's son of
Egil Skallagrimson, came the same autumn (A.D. 999) from Iceland
to Nidaros, and he was considered to be the most agreeable and
hopeful man of any born in Iceland.  There was also Haldor, a son
of Gudmund of Modruveller; and Kolbein, a son of Thord, Frey's
gode, and a brother's son of Brennuflose; together with Sverting,
a son of the gode Runolf.  All these were heathens; and besides
them there were many more, -- some men of power, others common
men of no property.  There came also from Iceland considerable
people, who, by Thangbrand's help, had been made Christians;
namely, Gissur the white, a son of Teit Ketilbjornson; and his
mother was Alof, daughter of herse Bodvar, who was the son of
Vikingakare.  Bodvar's brother was Sigurd, father of Eirik
Bjodaskalle, whose daughter Astrid was King Olaf's mother. 
Hjalte Skeggjason was the name of another Iceland man, who was
married to Vilborg, Gissur the White's daughter.  Hjalte was also
a Christian; and King Olaf was very friendly to his relations
Gissur and Hjalte, who live with him.  But the Iceland men who
directed the ships, and were heathens, tried to sail away as soon
as the king came to the town of Nidaros, for they were told the
king forced all men to become Christians; but the wind came stiff
against them, and drove them back to Nidarholm.  They who
directed the ships were Thorarin Nefjulson, the skald Halfred
Ottarson, Brand the Generous, and Thorleik, Brand's son.  It was
told the king that there were Icelanders with ships there, and
all were heathen, and wanted to fly from a meeting with the king.
Then the king sent them a message forbidding them to sail, and
ordering them to bring their ships up to the town, which they
did, but without discharging the cargoes.  (They carried on their
dealings and held a market at the king's pier.  In spring they
tried three times to slip away, but never succeeded; so they
continued lying at the king's pier.  It happened one fine day
that many set out to swim for amusement, and among them was a man
who distinguished himself above the others in all bodily
exercises.  Kjartan challenged Halfred Vandredaskald to try
himself in swimming against this man, but he declined it.  "Then
will I make a trial," said Kjartan, casting off his clothes, and
springing into the water.  Then he set after the man, seizes hold
of his foot, and dives with him under water.  They come up again,
and without speaking a word dive again, and are much longer under
water than the first time.  They come up again, and without
saying a word dive a third time, until Kjartan thought it was
time to come up again, which, however, he could in no way
accomplish, which showed sufficiently the difference in their
strength.  They were under water so long that Kjartan was almost
drowned.  They then came up, and swam to land.  This Northman
asked what the Icelander's name was.  Kjartan tells his name.

He says, "Thou art a good swimmer; but art thou expert also in
other exercises?"

Kjartan replied, that such expertness was of no great value.

The Northman asks, "Why dost thou not inquire of me such things
as I have asked thee about?"

Kjartan replies, "It is all one to me who thou art, or what thy
name is."

"Then will I," says he, "tell thee: I am Olaf Trygvason."

He asked Kjartan much about Iceland, which he answered generally,
and wanted to withdraw as hastily as he could; but the king said,
"Here is a cloak which I will give thee, Kjartan."  And Kjartan
took the cloak with many thanks.)" (1)


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The part included in parenthesis is not found in the
     original text of "Heimskringla", but taken from "Codex
     Frisianus".



89. BAPTISM OF THE ICELANDERS.

When Michaelmas came, the king had high mass sung with great
splendour.  The Icelanders went there, listening to the fine
singing and the sound of the bells; and when they came back to
their ships every man told his opinion of the Christian man's
worship.  Kjartan expressed his pleasure at it, but most of the
others scoffed at it; and it went according to the proverb, "the
king had many ears," for this was told to the king.  He sent
immediately that very day a message to Kjartan to come to him. 
Kjartan went with some men, and the king received him kindly.  
Kjartan was a very stout and handsome man, and of ready and
agreeable speech.  After the king and Kjartan had conversed a
little, the king asked him to adopt Christianity.  Kjartan
replies, that he would not say no to that, if he thereby obtained
the king's friendship; and as the king promised him the fullest
friendship, they were soon agreed.  The next day Kjartan was
baptized, together with his relation Bolle Thorlakson, and all
their fellow-travelers.  Kjartan and Bolle were the king's guests
as long as they were in their white baptismal clothes, and the
king had much kindness for them.  Wherever they came they were
looked upon as people of distinction.



90. HALFRED VANDREDASKALD BAPTIZED.

As King Olaf one day was walking in the street some men met him,
and he who went the foremost saluted the king.  The king asked
the man his name, and he called himself Halfred.

"Art thou the skald?" said the king.

"I can compose poetry," replied he.

"Wilt thou then adopt Christianity, and come into my service?"
asked the king.

"If I am baptized," replies he, "it must be on one condition, --
that thou thyself art my godfather; for no other will I have."

The king replies, "That I will do."  And Halfred was baptized,
the king holding him during the baptism.

Afterwards the king said, "Wilt thou enter into my service?"

Halfred replied, "I was formerly in Earl Hakon's court; but now I
will neither enter into thine nor into any other service, unless
thou promise me it shall never be my lot to be driven away from
thee."

"It has been reported to me," said the king, "that thou are
neither so prudent nor so obedient as to fulfil my commands."

"In that case," replied Halfred, "put me to death."

"Thou art a skald who composes difficulties," says the king; "but
into my service, Halfred, thou shalt be received."

Halfred says, "if I am to be named the composer of difficulties,
what cost thou give me, king, on my name-day?"

The king gave him a sword without a scabbard, and said, "Now
compose me a song upon this sword, and let the word sword be in
every line of the strophe." Halfred sang thus:

     "This sword of swords is my reward.
     For him who knows to wield a sword,
     And with his sword to serve his lord,
     Yet wants a sword, his lot is hard.
     I would I had my good lord's leave
     For this good sword a sheath to choose:
     I'm worth three swords when men use,
     But for the sword-sheath now I grieve."

Then the king gave him the scabbard, observing that the word
sword was wanting in one line of his strophe.  "But there instead
are three swords in one of the lines," says Halfred.  "That is
true," replies the king. -- Out of Halfred's lays we have taken
the most of the true and faithful accounts that are here related
about Olaf Trygvason.



91. THANGBRAND RETURNS FROM ICELAND.

The same harvest (A.D. 999) Thangbrand the priest came back from
Iceland to King Olaf, and told the ill success of his journey;
namely, that the Icelanders had made lampoons about him; and that
some even sought to kill him, and there was little hope of that
country ever being made Christian.  King Olaf was so enraged at
this, that he ordered all the Icelanders to be assembled by sound
of horn, and was going to kill all who were in the town, but
Kjartan, Gissur, and Hjalte, with the other Icelanders who had
become Christians, went to him, and said, "King, thou must not
fail from thy word -- that however much any man may irritate
thee, thou wilt forgive him if he turn from heathenism and become
Christian.  All the Icelanders here are willing to be baptized;
and through them we may find means to bring Christianity into
Iceland: for there are many amongst them, sons of considerable
people in Iceland, whose friends can advance the cause; but the
priest Thangbrand proceeded there as he did here in the court,
with violence and manslaughter, and such conduct the people there
would not submit to."  The king harkened to those remonstrances;
and all the Iceland men who were there were baptized.



92. OF KING OLAF'S FEATS.

King Olaf was more expert in all exercises than any man in Norway
whose memory is preserved to us in sagas; and he was stronger and
more agile than most men, and many stories are written down about
it.  One is that he ascended the Smalsarhorn, and fixed his
shield upon the very peak.  Another is, that one of his followers
had climbed up the peak after him, until he came to where he
could neither get up nor down; but the king came to his help,
climbed up to him, took him under his arm, and bore him to the
flat ground.  King Olaf could run across the oars outside of the
vessel while his men were rowing the Serpent.  He could play with
three daggers, so that one was always in the air, and he took the
one falling by the handle.  He could walk all round upon the
ship's rails, could strike and cut equally well with both hands,
and could cast two spears at once.  King Olaf was a very merry
frolicsome man; gay and social; was very violent in all respects;
was very generous; was very finical in his dress, but in battle
he exceeded all in bravery.  He was distinguished for cruelty
when he was enraged, and tortured many of his enemies.  Some he
burnt in fire; some he had torn in pieces by mad dogs; some he
had mutilated, or cast down from high precipices.  On this
account his friends were attached to him warmly, and his enemies
feared him greatly; and thus he made such a fortunate advance in
his undertakings, for some obeyed his will out of the friendliest
zeal, and others out of dread.



93. BAPTISM OF LEIF EIRIKSON.

Leif, a son of Eirik the Red, who first settled in Greenland,
came this summer (A.D. 999) from Greenland to Norway; and as he
met King Olaf he adopted Christianity, and passed the winter
(A.D. 1000) with the king.



94. FALL OF KING GUDROD.

Gudrod, a son of Eirik Bloodaxe and Gunhild, had been ravaging in
the west countries ever since he fled from Norway before the Earl
Hakon.  But the summer before mentioned (A.D. 999), where King
Olaf Trygvason had ruled four years over Norway, Gudrod came to
the country, and had many ships of war with him.  He had sailed
from England; and when he thought himself near to the Norway
coast, he steered south along the land, to the quarter where it
was least likely King Olaf would be.  Gudrod sailed in this way
south to Viken; and as soon as he came to the land he began to
plunder, to subject the people to him, and to demand that they
should accept of him as king.  Now as the country people saw that
a great army was come upon them, they desired peace and terms.
They offered King Gudrod to send a Thing-message over all the
country, and to accept of him at the Thing as king, rather than
suffer from his army; but they desired delay until a fixed day,
while the token of the Thing's assembling was going round through
the land.  The king demanded maintenance during the time this
delay lasted.  The bondes preferred entertaining the king as a
guest, by turns, as long as he required it; and the king accepted
of the proposal to go about with some of his men as a guest from
place to place in the land, while others of his men remained to
guard the ships.  When King Olaf's relations, Hyrning and
Thorgeir, heard of this, they gathered men, fitted out ships, and
went northwards to Viken.  They came in the night with their men
to a place at which King Gudrod was living as a guest, and
attacked him with fire and weapons; and there King Gudrod fell,
and most of his followers.  Of those who were with his ships some
were killed, some slipped away and fled to great distances; and
now were all the sons of Eirik and Gunhild dead.



95. BUILDING OF THE SHIP LONG SERPENT.

The winter after, King Olaf came from Halogaland (A.D. 1000), he
had a great vessel built at Hladhamrar, which was larger than any
ship in the country, and of which the beam-knees are still to be
seen.  The length of keel that rested upon the grass was seventy-
four ells.  Thorberg Skafhog was the man's name who was the
master-builder of the ship; but there were many others besides,
-- some to fell wood, some to shape it, some to make nails, some
to carry timber; and all that was used was of the best.  The ship
was both long and broad and high-sided, and strongly timbered.

While they were planking the ship, it happened that Thorberg had
to go home to his farm upon some urgent business; and as he
remained there a long time, the ship was planked up on both sides
when he came back.  In the evening the king went out, and
Thorberg with him, to see how the vessel looked, and everybody
said that never was seen so large and so beautiful a ship of
war.  Then the king returned to the town.  Early next morning the
king returns again to the ship, and Thorberg with him.  The
carpenters were there before them, but all were standing idle
with their arms across.  The king asked, "what was the matter?"
They said the ship was destroyed; for somebody had gone from,
stem to stern, and cut one deep notch after the other down the
one side of the planking.  When the king came nearer he saw it
was so, and said, with an oath, "The man shall die who has thus
destroyed the vessel out of envy, if he can be discovered, and I
shall bestow a great reward on whoever finds him out."

"I can tell you, king," said Thorberg, "who has done this piece
of work." --

"I don't think," replies the king, "that any one is so likely to
find it out as thou art."

Thorberg says, "I will tell you, king, who did it.  I did it
myself."

The king says, "Thou must restore it all to the same condition as
before, or thy life shall pay for it."

Then Thorberg went and chipped the planks until the deep notches
were all smoothed and made even with the rest; and the king and
all present declared that the ship was much handsomer on the side
of the hull which Thorberg, had chipped, and bade him shape the
other side in the same way; and gave him great thanks for the
improvement.  Afterwards Thorberg was the master builder of the
ship until she was entirely finished.  The ship was a dragon,
built after the one the king had captured in Halogaland; but this
ship was far larger, and more carefully put together in all her
parts.  The king called this ship Serpent the Long, and the
other Serpent the Short.  The long Serpent had thirty-four
benches for rowers.  The head and the arched tail were both gilt,
and the bulwarks were as high as in sea-going ships.  This ship
was the best and most costly ship ever made in Norway.



96. EARL EIRIK, THE SON OF HAKON.

Earl Eirik, the son of Earl Hakon, and his brothers, with many
other valiant men their relations, had left the country after
Earl Hakon's fall.  Earl Eirik went eastwards to Svithjod, to
Olaf, the Swedish king, and he and his people were well received.
King Olaf gave the earl peace and freedom in the land, and great
fiefs; so that he could support himself and his men well.  Thord
Kolbeinson speaks of this in the verses before given.  Many
people who fled from the country on account of King Olaf
Trygvason came out of Norway to Earl Eirik; and the earl resolved
to fit out ships and go a-cruising, in order to get property for
himself and his people.  First he steered to Gotland, and lay
there long in summer watching for merchant vessels sailing
towards the land, or for vikings.  Sometimes he landed and
ravaged all round upon the sea-coasts.  So it is told in the
"Banda-drapa": --

     "Eirik, as we have lately heard,
     Has waked the song of shield and sword --
     Has waked the slumbering storm of shields
     Upon the vikings' water-fields:
     From Gotland's lonely shore has gone
     Far up the land, and battles won:
     And o'er the sea his name is spread,
     To friends a shield, to foes a dread."

Afterwards Earl Eirik sailed south to Vindland, and at Stauren
found some viking ships, and gave them battle.  Eirik gained the
victory, and slew the vikings.  So it is told in the "Banda-
drapa": --

     "Earl Eirik, he who stoutly wields
     The battle-axe in storm of shields,
     With his long ships surprised the foe
     At Stauren, and their strength laid low
     Many a corpse floats round the shore;
     The strand with dead is studded o'er:
     The raven tears their sea-bleached skins --
     The land thrives well when Eirik wins."



97. EIRIK'S FORAY ON THE BALTIC COASTS.

Earl Eirik sailed back to Sweden in autumn, and staid there all
winter (A.D. 997); but in the spring fitted out his war force
again, and sailed up the Baltic.  When he came to Valdemar's
dominions he began to plunder and kill the inhabitants, and burn
the dwellings everywhere as he came along, and to lay waste the
country.  He came to Aldeigiuburg, and besieged it until he took
the castle; and he killed many people, broke down and burned the
castle, and then carried destruction all around far and wide in
Gardarike.  So it is told in the "Banda-drapa": --

     "The generous earl, brave and bold,
     Who scatters his bright shining gold,
     Eirik with fire-scattering hand,
     Wasted the Russian monarch's land, --
     With arrow-shower, and storm of war,
     Wasted the land of Valdemar.
     Aldeiga burns, and Eirik's might
     Scours through all Russia by its light."

Earl Eirik was five years in all on this foray; and when he
returned from Gardarike he ravaged all Adalsysla and Eysysla, and
took there four viking ships from the Danes and killed every man
on board.  So it is told in the "Banda-drapa": --

     "Among the isles flies round the word,
     That Eirik's blood-devouring sword
     Has flashed like fire in the sound,
     And wasted all the land around.
     And Eirik too, the bold in fight,
     Has broken down the robber-might
     Of four great vikings, and has slain
     All of the crew -- nor spared one Dane.
     In Gautland he has seized the town,
     In Syssels harried up and down;
     And all the people in dismay
     Fled to the forests far away.
     By land or sea, in field or wave,
     What can withstand this earl brave?
     All fly before his fiery hand --
     God save the earl, and keep the land."

When Eirik had been a year in Sweden he went over to Denmark
(A.D. 996) to King Svein Tjuguskeg, the Danish king, and courted
his daughter Gyda.  The proposal was accepted, and Earl Eirik
married Gyda; and a year after (A.D. 997) they had a son, who was
called Hakon.  Earl Eirik was in the winter in Denmark, or
sometimes in Sweden; but in summer he went a-cruising.



98. KING SVEIN'S MARRIAGE.

The Danish king, Svein Tjuguskeg, was married to Gunhild, a
daughter of Burizleif, king of the Vinds.  But in the times we
have just been speaking of it happened that Queen Gunhild fell
sick and died.  Soon after King Svein married Sigrid the Haughty,
a daughter of Skoglartoste, and mother of the Swedish king Olaf;
and by means of this relationship there was great friendship
between the kings and Earl Eirik, Hakon's son.



99. KING BURIZLEIF'S MARRIAGE.

Burizleif, the king of the Vinds, complained to his relation Earl
Sigvalde, that the agreement was broken which Sigvalde had made
between King Svein and King Burizleif, by which Burizleif was to
get in marriage Thyre, Harald's daughter, a sister of King Svein:
but that marriage had not proceeded, for Thyre had given positive
no to the proposal to marry her to an old and heathen king.
"Now," said King Burizleif to Earl Sigvalde, "I must have the
promise fulfilled."  And he told Earl Sigvalde to go to Denmark,
and bring him Thyre as his queen.  Earl Sigvalde loses no time,
but goes to King Svein of Denmark, explains to him the case; and
brings it so far by his persuasion, that the king delivered his
sister Thyre into his hands.  With her went some female
attendants, and her foster-father, by name Ozur Agason, a man of
great power, and some other people.  In the agreement between the
king and the earl, it was settled that Thyre should have in
property the possessions which Queen Gunhild had enjoyed in
Vindland, besides other great properties as bride-gifts.  Thyre
wept sorely, and went very unwillingly.  When the earl came to
Vindland, Burizleif held his wedding with Queen Thyre, and
received her in marriage; bus as long as she was among heathens
she would neither eat nor drink with them, and this lasted for
seven days.



100. OLAF GETS THYRE IN MARRIAGE.

It happened one night that Queen Thyre and Ozur ran away in the
dark, and into the woods, and, to be short in our story, came at
last to Denmark.  But here Thyre did not dare to remain, knowing
that if her brother King Svein heard of her, he would send her
back directly to Vindland.  She went on, therefore, secretly to
Norway, and never stayed her journey until she fell in with King
Olaf, by whom she was kindly received.  Thyre related to the king
her sorrows, and entreated his advice in her need, and protection
in his kingdom.  Thyre was a well-spoken woman, and the king had
pleasure in her conversation.  He saw she was a handsome woman,
and it came into his mind that she would be a good match; so he
turns the conversation that way, and asks if she will marry him.
Now, as she saw that her situation was such that she could not
help herself, and considered what a luck it was for her to marry
so celebrated a man, she bade him to dispose himself of her hand
and fate; and, after nearer conversation, King Olaf took Thyre in
marriage.  This wedding was held in harvest after the king
returned from Halogaland (A.D. 999), and King Olaf and Queen
Thyre remained all winter (A.D. 1000) at Nidaros.

The following spring Queen Thyre complained often to King Olaf,
and wept bitterly over it, that she who had so great property in
Vindland had no goods or possessions here in the country that
were suitable for a queen; and sometimes she would entreat the
king with fine words to get her property restored to her, and
saying that King Burizleif was so great a friend of King Olaf
that he would not deny King Olaf anything if they were to meet.
But when King Olaf's friends heard of such speeches, they 
dissuaded him from any such expedition.  It is related at the
king one day early in spring was walking in the street, and met a
man in the market with many, and, for that early season,
remarkably large angelica roots.  The king took a great stalk of
the angelica in his hand, and went home to Queen Thyre's lodging.
Thyre sat in her room weeping as the king came in.  The king
said, "Set here, queen, is a great angelica stalk, which I give
thee."  She threw it away, and said, "A greater present Harald
Gormson gave to my mother; and he was not afraid to go out of the
land and take his own.  That was shown when he came here to
Norway, and laid waste the greater part of the land, and seized
on all the scat and revenues; and thou darest not go across the
Danish dominions for this brother of mine, King Svein."  As she
spoke thus, King Olaf sprang up, and answered with loud oath,
"Never did I fear thy brother King Svein; and if we meet he shall
give way before me!"



101. OLAF'S LEVY FOR WAR.

Soon after the king convoked a Thing in the town, and proclaimed
to all the public, that in summer would go abroad upon an
expedition out of the country, and would raise both ships and men
from every district; and at the same time fixed how many ships
would have from the whole Throndhjem fjord.  Then he sent his
message-token south and north, both along the sea-coast and up in
the interior of the country, to let an army be gathered.  The
king ordered the Long Serpent to be put into the water, along
with all his other ships both small and great.  He himself
steered the Long Serpent.  When the crews were taken out for the
ships, they were so carefully selected that no man on board the
Long Serpent was older than sixty or younger than twenty years,
and all were men distinguished for strength and courage.  Those
who were Olaf's bodyguard were in particular chosen men, both of
the natives and of foreigners, and the boldest and strongest.



102. CREW ON BOARD OF THE LONG SERPENT.

Ulf the Red was the name of the man who bore King Olaf's banner,
and was in the forecastle of the Long Serpent; and with him was
Kolbjorn the marshal, Thorstein Uxafot, and Vikar of Tiundaland,
a brother of Arnliot Gelline.  By the bulkhead next the
forecastle were Vak Raumason from Gaut River, Berse the Strong,
An Skyte from Jamtaland, Thrand the Strong from Thelamork, and
his brother Uthyrmer.  Besides these were, of Halogaland men,
Thrand Skjalge and Ogmund Sande, Hlodver Lange from Saltvik, and
Harek Hvasse; together with these Throndhjem men -- Ketil the
High, Thorfin Eisle, Havard and his brothers from Orkadal.  The
following were in the fore-hold: Bjorn from Studla, Bork from the
fjords.  Thorgrim Thjodolfson from Hvin, Asbjorn and Orm, Thord
from Njardarlog, Thorstein the White from Oprustadar, Arnor from
More, Halstein and Hauk from the Fjord district, Eyvind Snak,
Bergthor Bestil, Halkel from Fialer, Olaf Dreng, Arnfin from
Sogn, Sigurd Bild, Einar from Hordaland, and Fin, and Ketil from
Rogaland and Grjotgard the Brisk.  The following were in the hold
next the mast: Einar Tambaskelfer, who was not reckoned as fully
experienced, being only eighteen years old; Thorstein Hlifarson,
Thorolf, Ivar Smetta, and Orm Skogarnef.  Many other valiant men
were in the Serpent, although we cannot tell all their names.  In
every half division of the hold were eight men, and each and all
chosen men; and in the fore-hold were thirty men.  It was a
common saying among people, that the Long Serpent's crew was as
distinguished for bravery, strength, and daring, among other men,
as the Long Serpent was distinguished among other ships.  Thorkel
Nefja, the king's brother, commanded the Short Serpent; and
Thorkel Dydril and Jostein, the king's mother's brothers, had the
Crane; and both these ships were well manned.  King Olaf had
eleven large ships from Throndhjem, besides vessels with twenty
rowers' benches, smaller vessels, and provision-vessels.



103. ICELAND BAPTIZED.

When King Olaf had nearly rigged out his fleet in Nidaros, he
appointed men over the Throndhjem country in all districts and
communities.  He also sent to Iceland Gissur the White and Hjalte
Skeggjason, to proclaim Christianity there; and sent with them a
priest called Thormod, along with several men in holy orders. 
But he retained with him, as hostages, four Icelanders whom he
thought the most important; namely, Kjartan Olafson, Haldor
Gudmundson, Kolbein Thordson, and Sverting Runolfson.  Of Gissur
and Hjalte's progress, it is related that they came to Iceland
before the Althing, and went to the Thing; and in that Thing
Christianity was introduced by law into Iceland, and in the
course of the summer all the people were baptized (A.D. 1000).



104. GREENLAND BAPTIZED

The same spring King Olaf also sent Leif Eirikson (A.D. 1000) to
Greenland to proclaim Christianity there, and Leif went there
that summer.  In the ocean he took up the crew of a ship which
had been lost, and who were clinging to the wreck.  He also found
Vinland the Good; arrived about harvest in Greenland; and had
with him for it a priest and other teachers, with whom he went to
Brattahild to lodge with his father Eirik.  People called him
afterwards Leif the Lucky: but his father Eirik said that his
luck and ill luck balanced each other; for if Leif had saved a
wreck in the ocean, he had brought a hurtful person with him to
Greenland, and that was the priest.



105. RAGNVALD SENDS MESSENGERS TO OLAF.

The winter after King Olaf had baptized Halogaland, he and Queen
Thyre were in Nidaros; and the summer before Queen Thyre had
brought King Olaf a boy child, which was both stout and
promising, and was called Harald, after its mother's father.  The
king and queen loved the infant exceedingly, and rejoiced in the
hope that it would grow up and inherit after its father; but it
lived barely a year after its birth, which both took much to
heart.  In that winter were many Icelanders and other clever men
in King Olaf's house, as before related.  His sister Ingebjorg,
Trygve's daughter, King Olaf's sister, was also at the court at
that time.  She was beautiful in  appearance, modest and frank
with the people, had a steady manly judgment, and was beloved of
all.  She was very fond of the Icelanders who were there, but
most of Kjartan Olafson, for he had been longer than the others
in the king's house; and he found it always amusing to converse
with her, for she had both understanding and cleverness in talk.
The king was always gay and full of mirth in his intercourse with
people; and often asked about the manners of the great men and
chiefs in the neighbouring countries, when strangers from Denmark
or Sweden came to see him.  The summer before Halfred
Vandredaskald had come from Gautland, where he had been with Earl
Ragnvald, Ulf's son, who had lately come to the government of
West Gautland.  Ulf, Ragnvald's father, was a brother of Sigurd
the Haughty; so that King Olaf the Swede and Earl Ragnvald were
brother's and sister's children.  Halfred told Olaf many things
about the earl: he said he was an able chief, excellently fitted
for governing, generous with money, brave and steady in
friendship.  Halfred said also the earl desired much the
friendship of King Olaf, and had spoken of making court
Ingebjorg, Trygve's daughter.  The same winter came ambassadors
from Gautland, and fell in with King Olaf in the north, in
Nidaros, and brought the message which Halfred had spoken of, --
that the earl desired to be King Olaf's entire friend, and wished
to become his brother-in-law by obtaining his sister Ingebjorg in
marriage.  Therewith the ambassadors laid before the king
sufficient tokens in proof that in reality they came from the
earl on this errand.  The king listened with approbation to their
speech; but said that Ingebjorg must determine on his assent to
the marriage.  The king then talked to his sister about the
matter, and asked her opinion about it.  She answered to this
effect, -- "I have been with you for some time, and you have
shown brotherly care and tender respect for me ever since you
came to the country.  I will agree therefore to your proposal
about my marriage, provided that you do not marry me to a heathen
man." The king said it should be as she wished.  The king then
spoke to the ambassadors; and it was settled before they
departed that in summer Earl Ragnvald should meet the king in the
east parts of the country, to enter into the fullest friendship
with each other, and when they met they would settle about the
marriage.  With this reply the earl's messengers went westward,
and King Olaf remained all winter in Nidaros in great splendour,
and with many people about him.



106. OLAF SENDS EXPEDITION TO VINDLAND.

King Olaf proceeded in summer with his ships and men southwards
along the land (and past Stad.  With him were Queen Thyre and
Ingebjorg, Trygveis daughter, the king's sister).  Many of his
friends also joined him, and other persons of consequence who had
prepared themselves to travel with the king.  The first man among
these was his brother-in-law, Erling Skjalgson, who had with him
a large ship of thirty benches of rowers, and which was in every
respect well equipt.  His brothers-in-law Hyrning and Thorgeir
also joined him, each of whom for himself steered a large vessel;
and many other powerful men besides followed him.  (With all this
war-force he sailed southwards along the land; but when he came
south as far as Rogaland he stopped there, for Erling Skjalgson
had prepared for him a splendid feast at Sole.  There Earl 
Ragnvald, Ulf's son, from Gautland, came to meet the king, and to
settle the business which had been proposed ;n winter in the
messages between them, namely, the marriage with Ingebjorg the
king's sister.  Olaf received him kindly; and when the matter
came to be spoken of, the king said he would keep his word, and
marry his sister Ingebjorg to him, provided he would accept the
true faith, and make all his subjects he ruled over in his land
be baptized; The earl agreed to this, and he and all his
followers were baptized.  Now was the feast enlarged that Erling
had prepared, for the earl held his wedding there with Ingebjorg
the king's sister.  King Olaf had now married off all his
sisters.  The earl, with Ingebjorg, set out on his way home; and
the king sent learned men with him to baptize the people in
Gautland, and to teach them the right faith and morals.  The king
and the earl parted in the greatest friendship.)



107. OLAF'S EXPEDITION VINDLAND.

(After his sister Ingebjorg's wedding, the king made ready in all
haste to leave the country with his army, which was both great
and made up of fine men.)  When he left the land and sailed
southwards he had sixty ships of war, with which he sailed past
Denmark, and in through the Sound, and on to Vindland.  He
appointed a meeting with King Burizleif; and when the kings met,
they spoke about the property which King Olaf demanded, and the
conference went off peaceably, as a good account was given of the
properties which King Olaf thought himself entitled to there.  He
passed here much of the summer, and found many of his old
friends.



108. CONSPIRACY AGAINST KING OLAF.

The Danish king, Svein Tjuguskeg, was married, as before related,
to Sigrid the Haughty.  Sigrid was King Olaf Trygvason's greatest
enemy; the cause of which, as before said, was that King Olaf had
broken off with her, and had struck her in the face.  She urged
King Svein much to give battle to King Olaf Trygvason; saying
that he had reason enough, as Olaf had married his sister Thyre
without his leave, "and that your predecessors would not have
submitted to."  Such persuasions Sigrid had often in her mouth;
and at last she brought it so far that Svein resolved firmly on
doing so.  Early in spring King Svein sent messengers eastward
into Svithjod, to his son-in-law Olaf, the Swedish king, and to
Earl Eirik; and informed them that King Olaf of Norway was
levying men for an expedition, and intended in summer to go to
Vindland.  To this news the Danish king added an invitation to
the Swedish king and Earl Eirik to meet King Svein with an army,
so that all together they might make an attack; on King Olaf
Trygvason.  The Swedish king and Earl Eirik were ready enough for
this, and immediately assembled a great fleet and an army through
all Svithjod, with which they sailed southwards to Denmark, and
arrived there after King Olaf Trygvason had sailed to the
eastward.  Haldor the Unchristian tells of this in his lay on
Earl Eirik: --

     "The king-subduer raised a host
     Of warriors on the Swedish coast.
     The brave went southwards to the fight,
     Who love the sword-storm's gleaming light;
     The brave, who fill the wild wolf's mouth,
     Followed bold Eirik to the south;
     The brave, who sport in blood -- each one
     With the bold earl to sea is gone."

The Swedish king and Earl Eirik sailed to meet the Danish king,
and they had all, when together, an immense force.



109. EARL SIGVALDE'S TREACHEROUS PLANS.

At the same time that king Svein sent a message to Svithjod for
an army, he sent Earl Sigvalde to Vindland to spy out King Olaf
Trygvason's proceedings, and to bring it about by cunning devices
that King Svein and King Olaf should fall in with each other.  So
Sigvalde sets out to go to Vindland.  First, he came to Jomsborg,
and then he sought out King Olaf Trygvason.  There was much
friendship in their conversation, and the earl got himself into
great favour with the king.  Astrid, the Earl's wife, King
Burizleif's daughter, was a great friend of King Olaf Trygvason,
particularly on account of the connection which had been between
them when Olaf was married to her sister Geira.  Earl Sigvalde
was a prudent, ready-minded man; and as he had got a voice in
King Olaf's council, he put him off much from sailing homewards,
finding various reasons for delay.  Olaf's people were in the
highest degree dissatisfied with this; for the men were anxious
to get home, and they lay ready to sail, waiting only for a wind.
At last Earl Sigvalde got a secret message from Denmark that the
Swedish king's army was arrived from the east, and that Earl
Eirik's also was ready; and that all these chiefs had resolved to
sail eastwards to Vindland, and wait for King Olaf at an island
which is called Svold.  They also desired the earl to contrive
matters so that they should meet King Olaf there.



110. KING OLAF'S VOYAGE FROM VINDLAND.

There came first a flying report to Vindland that the Danish
king, Svein, had fitted out an army; and it was soon whispered
that he intended to attack King Olaf.  But Earl Sigvalde says to
King Olaf, "It never can be King Svein's intention to venture
with the Danish force alone, to give battle to thee with such a
powerful army; but if thou hast any suspicion that evil is on
foot, I will follow thee with my force (at that time it was
considered a great matter to have Jomsborg vikings with an army),
and I will give thee eleven well-manned ships."  The king
accepted this offer; and as the light breeze of wind that came
was favourable, he ordered the ships to get under weigh, and the
war-horns to sound the departure.  The sails were hoisted and all
the small vessels, sailing fastest, got out to sea before the
others.  The earl, who sailed nearest to the king's ship, called
to those on board to tell the king to sail in his keel-track:
"For I know where the water is deepest between the islands and in
the sounds, and these large ships require the deepest."  Then the
earl sailed first with his eleven ships, and the king followed
with his large ships, also eleven in number; but the whole of the
rest of the fleet sailed out to sea.  Now when Earl Sigvalde came
sailing close under the island Svold, a skiff rowed out to inform
the earl that the Danish king's army was lying in the harbour
before them.  Then the earl ordered the sails of his vessels to
be struck, and they rowed in under the island.  Haldor the
Unchristian says: --

     "From out the south bold Trygve's son
     With one-and-seventy ships came on,
     To dye his sword in bloody fight,
     Against the Danish foeman's might.
     But the false earl the king betrayed;
     And treacherous Sigvalde, it is said,
     Deserted from King Olaf's fleet,
     And basely fled, the Danes to meet."

It is said here that King Olaf and Earl Sigvalde had seventy sail
of vessels: and one more, when they sailed from the south.



111. CONSULTATION OF THE KINGS.

The Danish King Svein, the Swedish King Olaf, and Earl Eirik,
were there with all their forces (1000).  The weather being fine
and clear sunshine, all these chiefs, with a great suite, went
out on the isle to see the vessels sailing out at sea, and many
of them crowded together; and they saw among them one large and
glancing ship.  The two kings said, "That is a large and very
beautiful vessel: that will be the Long Serpent."

Earl Eirik replied, "That is not the Long Serpent."  And he was
right; for it was the ship belonging to Eindride of Gimsar.

Soon after they saw another vessel coming sailing along much
larger than the first; then says King Svein, "Olaf Trygvason must
be afraid, for he does not venture to sail with the figure-head
of the dragon upon his ship."

Says Earl Eirik, "That is not the king's ship yet; for I know
that ship by the coloured stripes of cloth in her sail.  That is
Erling Skialgson's.  Let him sail; for it is the better for us
that the ship is away from Olaf's fleet, so well equipt as she
is."

Soon after they saw and knew Earl Sigvalde's ships, which turned
in and laid themselves under the island.  Then they saw three
ships coming along under sail, and one of them very large.  King
Svein ordered his men to go to their ships, "for there comes the
Long Serpent."

Earl Eirik says, "Many other great and stately vessels have they
besides the Long Serpent.  Let us wait a little."

Then said many, "Earl Eirik will not fight and avenge his father;
and it is a great shame that it should be told that we lay here
with so great a force, and allowed King Olaf to sail out to sea
before our eyes."

But when they had spoken thus for a short time, they saw four
ships coming sailing along, of which one had a large dragon-head
richly gilt.  Then King Svein stood up and said, "That dragon
shall carry me this evening high, for I shall steer it."

Then said many, "The Long Serpent is indeed a wonderfully large
and beautiful vessel, and it shows a great mind to have built
such a ship."

Earl Eirik said so loud that several persons heard him, "If King
Olaf had no ether vessels but only that one, King Svein would
never take it from him with the Danish force alone."

Thereafter all the people rushed on board their ships, took down
the tents, and in all haste made ready for battle.

While the chiefs were speaking among themselves as above related,
they saw three very large ships coming sailing along, and at last
after them a fourth, and that was the Long Serpent.  Of the large
ships which had gone before, and which they had taken for the
Long Serpent, the first was the Crane; the one after that was the
Short Serpent; and when they really, saw the Long Serpent, all
knew, and nobody had a word to say against it, that it must be
Olaf Trygvason who was sailing in such a vessel; and they went to
their ships to arm for the fight.

An agreement had been concluded among the chiefs, King Svein,
King Olaf the Swede, and Earl Eirik, that they should divide
Norway among them in three parts, in case they succeeded against
Olaf Trygvason; but that he of the chiefs who should first board
the Serpent should have her, and all the booty found in her, and
each should have the ships he cleared for himself.  Earl Eirik
had a large ship of war which he used upon his viking
expeditions; and there was an iron beard or comb above on both
sides of the stem, and below it a thick iron plate as broad as
the combs, which went down quite to the gunnel.



112. OF KING OLAF'S PEOPLE.

When Earl Sigvalde with his vessels rowed in under the island,
Thorkel Dydril of the Crane, and the other ship commanders who
sailed with him, saw that he turned his ships towards the isle,
and thereupon let fall the sails, and rowed after him, calling
out, and asking why he sailed that way.  The Earl answered, that
he was waiting for king Olaf, as he feared there were enemies in
the water.  They lay upon their oars until Thorkel Nefia came up
with the Short Serpent and the three ships which followed him.
When they told them the same they too struck sail, and let the
ships drive, waiting for king Olaf.  But when the king sailed in
towards the isle, the whole enemies' fleet came rowing within
them out to the Sound.  When they saw this they begged the king
to hold on his way, and not risk battle with so great a force.
The king replied, high on the quarter-deck where he stood,
"Strike the sails; never shall men of mine think of flight.  I
never fled from battle.  Let God dispose of my life, but flight I
shall never take."  It was done as the king commanded.  Halfred
tells of it thus: --

     "And far and wide the saying bold
     Of the brave warrior shall be told.
     The king, in many a fray well tried,
     To his brave champions round him cried,
     `My men shall never learn from me
     From the dark weapon-cloud to flee.'
     Nor were the brave words spoken then
     Forgotten by his faithful men."



113. OLAF'S SHIPS PREPARED FOR BATTLE.

King Olaf ordered the war-horns to sound for all his ships to
close up to each other.  The king's ship lay in the middle of the
line, and on one side lay the Little Serpent, and on the other
the Crane; and as they made fast the stems together (1), the Long
Serpent's stem and the short Serpent's were made fast together;
but when the king saw it he called out to his men, and ordered
them to lay the larger ship more in advance, so that its stern
should not lie so far behind in the fleet.

Then says Ulf the Red, "If the Long Serpent is to lie as much
more ahead of the other ships as she is longer than them, we
shall have hard work of it here on the forecastle."

The king replies, "I did not think I had a forecastle man afraid
as well as red."

Says Ulf, "Defend thou the quarterdeck as I shall the
forecastle."

The king had a bow in his hands, and laid an arrow on the string,
and aimed at Ulf.

Ulf said, "Shoot another way, king, where it is more needful: my
work is thy gain."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The mode of fighting in sea battles appears, from this and
     many other descriptions, to have been for each party to bind
     together the stems and sterns of their own ships, forming
     them thus into a compact body as soon aa the fleets came
     within fighting distance, or within spears' throw.  They
     appear to have fought principally from the forecastles; and
     to have used grappling irons for dragging a vessel out of
     the line, or within boarding distance. -- L.



114. OF KING OLAF.

King Olaf stood on the Serpent's quarterdeck, high over the
others.  He had a gilt shield, and a helmet inlaid with gold;
over his armour he had a short red coat, and was easy to be
distinguished from other men.  When King Olaf saw that the
scattered forces of the enemy gathered themselves together under
the banners of their ships, he asked, "Who is the chief of the
force right opposite to us?"

He was answered, that it was King Svein with the Danish army.

The king replies, "We are not afraid of these soft Danes, for
there is no bravery in them; but who are the troops on the right
of the Danes?"

He was answered, that it was King Olaf with the Swedish forces.

"Better it were," says King Olaf, "for these Swedes to be sitting
at home killing their sacrifices, than to be venturing under our
weapons from the Long Serpent.  But who owns the large ships on
the larboard side of the Danes?"

"That is Earl Eirik Hakonson," say they.

The king replies, "He, methinks, has good reason for meeting us;
and we may expect the sharpest conflict with these men, for they
are Norsemen like ourselves."



115. THE BATTLE BEGINS.

The kings now laid out their oars, and prepared to attack (A.D.
1000).  King Svein laid his ship against the Long Serpent. 
Outside of him Olaf the Swede laid himself, and set his ship's
stern against the outermost ship of King Olaf's line; and on the
other side lay Earl Eirik.  Then a hard combat began.  Earl
Sigvalde held back with the oars on his ships, and did not join
the fray.  So says Skule Thorsteinson, who at that time was with
Earl Eirik: --

     "I followed Sigvalde in my youth,
     And gallant Eirik, and in truth
     The' now I am grown stiff and old,
     In the spear-song I once was bold.
     Where arrows whistled on the shore
     Of Svold fjord my shield I bore,
     And stood amidst the loudest clash
     When swords on shields made fearful crash."

And Halfred also sings thus: --

     "In truth I think the gallant king,
     Midst such a foemen's gathering,
     Would be the better of some score
     Of his tight Throndhjem lads, or more;
     For many a chief has run away,
     And left our brave king in the fray,
     Two great kings' power to withstand,
     And one great earl's, with his small band,
     The king who dares such mighty deed
     A hero for his skald would need."



116. FLIGHT OF SVEIN AND OLAF THE SWEDE.

This battle was one of the severest told of, and many were the
people slain.  The forecastle men of the Long Serpent, the Little
Serpent, and the Crane, threw grapplings and stem chains into
King Svein's ship, and used their weapons well against the people
standing below them, for they cleared the decks of all the ships
they could lay fast hold of; and King Svein, and all the men who
escaped, fled to other vessels, and laid themselves out of
bow-shot.  It went with this force just as King Olaf Trygvason
had foreseen.  Then King Olaf the Swede laid himself in their
place; but when he came near the great ships it went with him as
with them, for he lost many men and some ships, and was obliged
to get away.  But Earl Eirik laid his ship side by side with the
outermost of King Olaf's ships, thinned it of men, cut the
cables, and let it drive.  Then he laid alongside of the next,
and fought until he had cleared it of men also.  Now all the
people who were in the smaller ships began to run into the
larger, and the earl cut them loose as fast as he cleared them of
men.  The Danes and Swedes laid themselves now out of shooting
distance all around Olaf's ship; but Earl Eirik lay always close
alongside of the ships, and used hid swords and battle-axes, and
as fast as people fell in his vessel others, Danes and Swedes,
came in their place.  So says Haldor, the Unchristian: --

     "Sharp was the clang of shield and sword,
     And shrill the song of spears on board,
     And whistling arrows thickly flew
     Against the Serpent's gallant crew.
     And still fresh foemen, it is said,
     Earl Eirik to her long side led;
     Whole armies of his Danes and Swedes,
     Wielding on high their blue sword-blades."

Then the fight became most severe, and many people fell.  But at
last it came to this, that all King Olaf Trygvason's ships were
cleared of men except the Long Serpent, on board of which all who
could still carry their arms were gathered.  Then Earl Eirik lay
with his ship by the side of the Serpent, and the fight went on
with battle-axe and sword.  So says Haldor: --

     "Hard pressed on every side by foes,
     The Serpent reels beneath the blows;
     Crash go the shields around the bow!
     Breast-plates and breasts pierced thro' and thro!
     In the sword-storm the Holm beside,
     The earl's ship lay alongside
     The king's Long Serpent of the sea --
     Fate gave the earl the victory."



117. OF EARL EIRIK.

Earl Eirik was in the forehold of his ship, where a cover of
shields (1) had been set up.  In the fight, both hewing weapons,
sword, and axe, and the thrust of spears had been used; and all
that could be used as weapon for casting was cast.  Some used
bows, some threw spears with the hand.  So many weapons were cast
into the Serpent, and so thick flew spears and arrows, that the
shields could scarcely receive them, for on all sides the Serpent
was surrounded by war-ships.  Then King Olaf's men became so mad
with rage, that they ran on board of the enemies ships, to get at
the people with stroke of sword and kill them; but many did not
lay themselves so near the Serpent, in order to escape the close
encounter with battle-axe or sword; and thus the most of Olaf's
men went overboard and sank under their weapons, thinking they
were fighting on plain ground.  So says Halfred: --

     "The daring lads shrink not from death; --
     O'erboard they leap, and sink beneath
     The Serpent's keel: all armed they leap,
     And down they sink five fathoms deep.
     The foe was daunted at the cheers;
     The king, who still the Serpent steers,
     In such a strait -- beset with foes --
     Wanted but some more lads like those."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Both in land and sea fights the commanders appear to have
     been protected from missile weapons, -- stones, arrows,
     spears, -- by a shieldburg: that is, by a party of men
     bearing shields surrounding them in such a way that the
     shields were a parapet, covering those within the circle. 
     The Romans had a similar military arrangement of shields in
     sieges -- the testudo. -- L.



118. OF EINAR TAMBARSKELVER.

Einar Tambarskelver, one of the sharpest of bowshooters, stood by
the mast, and shot with his bow.  Einar shot an arrow at Earl
Eirik, which hit the tiller end just above the earl's head so
hard that it entered the wood up to the arrow-shaft.  The earl
looked that way, and asked if they knew who had shot; and at the
same moment another arrow flew between his hand and his side, and
into the stuffing of the chief's stool, so that the barb stood
far out on the other side.  Then said the earl to a man called
Fin, -- but some say he was of Fin (Laplander) race, and was a
superior archer, -- "Shoot that tall man by the mast."  Fin shot;
and the arrow hit the middle of Einar's bow just at the moment
that Einar was drawing it, and the bow was split in two parts.

"What is that."cried King Olaf, "that broke with such a noise?"

"Norway, king, from thy hands," cried Einar.

"No!  not quite so much as that," says the king; "take my bow,
and shoot," flinging the bow to him.

Einar took the bow, and drew it over the head of the arrow.  "Too
weak, too weak," said he, "for the bow of a mighty king!" and,
throwing the bow aside, he took sword and shield, and fought
Valiantly.



119. OLAF GIVES HIS MEN SHARP SWORDS.

The king stood on the gangways of the Long Serpent. and shot the
greater part of the day; sometimes with the bow, sometimes with
the spear, and always throwing two spears at once.  He looked
down over the ship's sides, and saw that his men struck briskly
with their swords, and yet wounded but seldom.  Then he called
aloud, "Why do ye strike so gently that ye seldom cut?"  One
among the people answered, "The swords are blunt and full of
notches."  Then the king went down into the forehold, opened the
chest under the throne, and took out many sharp swords, which he
handed to his men; but as he stretched down his right hand with
them, some observed that blood was running down under his steel
glove, but no one knew where he was wounded.



120. THE SERPENT BOARDED.

Desperate was the defence in the Serpent, and there was the
heaviest destruction of men done by the forecastle crew, and
those of the forehold, for in both places the men were chosen
men, and the ship was highest, but in the middle of the ship the
people were thinned.  Now when Earl Eirik saw there were but few
people remaining beside the ship's mast, he determined to board;
and he entered the Serpent with four others.  Then came Hyrning,
the king's brother-in-law, and some others against him, and there
was the most severe combat; and at last the earl was forced to
leap back on board his own ship again, and some who had
accompanied him were killed, and others wounded.  Thord
Kolbeinson alludes to this: --

     "On Odin's deck, all wet with blood,
     The helm-adorned hero stood;
     And gallant Hyrning honour gained,
     Clearing all round with sword deep stained.
     The high mountain peaks shall fall,
     Ere men forget this to recall."

Now the fight became hot indeed, and many men fell on board the
Serpent; and the men on board of her began to be thinned off, and
the defence to be weaker.  The earl resolved to board the Serpent
again, and again he met with a warm reception.  When the
forecastle men of the Serpent saw what he was doing, they went
aft and made a desperate fight; but so many men of the Serpent
had fallen, that the ship's sides were in many places quite bare
of defenders; and the earl's men poured in all around into the
vessel, and all the men who were still able to defend the ship
crowded aft to the king, and arrayed themselves for his defence.
So says Haldor the Unchristian: --

     "Eirik cheers on his men, --
     `On to the charge again!'
     The gallant few
     Of Olaf's crew
     Must refuge take
     On the quarter-deck.
     Around the king
     They stand in ring;
     Their shields enclose
     The king from foes,
     And the few who still remain
     Fight madly, but in vain.
     Eirik cheers on his men --
     `On to the charge again!'"



121. THE SERPENT'S DECKS CLEARED.

Kolbjorn the marshal, who had on clothes and arms like the kings,
and was a remarkably stout and handsome man, went up to king on
the quarter-deck.  The battle was still going on fiercely even in
the forehold (1).  But as many of the earl's men had now got into
the Serpent as could find room, and his ships lay all round her,
and few were the people left in the Serpent for defence against
so great a force; and in a short time most of the Serpent's men 
fell, brave and stout though they were.  King Olaf and Kolbjorn
the marshal both sprang overboard, each on his own side of the
ship; but the earl's men had laid out boats around the Serpent,
and killed those who leaped overboard.  Now when the king had
sprung overboard, they tried to seize him with their hands, and
bring him to Earl Eirik; but King Olaf threw his shield over his
head, and sank beneath the waters.  Kolbjorn held his shield
behind him to protect himself from the spears cast at him from
the ships which lay round the Serpent, and he fell so upon his
shield that it came under him, so that he could not sink so
quickly.  He was thus taken and brought into a boat, and they
supposed he was the king.  He was brought before the earl; and
when the earl saw it was Kolbjorn, and not the king, he gave him
his life.  At the same moment all of King Olaf's men who were in
life sprang overboard from the Serpent; and Thorkel Nefia, the
king's brother, was the last of all the men who sprang overboard.
It is thus told concerning the king by Halfred: --

     "The Serpent and the Crane
     Lay wrecks upon the main.
     On his sword he cast a glance, --
     With it he saw no chance.
     To his marshal, who of yore
     Many a war-chance had come o'er,
     He spoke a word -- then drew in breath,
     And sprang to his deep-sea death."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  From the occasional descriptions of vessels in this and
     other battles, it may be inferred that even the Long
     Serpent, described in the 95tb chapter as of 150 feet of
     keel was only docked fore and aft; the thirty-four benches
     for rowers occupying the open area in the middle, and
     probably gangways running along the side for communicating
     from the quarter-deck to the forcastle. -- L.



122. REPORT AMONG THE PEOPLE.

Earl Sigvalde. as before related, came from Vindland, in company
with King Olaf, with ten ships; but the eleventh ship was manned
with the men of Astrid, the king's daughter, the wife of Earl
Sigvalde.  Now when King Olaf sprang overboard, the whole army
raised a shout of victory; and then Earl Sigvalde and his men put
their oars in the water and rowed towards the battle.  Haldor the
Unchristian tells of it thus: --

     "Then first the Vindland vessels came
     Into the fight with little fame;
     The fight still lingered on the wave,
     Tho' hope was gone with Olaf brave.
     War, like a full-fed ravenous beast,
     Still oped her grim jaws for the feast.
     The few who stood now quickly fled,
     When the shout told -- `Olaf is dead!'"

But the Vindland cutter, in which Astrid's men were, rowed back
to Vindland; and the report went immediately abroad and was told
by many, that King Olaf had cast off his coat-of-mail under
water, and had swum, diving under the longships, until he came to
the Vindland cutter, and that Astrid's men had conveyed him to
Vindland: and many tales have been made since about the
adventures of Olaf the king.  Halfred speaks thus about it: --

     "Does Olaf live? or is he dead?
     Has he the hungry ravens fed?
     I scarcely know what I should say,
     For many tell the tale each way.
     This I can say, nor fear to lie,
     That he was wounded grievously --
     So wounded in this bloody strife,
     He scarce could come away with life."

But however this may have been, King Olaf Trygvason never came
back again to his kingdom of Norway.  Halfred Vandredaskald
speaks also thus about it:

     "The witness who reports this thing
     Of Trygvason, our gallant king,
     Once served the king, and truth should tell,
     For Olaf hated lies like hell.
     If Olaf 'scaped from this sword-thing,
     Worse fate, I fear, befel our king
     Than people guess, or e'er can know,
     For he was hemm'd in by the foe.
     From the far east some news is rife
     Of king sore wounded saving life;
     His death, too sure, leaves me no care
     For cobweb rumours in the air.
     It never was the will of fate
     That Olaf from such perilous strait
     Should 'scape with life!  this truth may grieve --
     `What people wish they soon believe.'"



123. OF EARL EIRIK, THE SON OF HAKON.

By this victory Earl Eirik Hakonson became owner of the Long
Serpent, and made a great booty besides; and he steered the
Serpent from the battle.  So says Haldor: --

     "Olaf, with glittering helmet crowned,
     Had steered the Serpent through the Sound;
     And people dressed their boats, and cheered
     As Olaf's fleet in splendour steered.
     But the descendent of great Heming,
     Whose race tells many a gallant sea-king,
     His blue sword in red life-blood stained,
     And bravely Olaf's long ship gained."

Svein, a son of Earl Hakon, and Earl Eirik's brother, was engaged
at this time to marry Holmfrid, a daughter of King Olaf the
Swedish king.  Now when Svein the Danish king, Olaf the Swedish
king, and Earl Eirik divided the kingdom of Norway between them,
King Olaf got four districts in the Throndhjem country, and also
the districts of More and Raumsdal; and in the east part of the
land he got Ranrike, from the Gaut river to Svinasund.  Olaf gave
these dominions into Earl Svein's hands, on the same conditions
as the sub kings or earls had held them formerly from the upper-
king of the country.  Earl Eirik got four districts in the
Throndhjem country, and Halogaland, Naumudal, the Fjord
districts, Sogn, Hordaland, Rogaland, and North Agder, all the
way to the Naze.  So says Thord Kolbeinson: --

     "All chiefs within our land
     On Eirik's side now stand:
     Erling alone, I know
     Remains Earl Eirik's foe.
     All praise our generous earl, --
     He gives, and is no churl:
     All men are well content
     Fate such a chief has sent.
     From Veiga to Agder they,
     Well pleased, the earl obey;
     And all will by him stand,
     To guard the Norsemen's land.
     And now the news is spread
     That mighty Svein is dead,
     And luck is gone from those
     Who were the Norsemen's foes."

The Danish king Svein retained Viken as he had held it before,
but he gave Raumarike and Hedemark to Earl Eirik.  Svein Hakonson
got the title of earl from Olaf the Swedish king.  Svein was one 
of the handsomest men ever seen.  The earls Eirik and Svein both
allowed themselves to be baptized, and took up the true faith;
but as long as they ruled in Norway they allowed every one to do
as he pleased in holding by his Christianity.  But, on the other
hand, they held fast by the old laws, and all the old rights and
customs of the land, and were excellent men and good rulers. 
Earl Eirik had most to say of the two brothers in all matters of
government.



SAGA OF OLAF HARALDSON. (1)


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Olaf Haraldson the Saint's Saga is the longest, the most
important, and the most finished of all the sagas in
"Heimskringla".  The life of Olaf will be found treated more or
less freely in "Agrip", in "Historia Norvegiae", in "Thjodrek the
Monk", in the legendary saga, and in "Fagrskinna".  Other old
Norse literature relating to this epoch:

Are's "Islendingabok", "Landnama", "Kristni Saga", "Biskupa-
sogur", "Njala", "Gunlaugs Saga", "Ormstungu", "Bjarnar Saga
Hitdaelakappa", "Hallfredar Thattr Vandraedaskalde", "Eyrbyggia",
"Viga Styrs Saga", "Laxdaela", "Fostbraedra", "Gretla",
"Liosvetninga", "Faereyinga", "Orkneyinga".

Olaf Haraldson was born 995, went as a viking at the age of
twelve, 1007; visited England, one summer and three winters,
1009-1012; in France two summers and one winter, 1012-1013;
spent the winter in Normandy, 1014; returned to Norway and was
recognized as King, April 3, 1015; fled from Norway the winter
of 1028-1029; fell at Stiklestad, July 29 (or August 31), 1030.

Skalds quoted in this saga are: -- Ottar Svarte, Sigvat Skald,
Thord Kolbeinson, Berse Torfason, Brynjolf, Arnor Jarlaskald,
Thord Siarekson, Harek, Thorarin Loftunga, Halvard Hareksblese,
Bjarne Gulbraskald, Jokul Bardson, Thormod Kolbrunarskald,
Gissur, Thorfin Mun, Hofgardaref.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  King Olaf the Saint reigned from about the year 1015 to
     1030.  The death of King Olaf Trygvason was in the year
     1000: and Earl Eirik held the government for the Danish and
     Swedish kings about fifteen years. -- L.



1. OF SAINT OLAF'S BRINGING UP.

Olaf, Harald Grenske's son, was brought up by his stepfather
Sigurd Syr and his mother Asta.  Hrane the Far-travelled lived in
the house of Asta, and fostered this Olaf Haraldson.  Olaf came
early to manhood, was handsome in countenance, middle-sized in
growth, and was even when very young of good understanding and
ready speech.  Sigurd his stepfather was a careful householder,
who kept his people closely to their work, and often went about
himself to inspect his corn-rigs and meadowland, the cattle, and
also the smith-work, or whatsoever his people had on hand to do.



2. OF OLAF AND KING SIGURD SYR.

It happened one day that King Sigurd wanted to ride from home,
but there was nobody about the house; so he told his stepson Olaf
to saddle his horse.  Olaf went to the goats' pen, took out the
he-goat that was the largest, led him forth, and put the king's
saddle on him, and then went in and told King Sigurd he had
saddled his riding horse.  Now when King Sigurd came out and saw
what Olaf had done, he said "It is easy to see that thou wilt
little regard my orders; and thy mother will think it right that
I order thee to do nothing that is against thy own inclination. 
I see well enough that we are of different dispositions, and that
thou art far more proud than I am."  Olaf answered little, but
went his way laughing.



3. OF RING OLAF'S ACCOMPLISHMENTS.

When Olaf Haraldson grew up he was not tall, but middle-sized in
height, although very thick, and of good strength.  He had light
brown hair, and a broad face, which was white and red.  He had
particularly fine eyes, which were beautiful and piercing, so
that one was afraid to look him in the face when he was angry.
Olaf was very expert in all bodily exercises, understood well to
handle his bow, and was distinguished particularly in throwing
his spear by hand: he was a great swimmer, and very handy, and
very exact and knowing in all kinds of smithwork, whether he
himself or others made the thing.  He was distinct and acute in
conversation, and was soon perfect in understanding and strength.
He was beloved by his friends and acquaintances, eager in his
amusements, and one who always liked to be the first, as it was
suitable he should be from his birth and dignity.  He was called
Olaf the Great.



4. KING OLAF'S WAR EXPEDITION.

Olaf Haraldson was twelve years old when he, for the first time,
went on board a ship of war (A.D. 1007).  His mother Asta got
Hrane, who was called the foster-father of kings, to command a
ship of war and take Olaf under his charge; for Hrane had often
been on war expeditions.  When Olaf in this way got a ship and
men, the crew gave him the title of king; for it was the custom
that those commanders of troops who were of kingly descent, on
going out upon a viking cruise, received the title of king
immediately although they had no land or kingdom.  Hrane sat at
the helm; and some say that Olaf himself was but a common rower,
although he was king of the men-at-arms.  They steered east along
the land, and came first to Denmark.  So says Ottar Svarte, in
his lay which he made about King Olaf: --

     "Young was the king when from his home
     He first began in ships to roam,
     His ocean-steed to ride
     To Denmark o'er the tide.
     Well exercised art thou in truth --
     In manhood's earnest work, brave youth!
     Out from the distant north
     Mighty hast thou come forth."

Towards autumn he sailed eastward to the Swedish dominions, and
there harried and burnt all the country round; for he thought he
had good cause of hostility against the Swedes, as they killed
his father Harald.  Ottar Svarte says distinctly that he came
from the east, out by way of Denmark: --

     "Thy ship from shore to shore,
     With many a well-plied car,
     Across the Baltic foam is dancing. --
     Shields, and spears, and helms glancing!
     Hoist high the swelling sail
     To catch the freshening gale!
     There's food for the raven-flight
     Where thy sail-winged ship shall light;
          Thy landing-tread
          The people dread;
     And the wolf howls for a feast
     On the shore-side in the east."



5. OLAF'S FIRST BATTLE.

The same autumn Olaf had his first battle at Sotasker, which lies
in the Swedish skerry circle.  He fought there with some vikings,
whose leader was Sote.  Olaf had much fewer men, but his ships
were larger, and he had his ships between some blind rocks, which
made it difficult for the vikings to get alongside; and Olaf's
men threw grappling irons into the ships which came nearest, drew
them up to their own vessels, and cleared them of men.  The
vikings took to flight after losing many men.  Sigvat the skald
tells of this fight in the lay in which he reckons up King Olaf's
battles: --

     "They launch his ship where waves are foaming --
          To the sea shore
          Both mast and oar,
     And sent his o'er the seas a-roaming.
     Where did the sea-king first draw blood?
          In the battle shock
          At Sote's rock;
     The wolves howl over their fresh food."



6. FORAY IN SVITHJOD.

King Olaf steered thereafter eastwards to Svithjod, and into the
Lag (the Maelar lake), and ravaged the land on both sides.  He
sailed all the way up to Sigtuna, and laid his ships close to the
old Sigtuna.  The Swedes say the stone-heaps are still to be seen
which Olaf had laid under the ends of the gangways from the shore
to the ships.  When autumn was advanced, Olaf Haraldson heard
that Olaf the Swedish king was assembling an army, and also that
he had laid iron chains across Stoksund (the channel between the
Maelar lake and the sea), and had laid troops there; for the
Swedish king thought that Olaf Haraldson would be kept in there
till frost came, and he thought little of Olaf's force knowing he
had but few people.  Now when King Olaf Haraldson came to
Stoksund he could not get through, as there was a castle west of
the sound, and men-at-arms lay on the south; and he heard that
the Swedish king was come there with a great army and many ships.
He therefore dug a canal across the flat land Agnafit out to the
sea.  Over all Svithjod all the running waters fall into the
Maelar lake; but the only outlet of it to the sea is so small
that many rivers are wider, and when much rain or snow falls the
water rushes in a great cataract out by Stoksund, and the lake
rises high and floods the land.  It fell heavy rain just at this
time; and as the canal was dug out to the sea, the water and
stream rushed into it.  Then Olaf had all the rudders unshipped
and hoisted all sail aloft.  It was blowing a strong breeze
astern, and they steered with their oars, and the ships came in a
rush over all the shallows, and got into the sea without any
damage.  Now went the Swedes to their king, Olaf, and told him
that Olaf the Great had slipped out to sea; on which the king was
enraged against those who should have watched that Olaf did not
get away.  This passage has since been called King's Sound; but
large vessels cannot pass through it, unless the waters are very
high.  Some relate that the Swedes were aware that Olaf had cut
across the tongue of land, and that the water was falling out
that way; and they flocked to it with the intention to hinder
Olaf from getting away, but the water undermined the banks on
each side so that they fell in with the people, and many were
drowned: but the Swedes contradict this as a false report, and
deny the loss of people.  The king sailed to Gotland in harvest,
and prepared to plunder; but the Gotlanders assembled, and sent
men to the king, offering him a scat.  The king found this would
suit him, and he received the scat, and remained there all
winter.  So says Ottar Svarte: --

     "Thou seaman-prince! thy men are paid:
     The scat on Gotlanders is laid;
          Young man or old
          To our seamen bold
          Must pay, to save his head:
          The Yngling princes fled,
          Eysvssel people bled;
     Who can't defend the wealth they have
     Must die, or share with the rover brave."



7. THE SECOND BATTLE.

It is related here that King Olaf, when spring set in, sailed
east to Eysyssel, and landed and plundered; the Eysyssel men came
down to the strand and grave him battle.  King Olaf gained the
victory, pursued those who fled, and laid waste the land with
fire and sword.  It is told that when King Olaf first came to
Eysvssel they offered him scat, and when the scat was to be
brought down to the strand the king came to meet it with an armed
force, and that was not what the bondes there expected; for they
had brought no scat, but only their weapons with which they
fought against the king, as before related.  So says Sigvat the
skald: --

     "With much deceit and bustle
     To the heath of Eysyssel
     The bondes brought the king,
     To get scat at their weapon-thing.
     But Olaf was too wise
     To be taken by surprise;
     Their legs scarce bore them off
     O'er the common test enough."



8. THE THIRD BATTLE.

After this they sailed to Finland and plundered there, and went
up the country.  All the people fled to the forest, and they had
emptied their houses of all household goods.  The king went far
up the country, and through some woods, and came to some
dwellings in a valley called Herdaler, -- where, however, they
made but small booty, and saw no people; and as it was getting
late in the day, the king turned back to his ships.  Now when
they came into the woods again people rushed upon them from all
quarters, and made a severe attack.  The king told his men to
cover themselves with their shields, but before they got out of
the woods he lost many people, and many were wounded; but at
last, late in the evening, he got to the ships.  The Finlanders
conjured up in the night, by their witchcraft, a dreadful storm
and bad weather on the sea; but the king ordered the anchors to
be weighed and sail hoisted, and beat off all night to the
outside of the land.  The king's luck prevailed more than the
Finlanders' witchcraft; for he had the luck to beat round the
Balagard's side in the night. and so got out to sea.  But the
Finnish army proceeded on land, making the same progress as the
king made with his ships.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The third fight was at Herdaler, where
     The men of Finland met in war
     The hero of the royal race,
     With ringing sword-blades face to face.
     Off Balagard's shore the waves
     Ran hollow; but the sea-king saves
     His hard-pressed ship, and gains the lee
     Of the east coast through the wild sea."



9. THE FOURTH BATTLE IN SUDERVIK.

King Olaf sailed from thence to Denmark, where he met Thorkel the
Tall, brother of Earl Sigvalde, and went into partnership with
him; for he was just ready to set out on a cruise.  They sailed
southwards to the Jutland coast, to a place called Sudervik,
where they overcame many viking ships.  The vikings, who usually
have many people to command, give themselves the title of kings,
although they have no lands to rule over.  King Olaf went into
battle with them, and it was severe; but King Olaf gained the
victory, and a great booty.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Hark!  hark!  The war-shout
          Through Sudervik rings,
     And the vikings bring out
          To fight the two kings.
     Great honour, I'm told,
     Won these vikings so bold:
     But their bold fight was vain,
     For the two brave kings gain."



10. THE FIFTH BATTLE IN FRIESLAND.

King Olaf sailed from thence south to Friesland, and lay under
the strand of Kinlima in dreadful weather.  The king landed with
his men; but the people of the country rode down to the strand
against them, and he fought them.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Under Kinlima's cliff,
     This battle is the fifth.
     The brave sea-rovers stand
     All on the glittering sand;
     And down the horsemen ride
     To the edge of the rippling tide:
     But Olaf taught the peasant band
     To know the weight of a viking's hand."



11. DEATH OF KING SVEIN FORKED BEARD.

The king sailed from thence westward to England.  It was then the
case that the Danish king, Svein Forked Beard, was at that time
in England with a Danish army, and had been fixed there for some
time, and had seized upon King Ethelred's kingdom.  The Danes had
spread themselves so widely over England, that it was come so far
that King Ethelred had departed from the country, and had gone
south to Valland.  The same autumn that King Olaf came to
England, it happened that King Svein died suddenly in the night
in his bed; and it is said by Englishmen that Edmund the Saint
killed him, in the same way that the holy Mercurius had killed
the apostate Julian.  When Ethelred, the king of the English,
heard this in Flanders, he returned directly to England; and no
sooner was he come back, than he sent an invitation to all the
men who would enter into his pay, to join him in recovering the
country.  Then many people flocked to him; and among others, came
King Olaf with a great troop of Northmen to his aid.  They
steered first to London, and sailed into the Thames with their
fleet; but the Danes had a castle within.  On the other side of
the river is a great trading place, which is called Sudvirke.
There the Danes had raised a great work, dug large ditches, and
within had built a bulwark of stone, timber, and turf, where they
had stationed a strong army.  King Ethelred ordered a great
assault; but the Danes defended themselves bravely, and King
Ethelred could make nothing of it.  Between the castle and
Southwark (Sudvirke) there was a bridge, so broad that two
wagons could pass each other upon it.  On the bridge were raised
barricades, both towers and wooden parapets, in the direction of
the river, which were nearly breast high; and under the bridge
were piles driven into the bottom of the river.  Now when the
attack was made the troops stood on the bridge everywhere, and
defended themselves.  King Ethelred was very anxious to get
possession of the bridge, and he called together all the chiefs
to consult how they should get the bridge broken down.  Then said
King Olaf he would attempt to lay his fleet alongside of it, if
the other ships would do the same.  It was then determined in
this council that they should lay their war forces under the
bridge; and each made himself ready with ships and men.



12. THE SIXTH BATTLE.

King Olaf ordered great platforms of floating wood to be tied
together with hazel bands, and for this he took down old houses;
and with these, as a roof, he covered over his ships so widely,
that it reached over the ships' sides.  Under this screen he set
pillars so high and stout, that there both was room for swinging
their swords, and the roofs were strong enough to withstand the
stones cast down upon them.  Now when the fleet and men were
ready, they rode up along the river; but when they came near the
bridge, there were cast down upon them so many stones and missile
weapons, such as arrows and spears, that neither helmet nor
shield could hold out against it; and the ships themselves were
so greatly damaged, that many retreated out of it.  But King
Olaf, and the Northmen's fleet with him, rowed quite up under the
bridge, laid their cables around the piles which supported it,
and then rowed off with all the ships as hard as they could down
the stream.  The piles were thus shaken in the bottom, and were
loosened under the bridge.  Now as the armed troops stood thick
of men upon the bridge, and there were likewise many heaps of
stones and other weapons upon it, and the piles under it being
loosened and broken, the bridge gave way; and a great part of the
men upon it fell into the river, and all the ethers fled, some
into the castle, some into Southwark.  Thereafter Southwark was
stormed and taken.  Now when the people in the castle saw that
the river Thames was mastered, and that they could not hinder the
passage of ships up into the country, they became afraid,
surrendered the tower, and took Ethelred to be their king.  So
says Ottar Svarte: --

     "London Bridge is broken down. --
     Gold is won, and bright renown.
          Shields resounding,
          War-horns sounding,
     Hild is shouting in the din!
          Arrows singing,
          Mail-coats ringing --
     Odin makes our Olaf win!"

And he also composed these: --

     "King Ethelred has found a friend:
     Brave Olaf will his throne defend --
          In bloody fight
          Maintain his right,
          Win back his land
          With blood-red hand,
     And Edmund's son upon his throne replace --
     Edmund, the star of every royal race!"

Sigvat also relates as follows: --

     "At London Bridge stout Olaf gave
     Odin's law to his war-men brave --
          `To win or die!'
          And their foemen fly.
     Some by the dyke-side refuge gain --
     Some in their tents on Southwark plain!
          The sixth attack
          Brought victory back."



13. THE SEVENTH BATTLE.

King Olaf passed all the winter with King Ethelred, and had a
great battle at Hringmara Heath in Ulfkel's land, the domain
which Ulfkel Snilling at that time held; and here again the king
was victorious.  So says Sigvat the skald: --

     "To Ulfkel's land came Olaf bold,
     A seventh sword-thing he would hold.
     The race of Ella filled the plain --
     Few of them slept at home again!
     Hringmara heath
     Was a bed of death:
     Harfager's heir
     Dealt slaughter there."

And Ottar sings of this battle thus: --

     "From Hringmara field
          The chime of war,
     Sword striking shield,
          Rings from afar.
     The living fly;
     The dead piled high
     The moor enrich;
     Red runs the ditch."

The country far around was then brought in subjection to King
Ethelred: but the Thingmen (1) and the Danes held many castles,
besides a great part of the country.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Thing-men were hired men-at-arms; called Thing-men probably
     from being men above the class of thralls or unfree men, and
     entitled to appear at Things, as being udal-born to land at
     home.



14. EIGHTH AND NINTH BATTLES OF OLAF.

King Olaf was commander of all the forces when they went against
Canterbury; and they fought there until they took the town,
killing many people and burning the castle.  So says Ottar
Svarte: --

     "All in the grey of morn
          Broad Canterbury's forced.
     Black smoke from house-roofs borne
          Hides fire that does its worst;
     And many a man laid low
     By the battle-axe's blow,
     Waked by the Norsemen's cries,
     Scarce had time to rub his eyes."

Sigvat reckons this King Olaf's eighth battle: --

     "Of this eighth battle I can tell
     How it was fought, and what befell,
          The castle tower
          With all his power
          He could not take,
          Nor would forsake.
          The Perthmen fought,
          Nor quarter sought;
          By death or flight
          They left the fight.
     Olaf could not this earl stout
     From Canterbury quite drive out."

At this time King Olaf was entrusted with the whole land defence
of England, and he sailed round the land with his ships of War.
He laid his ships at land at Nyjamoda, where the troops of the
Thingmen were, and gave them battle and gained the victory.  So
says Sigvat the skald: --

     "The youthful king stained red the hair
     Of Angeln men, and dyed his spear
     At Newport in their hearts' dark blood:
     And where the Danes the thickest stood --
     Where the shrill storm round Olaf's head
     Of spear and arrow thickest fled.
     There thickest lay the Thingmen dead!
     Nine battles now of Olaf bold,
     Battle by battle, I have told."

King Olaf then scoured all over the country, taking scat of the
people and plundering where it was refused.  So says Ottar: --

     "The English race could not resist thee,
     With money thou madest them assist thee;
     Unsparingly thou madest them pay
     A scat to thee in every way;
     Money, if money could be got --
     Goods, cattle, household gear, if not.
     Thy gathered spoil, borne to the strand,
     Was the best wealth of English land."

Olaf remained here for three years (A.D. 1010-1012).



15. THE TENTH BATTLE.

The third year King Ethelred died, and his sons Edmund and Edward
took the government (A.D. 1012).  Then Olaf sailed southwards out
to sea, and had a battle at Hringsfjord, and took a castle
situated at Holar, where vikings resorted, and burnt the castle.
So says Sigvat the skald: --

     "Of the tenth battle now I tell,
     Where it was fought, and what befell.
     Up on the hill in Hringsfjord fair
     A robber nest hung in the air:
     The people followed our brave chief,
     And razed the tower of the viking thief.
     Such rock and tower, such roosting-place,
     Was ne'er since held by the roving race."



16. ELEVENTH, TWELFTH AND THIRTEENTH BATTLES.

Then King Olaf proceeded westwards to Grislupollar, and fought
there with vikings at Williamsby; and there also King Olaf gained
the victory.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The eleventh battle now I tell,
     Where it was fought, and what befell.
     At Grislupol our young fir's name
     O'ertopped the forest trees in fame:
     Brave Olaf's name -- nought else was heard
     But Olaf's name, and arm, and sword.
     Of three great earls, I have heard say,
     His sword crushed helm and head that day."

Next he fought westward on Fetlafjord, as Sigvat tells: --

     "The twelfth fight was at Fetlafjord,
     Where Olaf's honour-seeking sword
     Gave the wild wolf's devouring teeth
     A feast of warriors doomed to death."

From thence King Olaf sailed southwards to Seljupollar, where he
had a battle.  He took there a castle called Gunvaldsborg, which
was very large and old.  He also made prisoner the earl who ruled
over the castle and who was called Geirfin.  After a conference
with the men of the castle, he laid a scat upon the town and
earl, as ransom, of twelve thousand gold shillings: which was
also paid by those on whom it was imposed.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The thirteenth battle now I tell,
     Where it was fought, and what befell.
     In Seljupol was fought the fray,
     And many did not survive the day.
     The king went early to the shore,
     To Gunvaldsborg's old castle-tower;
     And a rich earl was taken there,
     Whose name was Geridin, I am sure."



17. FOURTEENTH BATTLE AND OLAF'S DREAM.

Thereafter King Olaf steered with his fleet westward to Karlsar,
and tarried there and had a fight.  And while King Olaf was lying
in Karlsa river waiting a wind, and intending to sail up to
Norvasund, and then on to the land of Jerusalem, he dreamt a
remarkable dream -- that there came to him a great and important
man, but of a terrible appearance withal, who spoke to him, and
told him to give up his purpose of proceeding to that land.
"Return back to thy udal, for thou shalt be king over Norway for
ever."  He interpreted this dream to mean that he should be king
over the country, and his posterity after him for a long time.



18. FIFTEENTH BATTLE.

After this appearance to him he turned about, and came to Poitou,
where he plundered and burnt a merchant town called Varrande.  Of
this Ottar speaks: --

     "Our young king, blythe and gay,
     Is foremost in the fray:
     Poitou he plunders, Tuskland burns, --
     He fights and wins where'er he turns."

And also Sigvat says: --

     "The Norsemen's king is on his cruise,
          His blue steel staining,
          Rich booty gaining,
     And all men trembling at the news.
     The Norsemen's kings up on the Loire:
          Rich Partheney
          In ashes lay;
     Far inland reached the Norsemen's spear."



19. OF THE EARLS OF ROUEN.

King Olaf had been two summers and one winter in the west in
Valland on this cruise; and thirteen years had now passed since
the fall of King Olaf Trygvason.  During this time earls had
ruled over Norway; first Hakon's sons Eirik and Svein, and
afterwards Eirik's sons Hakon and Svein.  Hakon was a sister's
son of King Canute, the son of Svein.  During this time there
were two earls in Valland, William and Robert; their father was
Richard earl of Rouen.  They ruled over Normandy.  Their sister
was Queen Emma, whom the English king Ethelred had married; and
their sons were Edmund, Edward the Good, Edwy, and Edgar. 
Richard the earl of Rouen was a son of Richard the son of William
Long Spear, who was the son of Rolf Ganger, the earl who first
conquered Normandy; and he again was a son of Ragnvald the
Mighty, earl of More, as before related.  From Rolf Ganger are
descended the earls of Rouen, who have long reckoned themselves
of kin to the chiefs in Norway, and hold them in such respect
that they always were the greatest friends of the Northmen; and
every Northman found a friendly country in Normandy, if he
required it.  To Normandy King Olaf came in autumn (A.D. 1013),
and remained all winter (A.D. 1014) in the river Seine in good
peace and quiet.



20. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

After Olaf Trygvason's fall, Earl Eirik gave peace to Einar
Tambaskelfer, the son of Eindride Styrkarson; and Einar went
north with the earl to Norway.  It is said that Einar was the
strongest man and the best archer that ever was in Norway.  His
shooting was sharp beyond all others; for with a blunt arrow he
shot through a raw, soft ox-hide, hanging over a beam.  He was
better than any man at running on snow-shoes, was a great man
at all exercises, was of high family, and rich.  The earls Eirik
and Svein married their sister Bergliot to Einar.  Their son was
named Eindride.  The earls gave Einar great fiefs in Orkadal, so
that he was one of the most powerful and able men in the
Throndhjem country, and was also a great friend of the earls, and
a great support and aid to them.



21. OF ERLING SKIALGSON.

When Olaf Trygvason ruled over Norway, he gave his brother-in-law
Erling half of the land scat, and royal revenues between the Naze
and Sogn.  His other sister he married to the Earl Ragnvald
Ulfson, who long ruled over West Gautland.  Ragnvald's father,
Ulf, was a brother of Sigrid the Haughty, the mother of Olaf the
Swedish king.  Earl Eirik was ill pleased that Erling Skialgson
had so large a dominion, and he took to himself all the king's
estates, which King Olaf had given to Erling.  But Erling levied,
as before, all the land scat in Rogaland; and thus the
inhabitants had often to pay him the land scat, otherwise he laid
waste their land.  The earl made little of the business, for no
bailiff of his could live there, and the earl could only come
there in guest-quarters, when he had a great many people with
him.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Olaf the king
     Thought the bonde Erling
     A man who would grace
     His own royal race.
     One sister the king
     Gave the bonde Erling;
     And one to an earl,
     And she saved him in peril."

Earl Eirik did not venture to fight with Erling, because he had
very powerful and very many friends, and was himself rich and
popular, and kept always as many retainers about him as if he
held a king's court.  Erling vas often out in summer on
plundering expeditions, and procured for himself means of living;
for he continued his usual way of high and splendid living,
although now he had fewer and less convenient fiefs than in the
time of his brother-in-law King Olaf Trygvason.  Erling was one
of the handsomest, largest, and strongest men; a better warrior
than any other; and in all exercises he was like King Olaf
himself.  He was, besides, a man of understanding, jealous in
everything he undertook, and a deadly man at arms.  Sigvat talks
thus of him: --

     "No earl or baron, young or old,
     Match with this bonde brave can hold.
     Mild was brave Erling, all men say,
     When not engaged in bloody fray:
     His courage he kept hid until
     The fight began, then foremost still
     Erling was seen in war's wild game,
     And famous still is Erling's name."

It was a common saying among the people, that Erling had been the
most valiant who ever held lands under a king in Norway.  Erlings
and Astrid s children were these -- Aslak, Skialg, Sigurd, Lodin,
Thorer, and Ragnhild, who was married to Thorberg Arnason. 
Erling had always with him ninety free-born men or more, and both
winter and summer it was the custom in his house to drink at the
mid-day meal according to a measure (1), but at the night meal
there was no measure in drinking.  When the earl was in the
neighbourhood he had 200 (2) men or more.  He never went to sea
with less than a fully-manned ship of twenty benches of rowers.
Erling had also a ship of thirty-two benches of rowers, which was
besides, very large for that size. and which he used in viking
cruises, or on an expedition; and in it there were 200 men at the
very least.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  There were silver-studs in a row from the rim to the bottom
     of the drinking born or cup; and as it went round each drank
     till the stud appeared above the liquor.  This was drinking
     by measure. -- L.
(2)  I.e., 240.



22. OF THE HERSE ERLING SKIALGSON.

Erling had always at home on his farm thirty slaves, besides
other serving-people.  He gave his slaves a certain day's work;
but after it he gave them leisure, and leave that each should
work in the twilight and at night for himself, and as he pleased.
He gave them arable land to sow corn in, and let them apply their
crops to their own use.  He laid upon each a certain quantity of
labour to work themselves free by doing it; and there were many
who bought their freedom in this way in one year, or in the
second year, and all who had any luck could make themselves free
within three years.  With this money he bought other slaves: and
to some of his freed people he showed how to work in the herring-
fishery, to others he showed some useful handicraft; and some
cleared his outfields and set up houses.  He helped all to
prosperity.



23. OF EARL EIRIK.

When Earl Eirik had ruled over Norway for twelve years. there
came a message to him from his brother-in-law King Canute, the
Danish king, that he should go with him on an expedition westward
to England; for Eirik was very celebrated for his campaigns, as
he had gained the victory in the two hardest engagements which
had ever been fought in the north countries.  The one was that in
which the Earls Hakon and Eirik fought with the Jomsborg vikings;
the other that in which Earl Eirik fought with King Olaf
Trygvason.  Thord Kolbeinson speaks of this: --

     "A song of praise
     Again I raise.
     To the earl bold
     The word is told,
     That Knut the Brave
     His aid would crave;
     The earl, I knew,
     To friend stands true."

The earl would not sleep upon the message of the king, but sailed
immediately out of the country, leaving behind his son Earl Hakon
to take care of Norway; and, as he was but seventeen years of
age, Einar Tambaskelfer was to be at his hand to rule the country
for him.

Eirik met King Canute in England, and was with him when he took
the castle of London.  Earl Eirik had a battle also to the
westward of the castle of London, and killed Ulfkel Snilling.  So
says Thord Kolbeinson: --

     "West of London town we passed,
     And our ocean-steeds made fast,
     And a bloody fight begin,
     Eng1and's lands to lose or win.
     Blue sword and shining spear
     Laid Ulfkel's dead corpse there,
     Our Thingmen hear the war-shower sounding
     Our grey arrows from their shields rebounding."

Earl Eirik was a winter in England, and had many battles there.
The following autumn he intended to make a pilgrimage to Rome,
but he died in England of a bloody flux.



24. THE MURDER OF EDMUND.

King Canute came to England the summer that King Ethelred died,
and had many battles with Ethelred's sons, in which the victory
was sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other.  Then King
Canute took Queen Emma in marriage; and their children were
Harald, Hardacanute, and Gunhild.  King Canute then made an
agreement with King Edmund, that each of them should have a half
of England.  In the same month Henry Strion murdered King Edmund.
King Canute then drove all Ethelred's sons out of England.  So
says Sigvat: --

     "Now all the sons of Ethelred
     Were either fallen, or had fled:
     Some slain by Canute, -- some they say,
     To save their lives had run away."



25. OLAF AND ETHELRED'S SONS.

King Ethelred's sons came to Rouen in Valland from England, to
their mother's brother, the same summer that King Olaf Haraldson
came from the west from his viking cruise, and they were all
during the winter in Normandy together.  They made an agreement
with each other that King Olaf should have Northumberland, if
they could succeed in taking England from the Danes.  Therefore
about harvest, Olaf sent his foster-father Hrane to England to
collect men-at-arms; and Ethelred's sons sent tokens to their
friends and relations with him.  King Olaf, besides, gave him
much money with him to attract people to them.  Hrane was all
winter in England, and got promises from many powerful men of
fidelity, as the people of the country would rather have native
kings over them; but the Danish power had become so great in
England, that all the people were brought under their dominion.



26. BATTLE OF KING OLAF.

In spring (A.D. 1014) King Olaf and King Ethelred's sons set out
together to the west, and came to a place in England called
Jungufurda, where they landed with their army and moved forward
against the castle.  Many men were there who had promised them
their aid.  They took the castle; and killed many people.  Now
when King Canute's men heard of this they assembled an army, and
were soon in such force that Ethelred's sons could not stand
against it; and they saw no other way left but to return to
Rouen.  Then King Olaf separated from them, and would not go back
to Valland, but sailed northwards along England, all the way to
Northumberland, where he put into a haven at a place called
Valde; and in a battle there with the townspeople and merchants
he gained the victory, and a great booty.



27. OLAF'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

King Olaf left his long-ships there behind, but made ready two
ships of burden; and had with him 220 men in them, well-armed,
and chosen people.  He sailed out to sea northwards in harvest,
but encountered a tremendous storm and they were in danger of
being lost; but as they had a chosen crew, and the king s luck
with them, all went on well.  So says Ottar: --

     "Olaf, great stem of kings, is brave --
     Bold in the fight, bold on the wave.
          No thought of fear
          Thy heart comes near.
     Undaunted, 'midst the roaring flood,
     Firm at his post each shipman stood;
          And thy two ships stout
          The gale stood out."

And further he says: --

     "Thou able chief!  with thy fearless crew
     Thou meetest, with skill and courage true,
          The wild sea's wrath
          On thy ocean path.
     Though waves mast-high were breaking round.
     Thou findest the middle of Norway's ground,
          With helm in hand
          On Saela's strand."

It is related here that King Olaf came from the sea to the very
middle of Norway; and the isle is called Saela where they landed,
and is outside of Stad.  King Olaf said he thought it must be a
lucky day for them, since they had landed at Saela in Norway; and
observed it was a good omen that it so happened.  As they were
going up in the isle, the king slipped with one foot in a place
where there was clay, but supported himself with the other foot.
Then said he "The king falls."  "Nay," replies Hrane, "thou didst
not fall, king, but set fast foot in the soil."  The king laughed
thereat, and said, "It may be so if God will."  They went down
again thereafter to their ships, and sailed to Ulfasund, where
they heard that Earl Hakon was south in Sogn, and was expected
north as soon as wind allowed with a single ship.



28. HAKON TAKEN PRISONER BY OLAF.

King Olaf steered his ships within the ordinary ships' course
when he came abreast of Fjaler district, and ran into
Saudungssund.  There he laid his two vessels one on each side of
the sound. with a thick cable between them.  At the same moment
Hakon, Earl Eirik's son, came rowing into the sound with a manned
ship; and as they thought these were but two merchant-vessels
that were lying in the sound, they rowed between them.  Then Olaf
and his men draw the cable up right under Hakon's ship's keel and
wind it up with the capstan.  As soon as the vessel's course was
stopped her stern was lifted up, and her bow plunged down; so
that the water came in at her fore-end and over both sides, and
she upset.  King Olaf's people took Earl Hakon and all his men
whom they could get hold of out of the water, and made them
prisoners; but some they killed with stones and other weapons,
and some were drowned.  So says Ottar: --

     "The black ravens wade
     In the blood from thy blade.
     Young Hakon so gay,
     With his ship, is thy prey:
     His ship, with its gear,
     Thou hast ta'en; and art here,
     Thy forefather's land
     From the earl to demand."

Earl Hakon was led up to the king's ship.  He was the handsomest
man that could be seen.  He had long hair, as fine as silk, bound
about his bead with a gold ornament.

When he sat down in the fore-hold, the king said to him, "It is
not false what is said of your family, that ye are handsome
people to look at; but now your luck has deserted you."

Hakon the earl replied, "It has always been the case that success
is changeable; and there is no luck in the matter.  It has gone
with your family as with mine, to have by turns the better lot. 
I am little beyond childhood in years; and at any rate we could
not have defended ourselves, as we did not expect any attack on
the way.  It may turn out better with us another time."

Then said King Olaf, "Dost thou not apprehend that thou art in
that condition that, hereafter, there can be neither victory nor
defeat for thee?"

The earl replies, "That is what thou only canst determine, king,
according to thy pleasure."

Olaf says, "What wilt thou give me, earl, if for this time I let
thee go, whole and unhurt?"

The earl asks what he would take.

"Nothing," says the king, "except that thou shalt leave the
country, give up thy kingdom, and take an oath that thou shalt
never go into battle against me."

The earl answered, that he would do so.  And now Earl Hakon took
the oath that he would never fight against Olaf, or seek to
defend Norway against him, or attack him; and King Olaf thereupon
gave him and all his men life and peace.  The earl got back the
ship which had brought him there, and he and his men rowed their
way.  Thus says Sigvat of him: --

     "In old Saudungs sound
     The king Earl Hakon found,
     Who little thought that there
     A foeman was so near.
     The best and fairest youth
     Earl Hakon was in truth,
     That speaks the Danish tongue,
     And of the race of great Hakon."



29. HAKON'S DEPARTURE FROM NORWAY.

After this (A.D. 1014) the earl made ready as fast as possible to
leave the country and sail over to England.  He met King Canute,
his mother's brother, there, and told him all that had taken
place between him and King Olaf.  King Canute received him
remarkably well, placed him in his court in his own house, and
gave him great power in his kingdom.  Earl Hakon dwelt a long
time with King Canute.  During the time Svein and Hakon ruled
over Norway, a reconciliation with Erling Skialgson was effected,
and secured by Aslak, Erling's son, marrying Gunhild, Earl
Svein's daughter; and the father and son, Erling and Aslak,
retained all the fiefs which King Olaf Trygvason had given to
Erling.  Thus Erling became a firm friend of the earl's, and
their mutual friendship was confirmed by oath.



30. ASTA RECEIVES HER SON OLAF.

King Olaf went now eastward along the land, holding Things with
the bondes all over the country.  Many went willingly with him;
but some, who were Earl Svein's friends or relations, spoke
against him.  Therefore King Olaf sailed in all haste eastward to
Viken; went in there with his ships; set them on the land; and
proceeded up the country, in order to meet his stepfather, Sigurd
Syr.  When he came to Vestfold he was received in a friendly way
by many who had been his father's friends or acquaintances; and
also there and in Folden were many of his family.  In autumn
(A.D. 1014) he proceeded up the country to his stepfather King
Sigurd's, and came there one day very early.  As Olaf was coming
near to the house, some of the servants ran beforehand to the
house, and into the room.  Olaf's mother, Asta, was sitting in
the room, and around her some of her girls.  When the servants
told her of King Olaf's approach, and that he might soon be
expected, Asta stood up directly, and ordered the men and girls
to put everything in the best order.  She ordered four girls to
bring out all that belonged to the decoration of the room and put
it in order with hangings and benches.  Two fellows brought straw
for the floor, two brought forward four-cornered tables and the
drinking-jugs, two bore out victuals and placed the meat on the
table, two she sent away from the house to procure in the
greatest haste all that was needed, and two carried in the ale;
and all the other serving men and girls went outside of the
house.  Messengers went to seek King Sigurd wherever he might be,
and brought to him his dress-clothes, and his horse with gilt
saddle, and his bridle, which was gilt and set with precious
stones.  Four men she sent off to the four quarters of the
country to invite all the great people to a feast, which she
prepared as a rejoicing for her son's return.  All who were
before in the house she made to dress themselves with the best
they had, and lent clothes to those who had none suitable.



31. KING SIGURD'S DRESS.

King Sigurd Syr was standing in his corn-field when the
messengers came to him and brought him the news, and also told
him all that Asta was doing at home in the house.  He had many
people on his farm.  Some were then shearing corn, some bound it
together, some drove it to the building, some unloaded it and put
it in stack or barn; but the king, and two men with him, went
sometimes into the field, sometimes to the place where the corn
was put into the barn.  His dress, it is told, was this: -- he
had a blue kirtle and blue breeches; shoes which were laced about
the legs; a grey cloak, and a grey wide-brimmed hat; a veil
before his face; a staff in his hand with a gilt-silver head on
it and a silver ring around it.  Of Sigurd's living and
disposition it is related that he was a very gain-making man who
attended carefully to his cattle and husbandry, and managed his
housekeeping himself.  He was nowise given to pomp, and was
rather taciturn.  But he was a man of the best understanding in
Norway, and also excessively wealthy in movable property.
Peaceful he was, and nowise haughty.  His wife Asta was generous
and high-minded.  Their children were, Guthorm, the eldest; then
Gunhild; the next Halfdan, Ingerid, and Harald.  The messengers
said to Sigurd, "Asta told us to bring thee word how much it lay
at her heart that thou shouldst on this occasion comport thyself
in the fashion of great men, and show a disposition more akin to
Harald Harfager's race than to thy mother's father's, Hrane Thin-
nose, or Earl Nereid the Old, although they too were very wise
men."  The king replies, "The news ye bring me is weighty, and ye
bring it forward in great heat.  Already before now Asta has been
taken up much with people who were not so near to her; and I see
she is still of the same disposition.  She takes this up with
great warmth; but can she lead her son out of the business with
the same splendour she is leading him into it?  If it is to
proceed so methinks they who mix themselves up in it regard
little property or life.  For this man, King Olaf, goes against a
great superiority of power; and the wrath of the Danish and
Swedish kings lies at the foot of his determination, if he
ventures to go against them."



32. OF THE FEAST.

When the king had said this he sat down, and made them take off
his shoes, and put corduvan boots on, to which he bound his gold
spurs.  Then he put off his cloak and coat, and dressed himself
in his finest clothes, with a scarlet cloak over all; girded on
his sword, set a gilded helmet upon his head, and mounted his
horse.  He sent his labouring people out to the neighbourhood,
and gathered to him thirty well-clothed men, and rode home with
them.  As they rode up to the house, and were near the room, they
saw on the other side of the house the banners of Olaf coming
waving; and there was he himself, with about 100 men all well
equipped.  People were gathered over all upon the house-tops.
King Sigurd immediately saluted his stepson from horseback in a
friendly way, and invited him and his men to come in and drink a
cup with him.  Asta, on the contrary, went up and kissed her son,
and invited him to stay with her; and land, and people, and all
the good she could do for him stood at his service.  King Olaf
thanked her kindly for her invitation.  Then she took him by the
hand, and led him into the room to the high-seat.  King Sigurd
got men to take charge of their clothes, and give their horses
corn; and then he himself went to his high-seat, and the feast
was made with the greatest splendour.



33. CONVERSATION OF OLAF AND SIGURD.

King Olaf had not been long here before he one day called his
stepfather King Sigurd, his mother Asta, and his foster-father
Hrane to a conference and consultation.  Olaf began thus: "It has
so happened," said he, "as is well known to you, that I have
returned to this country after a very long sojourn in foreign
parts, during all which time I and my men have had nothing for
our support but what we captured in war, for which we have often
hazarded both life and soul: for many an innocent man have we
deprived of his property, and some of their lives; and foreigners
are now sitting in the possessions which my father, his father,
and their forefathers for a long series of generations owned, and
to which I have udal right.  They have not been content with
this, but have taken to themselves also the properties of all our
relations who are descended from Harald Harfager.  To some they
have left little, to others nothing at all.  Now I will disclose
to you what I have long concealed in my own mind, that I intend
to take the heritage of my forefathers; but I will not wait upon
the Danish or Swedish king to supplicate the least thing from
them, although they for the time call that their property which
was Harald Harfager's heritage.  To say the truth, I intend
rather to seek my patrimony with battle-axe and sword, and that
with the help of all my friends and relations, and of those who
in this business will take my side.  And in this matter I will so
lay hand to the work that one of two things shall happen, --
either I shall lay all this kingdom under my rule which they got
into their hands by the slaughter of my kinsman Olaf Trygvason,
or I shall fall here upon my inheritance in the land of my
fathers.  Now I expect of thee, Sigurd, my stepfather, as well as
other men here in the country who have udal right of succession
to the kingdom, according to the law made by King Harald
Harfager, that nothing shall be of such importance to you as to
prevent you from throwing off the disgrace from our family of
being slow at supporting the man who comes forward to raise up
again our race.  But whether ye show any manhood in this affair
or not, I know the inclination of the people well, -- that all
want to be free from the slavery of foreign masters, and will
give aid and strength to the attempt.  I have not proposed this
matter to any before thee, because I know thou art a man of
understanding, and can best judge how this my purpose shall be
brought forward in the beginning, and whether we shall, in all
quietness, talk about it to a few persons, or instantly declare
it to the people at large.  I have already shown my teeth by
taking prisoner the Earl Hakon, who has now left the country, and
given me, under oath, the part of the kingdom which he had
before; and I think it will be easier to have Earl Svein alone to
deal with, than if both were defending the country against us."

King Sigurd answers, "It is no small affair, King Olaf, thou hast
in thy mind; and thy purpose comes more, methinks, from hasty
pride than from prudence.  But it may be there is a wide
difference between my humble ways and the high thoughts thou
hast; for whilst yet in thy childhood thou wast full always of
ambition and desire of command, and now thou art experienced in
battles, and hast formed thyself upon the manner of foreign
chiefs.  I know therefore well, that as thou hast taken this into
thy head, it is useless to dissuade thee from it; and also it is
not to be denied that it goes to the heart of all who have
courage in them, that the whole Harfager race and kingdom should
go to the ground.  But I will not bind myself by any promise,
before I know the views and intentions of other Upland kings; but
thou hast done well in letting me know thy purpose, before
declaring it publicly to the people.  I will promise thee,
however, my interest with the kings, and other chiefs, and
country people; and also, King Olaf, all my property stands to
thy aid, and to strengthen thee.  But we will only produce the
matter to the community so soon as we see some progress, and
expect some strength to this undertaking; for thou canst easily
perceive that it is a daring measure to enter into strife with
Olaf the Swedish king, and Canute, who is king both of Denmark
and England; and thou requirest great support under thee, if it
is to succeed.  It is not unlikely, in my opinion, that thou wilt
get good support from the people, as the commonalty always loves
what is new; and it went so before, when Olaf Trygvason came here
to the country, that all rejoiced at it, although he did not long
enjoy the kingdom."

When the consultation had proceeded so far, Asta took up the
word.  "For my part, my son, I am rejoiced at thy arrival, but
much more at thy advancing thy honour.  I will spare nothing for
that purpose that stands in my power, although it be but little
help that can be expected from me.  But if a choice could be
made, I would rather that thou shouldst be the supreme king of
Norway, even if thou shouldst not sit longer in thy kingdom than
Olaf Trygvason did, than that thou shouldst not be a greater king
than Sigurd Syr is, and die the death of old age."  With this the
conference closed.  King Olaf remained here a while with all his
men.  King Sigurd entertained them, day about, the one day with
fish and milk, the other day with flesh-meat and ale.



34. KINGS IN THE UPLAND DISTRICTS.

At that time there were many kings in the Uplands who had
districts to rule over, and the most of them were descended from
Harald Harfager.  In Hedemark two brothers ruled -- Hrorek and
Ring; in Gudbrandsdal, Gudrod; and there was also a king in
Raumarike; and one had Hadaland and Thoten; and in Valders also
there was a king.  With these district-kings Sigurd had a meeting
up in Hadaland, and Olaf Haraldson also met with them.  To these
district-kings whom Sigurd had assembled he set forth his stepson
Olaf's purpose, and asked their aid, both of men and in counsel
and consent; and represented to them how necessary it was to cast
off the yoke which the Danes and Swedes had laid upon them.  He
said that there was now a man before them who could head such an
enterprise; and he recounted the many brave actions which Olaf
had achieved upon his war-expeditions.

Then King Hrorek says, "True it is that Harald Harfager's kingdom
has gone to decay, none of his race being supreme king over
Norway.  But the people here in the country have experienced many
things.  When King Hakon, Athelstan's foster-son, was king, all
were content; but when Gunhild's sons ruled over the country, all
were so weary of their tyranny and injustice that they would
rather have foreign men as kings, and be themselves more their
own rulers; for the foreign kings were usually abroad and cared
little about the customs of the people if the scat they laid on
the country was paid.  When enmity arose between the Danish king
Harald and Earl Hakon, the Jomsborg vikings made an expedition
against Norway; then the whole people arose, and threw the
hostilities from themselves; and thereafter the people encouraged
Earl Hakon to keep the country, and defend it with sword and
spear against the Danish king.  But when he had set himself fast
in the kingdom with the help of the people, he became so hard and
overbearing towards the country-folks, that they would no longer
suffer him.  The Throndhjem people killed him, and raised to the
kingly power Olaf Trygvason, who was of the udal succession to
the kingdom, and in all respects well fitted to be a chief.  The
whole country's desire was to make him supreme king, and raise
again the kingdom which Harald Harfager had made for himself. 
But when King Olaf thought himself quite firmly seated in his
kingdom, no man could rule his own concerns for him.  With us
small kings he was so unreasonable, as to take to himself not
only all the scat and duties which Harald Harfager had levied
from us, but a great deal more.  The people at last had so little
freedom under him, that it was not allowed to every man to
believe in what god he pleased.  Now since he has been taken away
we have kept friendly with the Danish king; have received great
help from him when we have had any occasion for it; and have been
allowed to rule ourselves, and live in peace and quiet in the
inland country, and without any overburden.  I am therefore
content that things be as they are, for I do not see what better
rights I am to enjoy by one of my relations ruling over the
country; and if I am to be no better off, I will take no part in
the affair."

Then said King Ring, his brother, "I will also declare my opinion
that it is better for me, if I hold the same power and property
as now, that my relative is king over Norway, rather than a
foreign chief, so that our family may again raise its head in the
land.  It is, besides, my opinion about this man Olaf, that his
fate and luck must determine whether he is to obtain the kingdom
or not; and if he succeed in making himself supreme king, then he
will be the best off who has best deserved his friendship.  At
present he has in no respect greater power than any of us; nay,
indeed, he has less; as we have lands and kingdoms to rule over,
and he has nothing, and we are equally entitled by the udal right
to the kingdom as he is himself.  Now, if we will be his men,
give him our aid, allow him to take the highest dignity in the
country, and stand by him with our strength, how should he not
reward us well, and hold it in remembrance to our great
advantage, if he be the honourable man I believe him to be, and
all say he is?  Therefore let us join the adventure, say I, and
bind ourselves in friendship with him."

Then the others, one after the other, stood up and spoke; and the
conclusion was, that the most of them determined to enter into a
league with King Olaf.  He promised them his perfect friendship,
and that he would hold by and improve the country's laws and
rights, if he became supreme king of Norway.  This league was
confirmed by oath.



35. OLAF GETS THE TITLE OF KING FROM THE THING.

Thereafter the kings summoned a Thing, and there King Olaf set
forth this determination to all the people, and his demand on the
kingly power.  He desires that the bondes should receive him as
king; and promises, on the other hand, to allow them to retain
their ancient laws, and to defend the land from foreign masters
and chiefs.  On this point he spoke well, and long; and he got
great praise for his speech.  Then the kings rose and spoke, the
one after the other, and supported his cause, and this message to
the people.  At last it came to this, that King Olaf was
proclaimed king over the whole country, and the kingdom adjudged
to him according to law in the Uplands (A.D. 1014).



36. KING OLAF TRAVELS IN THE UPLANDS.

King Olaf began immediately his progress through the country,
appointing feasts before him wherever there were royal farms.
First he travelled round in Hadaland, and then he proceeded north
to Gudbrandsdal.  And now it went as King Sigurd Syr had
foretold, that people streamed to him from all quarters; and he
did not appear to have need for half of them, for he had nearly
300 men.  But the entertainments bespoken did not half serve; for
it had been the custom that kings went about in guest-quarters in
the Uplands with 60 or 70 men only, and never with more than 100
men.  The king therefore hastened over the country, only stopping
one night at the same place.  When he came north to Dovrefield,
he arranged his journey so that he came over the mountain and
down upon the north side of it, and then came to Opdal, where he
remained all night.  Afterwards he proceeded through Opdal
forest, and came out at Medaldal, where he proclaimed a Thing,
and summoned the bondes to meet him at it.  The king made a
speech to the Thing, and asked the bondes to accept him as king;
and promised, on his part, the laws and rights which King Olaf
Trygvason had offered them.  The bondes had no strength to make
opposition to the king; so the result was that they received him
as king, and confirmed it by oath: but they sent word to Orkadal
and Skaun of all that they knew concerning Olaf's proceedings.



37. LEVY AGAINST OLAF IN THRONDHJEM.

Einar Tambaskelfer had a farm and house at Husaby in Skaun; and
now when he got news of Olaf's proceedings, he immediately split
up a war-arrow, and sent it out as a token to the four quarters
-- north, south, east, west, -- to call together all free and
unfree men in full equipment of war: therewith the message, that
they were to defend the land against King Olaf.  The message-
stick went to Orkadal, and thence to Gaulardal, where the whole
war-force was to assemble.



38. OLAF'S PROGRESS IN THRONDHJEM.

King Olaf proceeded with his men down into Orkadal, and advanced
in peace and with all gentleness; but when he came to Griotar he
met the assembled bondes, amounting to more than 700 men.  Then
the king arrayed his army, for he thought the bondes were to give
battle.  When the bondes saw this, they also began to put their
men in order; but it went on very slowly, for they had not agreed
beforehand who among them should be commander.  Now when King
Olaf saw there was confusion among the bondes, he sent to them
Thorer Gudbrandson; and when he came he told them King Olaf did
not want to fight them, but named twelve of the ablest men in
their flock of people, who were desired to come to King Olaf. 
The bondes agreed to this; and the twelve men went over a rising
ground which is there, and came to the place where the king's
army stood in array.  The king said to them, "Ye bondes have done
well to give me an opportunity to speak with you, for now I will
explain to you my errand here to the Throndhjem country.  First I
must tell you, what ye already must have heard, that Earl Hakon
and I met in summer; and the issue of our meeting was, that he
gave me the whole kingdom he possessed in the Throndhjem country,
which, as ye know, consists of Orkadal, Gaulardal, Strind, and
Eyna district.  As a proof of this, I have here with me the very
men who were present, and saw the earl's and my own hands given
upon it, and heard the word and oath, and witnessed the agreement
the earl made with me.  Now I offer you peace and law, the same
as King Olaf Trygvason offered before me."

The king spoke well, and long; and ended by proposing to the
bondes two conditions -- either to go into his service and be
subject to him, or to fight him.  Thereupon the twelve bondes
went back to their people, and told the issue of their errand,
and considered with the people what they should resolve upon.
Although they discussed the matter backwards and forwards for a
while, they preferred at last to submit to the king; and it was
confirmed by the oath of the bondes.  The king now proceeded on
his journey, and the bondes made feasts for him.  The king then
proceeded to the sea-coast, and got ships; and among others he
got a long-ship of twenty benches of rowers from Gunnar of
Gelmin; another ship of twenty benches he got from Loden of
Viggia; and three ships of twenty benches from the farm of Angrar
on the ness which farm Earl Hakon had possessed, but a steward
managed it for him, by name Bard White.  The king had, besides,
four or five boats; and with these vessels he went in all haste
into the fjord of Throndhjem.



39. OF EARL SVEIN'S PROCEEDINGS.

Earl Svein was at that time far up in the Throndhjem fjord at
Steinker, which at that time was a merchant town, and was there
preparing for the yule festival (A.D. 1015).  When Einar
Tambaskelfer heard that the Orkadal people had submitted to King
Olaf, he sent men to Earl Svein to bring him the tidings.  They
went first to Nidaros, and took a rowing-boat which belonged to
Einar, with which they went out into the fjord, and came one day
late in the evening to Steinker, where they brought to the earl
the news about all King Olaf's proceedings.  The earl owned a
long-ship, which was lying afloat and rigged just outside the
town: and immediately, in the evening, he ordered all his movable
goods, his people's clothes, and also meat and drink, as much as
the vessel could carry, to be put on board, rowed immediately out
in the night-time, and came with daybreak to Skarnsund.  There he
saw King Olaf rowing in with his fleet into the fjord.  The earl
turned towards the land within Masarvik, where there was a thick
wood, and lay so near the rocks that the leaves and branches hung
over the vessel.  They cut down some large trees, which they laid
over the quarter on the sea-side, so that the ship could not be
seen for leaves, especially as it was scarcely clear daylight
when the king came rowing past them.  The weather was calm, and
the king rowed in among the islands; and when the king's fleet
was out of sight the earl rowed out of the fjord, and on to
Frosta, where his kingdom lay, and there he landed.



40. EARL SVEIN'S AND EINAR'S CONSULTATIONS.

Earl Svein sent men out to Gaulardal to his brother-in-law, Einar
Tambaskelfer; and when Einar came the earl told him how it had
been with him and King Olaf, and that now he would assemble men
to go out against King Olaf, and fight him.

Einar answers, "We should go to work cautiously, and find out
what King Olaf intends doing; and not let him hear anything
concerning us but that we are quiet.  It may happen that if he
hears nothing about our assembling people, he may sit quietly
where he is in Steinker all the Yule; for there is plenty
prepared for him for the Yule feast: but if he hears we are
assembling men, he will set right out of the fjord with his
vessels, and we shall not get hold of him."  Einar's advice was
taken; and the earl went to Stjoradal, into guest-quarters among
the bondes.

When King Olaf came to Steinker he collected all the meat
prepared for the Yule feast, and made it be put on board,
procured some transport vessels, took meat and drink with him,
and got ready to sail as fast as possible, and went out all the
way to Nidaros.  Here King Olaf Trygvason had laid the foundation
of a merchant town, and had built a king's house: but before that
Nidaros was only a single house, as before related.  When Earl
Eirik came to the country, he applied all his attention to his
house of Lade, where his father had had his main residence, and
he neglected the houses which Olaf had erected at the Nid; so
that some were fallen down, and those which stood were scarcely
habitable.  King Olaf went now with his ships up the Nid, made
all the houses to be put in order directly that were still
standing, and built anew those that had fallen down, and employed
in this work a great many people.  Then he had all the meat and
drink brought on shore to the houses, and prepared to hold Yule
there; so Earl Svein and Einar had to fall upon some other plan.



41. OF SIGVAT THE SKALD.

There was an Iceland man called Thord Sigvaldaskald, who had been
long with Earl Sigvalde, and afterwards with the earl's brother,
Thorkel the Tall; but after the earl's death Thord had become a
merchant.  He met King Olaf on his viking cruise in the west, and
entered into his service, and followed him afterwards.  He was
with the king when the incidents above related took place.  Thord
had a son called Sigvat fostered in the house of Thorkel at
Apavatn, in Iceland.  When he was nearly a grown man he went out
of the country with some merchants; and the ship came in autumn
to the Throndhjem country, and the crew lodged in the hered
(district).  The same winter King Olaf came to Throndhjem, as
just now related by us.  Now when Sigvat heard that his father
Thord was with the king, he went to him, and stayed a while with
him.  Sigvat was a good skald at an early age.  He made a lay in
honour of King Olaf, and asked the king to listen to it.  The
king said he did not want poems composed about him, and said he
did not understand the skald's craft.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "Rider of dark-blue ocean's steeds!
     Allow one skald to sing thy deeds;
     And listen to the song of one
     Who can sing well, if any can.
     For should the king despise all others,
     And show no favour to my brothers,
     Yet I may all men's favour claim,
     Who sing, still of our great king's fame."

King Olaf gave Sigvat as a reward for his verse a gold ring that
weighed half a mark, and Sigvat was made one of King Olaf's
court-men.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "I willingly receive this sword --
     By land or sea, on shore, on board,
     I trust that I shall ever be 
     Worthy the sword received from thee.
     A faithful follower thou hast bound --
     A generous master I have found;
     Master and servant both have made
     Just what best suits them by this trade."

Earl Svein had, according to custom, taken one half of the
harbour-dues from the Iceland ship-traders about autumn (A.D.
1014); for the Earls Eirik and Hakon had always taken one half of
these and all other revenues in the Throndhjem country.  Now when
King Olaf came there, he sent his men to demand that half of the
tax from the Iceland traders; and they went up to the king's
house and asked Sigvat to help them.  He went to the king, and
sang: --

     "My prayer, I trust, will not be vain --
     No gold by it have I to gain:
     All that the king himself here wins
     Is not red gold, but a few skins.
     it is not right that these poor men
     Their harbour-dues should pay again.
     That they paid once I know is true;
     Remit, great king, what scarce is due."



42. OF EARL SVEIN.

Earl Svein and Einar Tambaskelfer gathered a large armed force,
with which they came by the upper road into Gaulardal, and so
down to Nidaros, with nearly 2000 men.  King Olaf's men were out
upon the Gaular ridge, and had a guard on horseback.  They became
aware that a force was coming down the Gaulardal, and they
brought word of it to the king about midnight.  The king got up
immediately, ordered the people to be wakened, and they went on
board of the ships, bearing all their clothes and arms on board,
and all that they could take with them, and then rowed out of the
river.  Then came the earl's men to the town at the same moment,
took all the Christmas provision, and set fire to the houses.
King Olaf went out of the fjord down to Orkadal, and there landed
the men from their ships.  From Orkadal they went up to the
mountains, and over the mountains eastwards into Gudbrandsdal. 
In the lines composed about Kleng Brusason, it is said that Earl
Eirik burned the town of Nidaros: --

     "The king's half-finished hall,
     Rafters, root, and all,
     Is burned down by the river's side;
     The flame spreads o'er the city wide."



43. OF KING OLAF.

King Olaf went southwards through Gudbrandsdal, and thence out to
Hedemark.  In the depth of winter (A.D. 1015) he went about in
guest-quarters; but when spring returned he collected men, and
went to Viken.  He had with him many people from Hedemark, whom
the kings had given him; and also many powerful people from among
the bondes joined him, among whom Ketil Kalf from Ringanes.  He
had also people from Raumarike.  His stepfather, Sigurd Syr, gave
him the help also of a great body of men.  They went down from
thence to the coast, and made ready to put to sea from Viken. 
The fleet, which was manned with many fine fellows, went out then
to Tunsberg.



44. OF EARL SVEIN'S FORCES.

After Yule (A.D. 1015) Earl Svein gathers all the men of the
Throndhjem country, proclaims a levy for an expedition, and fits
out ships.  At that time there were in the Throndhjem country a
great number of lendermen; and many of them were so powerful and
well-born, that they descended from earls, or even from the royal
race, which in a short course of generations reckoned to Harald
Harfager, and they were also very rich.  These lendermen were of
great help to the kings or earls who ruled the land; for it was
as if the lenderman had the bonde-people of each district in his
power.  Earl Svein being a good friend of the lendermen, it was
easy for him to collect people.  His brother-in-law, Einar
Tambaskelfer, was on his side, and with him many other lendermen;
and among them many, both lendermen and bondes, who the winter
before had taken the oath of fidelity to King Olaf.  When they
were ready for sea they went directly out of the fjord, steering
south along the land, and drawing men from every district.  When
they came farther south, abreast of Rogaland, Erling Skialgson
came to meet them, with many people and many lendermen with him.
Now they steered eastward with their whole fleet to Viken, and
Earl Svein ran in there towards the end of Easter.  The earl
steered his fleet to Grenmar, and ran into Nesjar (A.D. 1015).



45. KING OLAF S FORCES.

King Olaf steered his fleet out from Viken, until the two fleets
were not far from each other, and they got news of each other the
Saturday before Palm Sunday.  King Olaf himself had a ship called
the Carl's Head, on the bow of which a king's head was carved
out, and he himself had carved it.  This head was used long after
in Norway on ships which kings steered themselves.



46. KING OLAF'S SPEECH.

As soon as day dawned on Sunday morning, King Olaf got up, put on
his clothes, went to the land, and ordered to sound the signal
for the whole army to come on shore.  Then he made a speech to
the troops, and told the whole assembly that he had heard there
was but a short distance between them and Earl Svein.  "Now,"
said he, "we shall make ready; for it can be but a short time
until we meet.  Let the people arm, and every man be at the post
that has been appointed him, so that all may be ready when I
order the signal to sound for casting off from the land.  Then
let us row off at once; and so that none go on before the rest of
the ships, and none lag behind when I row out of the harbour: for
we cannot tell if we shall find the earl where he was lying, or
if he has come out to meet us.  When we do meet, and the battle
begins, let people be alert to bring all our ships in close
order, and ready to bind them together.  Let us spare ourselves
in the beginning, and take care of our weapons, that we do not
cast them into the sea, or shoot them away in the air to no
purpose.  But when the fight becomes hot and the ships are bound
together, then let each man show what is in him of manly spirit."



47. OF THE BATTLE AT NESJAR.

King Olaf had in his ship 100 men armed in coats of ring-mail,
and in foreign helmets.  The most of his men had white shields,
on which the holy cross was gilt; but some had painted it in blue
or red.  He had also had the cross painted in front on all the
helmets, in a pale colour.  He had a white banner on which was a
serpent figured.  He ordered a mass to be read before him, went
on board ship, and ordered his people to refresh themselves with
meat and drink.  He then ordered the war-horns to sound to
battle, to leave the harbour, and row off to seek the earl.  Now
when they came to the harbour where the earl had lain, the earl's
men were armed, and beginning to row out of the harbour; but when
they saw the king's fleet coming they began to bind the ships
together, to set up their banners, and to make ready for the
fight.  When King Olaf saw this he hastened the rowing, laid his
ship alongside the earl's, and the battle began.  So says Sigvat
the skald: --

     "Boldly the king did then pursue
     Earl Svein, nor let him out of view.
     The blood ran down the reindeer's flank
     Of each sea-king -- his vessel's plank.
     Nor did the earl's stout warriors spare
     In battle-brunt the sword and spear.
     Earl Svein his ships of war pushed on,
     And lashed their stout stems one to one."

It is said that King Olaf brought his ships into battle while
Svein was still lying in the harbour.  Sigvat the skald was
himself in the fight; and in summer, just after the battle, he
composed a lay, which is called the "Nesjar Song", in which he
tells particularly the circumstances: --

     "In the fierce fight 'tis known how near
     The scorner of the ice-cold spear
     Laid the Charles' head the earl on board,
     All eastward of the Agder fjord."

Then was the conflict exceedingly sharp, and it was long before
it could be seen how it was to go in the end.  Many fell on both
sides, and many were the wounded.  So says Sigvat: --

     "No urging did the earl require,
     Midst spear and sword -- the battle's fire;
     No urging did the brave king need
     The ravens in this shield-storm to feed.
     Of limb-lopping enough was there,
     And ghastly wounds of sword and spear.
     Never, I think, was rougher play
     Than both the armies had that day."

The earl had most men, but the king had a chosen crew in his
ship, who had followed him in all his wars; and, besides, they
were so excellently equipped, as before related, that each man
had a coat of ring-mail, so that he could not be wounded.  So
says Sigvat: --

     "Our lads, broad-shouldered, tall, and hale,
     Drew on their cold shirts of ring-mail.
     Soon sword on sword was shrilly ringing,
     And in the air the spears were singing.
     Under our helms we hid our hair,
     For thick flew arrows through the air.
     Right glad was I our gallant crew,
     Steel-clad from head to foot, to view."



48. EARL SVEIN'S FLIGHT.

When the men began to fall on board the earl's ships, and many
appeared wounded, so that the sides of the vessels were but
thinly beset with men, the crew of King Olaf prepared to board.
Their banner was brought up to the ship that was nearest the
earl's, and the king himself followed the banner.  So says
Sigvat: --

     "`On with the king!' his banners waving:
     `On with the king!' the spears he's braving!
     `On, steel-clad men! and storm the deck,
     Slippery with blood and strewed with wreck.
     A different work ye have to share,
     His banner in war-storm to bear,
     From your fair girl's, who round the hall
     Brings the full mead-bowl to us all.'"

Now was the severest fighting.  Many of Svein's men fell, and
some sprang overboard.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Into the ship our brave lads spring, --
     On shield and helm their red blades ring;
     The air resounds with stroke on stroke, --
     The shields are cleft, the helms are broke.
     The wounded bonde o'er the side
     Falls shrieking in the blood-stained tide --
     The deck is cleared with wild uproar --
     The dead crew float about the shore."

And also these lines: --

     "The shields we brought from home were white,
     Now they are red-stained in the fight:
     This work was fit for those who wore
     Ringed coats-of-mail their breasts before.
     Where for the foe blunted the best sword
     I saw our young king climb on board.
     He stormed the first; we followed him --
     The war-birds now in blood may swim."

Now defeat began to come down upon the earl's men.  The king's
men pressed upon the earl's ship and entered it; but when the
earl saw how it was going, he called out to his forecastle-men to
cut the cables and cast the ship loose, which they did.  Then the
king's men threw grapplings over the timber heads of the ship,
and so held her fast to their own; but the earl ordered the
timber heads to be cut away, which was done.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The earl, his noble ship to save,
     To cut the posts loud order gave.
     The ship escaped: our greedy eyes
     Had looked on her as a clear prize.
     The earl escaped; but ere he fled
     We feasted Odin's fowls with dead: --
     With many a goodly corpse that floated
     Round our ship's stern his birds were bloated."

Einar Tambaskelfer had laid his ship right alongside the earl's.
They threw an anchor over the bows of the earl's ship, and thus
towed her away, and they slipped out of the fjord together.
Thereafter the whole of the earl's fleet took to flight, and
rowed out of the fjord.  The skald Berse Torfason was on the
forecastle of the earl's ship; and as it was gliding past the
king's fleet, King Olaf called out to him -- for he knew Berse,
who was distinguished as a remarkably handsome man, always well
equipped in clothes and arms -- "Farewell, Berse!"  He replied,
"Farewell, king!"  So says Berse himself, in a poem he composed
when he fell into King Olaf's power, and was laid in prison and
in fetters on board a ship: --

     "Olaf the Brave
     A `farewell' gave,
     (No time was there to parley long,)
     To me who knows the art of song.
          The skald was fain
          `Farewell' again
     In the same terms back to send --
     The rule in arms to foe or friend.
          Earl Svein's distress
          I well can guess,
     When flight he was compelled to take:
     His fortunes I will ne'er forsake,
          Though I lie here
     In chains a year,
     In thy great vessel all forlorn,
     To crouch to thee I still will scorn:
          I still will say,
          No milder sway
     Than from thy foe this land e'er knew:
     To him, my early friend, I'm true."



49. EARL SVEIN LEAVES THE COUNTRY.

Now some of the earl's men fled up the country, some surrendered
at discretion; but Svein and his followers rowed out of the
fjord, and the chiefs laid their vessels together to talk with
each other, for the earl wanted counsel from his lendermen.
Erling Skialgson advised that they should sail north, collect
people, and fight King Olaf again; but as they had lost many
people, the most were of opinion that the earl should leave the
country, and repair to his brother-in-law the Swedish King, and
strengthen himself there with men.  Einar Tambaskelfer approved
also of that advice, as they had no power to hold battle against
Olaf.  So they discharged their fleet.  The earl sailed across
Folden, and with him Einar Tambaskelfer.  Erling Skialgson again,
and likewise many other lendermen who would not abandon their
udal possessions, went north to their homes; and Erling had many
people that summer about him.



50. OLAF'S AND SIGURD'S CONSULTATION.

When King Olaf and his men saw that the earl had gathered his
ships together, Sigurd Syr was in haste for pursuing the earl,
and letting steel decide their cause.  But King Olaf replies,
that he would first see what the earl intended doing -- whether
he would keep his force together or discharge his fleet.  Sigurd
Syr said, "It is for thee, king, to command; but," he adds, "I
fear, from thy disposition and wilfulness, that thou wilt some
day be betrayed by trusting to those great people, for they are
accustomed of old to bid defiance to their sovereigns."  There
was no attack made, for it was soon seen that the earl's fleet
was dispersing.  Then King Olaf ransacked the slain, and remained
there some days to divide the booty.  At that time Sigvat made
these verses: --

     "The tale I tell is true
     To their homes returned but few
     Of Svein's men who came to meet
     King Olaf's gallant fleet.
     From the North these warmen came
     To try the bloody game, --
     On the waves their corpses borne
     Show the game that Sunday morn.
     The Throndhjem girls so fair
     Their jeers, I think, will spare,
     For the king's force was but small
     That emptied Throndhjem's hall.
     But if they will have their jeer,
     They may ask their sweethearts dear,
     Why they have returned shorn
     Who went to shear that Sunday morn."

And also these: --

     "Now will the king's power rise,
     For the Upland men still prize
     The king who o'er the sea
     Steers to bloody victory.
     Earl Svein!  thou now wilt know
     That our lads can make blood flow --
     That the Hedemarkers hale
     Can do more than tap good ale."

King Olaf gave his stepfather King Sigurd Syr, and the other
chiefs who had assisted him, handsome presents at parting.  He
gave Ketil of Ringanes a yacht of fifteen benches of rowers,
which Ketil brought up the Raum river and into the Mjosen lake.



51. OF KING OLAF.

King Olaf sent spies out to trace the earl's doings (A.D. 1015);
and when he found that the earl had left the country he sailed
out west, and to Viken, where many people came to him.  At the
Thing there he was taken as king, and so he proceeded all the way
to the Naze; and when he heard that Erling Skialgson had gathered
a large force, he did not tarry in North Agder, but sailed with a
steady fair wind to the Throndhjem country; for there it appeared
to him was the greatest strength of the land, if he could subdue
it for himself while the earl was abroad.  When Olaf came to
Throndhjem there was no opposition, and he was elected there to
be king.  In harvest (A.D. 1015) he took his seat in the town of
Nidaros, and collected the needful winter provision (A.D. 1016).
He built a king's house, and raised Clement's church on the spot
on which it now stands.  He parcelled out building ground, which
he gave to bondes, merchants, or others who he thought would
build.  There he sat down with many men-at-arms around him; for
he put no great confidence in the Throndhjem people, if the earl
should return to the country.  The people of the interior of the
Throndhjem country showed this clearly, for he got no land-scat
from them.



52. PLAN OF SVEIN AND THE SWEDISH KING.

Earl Svein went first to Svithjod to his brother-in-law Olaf the
Swedish king, told him all that had happened between him and Olaf
the Thick, and asked his advice about what he should now
undertake.  The king said that the earl should stay with him if
he liked, and get such a portion of his kingdom to rule over as
should seem to him sufficient; "or otherwise," says he, "I will
give thee help of forces to conquer the country again from Olaf."
The earl chose the latter; for all those among his men who had
great possessions in Norway, which was the case with many who
were with him, were anxious to get back; and in the council they
held about this, it was resolved that in winter they should take
the land-way over Helsingjaland and Jamtaland, and so down into
the Throndhjem land; for the earl reckoned most upon the faithful
help and strength of the Throndhjem people of the interior as
soon as he should appear there.  In the meantime, however, it was
determined to take a cruise in summer in the Baltic to gather
property.



53. EARL SVEIN'S DEATH.

Earl Svein went eastward with his forces to Russia, and passed
the summer (A.D. 1015) in marauding there; but on the approach of
autumn returned with his ships to Svithjod.  There he fell into a
sickness, which proved fatal.  After the earl's death some of the
people who had followed him remained in Svithjod; others went to
Helsingjaland, thence to Jamtaland, and so from the east over the
dividing ridge of the country to the Throndhjem district, where
they told all that had happened upon their journey: and thus the
truth of Earl Svein's death was known (A.D. 1016).



54. OF THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE.

Einar Tambaskelfer, and the people who had followed him went in
winter to the Swedish king, and were received in a friendly
manner.  There were also among them many who had followed the
earl.  The Swedish king took it much amiss that Olaf the Thick
had set himself down in his scat-lands, and driven the earl out
of them, and therefore he threatened the king with his heaviest
vengeance when opportunity offered.  He said that Olaf ought not
to have had the presumption to take the dominions which the earl
had held of him; and all the Swedish king's men agreed with him.
But the Throndhjem people, when they heard for certain that the
earl was dead. and could not be expected back to Norway, turned
all to obedience to King Olaf.  Many came from the interior of
the Throndhjem country, and became King Olaf's men; others sent
word and tokens that they would service him.  Then, in autumn, he
went into the interior of Throndhjem, and held Things with the
bondes, and was received as king in each district.  He returned
to Nidaros, and brought there all the king's scat and revenue,
and had his winter-seat provided there (A.D. 1016).



55. OF KING OLAF'S HOUSEHOLD.

King Olaf built a king's house in Nidaros, and in it was a large
room for his court, with doors at both ends.  The king's high-
seat was in the middle of the room; and within sat his court-
bishop, Grimkel, and next him his other priests; without them sat
his counsellors; and in the other high-seat opposite to the king
sat his marshal, Bjorn, and next to him his pursuivants.  When
people of importance came to him, they also had a seat of honour.
The ale was drunk by the fire-light.  He divided the service
among his men after the fashion of other kings.  He had in his
house sixty court-men and thirty pursuivants; and to them he gave
pay and certain regulations.  He had also thirty house-servants
to do the needful work about the house, and procure what was
required.  He had, besides, many slaves.  At the house were many
outbuildings, in which the court-men slept.  There was also a
large room, in which the king held his court-meetings.



56. OF KING OLAF'S HABITS.

It was King Olaf's custom to rise betimes in the morning, put on
his clothes, wash his hands, and then go to the church and hear
the matins and morning mass.  Thereafter he went to the Thing-
meeting, to bring people to agreement with each other, or to talk
of one or the other matter that appeared to him necessary.  He
invited to him great and small who were known to be men of 
understanding.  He often made them recite to him the laws which
Hakon Athelstan's foster-son had made for Throndhjem; and after
considering them with those men of understanding, he ordered laws
adding to or taking from those established before.  But Christian
privileges he settled according to the advice of Bishop Grimbel
and other learned priests; and bent his whole mind to uprooting
heathenism, and old customs which he thought contrary to
Christianity.  And he succeeded so far that the bondes accepted
of the laws which the king proposed.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The king, who at the helm guides
     His warlike ship through clashing tides,
     Now gives one law for all the land --
     A heavenly law, which long will stand."

King Olaf was a good and very gentle man, of little speech, and
open-handed although greedy of money.  Sigvat the skald, as
before related, was in King Olaf's house, and several Iceland
men.  The king asked particularly how Christianity was observed
in Iceland, and it appeared to him to be very far from where it
ought to be; for, as to observing Christian practices, it was
told the king that it was permitted there to eat horse-flesh, to
expose infants as heathens do, besides many other things contrary
to Christianity.  They also told the king about many principal
men who were then in Iceland.  Skapte Thorodson was then the
lagman of the country.  He inquired also of those who were best
acquainted with it about the state of people in other distant
countries; and his inquiries turned principally on how
Christianity was observed in the Orkney, Shetland, and Farey
Islands: and, as far as he could learn, it was far from being as
he could have wished.  Such conversation was usually carried on
by him; or else he spoke about the laws and rights of the
country.



57. KING OLAF'S MESSENGERS.

The same winter (A.D. 1016) came messengers from the Swedish
king, Olaf the Swede, out of Svithjod: and their leaders were two
brothers, Thorgaut Skarde and Asgaut the bailiff; and they, had
twenty-four men with them, when they came from the eastward, over
the ridge of the country down into Veradal, they summoned a Thing
of the bondes, talked to them, and demanded of them scat and
duties upon account of the king of Sweden.  But the bondes, after
consulting with each other, determined only to pay the scat which
the Swedish king required in so far as King Olaf required none
upon his account, but refused to pay scat to both.  The
messengers proceeded farther down the valley; but received at
every Thing they held the same answer, and no money.  They went
forward to Skaun, held a Thing there, and demanded scat; but it
went there as before.  Then they came to Stjoradal, and summoned
a Thing, but the bondes would not come to it.  Now the messengers
saw that their business was a failure; and Thorgaut proposed that
they should turn about, and go eastward again. "I do not think,"
says Asgaut, "that we have performed the king's errand unless we
go to King Olaf the Thick, since the bondes refer the matter to
him."  He was their commander; so they proceeded to the town
(Nidaros), and took lodging there.  The day after they presented
themselves to the king, just as he was seated at table, saluted
him, and said they came with a message of the Swedish king.  The
king told them to come to him next day.  Next day the king,
having heard mass, went to his Thing-house, ordered the
messengers of the Swedish king to be called, and told them to
produce their message.  Then Thorgaut spoke, and told first what
his errand was, and next how the Throndhjem people of the
interior had replied to it; and asked the king's decision on the
business, that they might know what result their errand there was
to have.  The king answers, "While the earls ruled over the
country, it was not to be wondered at if the country people
thought themselves bound to obey them, as they were at least of
the royal race of the kingdom.  But it would have been more just
if those earls had given assistance and service to the kings who
had a right to the country, rather than to foreign kings, or to
stir up opposition to their lawful kings, depriving them of their
land and kingdom.  With regard to Olaf the Swede, who calls
himself entitled to the kingdom of Norway, I, who in fact am so
entitled, can see no ground for his claim; but well remember the
skaith and damage we have suffered from him and his relations."

Then says Asgaut. "It is not wonderful that thou art called Olaf
the Thick, seeing thou answerest so haughtily to such a prince's
message, and canst not see clearly how heavy the king's wrath
will be for thee to support, as many have experienced who had
greater strength than thou appearest to have.  But if thou
wishest to keep hold of thy kingdom, it will be best for thee to
come to the king, and be his man; and we shall beg him to give
thee this kingdom in fief under him."

The king replies with all gentleness, "I will give thee an
advice, Asgaut, in return.  Go back to the east again to thy
king, and tell him that early in spring I will make myself ready,
and will proceed eastward to the ancient frontier that divided
formerly the kingdom of the kings of Norway from Sweden.  There
he may come if he likes, that we may conclude a peace with each
other; and each of us will retain the kingdom to which he is
born."

Now the messengers turned back to their lodging, and prepared for
their departure, and the king went to table.  The messengers came
back soon after to the king's house; but the doorkeepers saw it,
and reported it to the king, who told them not to let the
messengers in.  "I will not speak with them," said he.  Then the
messengers went off, and Thorgaut said he would now return home
with his men; but Asgaut insisted still that he would go forward
with the king's errand: so they separated.  Thorgaut proceeded
accordingly through Strind; but Asgaut went into Gaulardal and
Orkadal, and intended proceeding southwards to More, to deliver
his king's message.  When King Olaf came to the knowledge of this
he sent out his pursuivants after them, who found them at the
ness in Stein, bound their hands behind their backs, and led them
down to the point called Gaularas, where they raised a gallows,
and hanged them so that they could be seen by those who travelled
the usual sea-way out of the fjord.  Thorgaut heard this news
before he had travelled far on his way home through the
Throndhjem country; and he hastened on his journey until he came
to the Swedish king, and told him how it had gone with them.  The
king was highly enraged when he heard the account of it; and he
had no lack of high words.



58. OLAF AND ERLING RECONCILED.

The spring thereafter (A.D. 1016) King Olaf Haraldson calls out
an army from the Throndhjem land, and makes ready to proceed
eastward.  Some of the Iceland traders were then ready to sail
from Norway.  With them King Olaf sent word and token to Hjalte
Skeggjason, and summoned him to come to him, and at the same time
sent a verbal message to Skapte the lagman, and other men who
principally took part in the lawgiving of Iceland, to take out of
the law whatever appeared contrary to Christianity.  He sent,
besides, a message of friendship to the people in general.  The
king then proceeded southwards himself along the coast, stopping
at every district, and holding Things with the bondes; and in
each Thing he ordered the Christian law to be read, together with
the message of salvation thereunto belonging, and with which many
ill customs and much heathenism were swept away at once among the
common people: for the earls had kept well the old laws and
rights of the country; but with respect to keeping Christianity,
they had allowed every man to do as he liked.  It was thus come
so far that the people were baptized in the most places on the
sea-coast, but the most of them were ignorant of Christian law.
In the upper ends of the valleys, and in the habitations among
the mountains, the greater part of the people were heathen; for
when the common man is left to himself, the faith he has been
taught in his childhood is that which has the strongest hold over
his inclination.  But the king threatened the most violent
proceedings against great or small, who, after the king's
message, would not adopt Christianity.  In the meantime Olaf was
proclaimed king in every Law Thing in the country, and no man
spoke against him.  While he lay in Karmtsund messengers went
between him and Erling Skjalgson, who endeavoured to make peace
between them; and the meeting was appointed in Whitings Isle.
When they met they spoke with each other about agreement
together; but Erling found something else than he expected in the
conversation: for when he insisted on having all the fiefs which
Olaf Trygvason, and afterwards the Earls Svein and Hakon, had
given him, and on that condition would be his man and dutiful
friend, the king answered, "It appears to me, Erling, that it
would be no bad bargain for thee to get as great fiefs from me
for thy aid and friendship as thou hadst from Earl Eirik, a man
who had done thee the greatest injury by the bloodshed of thy
men; but even if I let thee remain the greatest lenderman in
Norway, I will bestow my fiefs according to my own will, and not
act as if ye lendermen had udal right to my ancestor's heritage,
and I was obliged to buy your services with manifold rewards."
Erling had no disposition to sue for even the smallest thing; and
he saw that the king was not easily dealt with.  He saw also that
he had only two conditions before him: the one was to make no
agreement with the king, and stand by the consequences; the other
to leave it entirely to the king's pleasure.  Although it was
much against his inclination, he chose the latter, and merely
said to the king, "The service will be the most useful to thee
which I give with a free will."  And thus their conference ended.
Erling's relations and friends came to him afterwards, and
advised him to give way, and proceed with more prudence and less
pride.  "Thou wilt still," they said, "be the most important and
most respected lenderman in Norway, both on account of thy own
and thy relations' abilities and great wealth."  Erling found
that this was prudent advice, and that they who gave it did so
with a good intention, and he followed it accordingly.  Erling
went into the king's service on such conditions as the king
himself should determine and please.  Thereafter they separated
in some shape reconciled, and Olaf went his way eastward along
the coast (A.D. 1016).



59. EILIF OF GAUTLAND'S MURDER.

As soon as it was reported that Olaf had come to Viken, the Danes
who had offices under the Danish king set off for Denmark,
without waiting for King Olaf.  But King Olaf sailed in along
Viken, holding Things with the bondes.  All the people of the
country submitted to him, and thereafter he took all the king's
taxes, and remained the summer (A.D. 1016) in Viken.  He then
sailed east from Tunsberg across the fjord, and all the way east
to Svinasund.  There the Swedish king's dominions begin, and he
had set officers over this country; namely, Eilif Gautske over
the north part, and Hroe Skialge over the east part, all the way
to the Gaut river.  Hroe had family friends on both sides of the
river, and also great farms on Hising Island, and was besides a
mighty and very rich man.  Eilif was also of great family, and
very wealthy.  Now when King Olaf came to Ranrike he summoned the
people to a Thing, and all who dwelt on the sea-coast or in the
out-islands came to him.  Now when the Thing was seated the
king's marshal, Bjorn, held a speech to them, in which he told
the bondes to receive Olaf as their king, in the same way as had
been done in all other parts of Norway.  Then stood up a bold
bonde by name Brynjolf Ulfalde, and said, "We bondes know where
the division-boundaries between the Norway and Danish and Swedish
kings' lands have stood by rights in old times; namely, that the
Gaut river divided their lands between the Vener lake and the
sea; but towards the north the forests until Eid forest, and from
thence the ridge of the country all north to Finmark.  We know,
also, that by turns they have made inroads upon each other's
territories, and that the Swedes have long had power all the way
to Svinasund.  But, sooth to say, I know that it is the
inclination of many rather to serve the king of Norway, but they
dare not; for the Swedish king's dominions surround us, both
eastward, southwards, and also up the country; and besides, it
may be expected that the king of Norway must soon go to the
north, where the strength of his kingdom lies, and then we have
no power to withstand the Gautlanders.  Now it is for the king to
give us good counsel, for we have great desire to be his men."
After the Thing, in the evening, Brynjolf was in the king's tent,
and the day after likewise, and they had much private
conversation together.  Then the king proceeded eastwards along
Viken.  Now when Eilif heard of his arrival, he sent out spies to
discover what he was about; but he himself, with thirty men, kept
himself high up in the habitations among the hills, where he had
gathered together bondes.  Many of the bondes came to King Olaf,
but some sent friendly messages to him.  People went between King
Olaf and Eilif, and they entreated each separately to hold a
Thing-meeting between themselves, and make peace in one way or
another.  They told Eilif that they might expect violent
treatment from King Olaf if they opposed his orders; but promised
Eilif he should not want men.  It was determined that they should
come down from the high country, and hold a thing with the bondes
and the king.  King Olaf thereupon sent the chief of his
pursuivants, Thorer Lange, with six men, to Brynjolf.  They were
equipped with their coats-of-mail under their cloaks, and their
hats over their helmets.  The following day the bondes came in
crowds down with Eilif; and in his suite was Brynjolf, and with
him Thorer.  The king laid his ships close to a rocky knoll that
stuck out into the sea, and upon it the king went with his
people, and sat down.  Below was a flat field, on which the
bondes' force was; but Eilif's men were drawn up, forming a
shield-fence before him.  Bjorn the marshal spoke long and
cleverly upon the king's account, and when he sat down Eilif
arose to speak; but at the same moment Thorer Lange rose, drew
his sword, and struck Eilif on the neck, so that his head flew
off.  Then the whole bonde-force started up; but the Gautland men
set off in full flight and Thorer with his people killed several
of them.  Now when the crowd was settled again, and the noise
over the king stood up, and told the bondes to seat themselves.
They did so, and then much was spoken.  The end of it was that
they submitted to the king, and promised fidelity to him; and he,
on the other hand, promised not to desert them, but to remain at
hand until the discord between him and the Swedish Olaf was
settled in one way or other.  King Olaf then brought the whole
northern district under his power, and went in summer eastward as
far as the Gaut river, and got all the king's scat among the
islands.  But when summer (A.D. 1016) was drawing towards an end
he returned north to Viken, and sailed up the Raum river to a
waterfall called Sarp.  On the north side of the fall, a point of
land juts out into the river.  There the king ordered a rampart
to be built right across the ness, of stone, turf, and wood, and
a ditch to be dug in front of it; so that it was a large earthen
fort or burgh, which he made a merchant town of.  He had a king's
house put up, and ordered the building of Mary church.  He also
laid out plans for other houses, and got people to build on them.
In harvest (A.D. 1016) he let everything be gathered there that
was useful for his winter residence (A.D. 1017), and sat there
with a great many people, and the rest he quartered in the
neighbouring districts.  The king prohibited all exports from
Viken to Gautland of herrings and salt, which the Gautland people
could ill do without.  This year the king held a great Yule
feast, to which he invited many great bondes.



60. THE HISTORY OF EYVIND URARHORN.

There was a man called Eyvind Urarhorn, who was a great man, of
high birth, who had his descent from the East Agder country.
Every summer he went out on a viking cruise, sometimes to the
West sea, sometimes to the Baltic, sometimes south to Flanders,
and had a well-armed cutter (snekkia) of twenty benches of
rowers.  He had been also at Nesjar, and given his aid to the
king; and when they separated the king promised him his favour,
and Eyvind, again, promised to come to the king's aid whenever he
was required.  This winter (A.D. 1017) Eyvind was at the Yule
feast of the king, and received goodly gifts from him.  Brynjolf
Ulfalde was also with the king, and he received a Yule present
from the king of a gold-mounted sword, and also a farm called
Vettaland, which is a very large head-farm of the district.
Brynjolf composed a song about these gifts, of which the refrain
was --

     "The song-famed hero to my hand
     Gave a good sword, and Vettaland."

The king afterwards gave him the title of Lenderman, and Brynjolf
was ever after the king's greatest friend.



61. THRAND WHITE'S MURDER.

This winter (A.D. 1017) Thrand White from Throndhjem went east to
Jamtaland, to take up scat upon account of King Olaf.  But when
he had collected the scat he was surprised by men of the Swedish
king, who killed him and his men, twelve in all, and brought the
scat to the Swedish king.  King Olaf was very ill-pleased when he
heard this news.



62. CHRISTIANITY PROCLAIMED IN VIKEN.

King Olaf made Christian law to be proclaimed in Viken, in the
same way as in the North country.  It succeeded well, because the
people of Viken were better acquainted with the Christian customs
than the people in the north; for, both winter and summer, there
were many merchants in Viken, both Danish and Saxon.  The people
of Viken, also, had much trading intercourse with England, and
Saxony, and Flanders, and Denmark; and some had been on viking
expeditions, and had had their winter abode in Christian lands.



63. HROE'S FALL.

About spring-time (A.D. 1017) King Olaf sent a message that
Eyvind Urarhorn should come to him; and they spake together in
private for a long time.  Thereafter Eyvind made himself ready
for a viking cruise.  He sailed south towards Viken, and brought
up at the Eikreys Isles without Hising Isle.  There he heard that
Hroe Skialge had gone northwards towards Ordost, and had there
made a levy of men and goods on account of the Swedish king, and
was expected from the north.  Eyvind rowed in by Haugasund, and
Hroe came rowing from the north, and they met in the sound and
fought.  Hroe fell there, with nearly thirty men; and Eyvind took
all the goods Hroe had with him.  Eyvind then proceeded to the
Baltic, and was all summer on a viking cruise.



64. FALL OF GUDLEIK AND THORGAUT.

There was a man called Gudleik Gerske, who came originally from
Agder.  He was a great merchant, who went far and wide by sea,
was very rich, and drove a trade with various countries.  He
often went east to Gardarike (Russia), and therefore was called
Gudleik Gerske (the Russian).  This spring (A.D. 1017) Gudleik
fitted out his ship, and intended to go east in summer to Russia.
King Olaf sent a message to him that he wanted to speak to him;
and when Gudleik came to the king he told him he would go in
partnership with him, and told him to purchase some costly
articles which were difficult to be had in this country.  Gudleik
said that it should be according to the king's desire.  The king
ordered as much money to be delivered to Gudleik as he thought
sufficient, and then Gudleik set out for the Baltic.  They lay in
a sound in Gotland; and there it happened, as it often does, that
people cannot keep their own secrets, and the people of the
country came to know that in this ship was Olaf the Thick's
partner.  Gudleik went in summer eastwards to Novgorod, where he
bought fine and costly clothes, which he intended for the king as
a state dress; and also precious furs, and remarkably splendid
table utensils.  In autumn (A.D. 1017), as Gudleik was returning
from the east, he met a contrary wind, and lay for a long time at
the island Eyland.  There came Thorgaut Skarde, who in autumn had
heard of Gudleik's course, in a long-ship against him, and gave
him battle.  They fought long, and Gudleik and his people
defended themselves for a long time; but the numbers against them
were great, and Gudleik and many of his ship's crew fell, and a
great many of them were wounded.  Thorgaut took all their goods,
and King Olaf's, and he and his comrades divided the booty among
them equally; but he said the Swedish king ought to have the
precious articles of King Olaf, as these, he said, should be
considered as part of the scat due to him from Norway. 
Thereafter Thorgaut proceeded east to Svithjod.  These tidings
were soon known; and as Eyvind Urarhorn came soon after to
Eyland, he heard the news, and sailed east after Thorgaut and his
troop, and overtook them among the Swedish isles on the coast,
and gave battle.  There Thorgaut and the most of his men were
killed, and the rest sprang overboard.  Eyvind took all the goods
and all the costly articles of King Olaf which they had captured
from Gudleik, and went with these back to Norway in autumn, and
delivered to King Olaf his precious wares.  The king thanked him
in the most friendly way for his proceeding, and promised him
anew his favour and friendship.  At this time Olaf had been three
years king over Norway (A.D. 1015-1017).



65. MEETING OF OLAF AND RAGNVALD.

The same summer (A.D. 1017) King Olaf ordered a levy, and went
out eastwards to the Gaut river, where he lay a great part of the
summer.  Messages were passing between King Olaf, Earl Ragnvald,
and the earl's wife, Ingebjorg, the daughter of Trygve.  She was
very zealous about giving King Olaf of Norway every kind of help,
and made it a matter of her deepest interest.  For this there
were two causes.  She had a great friendship for King Olaf; and
also she could never forget that the Swedish king had been one at
the death of her brother, Olaf Trygvason; and also that he, on
that account only, had any presence to rule over Norway.  The
earl, by her persuasion, turned much towards friendship with King
Olaf; and it proceeded so far that the earl and the king
appointed a meeting, and met at the Gaut river.  They talked
together of many things, but especially of the Norwegian and
Swedish kings' relations with each other; both agreeing, as was
the truth also, that it was the greatest loss, both to the people
of Viken and of Gautland, that there was no peace for trade
between the two countries; and at last both agreed upon a peace,
and still-stand of arms between them until next summer; and they
parted with mutual gifts and friendly speeches.



66. KING OLAF THE SWEDE.

The king thereupon returned north to Viken, and had all the royal
revenues up to the Gaut river; and all the people of the country
there had submitted to him.  King Olaf the Swede had so great a
hatred of Olaf Haraldson, that no man dared to call him by his
right name in the king's hearing.  They called him the thick man;
and never named him without some hard by-name.



67. ACCOUNT OF THEIR RECONCILIATION.

The bondes in Viken spoke with each other about there being
nothing for it but that the kings should make peace and a league
with each other, and insisted upon it that they were badly used
by the kings going to war; but nobody was so bold as to bring
these murmurs before the king.  At last they begged Bjorn the
marshal to bring this matter before the king, and entreat him to
send messengers to the Swedish king to offer peace on his side.
Bjorn was disinclined to do this, and put it off from himself
with excuses; but on the entreaties of many of his friends, he
promised at last to speak of it to the king; but declared, at the
same time, that he knew it would be taken very ill by the king to
propose that he should give way in anything to the Swedish king.
The same summer (A.D. 1017) Hjalte Skeggjason came over to Norway
from Iceland, according to the message sent him by King Olaf, and
went directly to the king.  He was well received by the king, who
told him to lodge in his house, and gave him a seat beside Bjorn 
the marshal, and Hjalte became his comrade at table.  There was
good-fellowship immediately between them.

Once, when King Olaf had assembled the people and bondes to
consult upon the good of the country, Bjorn the marshal said,
"What think you, king, of the strife that is between the Swedish
king and you?  Many people have fallen on both sides, without its
being at all more determined than before what each of you shall
have of the kingdom.  You have now been sitting in Viken one
winter and two summers, and the whole country to the north is
lying behind your back unseen; and the men who have property or
udal rights in the north are weary of sitting here.  Now it is
the wish of the lendermen, of your other people, and of the
bondes that this should come to an end.  There is now a truce,
agreement, and peace with the earl, and the West Gautland people
who are nearest to us; and it appears to the people it would be
best that you sent messengers to the Swedish king to offer a
reconciliation on your side; and, without doubt, many who are
about the Swedish king will support the proposal, for it is a
common gain for those who dwell in both countries, both here and
there."  This speech of Bjorn's received great applause.

Then the king said, "It is fair, Bjorn, that the advice thou hast
given should be carried out by thyself.  Thou shalt undertake
this embassy thyself, and enjoy the good of it, if thou hast
advised well; and if it involve any man in danger, thou hast
involved thyself in it.  Moreover, it belongs to thy office to
declare to the multitude what I wish to have told."  Then the
king stood up, went to the church, and had high mass sung before
him; and thereafter went to table.

The following day Hjalte said to Bjorn, "Why art thou so
melancholy, man?  Art thou sick, or art thou angry at any one?"
Bjorn tells Hjalte his conversation with the king, and says it is
a very dangerous errand.

Hjalte says, "It is their lot who follow kings that they enjoy
high honours, and are more respected than other men, but stand
often in danger of their lives: and they must understand how to
bear both parts of their lot.  The king's luck is great; and much
honour will be gained by this business, if it succeed."

Bjorn answered, "Since thou makest so light of this business in
thy speech, wilt thou go with me?  The king has promised that I
shall have companions with me on the journey."

"Certainly," says Hjalte; "I will follow thee, if thou wilt: for
never again shall I fall in with such a comrade if we part."



68. JOURNEY OF BJORN THE MARSHAL.

A few days afterwards. when the king was at a Thing-meeting,
Bjorn came with eleven others.  He says to the king that they
were now ready to proceed on their mission, and that their horses
stood saddled at the door.  "And now," says he, "I would know
with what errand I am to go, or what orders thou givest us."

The king replies, "Ye shall carry these my words to the Swedish
king -- that I will establish peace between our countries up to
the frontier which Olaf Trygvason had before me; and each shall
bind himself faithfully not to trespass over it.  But with regard
to the loss of people, no man must mention it if peace there is
to be; for the Swedish king cannot with money pay for the men the
Swedes have deprived us of."  Thereupon the king rose, and went
out with Bjorn and his followers; and he took a gold-mounted
sword and a gold ring, and said, in handing over the sword to
Bjorn, "This I give thee: it was given to me in summer by Earl
Ragnvald.  To him ye shall go; and bring him word from me to
advance your errand with his counsel and strength.  This thy
errand I will think well fulfilled if thou hearest the Swedish
king's own words, be they yea or nay: and this gold ring thou
shalt give Earl Ragnvald.  These are tokens (1) he must know
well."

Hjalte went up to the king, saluted him, and said, "We need much,
king, that thy luck attend us;" and wished that they might meet
again in good health. 

The king asked where Hjalte was going.

"With Bjorn," said he.

The king said, "It will assist much to the good success of the
journey that thou goest too, for thy good fortune has often been
proved; and be assured that I shall wish that all my luck, if
that be of any weight, may attend thee and thy company."

Bjorn and his followers rode their way, and came to Earl
Ragnvald's court, where they were well received.  Bjorn was a
celebrated and generally known man, -- known by sight and speech
to all who had ever seen King Olaf; for at every Thing, Bjorn
stood up and told the king's message.  Ingebjorg, the earl's
wife, went up to Hjalte and looked at him.  She recognized him,
for she was living with her brother Olaf Trygvason when Hjalte
was there: and she knew how to reckon up the relationship between
King Olaf and Vilborg, the wife of Hjalte; for Eirik Bjodaskalle
father of Astrid, King Olaf Trygvason's mother, and Bodvar father
of Olaf, mother of Gissur White the father of Vilborg, were
brother's sons of the lenderman Vikingakare of Vors.

They enjoyed here good entertainment.  One day Bjorn entered into
conversation with the earl and Ingebjorg, in which he set forth
his errand, and produced to the earl his tokens.

The earl replies, "What hast thou done, Bjorn, that the king
wishes thy death?  For, so far from thy errand having any
success, I do not think a man can be found who could speak these
words to the Swedish king without incurring wrath and punishment.
King Olaf, king of Sweden, is too proud for any man to speak to
him on anything he is angry at."

Then Bjorn says, "Nothing has happened to me that King Olaf is
offended at; but many of his disposition act both for themselves
and others, in a way that only men who are daring can succeed in.
But as yet all his plans have had good success, and I think this
will turn out well too; so I assure you, earl, that I will
actually travel to the Swedish king, and not turn back before I
have brought to his ears every word that King Olaf told me to say
to him, unless death prevent me, or that I am in bonds, and
cannot perform my errand; and this I must do, whether you give
any aid or no aid to me in fulfilling the king's wishes."

Then said IngebJorg, "I will soon declare my opinion.  I think,
earl, thou must turn all thy attention to supporting King Olaf
the king of Norway's desire that this message be laid before the
Swedish king, in whatever way he may answer it.  Although the
Swedish king's anger should be incurred, and our power and
property be at stake, yet will I rather run the risk, than that
it should be said the message of King Olaf was neglected from
fear of the Swedish king.  Thou hast that birth, strength of
relations, and other means, that here in the Swedish land it is
free to thee to tell thy mind, if it be right and worthy of being
heard, whether it be listened to by few or many, great or little
people, or by the king himself."

The earl replies, "It is known to every one how thou urgest me:
it may be, according to thy counsel, that I should promise the
king's men to follow them, so that they may get their errand laid
before the Swedish king, whether he take it ill or take it well.
But I will have my own counsel followed, and will not run hastily
into Bjorn's or any other man's measures, in such a highly
important matter.  It is my will that ye all remain here with me,
so long as I think it necessary for the purpose of rightly
forwarding this mission."  Now as the earl had thus given them to
understand that he would support them in the business, Bjorn
thanked him most kindly, and with the assurance that his advice
should rule them altogether.  Thereafter Bjorn and his fellow-
travellers remained very long in the earl's house.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Before writing was a common accomplishment in courts, the
     only way of accrediting a special messenger between kings
     and great men was by giving the messenger a token; that is.
     some article well known by the person receiving the message
     to be the property of and valued by the person sending it.



69. CONVERSATION OF BJORN AND INGEBJORG.

Ingebjorg was particularly kind to them; and Bjorn often spoke
with her about the matter, and was ill at ease that their journey
was so long delayed.  Hjalte and the others often spoke together
also about the matter; and Hjalte said; "I will go to the king if
ye like; for I am not a man of Norway, and the Swedes can have
nothing to say to me.  I have heard that there are Iceland men in
the king's house who are my acquaintances, and are well treated;
namely, the skalds Gissur Black and Ottar Black.  From them I
shall get out what I can about the Swedish king; and if the
business will really be so difficult as it now appears, or if
there be any other way of promoting it, I can easily devise some
errand that may appear suitable for me."

This counsel appeared to Bjorn and Ingebjorg to be the wisest,
and they resolved upon it among themselves.  Ingebjorg put Hjalte
in a position to travel; gave him two Gautland men with him, and
ordered them to follow him, and assist him with their service,
and also to go wherever he might have occasion to send them.
Besides, Ingebjorg gave him twenty marks of weighed silver money
for travelling expenses, and sent word and token by him to the
Swedish king Olaf's daughter, Ingegerd, that she should give all
her assistance to Hjalte's business, whenever he should find
himself under the necessity of craving her help.  Hjalte set off
as soon as he was ready.  When he came to King Olaf he soon found
the skalds Gissur and Ottar, and they were very glad at his
coming.  Without delay they went to the king, and told him that a
man was come who was their countryman, and one of the most
considerable in their native land, and requested the king to
receive him well.  The king told them to take Hjalte and his
fellow-travellers into their company and quarters.  Now when
Hjalte had resided there a short time, and got acquainted with
people, he was much respected by everybody.  The skalds were
often in the king's house, for they were well-spoken men; and
often in the daytime they sat in front of the king's high-seat,
and Hjalte, to whom they paid the highest respect in all things,
by their side.  He became thus known to the king, who willingly
entered into conversation with him, and heard from him news about
Iceland.



70. OF SIGVAT THE SKALD.

It happened that before Bjorn set out from home he asked Sigvat
the skald, who at that time was with King Olaf, to accompany him
on his journey.  It was a journey for which people had no great
inclination.  There was, however, great friendship between Bjorn
and Sigvat.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "With the king's marshals all have I,
          In days gone by,
          Lived joyously, --
     With all who on the king attend,
     And knee before him humbly bend,
     Bjorn, thou oft hast ta'en my part --
          Pleaded with art,
          And touched the heart.
     Bjorn!  brave stainer of the sword,
     Thou art my friend -- I trust thy word."

While they were riding up to Gautland, Sigvat made these verses:
--

     "Down the Fjord sweep wind and rain,
     Our stout ship's sails and tackle strain;
          Wet to the skin.
          We're sound within,
     And gaily o'er the waves are dancing,
     Our sea-steed o'er the waves high prancing!
          Through Lister sea
          Flying all free;
     Off from the wind with swelling sail,
     We merrily scud before the gale,
          And reach the sound
          Where we were bound.
     And now our ship, so gay and grand,
     Glides past the green and lovely land,
          And at the isle
          Moors for a while.
     Our horse-hoofs now leave hasty print;
     We ride -- of ease there's scanty stint --
          In heat and haste
          O'er Gautland's waste:
     Though in a hurry to be married,
     The king can't say that we have tarried."

One evening late they were riding through Gautland, and Sigvat
made these verses: --

     "The weary horse will at nightfall
     Gallop right well to reach his stall;
     When night meets day, with hasty hoof
     He plies the road to reach a roof.
     Far from the Danes, we now may ride
     Safely by stream or mountain-side;
     But, in this twilight, in some ditch
     The horse and rider both may pitch."

They rode through the merchant town of Skara, and down the street
to the earl's house.  He sang: --

     "The shy sweet girls, from window high
     In wonder peep at the sparks that fly
     From our horses heels, as down the street
     Of the earl's town we ride so fleet.
     Spur on! -- that every pretty lass
     May hear our horse-hoofs as we pass
     Clatter upon the stones so hard,
     And echo round the paved court-yard."



71. HJALTE SKEGGJASON WHILE HE WAS IN SVITHIOD.

One day Hjalte, and the skalds with him, went before the king,
and he began thus: -- "It has so happened, king, as is known to
you, that I have come here after a long and difficult journey;
but when I had once crossed the ocean and heard of your
greatness, it appeared to me unwise to go back without having
seen you in your splendour and glory.  Now it is a law between
Iceland and Norway, that Iceland men pay landing due when they
come into Norway, but while I was coming across the sea I took
myself all the landing dues from my ship's people; but knowing
that thou have the greatest right to all the power in Norway, I
hastened hither to deliver to you the landing dues."  With this
he showed the silver to the king, and laid ten marks of silver in
Gissur Black's lap.

The king replies, "Few have brought us any such dues from Norway
for some time; and now, Hjalte, I will return you my warmest
thanks for having given yourself so much trouble to bring us the
landing dues, rather than pay them to our enemies.  But I will
that thou shouldst take this money from me as a gift, and with it
my friendship."

Hjalte thanked the king with many words, and from that day set
himself in great favour with the king, and often spoke with him;
for the king thought, what was true, that he was a man of much
understanding and eloquence.  Now Hjalte told Gissur and Ottar
that he was sent with tokens to the king's daughter Ingegerd, to
obtain her protection and friendship; and he begged of them to
procure him some opportunity to speak with her.  They answered,
that this was an easy thing to do; and went one day to her house,
where she sat at the drinking table with many men.  She received
the skalds in a friendly manner, for they were known to her.
Hjalte brought her a salutation from the earl's wife, Ingebjorg;
and said she had sent him here to obtain friendly help and
succour from her, and in proof whereof produced his tokens.  The
king's daughter received him also kindly, and said he should be
welcome to her friendship.  They sat there till late in the day
drinking.  The king's daughter made Hjalte tell her much news,
and invited him to come often and converse with her.  He did so:
came there often, and spoke with the king's daughter; and at last
entrusted her with the purpose of Bjorn's and his comrade's
journey, and asked her how she thought the Swedish king would
receive the proposal that there should be a reconciliation
between the kings.  The king's daughter replied, that, in her
opinion, it would be a useless attempt to propose to the king any
reconciliation with Olaf the Thick; for the king was so enraged
against him, that he would not suffer his name to be mentioned
before him.  It happened one day that Hjalte was sitting with the
king and talking to him, and the king was very merry and drunk.
Then Hjalte said, "Manifold splendour and grandeur have I seen
here; and I have now witnessed with my eyes what I have often
heard of, that no monarch in the north is so magnificent: but it
is very vexatious that we who come so far to visit it have a road
so long and troublesome, both on account of the great ocean, but
more especially because it is not safe to travel through Norway
for those who are coming here in a friendly disposition.  But why
is there no one to bring proposals for a peace between you and
King Olaf the Thick?  I heard much in Norway, and in west
Gautland, of the general desire that this peace should have taken
place; and it has been told me for truth, as the Norway king's
words, that he earnestly desires to be reconciled to you; and the
reason I know is, that he feels how much less his power is than
yours.  It is even said that he intends to pay his court to your
daughter Ingegerd; and that would lead to a useful peace, for I 
have heard from people of credit that he is a remarkably
distinguished man."

The king answers. "Thou must not speak thus, Hjalte; but for this
time I will not take it amiss of thee, as thou dost not know what
people have to avoid here.  That fat fellow shall not be called
king in my court, and there is by no means the stuff in him that
people talk of: and thou must see thyself that such a connection
is not suitable; for I am the tenth king in Upsala who, relation
after relation, has been sole monarch over the Swedish, and many
other great lands, and all have been the superior kings over
other kings in the northern countries.  But Norway is little
inhabited, and the inhabitants are scattered.  There have only
been small kings there; and although Harald Harfager was the
greatest king in that country, and strove against the small
kings, and subdued them, yet he knew so well his position that he
did not covet the Swedish dominions, and therefore the Swedish
kings let him sit in peace, especially as there was relationship
between them.  Thereafter, while Hakon Athelstan's foster-son was
in Norway he sat in peace, until he began to maraud in Gautland
and Denmark; on which a war-force came upon him, and took from
him both life and land.  Gunhild's sons also were cut off when
they became disobedient to the Danish kings; and Harald Gormson
joined Norway to his own dominions, and made it subject to scat
to him.  And we reckon Harald Gormson to be of less power and
consideration than the Upsala kings, for our relation Styrbjorn
subdued him, and Harald became his man; and yet Eirik the
Victorious, my father, rose over Styrbjorn's head when it came to
a trial between them.  When Olaf Trygvason came to Norway and
proclaimed himself king, we would not permit it, but we went with
King Svein, and cut him off; and thus we have appropriated
Norway, as thou hast not heard, and with no less right than if I
had gained it in battle, and by conquering the kings who ruled it
before.  Now thou canst well suppose, as a man of sense, that I
will not let slip the kingdom of Norway for this thick fellow. 
It is wonderful he does not remember how narrowly he made his
escape, when we had penned him in in the Malar lake.  Although he
slipped away with life from thence, he ought, methinks, to have
something else in his mind than to hold out against us Swedes.
Now, Hjalte, thou must never again open thy mouth in my presence
on such a subject."

Hjalte saw sufficiently that there was no hope of the king's
listening to any proposal of a peace, and desisted from speaking
of it, and turned the conversation to something else.  When
Hjalte, afterwards, came into discourse with the king's daughter
Ingegerd, he tells her his conversation with the king.  She told
him she expected such an answer from the king.  Hjalte begged of
her to say a good word to the king about the matter, but she
thought the king would listen as little to what she said: "But
speak about it I will, if thou requirest it."  Hjalte assured her
he would be thankful for the attempt.  One day the king's
daughter Ingegerd had a conversation with her father Olaf; and as
she found her father was in a particularly good humour, she said,
"What is now thy intention with regard to the strife with Olaf
the Thick?  There are many who complain about it, having lost
their property by it; others have lost their relations by the
Northmen, and all their peace and quiet; so that none of your men
see any harm that can be done to Norway.  It would be a bad
counsel if thou sought the dominion over Norway; for it is a poor
country, difficult to come at, and the people dangerous: for the
men there will rather have any other for their king than thee. 
If I might advise, thou wouldst let go all thoughts about Norway,
and not desire Olaf's heritage; and rather turn thyself to the
kingdoms in the East country, which thy forefathers the former
Swedish kings had, and which our relation Styrbjorn lately
subdued, and let the thick Olaf possess the heritage of his
forefathers and make peace with him."

The king replies in a rage, "It is thy counsel, Ingegerd, that I
should let slip the kingdom of Norway, and give thee in marriage
to this thick Olaf. - No," says he, "something else shall first
take place.  Rather than that, I shall, at the Upsala Thing in
winter, issue a proclamation to all Swedes, that the whole people
shall assemble for an expedition, and go to their ships before
the ice is off the waters; and I will proceed to Norway, and lay
waste the land with fire and sword, and burn everything, to
punish them for their want of fidelity."

The king was so mad with rage that nobody ventured to say a word,
and she went away.  Hjalte, who was watching for her, immediately
went to her and asked how her errand to the king had turned out.
She answered, it turned out as she had expected; that none could
venture to put in a word with the king; but, on the contrary, he
had used threats; and she begged Hjalte never to speak of the
matter again before the king.  As Hjalte and Ingegerd spoke
together often, Olaf the Thick was often the subject, and he told
her about him and his manners; and Hjalte praised the king of
Norway what he could, but said no more than was the truth, and
she could well perceive it.  Once, in a conversation, Hjalte said
to her, "May I be permitted, daughter of the king, to tell thee
what lies in my mind?"

"Speak freely," says she; "but so that I alone can hear it."

"Then," said Hjalte, "what would be thy answer, if the Norway
king Olaf sent messengers to thee with the errand to propose
marriage to thee?"

She blushed, and answered slowly but gently, "I have not made up
my mind to answer to that; but if Olaf be in all respects so
perfect as thou tellest me, I could wish for no other husband;
unless, indeed, thou hast gilded him over with thy praise more
than sufficiently."

Hjalte replied, that he had in no respect spoken better of the
king than was true.  They often spoke together on the same
subject.  Ingegerd begged Hjalte to be cautious not to mention it
to any other person, for the king would be enraged against him if
it came to his knowledge.  Hjalte only spoke of it to the skalds
Gissur and Ottar, who thought it was the most happy plan, if it
could but be carried into effect.  Ottar, who was a man of great
power of conversation, and much beloved in the court, soon
brought up the subject before the king's daughter, and recounted
to her, as Hjalte had done, all King Olaf's excellent qualities.
Often spoke Hjalte and the others about him; and now that Hjalte
knew the result of his mission, he sent those Gautland men away
who had accompanied him, and let them return to the earl with
letters (1) which the king's daughter Ingegerd sent to the earl
and Ingebjorg.  Hjalte also let them give a hint to the earl
about the conversation he had had with Ingegerd, and her answer
thereto: and the messengers came with it to the earl a little
before Yule.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This seems the first notice we have in the sagas of written
     letters being sent instead of tokens and verbal messages. --
     L.



72. OLAF'S JOURNEY TO THE UPLANDS.

When King Olaf had despatched Bjorn and his followers to
Gautland, he sent other people also to the Uplands, with the
errand that they should have guest-quarters prepared for him, as
he intended that winter (A.D. 1018) to live as guest in the
Uplands; for it had been the custom of former kings to make a
progress in guest-quarters every third year in the Uplands.  In
autumn he began his progress from Sarpsborg, and went first to
Vingulmark.  He ordered his progress so that he came first to
lodge in the neighbourhood of the forest habitations, and
summoned to him all the men of the habitations who dwelt at the
greatest distance from the head-habitations of the district; and
he inquired particularly how it stood with their Christianity,
and, where improvement was needful, he taught them the right
customs.  If any there were who would not renounce heathen ways,
he took the matter so zealously that he drove some out of the
country, mutilated others of hands or feet, or stung their eyes
out; hung up some, cut down some with the sword; but let none go
unpunished who would not serve God.  He went thus through the
whole district, sparing neither great nor small.  He gave them
teachers, and placed these as thickly in the country as he saw
needful.  In this manner he went about in that district, and had
300 deadly men-at-arms with him; and then proceeded to Raumarike.
He soon perceived that Christianity was thriving less the farther
he proceeded into the interior of the country.  He went forward
everywhere in the same way, converting all the people to the
right faith, and severely punishing all who would not listen to
his word.



73.TREACHERY OF THE UPLAND KINGS.

Now when the king who at that time ruled in Raumarike heard of
this, he thought it was a very bad affair; for every day came men
to him, both great and small, who told him what was doing. 
Therefore this king resolved to go up to Hedemark, and consult
King Hrorek, who was the most eminent for understanding of the
kings who at that time were in the country.  Now when these kings
spoke with each other, they agreed to send a message to Gudrod,
the valley-king north in the Gudbrandsdal, and likewise to the
king who was in Hadaland, and bid them to come to Hedemark, to
meet Hrorek and the other kings there.  They did not spare their
travelling; for five kings met in Hedemark, at a place called
Ringsaker.  Ring, King Hrorek's brother, was the fifth of these
kings.  The kings had first a private conference together, in
which he who came from Raumarike first took up the word, and told
of King Olaf's proceedings, and of the disturbance he was causing
both by killing and mutilating people.  Some he drove out of the
country, some he deprived of their offices or property if they
spoke anything against him; and, besides, he was travelling over
the country with a great army, not with the number of people
fixed by law for a royal progress in guest-quarters.  He added,
that he had fled hither upon account of this disturbance, and
many powerful people with him had fled from their udal properties
in Raumarike.  "But although as yet the evil is nearest to us, it
will be but a short time before ye will also be exposed to it;
therefore it is best that we all consider together what
resolution we shall take."  When he had ended his speech, Hrorek
was desired to speak; and he said, "Now is the day come that I
foretold when we had had our meeting at Hadaland, and ye were all
so eager to raise Olaf over our heads; namely, that as soon as he
was the supreme master of the country we would find it hard to
hold him by the horns.  We have but two things now to do: the one
is, to go all of us to him, and let him do with us as he likes,
which I think is the best thing we can do; or the other is, to
rise against him before he has gone farther through the country.
Although he has 300 or 400 men, that is not too great a force for
us to meet, if we are only all in movement together: but, in
general, there is less success and advantage to be gained when
several of equal strength are joined together, than when one
alone stands at the head of his own force; therefore it is my
advice, that we do not venture to try our luck against Olaf
Haraldson."

Thereafter each of the kings spoke according to his own mind some
dissuading from going out against King Olaf, others urging it;
and no determination was come to, as each had his own reasons to
produce.

Then Gudrod, the valley-king, took up the word, and spoke: -- "It
appears wonderful to me, that ye make such a long roundabout in
coming to a resolution; and probably ye are frightened for him.
We are here five kings, and none of less high birth than Olaf.
We gave him the strength to fight with Earl Svein, and with our
forces he has brought the country under his power.  But if he
grudges each of us the little kingdom he had before, and
threatens us with tortures, or gives us ill words, then, say I
for myself, that I will withdraw myself from the king's slavery;
and I do not call him a man among you who is afraid to cut him
off, if he come into your hands here up in Hedemark.  And this I
can tell you, that we shall never bear our heads in safety while
Olaf is in life."  After this encouragement they all agreed to
his determination.

Then said Hrorek, "With regard to this determination, it appears
to me necessary to make our agreement so strong that no one shall
fail in his promise to the other.  Therefore, if ye determine
upon attacking Olaf at a fixed time, when he comes here to
Hedemark, I will not trust much to you if some are north in the
valleys, others up in Hedemark; but if our resolution is to come
to anything, we must remain here assembled together day and
night."

This the kings agreed to, and kept themselves there all
assembled, ordering a feast to be provided for them at Ringsaker,
and drank there a cup to success; sending out spies to Raumarike,
and when one set came in sending out others, so that day and
night they had intelligence of Olaf's proceedings, and of the
numbers of his men.  King Olaf went about in Raumarike in
guest-quarters, and altogether in the way before related; but as
the provision of the guest-quarter was not always sufficient,
upon account of his numerous followers, he laid it upon the
bondes to give additional contributions wherever he found it
necessary to stay.  In some places he stayed longer, in others,
shorter than was fixed; and his journey down to the lake Miosen
was shorter than had been fixed on.  The kings, after taking
their resolution, sent out message-tokens, and summoned all the
lendermen and powerful bondes from all the districts thereabout;
and when they had assembled the kings had a private meeting with
them, and made their determination known, setting a day for
gathering together and carrying it into effect; and it was
settled among them that each of the kings should have 300 (1)
men.  Then they sent away the lendermen to gather the people, and
meet all at the appointed place.  The most approved of the
measure; but it happened here, as it usually does, that every one
has some friend even among his enemies.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  I.e., 360.



74. MUTILATING OF THE UPLAND KINGS.

Ketil of Ringanes was at this meeting.  Now when he came home in
the evening he took his supper, put on his clothes, and went down
with his house-servants to the lake; took a light vessel which he
had, the same that King Olaf had made him a present of, and
launched it on the water.  They found in the boat-house
everything ready to their hands; betook themselves to their oars,
and rowed out into the lake.  Ketil had forty well-armed men with
him, and came early in the morning to the end of the lake.  He
set off immediately with twenty men, leaving the other twenty to
look after the ship.  King Olaf was at that time at Eid, in the
upper end of Raumarike.  Thither Ketil arrived just as the king
was coming from matins.  The king received Ketil kindly.  He said
he must speak with the king in all haste; and they had a private
conference together.  There Ketil tells the king the resolution
which the kings had taken, and their agreement, which he had come
to the certain knowledge of.  When the king learnt this he called
his people together, and sent some out to collect riding-horses
in the country; others he sent down to the lake to take all the
rowing-vessels they could lay hold of, and keep them for his use.
Thereafter he went to the church, had mass sung before him, and
then sat down to table.  After his meal he got ready, and
hastened down to the lake, where the vessels were coming to meet
him.  He himself went on board the light vessel, and as many men
with him as it could stow, and all the rest of his followers took
such boats as they could get hold of; and when it was getting
late in the evening they set out from the land, in still and calm
weather.  He rowed up the water with 400 men, and came with them
to Ringsaker before day dawned; and the watchmen were not aware
of the army before they were come into the very court.  Ketil
knew well in what houses the kings slept, and the king had all
these houses surrounded and guarded, so that nobody could get
out; and so they stood till daylight.  The kings had not people
enough to make resistance, but were all taken prisoners, and led
before the king.  Hrorek was an able but obstinate man, whose
fidelity the king could not trust to if he made peace with him;
therefore he ordered both his eyes to be punched out, and took
him in that condition about with him.  He ordered Gudrod's tongue
to be cut out; but Ring and two others he banished from Norway,
under oath never to return.  Of the lendermen and bondes who had
actually taken part in the traitorous design, some he drove out
of the country, some he mutilated, and with others he made peace.
Ottar Black tells of this: --

     "The giver of rings of gold,
     The army leader bold,
          In vengeance springs
          On the Hedemark kings.
     Olaf the bold and great,
     Repays their foul deceit --
          In full repays
          Their treacherous ways.
     He drives with steel-clad hand
     The small kings from the land, --
          Greater by far
          In deed of war.
     The king who dwelt most north
     Tongueless must wander forth:
          All fly away
          In great dismay.
     King Olaf now rules o'er
     What five kings ruled before.
          To Eid's old bound
          Extends his ground.
     No kings in days of yore
     E'er won so much before:
          That this is so
          All Norsemen know."

King Olaf took possession of the land these five kings had
possessed, and took hostages from the lendermen and bondes in it.
He took money instead of guest-quarters from the country north of
the valley district, and from Hedemark; and then returned to
Raumarike, and so west to Hadaland.  This winter (A.D. 1018) his
stepfather Sigurd Syr died; and King Olaf went to Ringerike,
where his mother Asta made a great feast for him.  Olaf alone
bore the title of king now in Norway.



75. KING OLAF'S HALF-BROTHERS.

It is told that when King Olaf was on his visit to his mother
Asta, she brought out her children, and showed them to him.  The
king took his brother Guthorm on the one knee, and his brother
Halfdan on the other.  The king looked at Guthorm, made a wry
face, and pretended to be angry at them: at which the boys were
afraid.  Then Asta brought her youngest son, called Harald, who
was three years old, to him.  The king made a wry face at him
also; but he looked the king in the face without regarding it.
The king took the boy by the hair, and plucked it; but the boy
seized the king's whiskers, and gave them a tug.  "Then," said
the king, "thou wilt be revengeful, my friend, some day."  The
following day the king was walking with his mother about the
farm, and they came to a playground, where Asta's sons, Guthorm
and Halfdan, were amusing themselves.  They were building great
houses and barns in their play, and were supposing them full of
cattle and sheep; and close beside them, in a clay pool, Harald
was busy with chips of wood, sailing them, in his sport along the
edge.  The king asked him what these were; and he answered, these
were his ships of war.  The king laughed, and said, "The time may
come, friend, when thou wilt command ships."

Then the king called to him Halfdan and Guthorm; and first he
asked Guthorm, "What wouldst thou like best to have?"

"Corn land," replied he.

"And how great wouldst thou like thy corn land to be?"

"I would have the whole ness that goes out into the lake sown
with corn every summer."  On that ness there are ten farms.

The king replies, "There would be a great deal of corn there."
And, turning to Halfdan, he asked, "And what wouldst thou like
best to have?"

"Cows," he replied.

"How many wouldst thou like to have?"

"When they went to the lake to be watered I would have so many,
that they stood as tight round the lake as they could stand."

"That would be a great housekeeping," said the king; "and therein
ye take after your father."

Then the king says to Harald, "And what wouldst thou like best to
have?"

"House-servants."

"And how many wouldst thou have?"

"Oh!  so many I would like to have as would eat up my brother
Halfdan's cows at a single meal."

The king laughed, and said to Asta, "Here, mother, thou art
bringing up a king."  And more is not related of them on this
occasion.



76. THE DIVISION OF THE COUNTRY.

In Svithjod it was the old custom, as long as heathenism
prevailed, that the chief sacrifice took place in Goe month at
Upsala.  Then sacrifice was offered for peace, and victory to the
king; and thither came people from all parts of Svithjod.  All
the Things of the Swedes, also, were held there, and markets, and
meetings for buying, which continued for a week: and after
Christianity was introduced into Svithjod, the Things and fairs
were held there as before.  After Christianity had taken root in
Svithjod, and the kings would no longer dwell in Upsala, the
market-time was moved to Candlemas, and it has since continued
so, and it lasts only three days.  There is then the Swedish
Thing also, and people from all quarters come there.  Svithjod is
divided into many parts.  One part is West Gautland, Vermaland,
and the Marks, with what belongs to them; and this part of the
kingdom is so large, that the bishop who is set over it has 1100
churches under him.  The other part is East Gautland, where there
is also a bishop's seat, to which the islands of Gotland and
Eyland belong; and forming all together a still greater
bishopric.  In Svithjod itself there is a part of the country
called Sudermanland, where there is also a bishopric.  Then comes
Westmanland, or Fiathrundaland, which is also a bishopric.  The
third portion of Svithjod proper is called Tiundaland; the fourth
Attandaland; the fifth Sialand, and what belongs to it lies
eastward along the coast.  Tiundaland is the best and most
inhabited part of Svithjod, under which the other kingdoms stand.
There Upsala is situated, the seat of the king and archbishop;
and from it Upsala-audr, or the domain of the Swedish kings,
takes its name.  Each of these divisions of the country has its
Lag-thing, and its own laws in many parts.  Over each is a
lagman, who rules principally in affairs of the bondes: for that
becomes law which he, by his speech, determines them to make law:
and if king, earl, or bishop goes through the country, and holds
a Thing with the bondes, the lagmen reply on account of the
bondes, and they all follow their lagmen; so that even the most
powerful men scarcely dare to come to their Al-thing without
regarding the bondes' and lagmen's law.  And in all matters in
which the laws differ from each other, Upsala-law is the
directing law; and the other lagmen are under the lagman who
dwells in Tiundaland.



77. OF THE LAGMAN THORGNY.

In Tiundaland there was a lagman who was called Thorgny, whose
father was called Thorgny Thorgnyson.  His forefathers had for a
long course of years, and during many kings' times, been lagmen
of Tiundaland.  At this time Thorgny was old, and had a great
court about him.  He was considered one of the wisest men in
Sweden, and was Earl Ragnvald's relation and foster-father.



78. MEETING OF RAGNVALD AND INGEGERD.

Now we must go back in our story to the time when the men whom
the king's daughter Ingegerd and Hjalte had sent from the east
came to Earl Ragnvald.  They relate their errand to the earl and
his wife Ingebjorg, and tell how the king's daughter had oft
spoken to the Swedish king about a peace between him and King
Olaf the Thick, and that she was a great friend of King Olaf; but
that the Swedish king flew into a passion every time she named
Olaf, so that she had no hopes of any peace.  The Earl told Bjorn
the news he had received from the east; but Bjorn gave the same
reply, that he would not turn back until he had met the Swedish
king, and said the earl had promised to go with him.  Now the
winter was passing fast, and immediately after Yule the earl made
himself ready to travel with sixty men, among whom where the
marshal Bjorn and his companions.  The earl proceeded eastward
all the way to Svithjod; but when he came a little way into the
country he sent his men before him to Upsala with a message to
Ingegerd the king's daughter to come out to meet him at
Ullaraker, where she had a large farm.  When the king's daughter
got the earl's message she made herself ready immediately to
travel with a large attendance, and Hjalte accompanied her.  But
before he took his departure he went to King Olaf, and said,
"Continue always to be the most fortunate of monarchs!  Such
splendour as I have seen about thee I have in truth never
witnessed elsewhere, and wheresoever I come it shall not be
concealed.  Now, king, may I entreat thy favour and friendship in
time to come?"

The king replies, "Why art thou in so great a haste, and where
art thou going?"

Hjalte replies, "I am to ride out to Ullaraker with Ingegerd thy
daughter."

The king says, "Farewell, then: a man thou art of understanding
and politeness, and well suited to live with people of rank."

Thereupon Hjalte withdrew.

The king's daughter Ingegerd rode to her farm in Ullaraker, and
ordered a great feast to be prepared for the earl.  When the earl
arrived he was welcomed with gladness, and he remained there
several days.  The earl and the king's daughter talked much, and
of many things, but most about the Swedish and Norwegian kings;
and she told the earl that in her opinion there was no hope of
peace between them.

Then said the earl, "How wouldst thou like it, my cousin, if Olaf
king of Norway were to pay his addresses to thee?  It appears to
us that it would contribute most towards a settled peace if there
was relationship established between the kings; but I would not
support such a matter if it were against thy inclination."

She replies, "My father disposes of my hand; but among all my
other relations thou art he whose advice I would rather follow in
weighty affairs.  Dost thou think it would be advisable?"  The
earl recommended it to her strongly, and reckoned up many
excellent achievements of King Olaf's.  He told her, in
particular, about what had lately been done; that King Olaf in an
hours time one morning had taken five kings prisoners, deprived
them all of their governments, and laid their kingdoms and
properties under his own power.  Much they talked about the
business, and in all their conversations they perfectly agreed
with each other.  When the earl was ready he took leave, and
proceeded on his way, taking Hjalte with him.



79. RAGNVALD AND THORGNY.

Earl Ragnvald came towards evening one day to the house of Lagman
Thorgny.  It was a great and stately mansion, and many people
stood outside, who received the earl kindly, and took care of the
horses and baggage.  The earl went into the room, where there was
a number of people.  In the high-seat sat an old man; and never
had Bjorn or his companions seen a man so stout.  His beard was
so long that it lay upon his knee, and was spread over his whole
breast; and the man, moreover, was handsome and stately in
appearance.  The earl went forward and saluted him.  Thorgny
received him joyfully and kindly, and bade him go to the seat he
was accustomed to take.  The earl seated himself on the other
side, opposite Thorgny.  They remained there some days before the
earl disclosed his errand, and then he asked Thorgny to go with
him into the conversing room.  Bjorn and his followers went there
with the earl.  Then the earl began, and told how Olaf king of
Norway had sent these men hither to conclude a peaceful
agreement.  He showed at great length what injury it was of to
the West Gautland people, that there was hostility between their
country and Norway.  He further related that Olaf the king of
Norway had sent ambassadors, who were here present, and to whom
he had promised he would attend them to the Swedish king; but he
added, "The Swedish king takes the matter so grievously, that he
has uttered menaces against those who entertain it.  Now so it
is, my foster-father, that I do not trust to myself in this
matter; but am come on a visit to thee to get good counsel and
help from thee in the matter."

Now when the earl had done speaking Thorgny sat silent for a
while, and then took up the word. "Ye have curious dispositions
who are so ambitious of honour and renown, and yet have no
prudence or counsel in you when you get into any mischief.  Why
did you not consider, before you gave your promise to this
adventure, that you had no power to stand against King Olaf?  In
my opinion it is not a less honourable condition to be in the
number of bondes and have one's words free, and be able to say
what one will, even if the king be present.  But I must go to the
Upsala Thing, and give thee such help that without fear thou
canst speak before the king what thou findest good."

The earl thanked him for the promise, remained with Thorgny, and
rode with him to the Upsala Thing.  There was a great assemblage
of people at the Thing, and King Olaf was there with his court.



80. OF THE UPSALA THING.

The first day the Thing sat, King Olaf was seated on a stool, and
his court stood in a circle around him.  Right opposite to him
sat Earl Ragnvald and Thorgny in the Thing upon one stool, and
before them the earl's court and Thorgny's house-people.  Behind
their stool stood the bonde community, all in a circle around
them.  Some stood upon hillocks and heights, in order to hear the
better.  Now when the king's messages, which are usually handled
in the Things, were produced and settled, the marshal Bjorn rose
beside the earl's stool, and said aloud, "King Olaf sends me here
with the message that he will offer to the Swedish king peace,
and the frontiers that in old times were fixed between Norway and
Svithjod."  He spoke so loud that the Swedish king could
distinctly hear him; but at first, when he heard King Olaf's name
spoken, he thought the speaker had some message or business of
his own to execute; but when he heard of peace, and the frontiers
between Norway and Svithjod, he saw from what root it came, and
sprang up, and called out that the man should be silent, for that
such speeches were useless.  Thereupon Bjorn sat down; and when
the noise had ceased Earl Ragnvald stood up and made a speech.

He spoke of Olaf the Thick's message, and proposal of peace to
Olaf the Swedish king; and that all the West Gautland people sent
their entreaty to Olaf that he would make peace with the king of
Norway.  He recounted all the evils the West Gautlanders were
suffering under; that they must go without all the things from
Norway which were necessary in their households; and, on the
other hand, were exposed to attack and hostility whenever the
king of Norway gathered an army and made an inroad on them.  The
earl added, that Olaf the Norway king had sent men hither with
the intent to obtain Ingegerd the king's daughter in marriage.

When the earl had done speaking Olaf the Swedish king stood up
and replied, and was altogether against listening to any
proposals of peace, and made many and heavy reproaches against
the earl for his impudence in entering into a peaceful truce with
the thick fellow, and making up a peaceful friendship with him,
and which in truth he considered treason against himself.  He
added, that it would be well deserved if Earl Ragnvald were
driven out of the kingdom.  The earl had, in his opinion, the
influence of his wife Ingebjorg to thank for what might happen;
and it was the most imprudent fancy he could have fallen upon to
take up with such a wife.  The king spoke long and bitterly,
turning his speech always against Olaf the Thick.  When he sat
down not a sound was to be heard at first.



81. THORGNY'S SPEECH.

Then Thorgny stood up; and when he arose all the bondes stood up
who had before been sitting, and rushed together from all parts
to listen to what Lagman Thorgny would say.  At first there was a
great din of people and weapons; but when the noise was settled
into silent listening, Thorguy made his speech. "The disposition
of Swedish kings is different now from what it has been formerly.
My grandfather Thorgny could well remember the Upsala king Eirik
Eymundson, and used to say of him that when he was in his best
years he went out every summer on expeditions to different
countries, and conquered for himself Finland, Kirjalaland,
Courland, Esthonia, and the eastern countries all around; and at
the present day the earth-bulwarks, ramparts, and other great
works which he made are to be seen.  And, more over, he was not
so proud that he would not listen to people who had anything to
say to him.  My father, again, was a long time with King Bjorn,
and was well acquainted with his ways and manners.  In Bjorn's
lifetime his kingdom stood in great power, and no kind of want
was felt, and he was gay and sociable with his friends.  I also
remember King Eirik the Victorious, and was with him on many a
war-expedition.  He enlarged the Swedish dominion, and defended
it manfully; and it was also easy and agreeable to communicate
our opinions to him.  But the king we have now got allows no man
to presume to talk with him, unless it be what he desires to
hear.  On this alone he applies all his power, while he allows
his scat-lands in other countries to go from him through laziness
and weakness.  He wants to have the Norway kingdom laid under
him, which no Swedish king before him ever desired, and therewith
brings war and distress on many a man.  Now it is our  will, we
bondes, that thou King Olaf make peace with the Norway king, Olaf
the Thick, and marry thy daughter Ingegerd to him.  Wilt thou,
however, reconquer the kingdoms in the east countries which thy
relations and forefathers had there, we will all for that purpose
follow thee to the war.  But if thou wilt not do as we desire, we
will now attack thee, and put thee to death; for we will no
longer suffer law and peace to be disturbed.  So our forefathers
went to work when they drowned five kings in a morass at the
Mula-thing, and they were filled with the same insupportable
pride thou hast shown towards us.  Now tell us, in all haste,
what resolution thou wilt take."  Then the whole public approved,
with clash of arms and shouts, the lagman's speech.

The king stands up and says he will let things go according to
the desire of the bondes.  "All Swedish kings," he said, "have
done so, and have allowed the bondes to rule in all according to
their will."  The murmur among the bondes then came to an end,
and the chiefs, the king, the earl, and Thorgny talked together,
and concluded a truce and reconciliation, on the part of the
Swedish king, according to the terms which the king of Norway had
proposed by his ambassadors; and it was resolved at the Thing
that Ingegerd, the king's daughter, should be married to Olaf
Haraldson.  The king left it to the earl to make the contract
feast, and gave him full powers to conclude this marriage affair;
and after this was settled at the Thing, they separated.  When
the earl returned homewards, he and the king's daughter Ingegerd
had a meeting, at which they talked between themselves over this
matter.  She sent Olaf a long cloak of fine linen richly
embroidered with gold, and with silk points.  The earl returned
to Gautland, and Bjorn with him; and after staying with him a
short time, Bjorn and his company returned to Norway.  When he
came to King Olaf he told him the result of his errand, and the
king returned him many thanks for his conduct, and said Bjorn had
had great success in bringing his errand to so favourabie a
conclusion against such animosity.



82. OF KING HROREK'S TREACHERY.

On the approach of spring (A.D. 1018) King Olaf went down to the
coast, had his ships rigged out, summoned troops to him, and
proceeded in spring out from Viken to the Naze, and so north to
Hordaland.  He then sent messages to all the lendermen, selected
the most considerable men in each district, and made the most
splendid preparations to meet his bride.  The wedding-feast was
to be in autumn, at the Gaut river, on the frontiers of the two
countries.  King Olaf had with him the blind king Hrorek.  When
his wound was healed, the king gave him two men to serve him, let
him sit in the high-seat by his side, and kept him in meat and
clothes in no respect Norse than he had kept himself before.
Hrorek  was taciturn, and answered short and cross when any one
spoke to him.  It was his custom to make his footboy, when he
went out in the daytime, lead him away from people, and then to
beat the lad until he ran away.  He would then complain to King
Olaf that the lad would not serve him.  The king changed his
servants, but it was as before; no servant would hold it out with
King Hrorek.  Then the king appointed a man called Svein to wait
upon and serve King Hrorek.  He was Hrorek's relation, and had
formerly been in his service.  Hrorek continued with his habits
of moroseness, and of solitary walks; but when he and Svein were
alone together, he was merry and talkative.  He used to bring up
many things which had happened in former days when he was king.
He alluded, too, to the man who had, in his former days, torn him
from his kingdom and happiness, and made him live on alms.  "It
is hardest of all," says he, "that thou and my other relations,
who ought to be men of bravery, are so degenerated that thou wilt
not avenge the shame and disgrace brought upon our race."  Such
discourse he often brought out.  Svein said, they had too great a
power to deal with, while they themselves had but little means.
Hrorek said, "Why should we live longer as mutilated men with
disgrace?  I, a blind man, may conquer them as well as they
conquered me when I was asleep.  Come then, let us kill this
thick Olaf.  He is not afraid for himself at present.  I will lay
the plan, and would not spare my hands if I could use them, but
that I cannot by reason of my blindness; therefore thou must use
the weapons against him, and as soon as Olaf is killed I can see
well enough that his power must come into the hands of his
enemies, and it may well be that I shall be king, and thou shalt
be my earl."  So much persuasion he used that Svein at last
agreed to join in the deed.  The plan was so laid that when the
king was ready to go to vespers, Svein stood on the threshold
with a drawn dagger under his cloak.  Now when the king came out
of the room, it so happened that he walked quicker than Svein
expected; and when he looked the king in the face he grew pale,
and then white as a corpse, and his hand sank down.  The king
observed his terror and said, "What is this, Svein?  Wilt thou
betray me?"  Svein threw down his cloak and dagger, and fell at
the king's feet, saying, "All is in Gods hands and thine, king!"
The king ordered his men to seize Svein, and he was put in irons.
The king ordered Hrorek's seat to be moved to another bench.  He
gave Svein his life, and he left the country.  The king appointed
a different lodging for Hrorek to sleep in from that in which he
slept himself, and in which many of his court-people slept.  He
set two of his court-men, who had been long with him, and whose
fidelity he had proof of, to attend Hrorek day and night; but it
is not said whether they were people of high birth or not.  King
Hrorek's mood was very different at different times.  Sometimes
he would sit silent for days together, so that no man could get a
word out of him; and sometimes he was so merry and gay, that
people found a joke in every word he said.  Sometimes his words
were very bitter.  He was sometimes in a mood that he would drink
them  all under the benches, and made all his neighbours drunk;
but in general he drank but little.  King Olaf gave him plenty of
pocket-money.  When he went to his lodgings he would often,
before going to bed, have some stoups of mead brought in, which
he gave to all the men in the house to drink, so that he was much
liked.



83. OF LITTLE FIN.

There was a man from the Uplands called Fin the Little, and some
said of him that he was of Finnish (1) race.  He was a remarkable
little man, but so swift of foot that no horse could overtake
him.  He was a particularly well-excercised runner with snow-
shoes, and shooter with the bow.  He had long been in the service
of King Hrorek, and often employed in errands of trust.  He knew
the roads in all the Upland hills, and was well known to all the
great people.  Now when King Hrorek was set under guards on the
journey Fin would often slip in among the men of the guard, and
followed, in general, with the lads and serving-men; but as often
as he could he waited upon Hrorek, and entered into conversation
with him.  The king, however, only spoke a word or two with him
at a time, to prevent suspicion.  In spring, when they came a
little way beyond Viken, Fin disappeared from the army for some
days, but came back, and stayed with them a while.  This happened
often, without anyone observing it particularly; for there were
many such hangers-on with the army.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The Laplanders are called Fins In Norway and Sweden. -- L.



84. MURDER OF OLAF'S COURT-MEN.

King Olaf came to Tunsberg before Easter (A.D. 1018), and
remained there late in spring.  Many merchant vessels came to the
town, both from Saxon-land and Denmark, and from Viken, and from
the north parts of the country.  There was a great assemblage of
people; and as the times were good, there was many a drinking
meeting.  It happened one evening that King Hrorek came rather
late to his lodging; and as he had drunk a great deal, he was
remarkably merry.  Little Fin came to him with a stoup of mead
with herbs in it, and very strong.  The king made every one in
the house drunk, until they fell asleep each in his berth.  Fin
had gone away, and a light was burning in the lodging.  Hrorek
waked the men who usually followed him, and told them he wanted
to go out into the yard.  They had a lantern with them, for
outside it was pitch dark.  Out in the yard there was a large
privy standing upon pillars, and a stair to go up to it.  While
Hrorek and his guards were in the yard they heard a man say, "Cut
down that devil;" and presently a crash, as if somebody fell.
Hrorek said, "These fellows must be dead drunk to be fighting
with each other so: run and separate them."  They rushed out; but
when they came out upon the steps both of them were killed: the
man who went out the last was the first killed.  There were
twelve of Hrorek's men there, and among them Sigurd Hit, who had
been his banner-man, and also little Fin.  They drew the dead
bodies up between the houses, took the king with them, ran out to
a boat they had in readiness, and rowed away.  Sigvat the skald
slept in King Olaf's lodgings.  He got up in the night, and his
footboy with him, and went to the privy.  But as they were
returning, on going down the stairs Sigvat's foot slipped, and he
fell on his knee; and when he put out his hands he felt the
stairs wet.  "I think," said he, laughing, "the king must have
given many of us tottering legs tonight."  When they came into
the house in which light was burning the footboy said, "Have you
hurt yourself that you are all over so bloody?"  He replied, "I
am not wounded, but something must have happened here." 
Thereupon he wakened Thord Folason, who was standard-bearer, and
his bedfellow.  They went out with a light, and soon found the
blood.  They traced it, and found the corpses, and knew them.
They saw also a great stump of a tree in which clearly a gash had
been cut, which, as was afterwards known, had been done as a
stratagem to entice those out who had been killed.  Sigvat and
Thord spoke together and agreed it was highly necessary to let
the king know of this without delay.  They immediately sent a lad
to the lodging where Hrorek had been.  All the men in it were
asleep; but the king was gone.  He wakened the men who were in
the house, and told them what had happened.  The men arose, and
ran out to the yard where the bodies were; but, however needful
it appeared to be that the king should know it, nobody dared to
waken him.

Then said Sigvat to Thord, "What wilt thou rather do, comrade,
waken the king, or tell him the tidings?"

Thord replies, "I do not dare to waken him, and I would rather
tell him the news."

Then said Sigvat, "There is minch of the night still to pass, and
before morning Hrorek may get himself concealed in such a way
that it may be difficult to find him; but as yet he cannot be
very far off, for the bodies are still warm.  We must never let
the disgrace rest upon us of concealing this treason from the
king.  Go thou, up to the lodging, and wait for me there."

Sigvat then went to the church, and told the bell-ringer to toll
for the souls of the king's court-men, naming the men who were
killed.  The-bell-ringer did as he was told.  The king awoke at
the ringing, sat up in his bed, and asked if it was already the
hours of matins.

Thord replies, "It is worse than that, for there has occurred a
very important affair.  Hrorek is fled, and two of the court-men
are killed."

The king asked how this had taken place, and Thord told him all
he knew.  The king got up immediately, ordered to sound the call
for a meeting of the court, and when the people were assembled he
named men to go out to every quarter from the town, by sea and
land, to search for Hrorek.  Thorer Lange took a boat, and set
off with thirty men; and when day dawned they saw two small boats
before them in the channel, and when they saw each other both
parties rowed as hard as they could.  King Hrorek was there with
thirty men.  When they came quite close to each other Hrorek and
his men turned towards the land, and all sprang on shore except
the king, who sat on the aft seat.  He bade them farewell, and
wished they might meet each other again in better luck.  At the
same moment Thorer with his company rowed to the land.  Fin the
Little shot off an arrow, which hit Thorer in the middle of the
body, and was his death; and Sigurd Hit, with his men, ran up
into the forest.  Thorer's men took his body, and transported it,
together with Hrorek, to Tunsberg.  King Olaf undertook himself
thereafter to look after King Hrorek, made him be carefully
guarded, and took good care of his treason, for which reason he
had a watch over him night and day.  King Hrorek thereafter was
very gay, and nobody could observe but that he was in every way
well satisfied.



85. OF HROREK'S ASSAULT.

It happened on Ascension-day that King Olaf went to high mass,
and the bishop went in procession around the church, and
conducted the king; and when they came back to the church the
bishop led the king to his seat on the north side of the choir.
There Hrorek sat next to the king, and concealed his countenance
in his upper cloak.  When Olaf had seated himself Hrorek laid his
hand on the king's shoulder, and felt it.

"Thou hast fine clothes on, cousin, today," said he.

King Olaf replies, "It is a festival today, in remembrance that
Jesus Christ ascended to heaven from earth."

King Hrorek says, "I understand nothing about it so as to hold in
my mind what ye tell me about Christ. Much of what ye tell me
appears to me incredible, although many wonderful things may have
come to pass in old times."

When the mass was finished Olaf stood up, held his hands up over
his head, and bowed down before the altar, so that his cloak hung
down behind his shoulders.  Then King Hrorek started up hastily
and sharply, and struck at the king with a long knife of the kind
called ryting; but the blow was received in the upper cloak at
the shoulder, because the king was bending himself forwards.  The
clothes were much cut, but the king was not wounded.  When the
king perceived the attack he sprang upon the floor; and Hrorek
struck at him again with the knife, but did not reach him, and
said, "Art thou flying, Olaf, from me, a blind men?"  The king
ordered his men to seize him and lead him out of the church,
which was done.  After this attempt many hastened to King Olaf,
and advised that King Hrorek should be killed.  "It is," said
they, "tempting your luck in the highest degree, king, to keep
him with you, and protect him, whatever mischief he may
undertake; for night and day he thinks upon taking your life. 
And if you send him away, we know no one who can watch him so
that he will not in all probability escape; and if once he gets
loose he will assemble a great multitude, and do much evil."

The king replies, "You say truly that many a one has suffered
death for less offence than Hrorek's; but willingly I would not
darken the victory I gained over the Upland kings, when in one
morning hour I took five kings prisoners, and got all their
kingdoms: but yet, as they were my relations, I should not be
their murderer but upon need.  As yet I can scarcely see whether
Hrorek puts me in the necessity of killing him or not."

It was to feel if King Olaf had armour on or not that Hrorek had
laid his hand on the king's shoulder.



86. KING HROREK'S JOURNEY TO ICELAND.

There was an Iceland man, by name Thorarin Nefiulfson, who had
his relations in the north of the country.  He was not of high
birth, but particularly prudent, eloquent, and agreeable in
conversation with people of distinction.  He was also a far-
travelled man, who had been long in foreign parts.  Thorarin was
a remarkably ugly man, principally because he had very ungainly
limbs.  He had great ugly hands, and his feet were still uglier.
Thorarin was in Tunsberg when this event happened which has just
been related, and he was known to King Olaf by their having had
conversations together.  Thorarin was just then done with rigging
out a merchant vessel which he owned, and with which he intended
to go to Iceland in summer.  King Olaf had Thorarin with him as a
guest for some days, and conversed much with him; and Thorarin
even slept in the king's lodgings.  One morning early the king
awoke while the others were still sleeping.  The sun had newly
risen in the sky, and there was much light within.  The king saw
that Thorarin had stretched out one of his feet from under the
bed-clothes, and he looked at the foot a while.  In the meantime
the others in the lodging awoke; and the king said to Thorarin,
"I have been awake for a while, and have seen a sight which was
worth seeing; and that is a man's foot so ugly that I do not
think an uglier can be found in this merchant town."  Thereupon
he told the others to look at it, and see if it was not so; and
all agreed with the king.  When Thorarin observed what they were
talking about, he said, "There are few things for which you
cannot find a match, and that may be the case here."

The king says, "I would rather say that such another ugly foot
cannot be found in the town, and I would lay any wager upon it."

Then said Thorarin, "I am willing to bet that I shall find an
uglier foot still in the town."

The king -- "Then he who wins shall have the right to get any
demand from the other he chooses to make."

"Be it so," said Thorarin.  Thereupon he stretches out his other
foot from under the bed-clothes, and it was in no way handsomer
than the other, and moreover, wanted the little toe.  "There,"
said Thorarin, "see now, king, my other foot, which is so much
uglier; and, besides, has no little toe.  Now I have won."

The king replies, "That other foot was so much uglier than this
one by having five ugly toes upon it, and this has only four; and
now I have won the choice of asking something from thee."

"The sovereign's decision must be right," says Thorarin; "but
what does the king require of me?"

"To take Hrorek," said the king, "to Greenland, and deliver him
to Leif Eirikson."

Thorarin replies, "I have never been in Greenland."

The king -- "Thou, who art a far-travelled man, wilt now have an
opportunity of seeing Greenland, if thou hast never been there
before."

At first Thorarin did not say much about it; but as the king
insisted on his wish he did not entirely decline, but said, "I
will let you hear, king, what my desire would have been had I
gained the wager.  It would have been to be received into your
body of court-men; and if you will grant me that, I will be the
more zealous now in fulfilling your pleasure."  The king gave his
consent, and Thorarin was made one of the court-men.  Then
Thorarin rigged out his vessel, and when he was ready he took on
board King Hrorek.  When Thorarin took leave of King Olaf, he
said, "Should it now turn out, king, as is not improbable, and
often happens, that we cannot effect the voyage to Greenland, but
must run for Iceland or other countries, how shall I get rid of
this king in a way that will be satisfactory to you?"

The king -- "If thou comest to Iceland, deliver him into the
hands of Gudmund Eyolfson, or of Skapte, the lagman, or of some
other chief who will receive my tokens and message of friendship.
But if thou comest to other countries nearer to this, do so with
him that thou canst know with certainty that King Hrorek never
again shall appear in Norway; but do so only when thou seest no
other way of doing whatsoever."

When Thorarin was ready for sea, and got a wind, he sailed
outside of all the rocks and islands, and when he was to the
north of the Naze set right out into the ocean.  He did not
immediately get a good wind, but he avoided coming near the land.
He sailed until he made land which he knew, in the south part of
Iceland, and sailed west around the land out into the Greenland
ocean.

There he encountered heavy storms, and drove long about upon the
ocean; but when summer was coming to an end he landed again in
Iceland in Breidafjord.  Thorgils Arason (1) was the first man of
any consequence who came to him.  Thorarin brings him the king's
salutation, message, and tokens, with which was the desire about
King Hrorek's reception.  Thorgils received these in a friendly
way, and invited King Hrorek to his house, where he stayed all
winter.  But he did not like being there, and begged that
Thorgils would let him go to Gudmund; saying he had heard some
time or other that there in Gudmund's house, was the most
sumptuous way of living in Iceland, and that it was intended he
should be in Gudmund's hands.  Thorgils let him have his desire,
and conducted him with some men to Gudmund at Modruveller.
Gudmund received Hrorek kindly on account of the king's message,
and he stayed there the next winter.  He did not like being there
either; and then Gudmund gave him a habitation upon a small farm
called Kalfskin, where there were but few neighbours.  There
Hrorek passed the third winter, and said that since he had laid
down his kingdom he thought himself most comfortably situated
here; for here he was most respected by all.  The summer after
Hrorek fell sick, and died; and it is said he is the only king
whose bones rest in Iceland.  Thorarin Nefiulfson was afterwards
for a long time upon voyages; but sometimes he was with King
Olaf.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Thorgils was the son of Are Marson, who visited America
     (Vindland).  Thorgils, who was still alive in the year 1024,
     was noted for his kindness toward all persecuted persons.



87. BATTLE IN ULFREKS-FJORD.

The summer that Thorarin went with Hrorek to Iceland, Hjalte
Skeggjason went also to Iceland, and King Olaf gave him many
friendly gifts with him when they parted.  The same summer Eyvind
Urarhorn went on an expedition to the west sea, and came in
autumn to Ireland, to the Irish king Konofogor (1).  In autumn
Einar earl of Orkney and this Irish king met in Ulfreks-fjord,
and there was a great battle, in which Konofogor gained the
victory, having many more people.  The earl fled with a single
ship and came back about autumn to Orkney, after losing most of
his men and all the booty they had made.  The earl was much
displeased with his expedition, and threw the blame upon the
Northmen, who had been in the battle on the side of the Irish
king, for making him lose the victory.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Konofogor's Irish name was Connor.



88. OLAF PREPARES FOR HIS BRIDAL JOURNEY.

Now we begin again our story where we let it slip -- at King
Olaf's travelling to his bridal, to receive his betrothed
Ingegerd the king's daughter.  The king had a great body of men
with him, and so chosen a body that all the great people he could
lay hold of followed him; and every man of consequence had a
chosen band of men with him distinguished by birth or other
qualifications.  The whole were well appointed, and equipped in
ships, weapons, and clothes.  They steered the fleet eastwards to
Konungahella; but when they arrived there they heard nothing of
the Swedish king and none of his men had come there.  King Olaf
remained a long time in summer (A.D. 1018) at Konungahella, and
endeavored carefully to make out what people said of the Swedish
king's movements, or what were his designs; but no person could
tell him anything for certain about it.  Then he sent men up to
Gautland to Earl Ragnvald, to ask him if he knew how it came to
pass that the Swedish king did not come to the meeting agreed on.
The earl replies, that he did not know.  "But as soon," said he,
"as I hear, I shall send some of my men to King Olaf, to let him
know if there be any other cause for the delay than the multitude
of affairs; as it often happens that the Swedish king's movements
are delayed by this more than he could have expected."



89. OF THE SWEDISH KING'S CHILDREN.

This Swedish king, Olaf Eirikson, had first a concubine who was
called Edla, a daughter of an earl of Vindland, who had been
captured in war, and therefore was called the king's slave-girl.
Their children were Emund, Astrid, Holmfrid....  They had,
besides, a son, who was born the day before St. Jacob's-day. 
When the boy was to be christened the bishop called him Jacob,
which the Swedes did not like, as there never had been a Swedish
king called Jacob.  All King Olaf's children were handsome in
appearance, and clever from childhood.  The queen was proud, and
did not behave well towards her step-children; therefore the king
sent his son Emund to Vindland, to be fostered by his mother's
relations, where he for a long time neglected his Christianity.
The king's daughter, Astrid, was brought up in West Gautland, in
the house of a worthy man called Egil.  She was a very lovely
girl: her words came well into her conversation; she was merry,
but modest, and very generous.  When she was grown up she was
often in her father's house, and every man thought well of her.
King Olaf was haughty and harsh in his speech.  He took very ill
the uproar and clamour the country people had raised against him
at the Upsala Thing, as they had threatened him with violence,
for which he laid the chief blame on Earl Ragnvald.  He made no
preparation for the bridal, according to the agreement to marry
his daughter Ingegerd to Olaf the king of Norway, and to meet him
on the borders for that purpose.  As the summer advanced many of
his men were anxious to know what the kings intentions were;
whether to keep to the agreement with King Olaf, or break his
word, and with it the peace of the country.  But no one was so
bold as to ask the king, although they complained of it to
Ingegerd, and besought her to find out what the king intended.
She replied "I have no inclination to speak to the king again
about the matters between him and King Olaf; for he answered me
ill enough once before when I brought forward Olaf's name."  In
the meantime Ingegerd, the king's daughter, took it to heart,
became melancholy and sorrowful and yet very curious to know what
the king intended.  She had much suspicion that he would not keep
his word and promise to King Olaf; for he appeared quite enraged
whenever Olaf the Thick's name was in any way mentioned.



90. OF THE SWEDISH KING OLAF'S HUNTING.

One morning early the king rode out with his dogs and falcons,
and his men around him.  When they let slip the falcons the
king's falcon killed two black-cocks in one flight, and three in
another.  The dogs ran and brought the birds when they had fallen
to the ground.  The king ran after them, took the game from them
himself, was delighted with his sport, and said, "It will be long
before the most of you have such success."  They agreed in this;
adding, that in their opinion no king had such luck in hunting as
he had.  Then the king rode home with his followers in high
spirits.  Ingegerd, the king's daughter, was just going out of
her lodging when the king came riding into the yard, and she
turned round and saluted him.  He saluted her in return,
laughing; produced the birds, and told her the success of his
chase.

"Dost thou know of any king," said he, "who made so great a
capture in so short a time?"

"It is indeed," replied she, "a good morning's hunting, to have
got five black-cocks; but it was a still better when, in one
morning, the king of Norway, Olaf, took five kings, and subdued
all their kingdoms."

When the king heard this he sprang from his horse, turned to
Ingegerd, and said, "Thou shalt know, Ingegerd, that however
great thy love may be for this man, thou shalt never get him, nor
he get thee.  I will marry thee to some chief with whom I can be
in friendship; but never can I be a friend of the man who has
robbed me of my kingdom, and done me great mischief by marauding
and killing through the land."  With that their conversation
broke off, and each went away.



91. OLAF THE NORWAY KING'S COUNSELS.

Ingegerd, the king's daughter, had now full certainty of King
Olaf's intention, and immediately sent men to West Gautland to
Earl Ragnvald, and let him know how it stood with the Swedish
king, and that the agreement made with the king of Norway was
broken; and advising the earl and people of West Gautland to be
upon their guard, as no peace from the people of Norway was to be
expected.  When the earl got this news he sent a message through
all his kingdom, and told the people to be cautious, and prepared
in case of war or pillage from the side of Norway.  He also sent
men to King Olaf the Thick, and let him know the message he had
received, and likewise that he wished for himself to hold peace
and friendship with King Olaf; and therefore he begged him not to
pillage in his kingdom.  When this message came to King Olaf it
made him both angry and sorry; and for some days nobody got a
word from him.  He then held a House-Thing with his men, and in
it Bjorn arose, and first took the word.  He began his speech by
telling that he had proceeded eastward last winter to establish a
peace, and he told how kindly Earl Ragnvald had received him;
and, on the other hand, how crossly and heavily the Swedish king
had accepted the proposal. "And the agreement," said he, "which
was made, was made more by means of the strength of the people,
the power of Thorgny, and the aid of the earl, than by the king's
good-will.  Now, on these grounds, we know for certain that it is
the king who has caused the breach of the agreement; therefore we
ought by no means to make the earl suffer, for it is proved that
he is King Olaf's firm friend."  The king wished now to hear from
the chiefs and other leaders of troops what course he should
adopt.  "Whether shall we go against Gautland, and maraud there
with such men as we have got; or is there any other course that
appears to you more advisable?"  He spoke both long and well.

Thereafter many powerful men spoke, and all were at last agreed
in dissuading from hostilities.  They argued thus: -- "Although
we are a numerous body of men who are assembled here, yet they
are all only people of weight and power; but, for a war
expedition, young men who are in quest of property and
consideration are more suitable.  It is also the custom of people
of weight and power, when they go into battle or strife, to have
many people with them whom they can send out before them for
their defence; for the men do not fight worse who have little
property, but even better than those who are brought up in the
midst of wealth."  After these considerations the king resolved
to dismiss this army from any expedition, and to give every man
leave to return home; but proclaimed, at the same time, that next
summer the people over the whole country would be called out in a
general levy, to march immediately against the Swedish king, and
punish him for his want of faith.  All thought well of this plan.
Then the king returned northwards to Viken, and took his abode at
Sarpsborg in autumn, and ordered all things necessary for winter
provision to be collected there; and he remained there all winter
(A.D. 1019) with a great retinue.



92. SIGVAT THE SKALD'S JOURNEY EASTWARDS.

People talked variously about Earl Ragnvald; some said he was
King Olaf's sincere friend; others did not think this likely, and
thought it stood in his power to warn the Swedish king to keep
his word, and the agreement concluded on between him and King
Olaf.  Sigvat the poet often expressed himself in conversation as
Earl Ragnvald's great friend, and often spoke of him to King
Olaf; and he offered to the king to travel to Earl Ragnvald's and
spy after the Swedish kings doings, and to attempt, if possible,
to get the settlement of the agreement.  The king thought well of
this plan; for he oft, and with pleasure, spoke to his
confidential friends about Ingegerd, the king's daughter.  Early
in winter (A.D. 1019) Sigvat the skald, with two companions, left
Sarpsborg, and proceeded eastwards over the moors to Gautland.
Before Sigvat and King Olaf parted he composed these verses: --

     "Sit happy in thy hall, O king!
     Till I come back, and good news bring:
     The skald will bid thee now farewell,
     Till he brings news well worth to tell.
     He wishes to the helmed hero
     Health, and long life, and a tull flow
     Of honour, riches. and success --
     And, parting, ends his song with this.
     The farewell word is spoken now __
     The word that to the heart lies nearest;
     And yet, O king!  before I go,
     One word on what I hold the dearest,
     I fain would say, "O!  may God save
     To thee the bravest of the brave,
     The land, which is thy right by birth!"
     This is my dearest with on earth."

Then they proceeded eastwards towards Eid, and had difficulty in
crossing the river in a little cobble; but they escaped, though
with danger: and Sigvat sang: --

     "On shore the crazy boat I drew,
     Wet to the skin, and frightened too;
     For truly there was danger then;
     The mocking hill elves laughed again. 
     To see us in this cobble sailing,
     And all our sea-skill unavailing.
     But better did it end, you see,
     Than any of us could foresee."

Then they went through the Eid forest, and Sigvat sang: --

     "A hundred miles through Eid's old wood,
     And devil an alehouse, bad or good, --
     A hundred miles, and tree and sky
     Were all that met the weary eye.
     With many a grumble, many a groan.
     A hundred miles we trudged right on;
     And every king's man of us bore
     On each foot-sole a bleeding sore."

They came then through Gautland, and in the evening reached a
farm-house called Hof.  The door was bolted so that they could
not come in; and the servants told them it was a fast-day, and
they could not get admittance.  Sigvat sang: --

     "Now up to Hof in haste I hie,
     And round the house and yard I pry.
     Doors are fast locked -- but yet within,
     Methinks, I hear some stir and din.
     I peep, with nose close to the ground.
     Below the door, but small cheer found.
     My trouble with few words was paid --
     "`Tis holy time,' the house-folkd said.
     Heathens!  to shove me thus away!
     I' the foul fiend's claws may you all lay."

Then they came to another farm, where the good-wife was standing
at the door. and told them not to come in, for they were busy
with a sacrifice to the elves.  Sigvat sang of it thus: --

     "`My poor lad, enter not, I pray!'
     Thus to me did the old wife say;
     `For all of us are heathens here,
     And I for Odin's wrath do fear.'
     The ugly witch drove me away,
     Like scared wolf sneaking from his prey.
     When she told me that there within
     Was sacrifice to foul Odin."

Another evening, they came to three bondes, all of them of the
name of Olver, who drove them away.  Sigvat sang: --

     "Three of one name,
     To their great shame,
     The traveller late
     Drove from their gate!
     Travellers may come
     From our viking-home,
     Unbidden guests
     At these Olvers' feasts."

They went on farther that evening, and came to a fourth bonde,
who was considered the most hospitable man in the country; but he
drove them away also.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "Then on I went to seek night's rest
     From one who was said to be the best,
     The kindest host in the land around,
     And there I hoped to have quarters found.
     But, faith,'twas little use to try;
     For not so much as raise an eye
     Would this huge wielder of the spade:
     If he's the hest, it must he said
     Bad is the best, and the skald's praise
     Cannot be given to churls like these.
     I almost wished that Asta's son
     In the Eid forest had been one
     When we, his men, were even put
     Lodging to crave in a heathen's hut.
     I knew not where the earl to find;
     Four times driven off by men unkind,
     I wandered now the whole night o'er,
     Driven like a dog from door to door."

Now when they came to Earl Ragnvald's the earl said they must
have had a severe journey.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "The message-bearers of the king
     From Norway came his words to bring;
     And truly for their master they
     Hard work have done before to-day.
     We did not loiter on the road,
     But on we pushed for thy abode:
     Thy folk, in sooth, were not so kind
     That we cared much to lag hehind.
     But Eid to rest safe we found,
     From robbers free to the eastern bound:
     This praise to thee, great earl, is due --
     The skald says only what is true."

Earl Ragnvald gave Sigvat a gold arm-ring, and a woman said "he
had not made the journey with his black eyes for nothing." 
Sigvat sang: --

     "My coal-black eyes
     Dost thou despise?
     They have lighted me
     Across the sea
     To gain this golden prize:
     They have lighted me,
     Thy eyes to see,
     O'er Iceland's main,
     O'er hill and plain:
     Where Nanna's lad would fear to be
     They have lighted me."

Sigvat was long entertained kindly and well in the house of Earl
Ragnvald.  The earl heard by letters, sent by Ingegerd the king's
daughter, that ambassadors from King Jarisleif were come from
Russia to King Olaf of Svithjod to ask his daughter Ingegerd in
marriage, and that King Olaf had given them hopes that he would
agree to it.  About the same time King Olaf's daughter Astrid
came to Earl Ragnvald's court, and a great feast was made for
her.  Sigvat soon became acquainted by conversation with the
king's daughter, and she knew him by name and family, for Ottar
the skald, Sigvat's sister's son, had long intimate acquaintance
with King Olaf, the Swedish king.  Among other things talked of,
Earl Ragnvald asked Sigvat if the king of Norway would not marry
the king's daughter Astrid.  "If he would do that," said he, "I
think we need not ask the Swedish king for his  consent." 
Astrid, the kings daughter, said exactly the same.  Soon after
Sigvat returns home, and comes to King Olaf at Sarpsborg a little
before Yule.

When Sigvat came home to King Olaf he went into the hall, and,
looking around on the walls, he sang: --

     "When our men their arms are taking
     The raven's wings with greed are shaking;
     When they come back to drink in hall
     Brave spoil they bring to deck the wall --
     Shield, helms, and panzers (1), all in row,
     Stripped in the field from lifeless fow.
     In truth no royal nail comes near
     Thy splendid hall in precious gear."

Afterwards Sigvat told of his journey, and sang these verses: --

     "The king's court-guards desire to hear
     About our journey and our cheer,
     Our ships in autumn reach the sound,
     But long the way to Swedish ground.
     With joyless weather, wind and raind,
     And pinching cold, and feet in pain --
     With sleep, fatigue, and want oppressed,
     No songs had we -- we scarce had rest."

And when he came into conversation with the king he sang: --

     "When first I met the earl I told
     How our king loved a friend so bold;
     How in his heart he loved a man
     With hand to do, and head to plan.
     Thou generous king!  with zeal and care
     I sought to advance thy great affair;
     For messengers from Russian land
     Had come to ask Ingegerd's hand.
     The earl, thy friend, bids thee, who art
     So mild and generous of heart,
     His servants all who here may come
     To cherish in thy royal home;
     And thine who may come to the east
     In Ragnvald's hall shall find a feast --
     In Ragnvald's house shall find a home --
     At Ragnvald's court be still welcome.
     When first I came the people's mind
     Incensed by Eirik's son I find;
     And he refused the wish to meet,
     Alleging treachery and deceit.
     But I explained how it was here,
     For earl and king, advantage clear
     With thee to hold the strictest peace,
     And make all force and foray cease.
     The earl is wise, and understands
     The need of peace for both the lands;
     And he entreats thee not to break
     The present peace for vengeance's sake!"

He immediately tells King Olaf the news he had heard; and at
first the king was much cast down when he heard of King
Jarisleif's suit, and he said he expected nothing but evil from
King Olaf; but wished he might be able to return it in such a way
as Olaf should remember.  A while afterwards the king asks Sigvat
about various news from Gautland.  Sigvat spoke a great deal
about Astrid, the kings daughter; how beautiful she was, how
agreeable in her conversation; and that all declared she was in
no respect behind her sister Ingegerd.  The king listened with
pleasure to this.  Then Sigvat told him the conversation he and
Astrid had had between themselves, and the king was delighted at
the idea.  "The Swedish king," said he, "will scarcely think that
I will dare to marry a daughter of his without his consent."  But
this speech of his was not known generally.  King Olaf and Sigvat
the skald often spoke about it.  The king inquired particularly
of Sigvat what he knew about Earl Ragnvald, and "if he be truly
our friend," said the king.  Sigvat said that the earl was King
Olaf's best friend, and sang these verses: --

     "The mighty Olaf should not cease
     With him to hold good terms and peace;
     For this good earl unwearied shows
     He is thy friend where all are foes.
     Of all who dwell by the East Sea
     So friendly no man is as he:
     At all their Things he takes thy part,
     And is thy firm friend, hand and heart."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The Pantzer -- a complete suit of plate-armour.



93. RAGNVALD AND ASTRA'S JOURNEY.

After Yule (A.D. 1019), Thord Skotakol, a sister's son of Sigvat,
attended by one of Sigvat's footboys, who had been with Sigvat
the autumn before in Gautland, went quite secretly from the
court, and proceeded to Gautland.  When they came to Earl
Ragnvald's court, they produced the tokens which Olaf himself had
sent to the earl, that he might place confidence in Thord.
Without delay the earl made himself ready for a journey, as did
Astrid, the king's daughter; and the earl took with him 120 men,
who were chosen both from among his courtmen and the sons of
great bondes, and who were carefully equipped in all things,
clothes, weapons, and horses.  Then they rode northwards to
Sarpsborg, and came there at Candlemas.



94. OF KING OLAF'S MARRIAGE.

King Olaf had put all things in order in the best style.  There
were all sorts of liquors of the best that could be got, and all
other preparations of the same quality.  Many people of
consequence were summoned in from their residences.  When the
earl arrived with his retinue the king received him particularly
well; and the earl was shown to a large, good, and remarkably
well-furnished house for his lodging; and serving-men and others
were appointed to wait on him; and nothing was wanting, in any
respect, that could grace a feast.  Now when the entertainment
had lasted some days, the king, the earl, and Astrid had a
conference together; and the result of it was, that Earl Ragnvald
contracted Astrid, daughter of the Swedish king Olaf, to Olaf
king of Norway, with the same dowry which had before been settled
that her sister Ingegerd should have from home.  King Olaf, on
his part, should give Astrid the same bride-gift that had been
intended for her sister Ingegerd.  Thereupon an eke was made to
the feast, and King Olaf and Queen Astrid's wedding was drunk in
great festivity.  Earl Ragnvald then returned to Gautland, and
the king gave the earl many great and good gifts at parting; and
they parted the dearest of friends, which they continued to be
while they lived.



95. THE AGREEMENT BROKEN BY OLAF.

The spring (A.D. 1019) thereafter came ambassadors from King
Jarisleif in Novgorod to Svithjod, to treat more particularly
about the promise given by King Olaf the preceding summer to
marry his daughter Ingegerd to King Jarisleif.  King Olaf tallied
about the business with Ingegerd, and told her it was his
pleasure that she should marry King Jarisleif.  She replied. "If
I marry King Jarisleif, I must have as my bride-gift the town and
earldom of Ladoga."  The Russian ambassadors agreed to this, on
the part of their sovereign.  Then said Ingegerd, "If I go east
to Russia, I must choose the man in Svithjod whom I think most
suitable to accompany me; and I must stipulate that he shall not
have any less title, or in any respect less dignity, privilege,
and consideration there, than he has, here."  This the king and
the ambassadors agreed to, and gave their hands upon it in
confirmation of the condition.

"And who," asked the king, "is the man thou wilt take with thee
as thy attendant?"

"That man," she replied, "is my relation Earl Ragnvald."

The king replies, "I have resolved to reward Earl Ragnvald in a
different manner for his treason against his master in going to
Norway with my daughter, and giving her as a concubine to that
fellow, who he knew was my greatest enemy.  I shall hang him up
this summer."

Then Ingegerd begged her father to be true to the promise he had
made her, and had confirmed by giving his hand upon it.  By her
entreaties it was at last agreed that the king should promise to
let Earl Ragnvald go in peace from Svithjod, but that he should
never again appear in the king's presence, or come back to
Svithjod while Olaf reigned.  Ingegerd then sent messengers to
the earl to bring him these tidings, and to appoint a place of
meeting.  The earl immediately prepared for his journey; rode up
to East Gautland; procured there a vessel, and, with his retinue,
joined Ingegerd, and they proceeded together eastward to Russia.
There Ingegerd was married to King Jarisleif; and their children
were Valdemar, Vissivald, and Holte the Bold.  Queen Ingegerd
gave Earl Ragnvald the town of Ladoga, and earldom belonging to
it.  Earl Ragnvald was there a long time, and was a celebrated
man.  His sons and Ingebjorg's were Earl Ulf and Earl Eilif.



96. HISTORY OF THE LAGMAN EMUND.

There was a man called Emund of Skara, who was lagman of west
Gautland, and was a man of great understanding and eloquence, and
of high birth, great connection, and very wealthy; but was
considered deceitful, and not to be trusted.  He was the most
powerful man in West Gautland after the earl was gone.  The same
spring (A.D. 1019) that Earl Ragnvald left Gautland the Gautland
people held a Thing among themselves, and often expressed their
anxiety to each other about what the Swedish king might do.  They
heard he was incensed because they had rather held in friendship
with the king of Norway than striven against him; and he was also
enraged against those who had attended his daughter Astrid to
Norway.  Some proposed to seek help and support from the king of
Norway, and to offer him their services; others dissuaded from
this measure, as West Gautland had no strength to oppose to the
Swedes.  "And the king of Norway," said they, "is far from us,
the chief strength of his country very distant; and therefore let
us first send men to the Swedish king to attempt to come to some
reconciliation with him.  If that fail, we can still turn to the
king of Norway."  Then the bondes asked Emund to undertake this
mission, to which he agreed; and he proceeded with thirty men to
East Gautland, where there were many of his relations and
friends, who received him hospitably.  He conversed there with
the most prudent men about this difficult business; and they were
all unanimous on one point, -- that the king's treatment of them
was against law and reason.  From thence Emund went into
Svithjod, and conversed with many men of consequence, who all
expressed themselves in the same way.  Emund continued his
journey thus, until one day, towards evening, he arrived at
Upsala, where he and his retinue took a good lodging, and stayed
there all night.  The next day Emund waited upon the king, who
was just then sitting in the Thing surrounded by many people.
Emund went before him, bent his knee, and saluted him.  The king
looked at him, saluted him, and asked him what news he brought.

Emund replies, "There is little news among us Gautlanders; but it
appears to us a piece of remarkable news that the proud, stupid
Atte, in Vermaland, whom we look upon as a great sportsman, went
up to the forest in winter with his snow-shoes and his bow. 
After he had got as many furs in the mountains as filled his
hand-sledge so full that he could scarcely drag it, he returned
home from the woods.  But on the way he saw a squirrel in the
trees, and shot at it, but did not hit; at which he was so angry,
that he left the sledge to run after the squirrel: but still the
squirrel sprang where the wood was thickest, sometimes among the
roots of the trees, sometimes in the branches, sometimes among
the arms that stretch from tree to tree.  When Atte shot at it
the arrows flew too high or too low, and the squirrel never
jumped so that Atte could get a fair aim at him.  He was so eager
upon this chase that he ran the whole day after the squirrel, and
yet could not get hold of it.  It was now getting dark; so he
threw himself down upon the snow, as he was wont, and lay there
all night in a heavy snow-storm.  Next day Atte got up to look
after his sledge, but never did he find it again; and so he
returned home.  And this is the only news, king, I have to tell."

The king says, "This is news of but little importance, if it be
all thou hast to tell."

Ernund replies, "Lately something happened which may well be
called news.  Gaute Tofason went with five warships out of the
Gaut river, and when he was lying at the Eikrey Isles there came
five large Danish merchant-ships there.  Gaute and his men
immediately took four of the great vessels, and made a great
booty without the loss of a man: but the fifth vessel slipped out
to sea, and sailed away.  Gaute gave chase with one ship, and at
first came nearer to them; but as the wind increased, the Danes
got away.  Then Gaute wanted to turn back; but a storm came on so
that he lost his ship at Hlesey, with all the goods, and the
greater part of his crew.  In the meantime his people were
waiting for him at the Eikrey Isles: but the Danes came over in
fifteen merchant-ships, killed them all, and took all the booty
they had made.  So but little luck had they with their greed of
plunder."

The king replied.  "That is great news, and worth being told; but
what now is thy errand here?"

Emund replies, "I travel, sire, to obtain your judgment in a
difficult case, in which our law and the Upsala law do not
agree."

The king asks, "What is thy appeal case?"

Emund replies, "There were two noble-born men of equal birth, but
unequal in property and disposition.  They quarrelled about some
land, and did each other much damage; but most was done to him
who was the more powerful of the two.  This quarrel, however, was
settled, and judged of at a General Thing; and the judgment was,
that the most powerful should pay a compensation.  But at the
first payment, instead of paying a goose, he paid a gosling; for
an old swine he paid a sucking pig; and for a mark of stamped
gold only a half- mark, and for the other half-mark nothing but
clay and dirt; and, moreover, threatened, in the most violent
way, the people whom he forced to receive such goods in payment.
Now, sire, what is your judgment?"

The king replies, "He shall pay the full equivalent whom the
judgment ordered to do so, and that faithfully; and further,
threefold to his king: and if payment be not made within a year
and a day, he shall be cut off from all his property, his goods
confiscated, and half go the king's house, and half to the other
party."

Emund took witnesses to this judgment among the most considerable
of the men who were present, according to the laws which were
held in the Upsala Thing.  He then saluted the king, and went his
way; and other men brought their cases before the king, and he
sat late in the day upon the cases of the people.  Now when the
king came to table, he asked where Lagman Emund was.  It was
answered, he was home at his lodgings.  "Then," said the king,
"go after him, and tell him to be my guest to-day."  Thereafter
the dishes were borne in; then came the musicians with harps,
fiddles, and musical instruments; and lastly, the cup-bearers.
The king was particularly merry, and had many great people at
table with him, so that he thought little of Emund.  The king
drank the whole day, and slept all the night after; but in the
morning the king awoke, and recollected what Emund had said the
day before: and when he had put on his clothes, he let his wise
men be summoned to him; for he had always twelve of the wisest
men who sat in judgment with him, and treated the more difficult
cases; and that was no easy business, for the king was ill-
pleased if the judgment was not according to justice, and yet it
was of no use to contradict him.  In this meeting the king
ordered Lagman Emund to be called before them.  The messenger
returned, and said, "Sire, Lagman Emund rode away yesterday as
soon as he had dined."  "Then," said the king, "tell me, ye good
chiefs, what may have been the meaning of that law-case which
Emund laid before us yesterday?"

They replied, "You must have considered it yourself, if you think
there was any other meaning under it than what he said."

The king replied, "By the two noble-born men whom he spoke of,
who were at variance, and of whom one was more powerful than the
other, and who did each other damage, he must have meant us and
Olaf the Thick."

They answered, "It is, sire, as you say."

The king -- "Our case was judged at the Upsala Thing.  But what
was his meaning when he said that bad payment was made; namely, a
gosling for a goose, a pig for a swine, and clay and dirt for
half of the money instead of gold?"

Arnvid the Blind replied, "Sire, red gold and clay are things
very unlike; but the difference is still greater between king and
slave.  You promised Olaf the Thick your daughter Ingegerd, who,
in all branches of her descent, is born of kings, and of the
Upland Swedish race of kings, which is the most noble in the
North; for it is traced up to the gods themselves.  But now Olaf
has got Astrid; and although she is a king's child, her mother
was but a slave-woman, and, besides, of Vindish race.  Great
difference, indeed, must there be between these kings, when the
one takes thankfully such a match; and now it is evident, as
might be expected, that no Northman is to be placed by the side
of the Upsala kings.  Let us all give thanks that it has so
turned out; for the gods have long protected their descendants,
although many now neglect this faith."

There were three brothers: -- Arnvid the Blind, who had a great
understanding, but was so weak-sighted that he was scarcely fit
for war; the second was Thorvid the Stammerer, who could not
utter two words together at one time, but was remarkably bold and
courageous; the third was Freyvid the Deaf, who was hard of
hearing.  All these brothers were rich and powerful men, of noble
birth, great wisdom, and all very dear to the king.

Then said King Olaf, "What means that which Emund said about Atte
the Dull?"

None made any reply, but the one looked at the other.

"Speak freely," said the king.

Then said Thorvid the Stammerer, "Atte -- quarrel -- some --
greedy -- jealous -- deceitful -- dull."

Then said the king, "To whom are these words of reproach and
mockery applied?"

Freyvid the Deaf replied, "We will speak more clearly if we have
your permission."

The king -- "Speak freely, Freyvid, what you will."

Freyvid took up the word, and spoke.  "My brother Thorvid, who is
considered to be the wisest of us brothers, holds the words
`quarrelsome, greedy, jealous, dull,' to be one and the same
thing; for it applies to him who is weary of peace, longs for
small things without attaining them, while he lets great and
useful things pass away as they came.  I am deaf; yet so loud
have many spoken out, that I can perceive that all men, both
great and small, take it ill that you have not kept your promise
to the king of Norway; and, worse than that, that you broke the
decision of the community as it was delivered at Upsala Thing.
You need not fear either the king of Norway, or the king of
Denmark, or any other, so long as the Swedish army will follow
you; but if the people of the country unanimously turn against
you, we, your friends, see no counsel that can be of advantage to
you."

The king asks, "Who is the chief who dares to betray the country
and me?"

Freyvid replies, "All Swedes desire to have the ancient laws, and
their full rights.  Look but here, sire, how many chiefs are
sitting in council with you.  I think, in truth, we are but six
whom you call your councillors: all the others, so far as I know,
have ridden forth through the districts to hold Things with the
people; and we will not conceal it from you, that the message-
token has gone forth to assemble a Retribution-thing (1).  All of
us brothers have been invited to take part in the decisions of
this council, but none of us will bear the name of traitor to the
sovereign; for that our father never was."

Then the king said, "What council shall we take in this dangerous
affair that is in our hands?  Good chiefs give me council, that I
may keep my kingdom, and the heritage of my forefathers; for I
cannot enter into strife against the whole Swedish force."

Arnvid the Blind replies, "Sire, it is my advice that you ride
down to Aros with such men as will follow you; take your ship
there and go out into the Maeler lake; summon all people to meet
you; proceed no longer with haughtiness, but promise every man
the law and rights of old established in the country; keep back
in this way the message-token, for it cannot as yet, in so short
a time have travelled far through the land.  Send, then those of
your men in whom you have the most confidence to those who have
this business on hand, and try if this uproar can be appeased."

The king says that he will adopt this advice. "I will," says he,
"that ye brothers undertake this business; for I trust to you the
most among my men."

Thorvid the Stammerer said, "I remain behind.  Let Jacob, your
son, go with them, for that is necessary."

Then said Freyvid, "Let us do as Thorvid says: he will not leave
you, and I and Arnvid must travel."

This counsel was followed.  Olaf went to his ships, and set out
into the Maelar lake, and many people came to him.  The brothers
Arnvid and Freyvid rode out to Ullaraker, and had with them the
king's son Jacob; but they kept it a secret that he was there.
The brothers observed that there was a great concourse and war-
gathering, for the bondes held the Thing night and day.  When
Arnvid and Freyvid met their relations and friends, they said
they would join with the people; and many agreed to leave the
management of the business in the hands of the brothers.  But
all, as one man, declared they would no longer have King Olaf
over them, and no longer suffer his unlawful proceedings, and
over-weening pride which would not listen to any man's
remonstrances, even when the great chiefs spoke the truth to him.
When Freyvid observed the heat of the people, he saw in what a
bad situation the king's cause was.  He summoned the chiefs of
the land to a meeting with him and addressed them thus: -- "It
appears to me, that if we are to depose Olaf Eirikson from his
kingdom, we Swedes of the Uplands should be the leading men in
it: for so it has always been, that the counsel which the Upland
chiefs have resolved among themselves has always been followed
by the men of the rest of the country.  Our forefathers did not
need to take advice from the West Gautlanders about the
government of the Swedes.  Now we will not be so degenerate as to
need Emund to give us counsel; but let us, friends and relations,
unite ourselves for the purpose of coming to a determination."
All agreed to this, and thought it was well said.  Thereafter the
people joined this union which the Upland chiefs made among
themselves, and Freyvid and Arnvid were chiefs of the whole
assemblage.  When Emund heard this he suspected how the matter
would end, and went to both the brothers to have a conversation
with them.  Then Freyvid asked Emund, "Who, in your opinion,
should we take for king, in case Olaf Eirikson's days are at an
end?"

Emund -- "He whom we think best suited to it, whether he be of
the race of chiefs or not."

Freyvid answers, "We Uplanders will not, in our time, have the
kingdom go out of the old race of our ancestors, which has given
us kings for a long course of generations, so long as we have so
good a choice as now.  King Olaf has two sons, one of whom we
will choose for king, although there is a great difference
between them.  The one is noble-born, and of Swedish race on both
sides; the other is a slave-woman's son, and of Vindish race on
the mother's side."

This decision was received with loud applause, and all would have
Jacob for king.

Then said Emund. "Ye Upland Swedes have the power this time to
determinate the matter; but I will tell you what will happen: --
some of those who now will listen to nothing but that the kingdom
remain in the old race will live to see the day when they will
wish the kingdom in another race, as being of more advantage."

Thereupon the brothers Freyvid and Arnvid led the king's son
Jacob into the Thing, and saluted him with the title of king; and
the Swedes gave him the name of Onund, which he afterwards
retained as long as he lived.  He was then ten or twelve years
old.  Thereafter King Onund took a court, and chose chiefs to be
around him; and they had as many attendants in their suite as
were thought necessary, so that he gave the whole assemblage of
bondes leave to return home.  After that ambassadors went between
the two kings; and at last they had a meeting, and came to an
agreement.  Olaf was to remain king over the country as long as
he lived; but should hold peace and be reconciled with King Olaf
of Norway, and also with all who had taken part in this business.
Onund should also be king, and have a part of the land, such as
the father and son should agree upon; but should be bound to
support the bondes in case King Olaf did anything which the
bondes would not suffer.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Refsithing -- a Thing for punishment by penalty or death for
     crimes and misdemeanours. -- L.



97. MEETING OF RECONCILIATION BETWEEN THE KINGS, AND THEIR GAME
    AT DICE.

Thereafter ambassadors were sent to Norway to King Olaf, with the
errand that he should come with his retinue to a meeting at
Konungahella with the Swedish kings, and that the Swedish kings
would there confirm their reconciliation.  When King Olaf heard
this message, he was willing, now as formerly, to enter into the
agreement, and proceeded to the appointed place.  There the
Swedish kings also came; and the relations, when they met, bound
themselves mutually to peace and agreement.  Olaf the Swedish
king was then remarkably mild in manner, and agreeable to talk
with.  Thorstein Frode relates of this meeting, that there was an
inhabited district in Hising which had sometimes belonged to
Norway, and sometimes to Gautland.  The kings came to the
agreement between themselves that they would cast lots by the
dice to determine who should have this property, and that he who
threw the highest should have the district.  The Swedish king
threw two sixes, and said King Olaf need scarcely throw.  He
replied, while shaking the dice in his hand, "Although there be
two sixes on the dice, it would be easy, sire, for God Almighty
to let them turn up in my favour."  Then he threw, and had sixes
also.  Now the Swedish king threw again, and had again two sixes.
Olaf king of Norway then threw, and had six upon one dice, and
the other split in two, so as to make seven eyes in all upon it;
and the district was adjudged to the king of Norway.  We have
heard nothing else of any interest that took place at this
meeting; and the kings separated the dearest of friends with each
other.



98. OF OLAF OF NORWAY, AFTER THE MEETING.

After the events now related Olaf returned with his people to
Viken.  He went first to Tunsberg, and remained there a short
time, and then proceeded to the north of the country.  In
harvest-time he sailed north to Throndhjem, and had winter
provision laid in there, and remained there all winter (A.D.
1090).  Olaf Haraldson was now sole and supreme king of Norway,
and the whole of that sovereignty, as Harald Harfager had
possessed it, and had the advantage over that monarch of being
the only king in the land.  By a peaceful agreement he had also
recovered that part of the country which Olaf the Swedish king
had before occupied; and that part of the country which the
Danish king had got he retook by force, and ruled over it as
elsewhere in the country.  The Danish king Canute ruled at that
time both over Denmark and England; but he himself was in England
for the most part, and set chiefs over the country in Denmark,
without at that time making any claim upon Norway.



99. HISTORY OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.

It is related that in the days of Harald Harfager, the king of
Norway, the islands of Orkney, which before had been only a
resort for vikings, were settled . The first earl in the Orkney
Islands was called Sigurd, who was a son of Eystein Giumra, and
brother of Ragnvald earl of More.  After Sigurd his son Guthorm
was earl for one year.  After him Torf-Einar, a son of Ragnvald,
took the earldom, and was long earl, and was a man of great
power.  Halfdan Haleg, a son of Harald Harfager, assaulted Torf-
Einar, and drove him from the Orkney Islands; but Einar came back
and killed Halfdan in the island Ronaldsha.  Thereafter King
Harald came with an army to the Orkney Islands.  Einar fled to
Scotland, and King Harald made the people of the Orkney Islands
give up their udal properties, and hold them under oath from him.
Thereafter the king and earl were reconciled, so that the earl
became the king's man, and took the country as a fief from him;
but that it should pay no scat or feu-duty, as it was at that
time much plundered by vikings.  The earl paid the king sixty
marks of gold; and then King Harald went to plunder in Scotland,
as related in the "Glym Drapa".  After Torf-Einar, his sons
Arnkel, Erlend, and Thorfin Hausakljufer (1) ruled over these
lands. In their days came Eirik Blood-axe from Norway, and
subdued these earls.  Arnkel and Erlend fell in a war expedition;
but Thorfin ruled the country long, and became an old man.  His
sons were Arnfin, Havard, Hlodver, Liot, and Skule.  Their mother
was Grelad, a daughter of Earl Dungad of Caithness.  Her mother
was Groa, a daughter of Thorstein Raud.  In the latter days of
Earl Thorfin came Eirik Blood-axe's sons, who had fled from Earl
Hakon out of Norway, and committed great excesses in Orkney. 
Earl Thorfin died on a bed of sickness, and his sons after him
ruled over the country, and there are many stories concerning
them.  Hlodver lived the longest of them, and ruled alone over
this country.  His son was Sigurd the Thick, who took the earldom
after him, and became a powerful man and a great warrior.  In his
days came Olaf Trygvason from his viking expedition in the
western ocean, with his troops, landed in Orkney and took Earl
Sigurd prisoner in South Ronaldsha, where he lay with one ship.
King Olaf allowed the earl to ransom his life by letting himself
be baptized, adopting the true faith, becoming his man, and
introducing Christianity into all the Orkney Islands.  As a
hostage, King Olaf took his son, who was called Hunde or Whelp.
Then Olaf went to Norway, and became king; and Hunde was several
years with King Olaf in Norway, and died there.  After his death
Earl Sigurd showed no obedience or fealty to King Olaf.  He
married a daughter of the Scottish king Malcolm, and their son
was called Thorfin.  Earl Sigurd had, besides, older sons; 
namely, Sumarlide, Bruse, and Einar Rangmund.  Four or five years
after Olaf Tryrgvason's fall Earl Sigurd went to Ireland, leaving
his eldest sons to rule the country, and sending Thorfin to his
mother's father, the Scottish king.  On this expedition Earl
Sigurd fell in Brian's battle (l).  When the news was received in
Orkney, the brothers Sumarlide, Bruse, and Einar were chosen
earls, and the country was divided into three parts among them.
Thorfin Sigurdson was five years old when Earl Sigurd fell.  When
the Scottish king heard of the earl's death he gave his relation
Thorfin Caithness and Sutherland, with the title of earl, and
appointed good men to rule the land for him.  Earl Thorfin was
ripe in all ways as soon as he was grown up: he was stout and
strong, but ugly; and as soon as he was a grown man it was easy
to see that he was a severe and cruel but a very clever man.  So
says Arnor, the earls' skald: --

     "Under the rim of heaven no other,
     So young in years as Einar's brother,
     In battle had a braver hand,
     Or stouter, to defend the land."



ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hausakljufer -- the splitter of skulls. -- L.
(2)  Brian's battle is supposed to have taken place on the 23rd
     April 1014, at Clontart, near Dublin; and is known in Irish
     history as the battle of Clontarf, and was one of the
     bloodiest of the age.  It was fought between a viking called
     Sigtryg and Brian king of Munster, who gained the victory,
     but lost his life. -- L.



100. OF THE EARLS EINAR AND BRUSE.

The brothers Einar and Bruse were very unlike in disposition.
Bruse was a soft-minded, peaceable man, -- sociable, eloquent,
and of good understanding.  Einar was obstinate, taciturn, and
dull; but ambitious, greedy of money, and withal a great warrior.
Sumarlide, the eldest of the brothers, was in disposition like
Bruse, and lived not long, but died in his bed.  After his death
Thorfin claimed his share of the Orkney Islands.  Einar replied,
that Thorfin had the dominions which their father Sigurd had
possessed, namely, Caithness and Sutherland, which he insisted
were much larger than a third part of Orkney; therefore he would
not consent to Thorfin's having any share.  Bruse, on the other
hand, was willing, he said, to divide with him.  "I do not-
desire," he said, "more than the third part of the land, and
which of right belongs to me."  Then Einar took possession of two
parts of the country, by which he became a powerful man,
surrounded by many followers.  He was often in summer out on
marauding expeditions, and called out great numbers of the people
to join him; but it went always unpleasantly with the division of
the booty made on his viking cruises.  Then the bondes grew weary
of all these burdens; but Earl Einar held fast by them with
severity, calling in all services laid upon the people, and
allowing no opposition from any man; for he was excessively proud
and overbearing.  And now there came dearth and scarcity in his
lands, in consequence of the services and money outlay exacted
from the bondes; while in the part of the country belonging to
Bruse there were peace and plenty, and therefore he was the best
beloved by the bondes.



101. OF THORKEL AMUNDASON.

There was a rich and powerful man who was called Amunde, who
dwelt in Hrossey at Sandvik, in Hlaupandanes.  His son, called
Thorkel, was one of the ablest men in the islands.  Amunde was a
man of the best understanding, and most respected in Orkney.  One
spring Earl Einar proclaimed a levy for an expedition, as usual.
The bondes murmured greatly against it, and applied to Amunde
with the entreaty that he would intercede with the earl for them.
He replied, that the earl was not a man who would listen to other
people, and insisted that it was of no use to make any entreaty
to the earl about it.  "As things now stand, there is a good
understanding between me and the earl; but, in my opinion, there
would be much danger of our quarrelling, on account of our
different dispositions and views on both sides; therefore I will
have nothing to do with it."  They then applied to Thorkel, who
was also very loath to interfere, but promised at last to do so,
in consequence of the great entreaty of the people.  Amunde
thought he had given his promise too hastily.  Now when the earl
held a Thing, Thorkel spoke on account of the people, and
entreated the earl to spare the people from such heavy burdens,
recounting their necessitous condition.  The earl replies
favourably, saying that he would take Thorkel's advice.  "I had
intended to go out from the country with six ships, but now I
will only take three with me; but thou must not come again,
Thorkel, with any such request."  The bondes thanked Thorkel for
his assistance, and the earl set out on a viking cruise, and came
back in autumn.  The spring after, the earl made the same levy as
usual, and held a Thing with the bondes.  Then Thorkel again made
a speech, in which he entreated the earl to spare the people. 
The earl now was angry, and said the lot of the bondes should be
made worse in consequence of his intercession; and worked himself
up into such a rage, that he vowed they should not both come next
spring to the Thing in a whole skin.  Then the Thing was closed.
When Amunde heard what the earl and Thorkel had said at the
Thing, he told Thorkel to leave the country, and he went over to
Caithness to Earl Thorfin.  Thorkel was afterwards a long time
there, and brought up the earl in his youth, and was on that
account called Thorkel the Fosterer; and he became a very
celebrated man.



102. THE AGREEMENT OF THE EARLS.

There were many powerful men who fled from their udal properties
in Orkney on account of Earl Einar's violence, and the most fled
over to Caithness to Earl Thorfin: but some fled from the Orkney
Islands to Norway, and some to other countries.  When Earl
Thorfin was grown up he sent a message to his brother Einar, and
demanded the part of the dominion which he thought belonged to
him in Orkney; namely, a third of the islands.  Einar was nowise
inclined to diminish his possessions.  When Thorfin found this he
collected a warforce in Caithness, and proceeded to the islands.
As soon as Earl Einar heard of this he collected people, and
resolved to defend his country.  Earl Bruse also collected men,
and went out to meet them, and bring about some agreement between
them.  An agreement was at last concluded, that Thorfin should
have a third part of the islands, as of right belonging to him,
but that Bruse and Einar should lay their two parts together, and
Einar alone should rule over them; but if the one died before the
other, the longest liver should inherit the whole.  This
agreement seemed reasonable, as Bruse had a son called Ragnvald,
but Einar had no son.  Earl Thorfin set men to rule over his land
in Orkney, but he himself was generally in Caithness.  Earl Einar
was generally on viking expeditions to Ireland, Scotland, and
Bretland.



103. EYVIND URARHORN'S MURDER.

One summer (A.D. 1018) that Earl Einar marauded in Ireland, he
fought in Ulfreks-fjord with the Irish king Konofogor, as has
been related before, and suffered there a great defeat.  The
summer after this (A.D. 1019) Eyvind Urarhorn was coming from the
west from Ireland, intending to go to Norway; but the weather was
boisterous, and the current against him, so he ran into
Osmundwall, and lay there wind-bound for some time.  When Earl
Einar heard of this, he hastened thither with many people, took
Eyvind prisoner, and ordered him to be put to death, but spared
the lives of most of his people.  In autumn they proceeded to
Norway to King Olaf, and told him Eyvind was killed.  The king
said little about it, but one could see that he considered it a
great and vexatious loss; for he did not usually say much if
anything turned out contrary to his wishes.  Earl Thorfin sent
Thorkel Fosterer to the islands to gather in his scat.  Now, as
Einar gave Thorkel the greatest blame for the dispute in which
Thorfin had made claim to the islands, Thorkel came suddenly back
to Caithness from Orkney, and told Earl Thorfin that he had
learnt that Earl Einar would have murdered him if his friends and
relations had not given him notice to escape.  "Now," says he,
"it is come so far between the earl and me, that either some
thing decisive between us must take place if we meet, or I must
remove to such a distance that his power will not reach me."  The
earl encouraged Thorkel much to go east to Norway to King Olaf.
"Thou wilt be highly respected," says he, "wherever thou comest
among honourable men; and I know so well thy disposition and the
earl's, that it will not be long before ye come to extremities."
Thereupon Thorkel made himself ready, and proceeded in autumn to
Norway, and then to King Olaf, with whom he stayed the whole
winter (A.D. 1020), and was in high favour.  The king often
entered into conversation with him, and he thought, what was
true, that Thorkel was a high-minded man, of good understanding.
In his conversations with Thorkel, the king found a great
difference in his description of the two earls; for Thorkel was a
great friend of Earl Thorfin, but had much to say against Einar.
Early in spring (A.D. 1020) the king sent a ship west over the
sea to Earl Thorfin, with the invitation to come east and visit
him in Norway.  The earl did not decline the invitation, for it
was accompanied by assurances of friendship.



104. EARL EINAR'S MURDER.

Earl Thorfin went east to Norway, and came to King Olaf, from
whom he received a kind reception, and stayed till late in the
summer.  When he was preparing to return westwards again, King
Olaf made him a present of a large and fully-rigged long-ship.
Thorkel the Fosterer joined company with the earl, who gave him
the ship which he brought with him from the west.  The king and
the earl took leave of each other tenderly.  In autumn Earl
Thorfin came to Orkney, and when Earl Einar heard of it he went
on board his ships with a numerous band of men.  Earl Bruse came
up to his two brothers, and endeavoured to mediate between them,
and a peace was concluded and confirmed by oath.  Thorkel
Fosterer was to be in peace and friendship with Earl Einar; and
it was agreed that each of them should give a feast to the other,
and that the earl should first be Thorkel's guest at Sandwick.
When the earl came to the feast he was entertained in the best
manner; but the earl was not cheerful.  There was a great room,
in which there were doors at each end.  The day the earl should
depart Thorkel was to accompany him to the other feast; and
Thorkel sent men before, who should examine the road they had to
travel that day.  The spies came back, and said to Thorkel they
had discovered three ambushes.  "And we think," said they, "there
is deceit on foot."  When Thorkel heard this he lengthened out
his preparations for the journey, and gathered people about him.
The earl told him to get ready, as it was time to be on
horseback.  Thorkel answered, that he had many things to put in
order first, and went out and in frequently.  There was a fire
upon the floor.  At last he went in at one door, followed by an
Iceland man from Eastfjord, called Halvard, who locked the door
after him.  Thorkel went in between the fire and the place where
the earl was sitting.  The earl asked, "Art thou ready at last,
Thorkel?"

Thorkel answers, "Now I am ready;" and struck the earl upon the
head so that he fell upon the floor.

Then said the Icelander, "I never saw people so foolish as not to
drag the earl out of the fire;" and took a stick, which he set
under the earl's neck, and put him upright on the bench.  Thorkel
and his two comrades then went in all haste out of the other door
opposite to that by which they went in, and Thorkel's men were
standing without fully armed.  The earl's men now went in, and
took hold of the earl.  He was already dead, so nobody thought of
avenging him: and also the whole was done so quickly; for nobody
expected such a deed from Thorkel, and all supposed that there
really was, as before related, a friendship fixed between the
earl and Thorkel.  The most who were within were unarmed, and
they were partly Thorkel's good friends; and to this may be
added, that fate had decreed a longer life to Thorkel.  When
Thorkel came out he had not fewer men with him than the earl's
troop.  Thorkel went to his ship, and the earl's men went their
way.  The same day Thorkel sailed out eastwards into the sea.
This happened after winter; but he came safely to Norway, went as
fast as he could to Olaf, and was well received by him.  The king
expressed his satisfaction at this deed, and Thorkel was with him
all winter (A.D. 1091).



105. AGREEMENT BETWEEN KING OLAF AND EARL BRUSE.

After Earl Einar's fall Bruse took the part of the country which
he had possessed; for it was known to many men on what conditions
Einar and Bruse had entered into a partnership.  Although Thorfin
thought it would be more just that each of them had half of the
islands, Bruse retained the two-thirds of the country that winter
(A.D. 1021).  In spring, however, Thorfin produced his claim, and
demanded the half of the country; but Bruse would not consent.
They held Things and meetings about the business; and although
their friends endeavoured to settle it, Thorfin would not be
content with less than the half of the islands, and insisted that
Bruse, with his disposition, would have enough even with a third
part.  Bruse replies, "When I took my heritage after my father I
was well satisfied with a third part of the country, and there
was nobody to dispute it with me; and now I have succeeded to
another third in heritage after my brother, according to a lawful
agreement between us; and although I am not powerful enough to
maintain a feud against thee, my brother, I will seek some other
way, rather than willingly renounce my property."  With this
their meeting ended.  But Bruse saw that he had no strength to
contend against Thorfin, because Thorfin had both a greater
dominion and also could have aid from his mother's brother, the
Scottish king.  He resolved, therefore, to go out of the country;
and he went eastward to King Olaf, and had with him his son
Ragnvald, then ten years old.  When the earl came to the king he
was well received.  The earl now declared his errand, and told
the king the circumstances of the whole dispute between him and
his brother, and asked help to defend his kingdom of Orkney;
promising, in return, the fullest friendship towards King Olaf.
In his answer, the king began with showing how Harald Harfager
had appropriated to himself all udal rights in Orkney, and that
the earls, since that time, have constantly held the country as a
fief, not as their udal property.  "As a sufficient proof of
which," said he, "when Eirik Blood-axe and his sons were in
Orkney the earls were subject to them; and also when my relation
Olaf Trygvason came there thy father, Earl Sigurd, became his
man.  Now I have taken heritage after King Olaf, and I will give
thee the condition to become my man and then I will give thee the
islands as a fief; and we shall try if I cannot give thee aid
that will he more to the purpose than Thorfin can get from the
Scottish king.  If thou wilt not accept of these terms, then will
I win back my udal property there in the West, as our forefathers
and relations of old possessed it."

The earl carefully considered this speech, laid it before his
friends, and demanded their advice if he should agree to it, and
enter into such terms with King Olaf and become his vassal.  "But
I do not see what my lot will be at my departure if I say no; for
the king has clearly enough declared his claim upon Orkney; and
from his great power, and our being in his hands, it is easy for
him to make our destiny what he pleases."

Although the earl saw that there was much to be considered for
and against it he chose the condition to deliver himself and his
dominion into the king's power.  Thereupon the king took the
earl's power, and the government over all the earl's lands, and
the earl became his vassal under oath of fealty.



106. THE EARL'S AGREEMENT TO THE KING'S TERMS.

Thorfin the earl heard that his brother Bruse had gone east to
King Olaf to seek support from him; but as Thorfin had been on a
visit to King Olaf before, and had concluded a friendship with
him, he thought his case would stand well with the king, and that
many would support it; but he believed that many more would do so
if he went there himself.  Earl Thorfin resolved, therefore, to
go east himself without delay; and he thought there would be so
little difference between the time of his arrival and Bruse's,
that Bruse's errand could not be accomplished before he came to
King Olaf.  But it went otherwise than Earl Thorfin had expected;
for when he came to the king the agreement between the king and
Bruse was already concluded and settled, and Earl Thorfin did not
know a word about Bruse's having surrendered his udal domains
until he came to King Olaf.  As soon as Earl Thorfin and King
Olaf met, the king made the same demand upon the kingdom of
Orkney that he had done to Earl Bruse, and required that Thorfin
should voluntarily deliver over to the king that part of the
country which he had possessed hitherto.  The earl answered in a
friendly and respectful way, that the king's friendship lay near
to his heart: "And if you think, sire, that my help against other
chiefs can be of use, you have already every claim to it; but I
cannot be your vessel for service, as I am an earl of the
Scottish king, and owe fealty to him."

As the king found that the earl, by his answer, declined
fulfilling the demand he had made, he said, "Earl, if thou wilt
not become my vassal, there is another condition; namely, that I
will place over the Orkney Islands the man I please, and require
thy oath that thou wilt make no claim upon these lands, but allow
whoever I place over them to sit in peace.  If thou wilt not
accept of either of these conditions, he who is to rule over
these lands may expect hostility from thee, and thou must not
think it strange if like meet like in this business."

The earl begged of the king some time to consider the matter. 
The king did so, and gave the earl time to take the counsel of
his friends on the choosing one or other of these conditions.
Then the earl requested a delay until next summer, that he might
go over the sea to the west, for his proper counsellors were all
at home, and he himself was but a child in respect of age; but
the king required that he should now make his election of one or
other of the conditions.  Thorkel Fosterer was then with the
king, and he privately sent a person to Earl Thorfin, and told
him, whatever his intentions might be, not to think of leaving
Olaf without being reconciled with him, as he stood entirely in
Olaf's power.  From such hints the earl saw there was no other
way than to let the king have his own will.  It was no doubt a
hard condition to have no hope of ever regaining his paternal
heritage, and moreover to bind himself by oath to allow those to
enjoy in peace his domain who had no hereditary right to it; but
seeing it was uncertain how he could get away, he resolved to
submit to the king and become his vassal, as Bruse had done.  The
king observed that Thorfin was more high-minded, and less
disposed to suffer subjection than Bruse, and therefore he
trusted less to Thorfin than to Bruse; and he considered also
that Thorfin would trust to the aid of the Scottish king, if he
broke the agreement.  The king also had discernment enough to
perceive that Bruse, although slow to enter into an agreement,
would promise nothing but what he intended to keep; but as to
Thorfin when he had once made up his mind he went readily into
every proposal and made no attempt to obtain any alteration of
the king's first conditions: therefore the king had his
suspicions that the earl would infringe the agreement.



107. EARL THORFIN'S DEPARTURE, AND RECONCILIATION WITH THORKEL.

When the king had carefully considered the whole matter by
himself, he ordered the signal to sound for a General Thing, to
which he called in the earls.  Then said the king, "I will now
make known to the public our agreement with the Orkney earls.
They have now acknowledged my right of property to Orkney and
Shetland, and have both become my vassals, all which they have
confirmed by oath; and now I will invest them with these lands as
a fief: namely, Bruse with one third part and Thorfin with one
third, as they formerly enjoyed them; but the other third which
Einar Rangmund had, I adjudge as fallen to my domain, because he
killed Eyvind Urarhorn, my court-man, partner, and dear friend;
and that part of the land I will manage as I think proper.  I
have also my earls, to tell you it is my pleasure that ye enter
into an agreement with Thorkel Amundason for the murder of your
brother Einar, for I will take that business, if ye agree
thereto, within my own jurisdiction."  The earls agreed to this,
as to everything else that the king proposed.  Thorkel came
forward, and surrendered to the king's judgment of the case, and
the Thing concluded.  King Olaf awarded as great a penalty for
Earl Einar's murder as for three lendermen; but as Einar himself
was the cause of the act, one third of the mulct fell to the
ground.  Thereafter Earl Thorfin asked the king's leave to
depart, and as soon as he obtained it made ready for sea with all
speed.  It happened one day, when all was ready for the voyage,
the earl sat in his ship drinking; and Thorkel Amundason came
unexpectedly to him, laid his head upon the earl's knee, and bade
him do with him what he pleased.  The earl asked why he did so.
"We are, you know, reconciled men, according to the king's
decision; so stand up, Thorkel." 

Thorkel replied, "The agreement which the king made as between me
and Bruse stands good; but what regards the agreement with thee
thou alone must determine.  Although the king made conditions for
my property and safe residence in Orkney, yet I know so well thy
disposition that there is no going to the islands for me, unless
I go there in peace with thee, Earl Thorfin; and therefore I am
willing to promise never to return to Orkney, whatever the king
may desire."

The earl remained silent; and first, after a long pause, he said,
"If thou wilt rather, Thorkel, that I shall judge between us than
trust to the king's judgment, then let the beginning of our
reconciliation be, that you go with me to the Orkney Islands,
live with me, and never leave me but with my will, and be bound
to defend my land, and execute all that I want done, as long as
we both are in life."

Thorkel replies, "This shall be entirely at thy pleasure, earl,
as well as everything else in my power."  Then Thorkel went on,
and solemnly ratified this agreement.  The earl said he would
talk afterwards about the mulct of money, but took Thorkel's oath
upon the conditions.  Thorkel immediately made ready to accompany
the earl on his voyage.  The earl set off as soon as all was
ready, and never again were King Olaf and Thorfin together.



108. EARL BRUSE'S DEPARTURE.

Earl Bruse remained behind, and took his time to get ready.
Before his departure the king sent for him, and said, "It appears
to me, earl, that in thee I have a man on the west side of the
sea on whose fidelity I can depend; therefore I intend to give
thee the two parts of the country which thou formerly hadst to
rule over; for I will not that thou shouldst be a less powerful
man after entering into my service than before: but I will secure
thy fidelity by keeping thy son Ragnvald with me.  I see well
enough that with two parts of the country and my help, thou wilt
be able to defend what is thy own against thy brother Thorfin."
Bruse was thankful for getting two thirds instead of one third of
the country, and soon after he set out, and came about autumn to
Orkney; but Ragnvald, Bruse's son, remained behind in the East
with King Olaf.  Ragnvald was one of the handsomest men that
could be seen, -- his hair long, and yellow as silk; and he soon
grew up, stout and tall, and he was a very able and superb man,
both of great understanding and polite manners.  He was long with
King Olaf.  Otter Svarte speaks of these affairs in the poem he
composed about King Olaf: --

     "From Shetland, far off in the cold North Sea,
     Come chiefs who desire to be subject to thee:
     No king so well known for his will, and his might,
     To defend his own people from scaith or unright.
     These isles of the West midst the ocean's wild roar,
     Scarcely heard the voice of their sovereign before;
     Our bravest of sovereigns before could scarce bring
     These islesmen so proud to acknowledge their king."



109. OF THE EARLS THORFIN AND BRUSE.

The brothers Thorfin and Bruse came west to Orkney; and Bruse
took the two parts of the country under his rule, and Thorfin the
third part.  Thorfin was usually in Caithness and elsewhere in
Scotland; but placed men of his own over the islands.  It was
left to Bruse alone to defend the islands, which at that time
were severely scourged by vikings; for the Northmen and Danes
went much on viking cruises in the west sea, and frequently
touched at Orkney on the way to or from the west, and plundered,
and took provisions and cattle from the coast.  Bruse often
complained of his brother Thorfin, that he made no equipment of
war for the defence of Orkney and Shetland, yet levied his share
of the scat and duties.  Then Thorfin offered to him to exchange,
and that Bruse should have one third and Thorfin two thirds of
the land, but should undertake the defence of the land, for the
whole.  Although this exchange did not take place immediately, it
is related in the saga of the earls that it was agreed upon at
last; and that Thorfin had two parts and Bruse only one, when
Canute the Great subdued Norway and King Olaf fled the country.
Earl Thorfin Sigurdson has been the ablest earl of these islands,
and has had the greatest dominion of all the Orkney earls; for he
had under him Orkney, Shetland, and the Hebudes, besides very
great possessions in Scotland and Ireland.  Arnor, the earls'
skald, tells of his possessions: --

     "From Thurso-skerry to Dublin,
     All people hold with good Thorfin --
     All people love his sway,
     And the generous chief obey."

Thorfin was a very great warrior.  He came to the earldom at five
years of age, ruled more than sixty years, and died in his bed
about the last days of Harald Sigurdson.  But Bruse died in the
days of Canute the Great, a short time after the fall of Saint
Olaf.



110. OF HAREK OF THJOTTA.

Having now gone through this second story, we shall return to
that which we left, -- at King Olaf Haraldson having concluded
peace with King Olaf the Swedish king, and having the same summer
gone north to Throndhjem (1019).  He had then been king in Norway
five years (A.D. 1015-1019).  In harvest time he prepared to take
his winter residence at Nidaros, and he remained all winter there
(A.D. 1020).  Thorkel the Fosterer, Amunde's son, as before
related, was all that winter with him.  King Olaf inquired very
carefully how it stood with Christianity throughout the land, and
learnt that it was not observed at all to the north of
Halogaland, and was far from being observed as it should be in
Naumudal, and the interior of Throndhjem.  There was a man by
name Harek, a son of Eyvind Skaldaspiller, who dwelt in an island
called Thjotta in Halogaland.  Eyvind had not been a rich man,
but was of high family and high mind.  In Thjotta, at first,
there dwelt many small bondes; but Harek began with buying a farm
not very large and lived on it, and in a few years he had got all
the bondes that were there before out of the way; so that he had
the whole island, and built a large head-mansion.  He soon became
very rich; for he was a very prudent man, and very successful. 
He had long been greatly respected by the chiefs; and being
related to the kings of Norway, had been raised by them to high
dignities.  Harek's father's mother Gunhild was a daughter of
Earl Halfdan, and Ingebjorg, Harald Harfager's daughter.  At the
time the circumstance happened which we are going to relate he
was somewhat advanced in years.  Harek was the most respected man
in Halogaland, and for a long time had the Lapland trade, and did
the king's business in Lapland; sometimes alone, sometimes with
others joined to him.  He had not himself been to wait on King
Olaf, but messages had passed between them, and all was on the
most friendly footing.  This winter (A.D. 1020) that Olaf was in
Nidaros, messengers passed between the king and Harek of Thjotta.
Then the king made it known that he intended going north to
Halogaland, and as far north as the land's end; but the people of
Halogaland expected no good from this expedition.



111. OF THE PEOPLE OF HALOGALAND.

Olaf rigged out five ships in spring (A.D. 1020), and had with
him about 300 men.  When he was ready for sea he set northwards
along the land; and when he came to Naumudal district he summoned
the bondes to a Thing, and at every Thing was accepted as king. 
He also made the laws to be read there as elsewhere, by which the
people are commanded to observe Christianity; and he threatened
every man with loss of life, and limbs, and property who would
not subject himself to Christian law.  He inflicted severe
punishments on many men, great as well as small, and left no
district until the people had consented to adopt the holy faith.
The most of the men of power and of the great bondes made feasts
for the king, and so he proceeded all the way north to
Halogaland.  Harek of Thjotta also made a feast for the king, at
which there was a great multitude of guests, and the feast was
very splendid.  Harek was made lenderman, and got the same
privileges he had enjoyed under the former chiefs of the country.



112. OF ASMUND GRANKELSON.

There was a man called Grankel, or Granketil, who was a rich
bonde, and at this time rather advanced in age.  In his youth he
had been on viking cruises, and had been a powerful fighter; for
he possessed great readiness in all sorts of bodily exercises.
His son Asmund was equal to his father in all these, and in some,
indeed, he excelled him.  There were many who said that with
respect to comeliness, strength, and bodily expertness, he might
be considered the third remarkably distinguished for these that
Norway had ever produced.  The first was Hakon Athelstan's
foster-son; the second, Olaf Trygvason.  Grankel invited King
Olaf to a feast, which was very magnificent; and at parting
Grankel presented the king with many honourable gifts and tokens
of friendship.  The king invited Asmund, with many persuasions,
to follow him; and as Asmund could not decline the honours
offered him, he got ready to travel with the king, became his
man, and stood in high favour with him.  The king remained in
Halogaland the greater part of the summer, went to all the
Things, and baptized all the people.  Thorer Hund dwelt at that
time in the island Bjarkey.  He was the most powerful man in the
North, and also became one of Olaf's lendermen.  Many sons of
great bondes resolved also to follow King Olaf from Halogaland.
Towards the end of summer King Olaf left the North, and sailed
back to Throndhjem, and landed at Nidaros, where he passed the
winter (A.D. 1021).  It was then that Thorkel the Fosterer came
from the West from Orkney, after killing Einar Rangmumd, as
before related.  This autumn corn was dear in Throndhjem, after a
long course of good seasons, and the farther north the dearer was
the corn; but there was corn enough in the East country, and in
the Uplands, and it was of great help to the people of Throndhjem
that many had old corn remaining beside them.



113. OF THE SACRIFICES OF THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE.

In autumn the news was brought to King Olaf that the bondes had
had a great feast on the first winter-day's eve, at which there
was a numerous attendance and much drinking; and it was told the
king that all the remembrance-cups to the Asas, or old gods, were
blessed according to the old heathen forms; and it was added,
that cattle and horses had been slain, and the altars sprinkled
with their blood, and the sacrifices accompanied with the prayer
that was made to obtain good seasons.  It was also reported that
all men saw clearly that the gods were offended at the Halogaland
people turning Christian.  Now when the king heard this news he
sent men into the Throndhjem country, and ordered several bondes,
whose names he gave, to appear before him.  There was a man
called Olver of Eggja, so called after his farm on which he
lived.  He was powerful, of great family, and the head-man of
those who on account of the bondes appeared before the king. 
Now, when they came to the king, he told them these accusations;
to which Olver, on behalf of the bondes, replied, that they had
had no other feasts that harvest than their usual entertainments,
and social meetings, and friendly drinking parties.  "But as to
what may have been told you of the words which may have fallen
from us Throndhjem people in our drinking parties, men of
understanding would take good care not to use such language; but
I cannot hinder drunken or foolish people's talk."  Olver was a
man of clever speech, and bold in what he said, and defended the
bondes against such accusations.  In the end, the king said the
people of the interior of Thorndhjem must themselves give the
best testimony to their being in the right faith.  The bondes got
leave to return home, and set off as soon as they were ready.



114. OF THE SACRIFICES BY THE PEOPLE OF THE INTERIOR OF THE
     THRONDHJEM DISTRICT.

Afterwards, when winter was advanced, it was told the king that
the people of the interior of Throndhjem had assembled in great
number at Maerin, and that there was a great sacrifice in the
middle of winter, at which they sacrificed offerings for peace
and a good season.  Now when the king knew this on good authority
to be true, he sent men and messages into the interior, and
summoned the bondes whom he thought of most understanding into
the town.  The bondes held a council among themselves about this
message; and all those who had been upon the same occasion in the
beginning of winter were now very unwilling to make the journey.
Olver, however, at the desire of all the bondes, allowed himself
to be persuaded.  When he came to the town he went immediately
before the king, and they talked together.  The king made the
same accusation against the bondes, that they had held a mid-
winter sacrifice.  Olver replies, that this accusation against
the bondes was false.  "We had," said he, "Yule feasts and
drinking feasts wide around in the districts; and the bondes do
not prepare their feasts so sparingly, sire, that there is not
much left over, which people consume long afterwards.  At Maerin
there is a great farm, with a large house on it, and a great
neighbourhood all around it, and it is the great delight of the
people to drink many together in company."  The king said little
in reply, but looked angry, as he thought he knew the truth of
the matter better than it was now represented.  He ordered the
bondes to return home.  "I shall some time or other," said he,
"come to the truth of what you are now concealing, and in such a
way that ye shall not be able to contradict it.  But, however,
that may be, do not try such things again."  The bondes returned
home, and told the result of their journey, and that the king was
altogether enraged.



115. MURDER OF OLVER OF EGGJA.

At Easter (A.D. 1021) the king held a feast, to which he had
invited many of the townspeople as well as bondes.  After Easter
he ordered his ships to be launched into the water, oars and
tackle to be put on board, decks to be laid in the ships, and
tilts (1) and rigging to be set up, and to be laid ready for sea
at the piers.  Immediately after Easter he sent men into Veradal.
There was a man called Thoralde, who was the king's bailiff, and
who managed the king's farm there at Haug; and to him the king
sent a message to come to him as quickly as possible.  Thoralde
did not decline the journey, but went immediately to the town
with the messenger.  The king called him in and in a private
conversation asked him what truth there was in what had been told
him of the principles and living of the people of the interior
of Throndhjem, and if it really was so that they practised
sacrifices to heathen gods.  "I will," says the king, "that thou
declare to me the things as they are, and as thou knowest to be
true; for it is thy duty to tell me the truth, as thou art my
man."

Thoralde replies, "Sire, I will first tell you that I have
brought here to the town my two children, my wife, and all my
loose property that I could take with me, and if thou desirest to
know the truth it shall be told according to thy command; but
if I declare it, thou must take care of me and mine."

The king replies, "Say only what is true on what I ask thee, and
I will take care that no evil befall thee."

Then said Thoralde, "If I must say the truth, king, as it is, I
must declare that in the interior of the Throndhjem land almost
all the people are heathen in faith, although some of them are
baptized.  It is their custom to offer sacrifice in autumn for a
good winter, a second at mid-winter, and a third in summer.  In
this the people of Eyna, Sparby, Veradal, and Skaun partake.
There are twelve men who preside over these sacrifice-feasts; and
in spring it is Olver who has to get the feast in order, and he
is now busy transporting to Maerin everything needful for it."
Now when the king had got to the truth with a certainty, he
ordered the signal to be sounded for his men to assemble, and for
the men-at-arms to go on board ship.  He appointed men to steer
the ships, and leaders for the people, and ordered how the people
should be divided among the vessels.  All was got ready in haste,
and with five ships and 300 men he steered up the fjord.  The
wind was favourable, the ships sailed briskly before it, and
nobody could have thought that the king would be so soon there.
The king came in the night time to Maerin, and immediately
surrounded the house with a ring of armed men.  Olver was taken,
and the king ordered him to be put to death, and many other men
besides.  Then the king took all the provision for the feast, and
had it brought to his ships; and also all the goods, both
furniture, clothes, and valuables, which the people had brought
there, and divided the booty among his men.  The king also let
all the bondes he thought had the greatest part in the business
be plundered by his men-at-arms.  Some were taken prisoners and
laid in irons, some ran away, and many were robbed of their
goods.  Thereafter the bondes were summoned to a Thing; but
because he had taken many powerful men prisoners, and held them
in his power, their friends and relations resolved to promise
obedience to the king, so that there was no insurrection against
the king on this occasion.  He thus brought the whole people back
to the right faith, gave them teachers, and built and consecrated
churches.  The king let Olver lie without fine paid for his
bloodshed, and all that he possessed was adjudged to the king;
and of the men he judged the most guilty, some he ordered to be
executed, some he maimed, some he drove out of the country, and
took fines from others.  The king then returned to Nidaros.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The ships appear to have been decked fore and aft only; and
     in the middle, where the rowers sat, to have had tilts or
     tents set up at night to sleep under. -- L.



116. OF THE SONS OF ARNE.

There was a man called Arne Arnmodson, who was married to Thora,
Thorstein Galge's daughter.  Their children were Kalf, Fin,
Thorberg, Amunde, Kolbjorn, Arnbjorn, and Arne.  Their daughter,
who was called Ragnhild, was married to Harek of Thjotta.  Arne
was a lenderman, powerful, and of ability, and a great friend of
King Olaf.  At that time his sons Kalf and Fin were with the
king, and in great favour.  The wife whom Olver of Eggja had left
was young and handsome, of great family, and rich, so that he who
got her might be considered to have made an excellent marriage;
and her land was in the gift of the king.  She and Olver had two
sons, who were still in infancy.  Kalf Arneson begged of the king
that he would give him to wife the widow of Olver; and out of
friendship the king agreed to it, and with her he got all the
property Olver had possessed.  The king at the same time made him
his lenderman, and gave him an office in the interior of the
Throndhjem country.  Kalf became a great chief, and was a man of
very great understanding.



117. KING OLAF'S JOURNEY TO THE UPLANDS.

When King Olaf had been seven years (A.D. 1015-1021) in Norway
the earls Thorfin and Bruse came to him, as before related, in
the summer, from Orkney, and he became master of their land.  The
same summer Olaf went to North and South More, and in autumn to
Raumsdal.  He left his ships there, and came to the Uplands, and
to Lesjar.  Here he laid hold of all the best men, and forced
them, both at Lesjar and Dovre, either to receive Christianity or
suffer death, if they were not so lucky as to escape.  After they
received Christianity, the king took their sons in his hands as
hostages for their fidelity.  The king stayed several nights at a
farm in Lesjar called Boar, where he placed priests.  Then he
proceeded over Orkadal and Lorodal, and came down from the
Uplands at a place called Stafabrekka.  There a river runs along
the valley, called the Otta, and a beautiful hamlet, by name
Loar, lies on both sides of the river, and the king could see far
down over the whole neighbourhood.  "A pity it is," said the
king, "so beautiful a hamlet should be burnt."  And he proceeded
down the valley with his people, and was all night on a farm
called Nes.  The king took his lodging in a loft, where he slept
himself; and it stands to the present day, without anything in it
having been altered since.  The king was five days there, and
summoned by message-token the people to a Thing, both for the
districts of Vagar, Lear, and Hedal; and gave out the message
along with the token, that they must either receive Christianity
and give their sons as hostages, or see their habitations burnt.
They came before the king, and submitted to his pleasure; but
some fled south down the valley.



118. THE STORY OF DALE-GUDBRAND.

There was a man called Dale-Gudbrand, who was like a king in the
valley (Gudbrandsdal), but was only herse in title.  Sigvat the
skald compared him for wealth and landed property to Erling
Skjalgson.  Sigvat sang thus concerning Erling: --

     "I know but one who can compare
     With Erling for broad lands and gear --
     Gudbrand is he, whose wide domains
     Are most like where some small king reigns.
     These two great bondes, I would say,
     Equal each other every way.
     He lies who says that he can find
     One by the other left behind."

Gudbrand had a son, who is here spoken of.  Now when Gudbrand
received the tidings that King Olaf was come to Lear, and obliged
people to accept Christianity, he sent out a message-token, and
summoned all the men in the valley to meet him at a farm called
Hundthorp.  All came, so that the number could not be told; for
there is a lake in the neighbourhood called Laugen, so that
people could come to the place both by land and by water.  There
Gudbrand held a Thing with them, and said, "A man is come to Loar
who is called Olaf, and will force upon us another faith than
what we had before, and will break in pieces all our gods.  He
says that he has a much greater and more powerful god; and it is
wonderful that the earth does not burst asunder under him, or
that our god lets him go about unpunished when he dares to talk
such things.  I know this for certain, that if we carry Thor, who
has always stood by us, out of our temple that is standing upon
this farm, Olaf's god will melt away, and he and his men be made
nothing so soon as Thor looks upon them."  Then the bondes all
shouted as one person that Olaf should never get away with life
if he came to them; and they thought he would never dare to come
farther south through the valley.  They chose out 700 men to go
northwards to Breida, to watch his movements.  The leader of this
band was Gudbrand's son, eighteen years of age, and with him were
many other men of importance.  When they came to a farm called
Hof they heard of the king; and they remained three nights there.
People streamed to them from all parts, from Lesjar, Loar, and
Vagar, who did not wish to receive Christianity.  The king and
Bishop Sigurd fixed teachers in Loaf and in Vagar.  From thence
they went round Vagarost, and came down into the valley at Sil,
where they stayed all night, and heard the news that a great
force of men were assembled against them.  The bondes who were in
Breida heard also of the king's arrival, and prepared for battle.
As soon as the king arose in the morning he put on his armour,
and went southwards over the Sil plains, and did not halt until
he came to Breida, where he saw a great army ready for battle.
Then the king drew up his troops, rode himself at the head of
them, and began a speech to the bondes, in which he invited them
to adopt Christianity.  They replied, "We shall give thee
something else to do to-day than to be mocking us;" and raised a
general shout, striking also upon their shields with their
weapons.  Then the king's men ran forward and threw their spears;
but the bondes turned round instantly and fled, so that only few
men remained behind.  Gudbrand's son was taken prisoner; but the
king gave him his life, and took him with him.  The king was four
days here.  Then the king said to Gudbrand's son, "Go home now to
thy father, and tell him I expect to be with him soon."

He went accordingly, and told his father the news, that they had
fallen in with the king, and fought with him; but that their
whole army, in the very beginning, took flight.  "I was taken
prisoner," said he, "but the king gave me my life and liberty,
and told me to say to thee that he will soon be here.  And now we
have not 200 men of the force we raised against him; therefore I
advise thee, father, not to give battle to that man."

Says Gudbrand, "It is easy to see that all courage has left thee,
and it was an unlucky hour ye went out to the field.  Thy
proceeding will live long in the remembrance of people, and I see
that thy fastening thy faith on the folly that man is going about
with has brought upon thee and thy men so great a disgrace."

But the night after, Gudbrand dreamt that there came to him a man
surrounded by light, who brought great terror with him, and said
to him, "Thy son made no glorious expedition against King Olaf;
but still less honour wilt thou gather for thyself by holding a
battle with him.  Thou with all thy people wilt fall; wolves will
drag thee, and all thine, away; ravens wilt tear thee in
stripes."  At this dreadful vision he was much afraid, and tells
it to Thord Istermage, who was chief over the valley.  He
replies, "The very same vision came to me."  In the morning they
ordered the signal to sound for a Thing, and said that it
appeared to them advisable to hold a Thing with the man who had
come from the north with this new teaching, to know if there was
any truth in it.  Gudbrand then said to his son, "Go thou, and
twelve men with thee, to the king who gave thee thy life."  He
went straightway, and found the king, and laid before him their
errand; namely, that the bondes would hold a Thing with him, and
make a truce between them and him.  The king was content; and
they bound themselves by faith and law mutually to hold the peace
so long as the Thing lasted.  After this was settled the men
returned to Gudbrand and Thord, and told them there was made a
firm agreement for a truce.  The king, after the battle with the
son of Gudbrand, had proceeded to Lidstad, and remained there for
five days: afterwards he went out to meet the bondes, and hold a
Thing with them.  On that day there fell a heavy rain.  When the
Thing was seated, the king stood up and said that the people in
Lesjar, Loaf, and Vagar had received Christianity, broken down
their houses of sacrifice, and believed now in the true God who
had made heaven and earth and knows all things.

Thereupon the king sat down, and Gudbrand replies, "We know
nothing of him whom thou speakest about.  Dost thou call him God,
whom neither thou nor any one else can see?  But we have a god
who call be seen every day, although he is not out to-day,
because the weather is wet, and he will appear to thee terrible
and very grand; and I expect that fear will mix with your very
blood when he comes into the Thing.  But since thou sayest thy
God is so great, let him make it so that to-morrow we have a
cloudy day but without rain, and then let us meet again."

The king accordingly returned home to his lodging, taking
Gudbrand's son as a hostage; but he gave them a man as hostage in
exchange.  In the evening the king asked Gudbrand's son what like
their god was.  He replied, that he bore the likeness of Thor;
had a hammer in his hand; was of great size, but hollow within;
and had a high stand, upon which he stood when he was out.
"Neither gold nor silver are wanting about him, and every day he
receives four cakes of bread, besides meat."  They then went to
bed, but the king watched all night in prayer.  When day dawned
the king went to mass, then to table, and from thence to the
Thing.  The weather was such as Gudbrand desired.  Now the bishop
stood up in his choir-robes, with bishop's coif upon his head,
and bishop's staff in his hands.  He spoke to the bondes of the
true faith, told the many wonderful acts of God, and concluded
his speech well.

Thord Istermage replies, "Many things we are told of by this
horned man with the staff in his hand crooked at the top like a
ram's horn; but since ye say, comrades, that your god is so
powerful, and can do so many wonders, tell him to make it clear
sunshine to-morrow forenoon, and then we shall meet here again,
and do one of two things, -- either agree with you about this
business, or fight you."  And they separated for the day.



119. DALE-GUDBRAND IS BAPTIZED.

There was a man with King Olaf called Kolbein Sterke (the
strong), who came from a family in the Fjord district.  Usually
he was so equipped that he was girt with a sword, and besides
carried a great stake, otherwise called a club, in his hands. 
The king told Kolbein to stand nearest to him in the morning; and
gave orders to his people to go down in the night to where the
ships of the bondes lay and bore holes in them, and to set loose
their horses on the farms where they were; all which was done.
Now the king was in prayer all the night, beseeching God of His
goodness and mercy to release him from evil.  When mass was
ended, and morning was grey, the king went to the Thing.  When he
came there some bondes had already arrived, and they saw a great
crowd coming along, and bearing among them a huge man's image
glancing with gold and silver.  When the bondes who were at the
Thing saw it they started up, and bowed themselves down before
the ugly idol.  Thereupon it was set down upon the Thing-field;
and on the one side of it sat the bondes, and on the other the
king and his people.

Then Dale-Gudbrand stood up, and said, "Where now, king, is thy
god?  I think he will now carry his head lower; and neither thou,
nor the man with the horn whom ye call bishop, and sits there
beside thee, are so bold to-day as on the former days; for now
our god, who rules over all, is come, and looks on you with an
angry eye; and now I see well enough that ye are terrified, and
scarcely dare to raise your eyes.  Throw away now all your
opposition, and believe in the god who has all your fate in his
hands."

The king now whispers to Kolbein Sterke, without the bondes
perceiving it, "If it come so in the course of my speech that the
bondes look another way than towards their idol, strike him as
hard as thou canst with thy club."

The king then stood up and spoke.  "Much hast thou talked to us
this morning, and greatly hast thou wondered that thou canst not
see our God; but we expect that he will soon come to us.  Thou
wouldst frighten us with thy god, who is both blind and deaf, and
can neither save himself nor others, and cannot even move about
without being carried; but now I expect it will be but a short
time before he meets his fate: for turn your eyes towards the
east, -- behold our God advancing in great light."

The sun was rising, and all turned to look.  At that moment
Kolbein gave their god a stroke, so that the idol burst asunder;
and there ran out of it mice as big almost as cats, and reptiles,
and adders.  The bondes were so terrified that some fled to their
ships; but when they sprang out upon them they filled with water,
and could not get away.  Others ran to their horses, but could
not find them.  The king then ordered the bondes to be called
together, saying he wanted to speak with them; on which the
bondes came back, and the Thing was again seated.

The king rose up and said, "I do not understand what your noise
and running mean.  Ye see yourselves what your god can do, -- the
idol ye adorned with gold and silver, and brought meat and
provisions to. Ye see now that the protecting powers who used it
were the mice and adders, reptiles and paddocks; and they do ill
who trust to such, and will not abandon this folly.  Take now
your gold and ornaments that are lying strewed about on the
grass, and give them to your wives and daughters; but never hang
them hereafter upon stock or stone.  Here are now two conditions
between us to choose upon, -- either accept Christianity, or
fight this very day; and the victory be to them to whom the God
we worship gives it."

Then Dale-Gudbrand stood up and said, "We have sustained great
damage upon our god; but since he will not help us, we will
believe in the God thou believest in."

Then all received Christianity.  The bishop baptized Gudbrand and
his son.  King Olaf and Bishop Sigurd left behind them teachers, 
and they who met as enemies parted as friends; and Gudbrand built
a church in the valley.



120. HEDEMARK BAPTIZED.

King Olaf proceeded from thence to Hedemark, and baptized there;
but as he had formerly carried away their kings as prisoners, he
did not venture himself, after such a deed, to go far into the
country with few people at that time, but a small part of
Hedemark was baptized; but the king did not desist from his
expedition before he had introduced Christianity over all
Hedemark, consecrated churches, and placed teachers.  He then
went to Hadaland and Thoten, improving the customs of the people,
and persisting until all the country was baptized.  He then went
to Ringerike, where also all people went over to Christianity.
The people of Raumarike then heard that Olaf intended coming to
them, and they gathered a great force.  They said among
themselves that the journey Olaf had made among them the last
time was not to be forgotten, and he should never proceed so
again.  The king, notwithstanding, prepared for the journey.  Now
when the king went up into Raumarike with his forces, the
multitude of bondes came against him at a river called Nitja; and
the bondes had a strong army, and began the battle as soon as
they met; but they soon fell short, and took to flight.  They
were forced by this battle into a better disposition, and
immediately received Christianity; and the king scoured the whole
district, and did not leave it until all the people were made
Christians.  He then went east to Soleys, and baptized that
neighbourhood.  The skald Ottar Black came to him there, and
begged to be received among his men.  Olaf the Swedish king had
died the winter before (A.D. 1021), and Onund, the son of Olaf,
was now the sole king over all Sweden.  King Olaf returned, when
the winter (A.D. 1022) was far advanced, to Raumarike.  There he
assembled a numerous Thing, at a place where the Eidsvold Things
have since been held.  He made a law, that the Upland people
should resort to this Thing, and that Eidsvold laws should be
good through all the districts of the Uplands, and wide around in
other quarters, which also has taken place.  As spring was
advancing, he rigged his ships, and went by sea to Tunsberg.  He
remained there during the spring, and the time the town was most
frequented, and goods from other countries were brought to the
town for sale.  There had been a good year in Viken, and
tolerable as far north as Stad; but it was a very dear time in
all the country north of there.



121. RECONCILIATION OF THE KING AND EINAR.

In spring (A.D. 1022) King Olaf sent a message west to Agder, and
north all the way to Hordaland and Rogaland, prohibiting the
exporting or selling of corn, malt, or meal; adding, that he, as
usual, would come there with his people in guest-quarters.  The
message went round all the districts; but the king remained in
Viken all summer, and went east to the boundary of the country.
Einar Tambaskelfer had been with the Swedish king Olaf since the
death of his relation Earl Svein, and had, as the khag's man,
received great fiefs from him.  Now that the king was dead, Einar
had a great desire to come into friendship agreement with Olaf;
and the same spring messages passed between them about it.  While
the king was lying in the Gaut river, Einar Tambaskelfer came
there with some men; and after treating about an agreement, it
was settled that Einar should go north to Throndhjem, and there
take possession of all the lands and property which Bergliot had
received in dower.  Thereupon Einar took his way north; but the
king remained behind in Viken, and remained long in Sarpsborg in
autumn (A.D. 1022), and during the first part of winter.



122. RECONCILIATION OF THE KING AND ERLING.

Erling Skjalgson held his dominion so, that all north from Sogn
Lake, and east to the Naze, the bondes stood under him; and
although he had much smaller royal fiefs than formerly, still so
great a dread of him prevailed that nobody dared to do anything
against his will, so that the king thought his power too great.
There was a man called Aslak Fitiaskalle, who was powerful and of
high birth.  Erling's father Skjalg, and Aslak's father Askel,
were brother's sons.  Aslak was a great friend of King Olaf, and
the king settled him in South Hordaland, where he gave him a
great fief, and great income, and ordered him in no respect to
give way to Erling.  But this came to nothing when the king was
not in the neighbourhood; for then Erling would reign as he used
to do, and was not more humble because Aslak would thrust himself
forward as his equal.  At last the strife went so far that Aslak
could not keep his place, but hastened to King Olaf, and told him
the circumstances between him and Erling.  The king told Aslak to
remain with him until he should meet Erling; and sent a message
to Erling that he should come to him in spring at Tunsberg.  When
they all arrived there they held a meeting at which the king said
to him, "It is told me concerning thy government, Erling, that no
man from Sogn Lake to the Naze can enjoy his freedom for thee;
although there are many men there who consider themselves born to
udal rights, and have their privileges like others born as they
are.  Now, here is your relation Aslak, who appears to have
suffered great inconvenience from your conduct; and I do not know
whether he himself is in fault, or whether he suffers because I
have placed him to defend what is mine; and although I name him,
there are many others who have brought the same complaint before
us, both among those who are placed in office in our districts,
and among the bailiffs who have our farms to manage, and are
obliged to entertain me and my people."

Erling replies to this, "I will answer at once.  I deny
altogether that I have ever injured Aslak, or any one else, for
being in your service; but this I will not deny, that it is now,
as it has long been, that each of us relations will willingly be
greater than the other: and, moreover, I freely acknowledge that
I am ready to bow my neck to thee, King Olaf; but it is more
difficult for me to stoop before one who is of slave descent in
all his generation, although he is now your bailiff, or before
others who are but equal to him in descent, although you bestow
honours on them."

Now the friends of both interfered, and entreated that they would
be reconciled; saying, that the king never could have such
powerful aid as from Erling, "if he was your friend entirely." 
On the other hand, they represent to Erling that he should give
up to the king; for if he was in friendship with the king, it
would be easy to do with all the others what he pleased.  The
meeting accordingly ended so that Erling should retain the fiefs
he formerly had, and every complaint the king had against Erling
should be dropped; but Skjalg, Erling's son, should come to the
king, and remain in his power.  Then Aslak returned to his
dominions, and the two were in some sort reconciled.  Erling
returned home also to his domains, and followed his own way of
ruling them.



123. HERE BEGINS THE STORY OF ASBJORN SELSBANE.

There was a man named Sigurd Thoreson, a brother of Thorer Hund
of Bjarkey Island.  Sigurd was married to Sigrid Skjalg's
daughter, a sister of Erling.  Their son, called Asbjorn, became
as he grew up a very able man.  Sigurd dwelt at Omd in
Thrandarnes, and was a very rich and respected man.  He had not
gone into the king's service; and Thorer in so far had attained
higher dignity than his brother, that he was the king's
lenderman.  But at home, on his farm, Sigurd stood in no respect
behind his brother in splendour and magnificence.  As long as
heathenism prevailed, Sigurd usually had three sacrifices every
year: one on winter-night's eve, one on mid-winter's eve, and the
third in summer.  Although he had adopted Christianity, he
continued the same custom with his feasts: he had, namely, a
great friendly entertainment at harvest time; a Yule feast in
winter, to which he invited many; the third feast he had about
Easter, to which also he invited many guests.  He continued this
fashion as long as he lived.  Sigurd died on a bed of sickness
when Asbjorn was eighteen years old.  He was the only heir of his
father, and he followed his father's custom of holding three
festivals every year.  Soon after Asbjorn came to his heritage
the course of seasons began to grow worse, and the corn harvests
of the people to fail; but Asbjorn held his usual feasts, and
helped himself by having old corn, and an old provision laid up
of all that was useful.  But when one year had passed and another
came, and the crops were no better than the year before, Sigrid
wished that some if not all of the feasts should be given up.
That Asbjorn would not consent to, but went round in harvest
among his friends, buying corn where he could get it, and some he
received in presents.  He thus kept his feasts this winter also;
but the spring after people got but little seed into the ground,
for they had to buy the seed-corn.  Then Sigurd spoke of
diminishing the number of their house-servants.  That Asbjorn
would not consent to, but held by the old fashion of the house in
all things.  In summer (A.D. 1022) it appeared again that there
would be a bad year for corn; and to this came the report from
the south that King Olaf prohibited all export of corn, malt, or
meal from the southern to the northern parts of the country. 
Then Asbjorn perceived that it would be difficult to procure what
was necessary for a house-keeping, and resolved to put into the
water a vessel for carrying goods which he had, and which was
large enough to go to sea with.  The ship was good, all that
belonged to her was of the best, and in the sails were stripes of
cloth of various colours.  Asbjorn made himself ready for a
voyage, and put to sea with twenty men.  They sailed from the
north in summer; and nothing is told of their voyage until one
day, about the time the days begin to shorten, they came to
Karmtsund, and landed at Augvaldsnes.  Up in the island Karmt
there is a large farm, not far from the sea, and a large house
upon it called Augvaldsnes, which was a king's house, with an
excellent farm, which Thorer Sel, who was the king's bailiff, had
under his management.  Thorer was a man of low birth, but had
swung himself up in the world as an active man; and he was polite
in speech, showy in clothes, and fond of distinction, and not apt
to give way to others, in which he was supported by the favour of
the king.  He was besides quick in speech, straightforward, and
free in conversation.  Asbjorn, with his company, brought up
there for the night; and in the morning, when it was light,
Thorer went down to the vessel with some men, and inquired who
commanded the splendid ship.  Asbjorn named his own and his
father's name.  Thorer asks where the voyage was intended for,
and what was the errand.

Asbjorn replies, that he wanted to buy corn and malt; saying, as
was true, that it was a very dear time north in the country. 
"But we are told that here the seasons are good; and wilt thou,
farmer, sell us corn?  I see that here are great corn stacks, and
it would be very convenient if we had not to travel farther."

Thorer replies, "I will give thee the information that thou
needst not go farther to buy corn, or travel about here in
Rogaland; for I can tell thee that thou must turn about, and not
travel farther, for the king forbids carrying corn out of this to
the north of the country.  Sail back again, Halogalander, for
that will be thy safest course."

Asbjorn replies, "If it be so, bonde, as thou sayest, that we can
get no corn here to buy, I will, notwithstanding, go forward upon
my errand, and visit my family in Sole, and see my relation
Erling's habitation."

Thorer: "How near is thy relationship to Erling?"

Asbjorn: "My mother is his sister."

Thorer: "It may be that I have spoken heedlessly, if so be that
thou art sister's son of Erling."

Thereupon Asbjorn and his crew struck their tents, and turned the
ship to sea.  Thorer called after them. "A good voyage, and come
here again on your way back."  Asbjorn promised to do so, sailed
away, and came in the evening to Jadar.  Asbjorn went on shore
with ten men; the other ten men watched the ship.  When Asbjorn
came to the house he was very well received, and Erling was very
glad to see him, placed him beside himself, and asked him all the
news in the north of the country.  Asbjorn concealed nothing of
his business from him; and Erling said it happened unfortunately
that the king had just forbid the sale of corn.  "And I know no
man here." says he, "who has courage to break the king's order,
and I find it difficult to keep well with the king, so many are
trying to break our friendship."

Asbjorn replies, "It is late before we learn the truth.  In my
childhood I was taught that my mother was freeborn throughout her
whole descent, and that Erling of Sole was her boldest relation;
and now I hear thee say that thou hast not the freedom, for the
king's slaves here in Jadar, to do with thy own corn what thou
pleasest."

Erling looked at him, smiled through his teeth, and said, "Ye
Halogalanders know less of the king's power than we do here; but
a bold man thou mayst be at home in thy conversation.  Let us now
drink, my friend, and we shall see tomorrow what can be done in
thy business."

They did so, and were very merry all the evening.  The following
day Erling and Asbjorn talked over the matter again, and Erling
said. "I have found out a way for you to purchase corn, Asbjorn.
It is the same thing to you whoever is the seller."  He answered
that he did not care of whom he bought the corn, if he got a good
right to his purchase.  Erling said. "It appears to me probable
that my slaves have quite as much corn as you require to buy; and
they are not subject to law, or land regulation, like other men."
Asbjorn agreed to the proposal.  The slaves were now spoken to
about the purchase, and they brought forward corn and malt, which
they sold to Asbjorn, so that he loaded his vessel with what he
wanted.  When he was ready for sea Erling followed him on the
road, made him presents of friendship, and they took a kind
farewell of each other.  Asbjorn got a good breeze, landed in the
evening at Karmtsund, near to Augvaldsnes, and remained there for
the night.  Thorer Sel had heard of Asbjorn's voyage, and also
that his vessel was deeply laden.  Thorer summoned people to him
in the night, so that before daylight he had sixty men; and with
these he went against Asbjorn as soon as it was light, and went
out to the ship just as Asbjorn and his men were putting on their
clothes.  Asbjorn saluted Thorer, and Thorer asked what kind of
goods Asbjorn had in the vessel.

He replied, "Corn and malt."

Thorer said, "Then Erling is doing as he usually does, and
despising the king's orders, and is unwearied in opposing him in
all things, insomuch that it is wonderful the king suffers it."

Thorer went on scolding in this way, and when he was silent
Asbjorn said that Erling's slaves had owned the corn.

Thorer replied hastily, that he did not regard Erling's tricks.
"And now, Asbjorn, there is no help for it; ye must either go on
shore, or we will throw you overboard; for we will not be
troubled with you while we are discharging the cargo."

Asbjorn saw that he had not men enough to resist Thorer;
therefore he and his people landed, and Thorer took the whole
cargo out of the vessel.  When the vessel was discharged Thorer
went through the ship, and observed. "Ye Halogalanders have good
sails: take the old sail of our vessel and give it them; it is
good enough for those who are sailing in a light vessel."  Thus
the sails were exchanged.  When this was done Asbjorn and his
comrades sailed away north along the coast, and did not stop
until they reached home early in whiter.  This expedition was
talked of far and wide, and Asbjorn had no trouble that winter in
making feasts at home.  Thorer Hund invited Asbjorn and his
mother, and also all whom they pleased to take along with him, to
a Yule feast; but Asbjorn sat at home, and would not travel, and
it was to be seen that Thorer thought Asbjorn despised his
invitation, since he would not come.  Thorer scoffed much at
Asbjorn's voyage.  "Now," said he, "it is evident that Asbjorn
makes a great difference in his respect towards his relations;
for in summer he took the greatest trouble to visit his relation
Erling in Jadar, and now will not take the trouble to come to me
in the next house.  I don't know if he thinks there may be a
Thorer Sel in his way upon every holm."  Such words, and the like
sarcasms, Asbjorn heard of; and very ill satisfied he was with
his voyage, which had thus made him a laughing-stock to the
country, and he remained at home all winter, and went to no
feasts.



124. MURDER OF THORER SEL.

Asbjorn had a long-ship standing in the noust (shipshed), and it
was a snekke (cutter) of twenty benches; and after Candlemas
(February 2, 1023), he had the vessel put in the water, brought
out all his furniture, and rigged her out.  He then summoned to
him his friends and people, so that he had nearly ninety men all
well armed.  When he was ready for sea, and got a wind, he sailed
south along the coast, but as the wind did not suit, they
advanced but slowly.  When they came farther south they steered
outside the rocks, without the usual ships' channel, keeping to
sea as much as it was possible to do so.  Nothing is related of
his voyage before the fifth day of Easter (April 18, 1023), when,
about evening, they came on the outside of Karmt Island.  This
island is so shaped that it is very long, but not broad at its
widest part; and without it lies the usual ships' channel.  It is
thickly inhabited; but where the island is exposed to the ocean
great tracts of it are uncultivated.  Asbjorn and his men landed
at a place in the island that was uninhabited.  After they had
set up their ship-tents Asbjorn said, "Now ye must remain here
and wait for me.  I will go on land in the isle, and spy what
news there may be which we know nothing of."  Asbjorn had on mean
clothes, a broadbrimmed hat, a fork in his hand, but had girt on
his sword under his clothes.  He went up to the land, and in
through the island; and when he came upon a hillock, from which
he could see the house on Augvaldsnes, and on as far as
Karmtsund, he saw people in all quarters flocking together by
land and by sea, and all going up to the house of Augvaldsnes.
This seemed to him extraordinary; and therefore he went up
quietly to a house close by, in which servants were cooking meat.
From their conversation he discovered immediately that the king
Olaf had come there to a feast, and that he had just sat down to
table.  Asbjorn turned then to the feasting-room, and when he
came into the ante-room one was going in and another coming out;
but nobody took notice of him.  The hall-door was open, and he
saw that Thorer Sel stood before the table of the high-seat.  It
was getting late in the evening, and Asbjorn heard people ask
Thorer what had taken place between him and Asbjorn; and Thorer
had a long story about it, in which he evidently departed from
the truth.  Among other things he heard a man say, "How did
Asbjorn behave when you discharged his vessel?"  Thorer replied,
"When we were taking out the cargo he bore it tolerably, but not
well; and when we took the sail from him he wept."  When Asbjorn
heard this he suddenly drew his sword, rushed into the hall, and
cut at Thorer.  The stroke took him in the neck, so that the head
fell upon the table before the king, and the body at his feet,
and the table-cloth was soiled with blood from top to bottom. 
The king ordered him to be seized and taken out.  This was done.
They laid hands on Asbjorn, and took him from the hall.  The
table-furniture and table-cloths were removed, and also Thorer's
corpse, and all the blood wiped up.  The king was enraged to the
highest; but remained quiet in speech, as he always was when in
anger.



125. OF SKJALG, THE SON OF ERLING SKJALGSON.

Skjalg Erlingson stood up, went before the king, and said, "Now
may it go, as it often does, that every case will admit of
alleviation.  I will pay thee the mulct for the bloodshed on
account of this man, so that he may retain life and limbs.  All
the rest determine and do, king, according to thy pleasure."

The king replies, "Is it not a matter of death, Skjalg, that a
man break the Easter peace; and in the next place that he kills a
man in the king's lodging; and in the third that he makes my feet
his execution-block, although that may appear a small matter to
thee and thy father?"

Skjalg replies, "It is ill done, king, in as far as it displeases
thee; but the deed is, otherwise, done excellently well.  But if
the deed appear to thee so important, and be so contrary to thy
will, yet may I expect something for my services from thee; and
certainly there are many who will say that thou didst well."

The king replies, "Although thou hast made me greatly indebted to
thee, Skjalg, for thy services, yet I will not for thy sake break
the law, or cast away my own dignity."

Then Skjalg turned round, and went out of the hall.  Twelve men
who had come with Skjalg all followed him, and many others went
out with him.  Skjalg said to Thorarin Nefiulfson, "If thou wilt
have me for a friend, take care that this man be not killed
before Sunday."  Thereupon Skjalg and his men set off, took a
rowing boat which he had, and rowed south as fast as they could,
and came to Jadar with the first glimpse of morning.  They went
up instantly to the house, and to the loft in which Erling slept.
Skjalg rushed so hard against the door that it burst asunder at
the nails.  Erling and the others who were within started up.  He
was in one spring upon his legs, grasped his shield and sword,
and rushed to the door, demanding who was there.  Skjalg named
himself, and begs him to open the door.  Erling replies, "It was
most likely to be thee who hast behaved so foolishly; or is there
any one who is pursuing thee?"  Thereupon the door was unlocked.
Then said Skjalg, "Although it appears to thee that I am so
hasty, I suppose our relation Asbjorn will not think my
proceedings too quick; for he sits in chains there in the north
at Augvaldsnes, and it would be but manly to hasten back and
stand by him."  The father and son then had a conversation
together, and Skjalg related the whole circumstances of Thorer
Sel's murder.



126. OF THORARIN NEFIULFSON.

King Olaf took his seat again when everything in the hall was put
in order, and was enraged beyond measure.  He asked how it was
with the murderer.  He was answered, that he was sitting out upon
the doorstep under guard.

The king says, "Why is he not put to death?"

Thorarin Nefiulfson replies, "Sire, would you not call it murder
to kill a man in the night-time?"

The king answers, "Put him in irons then, and kill him in the
morning."

Then Asbjorn was laid in chains, and locked up in a house for the
night.  The day after the king heard the morning mass, and then
went to the Thing, where he sat till high mass.  As he was going
to mass he said to Thorarin, "Is not the sun high enough now in
the heavens that your friend Asbjorn may be hanged?"

Thorarin bowed before the king, and said, "Sire, it was said by
Bishop Sigurd on Friday last, that the King who has all things in
his power had to endure great temptation of spirit; and blessed
is he who rather imitates him, than those who condemned the man
to death, or those who caused his slaughter.  It is not long till
tomorrow, and that is a working day."

The king looked at him, and said, "Thou must take care then that
he is not put to death to-day; but take him under thy charge, and
know for certain that thy own life shall answer for it if he
escape in any way."

Then the king went away.  Thorarin went also to where Asbjorn lay
in irons, took off his chains, and brought him to a small room,
where he had meat and drink set before him, and told him what the
king had determined in case Asbjorn ran away.  Asbjorn replies,
that Thorarin need not be afraid of him.  Thorarin sat a long
while with him during the day, and slept there all night.  On
Saturday the king arose and went to the early mass, and from
thence he went to the Thing, where a great many bondes were
assembled, who had many complaints to be determined.  The king
sat there long in the day, and it was late before the people went
to high mass.  Thereafter the king went to table.  When he had
got meat he sat drinking for a while, so that the tables were not
removed.  Thorarin went out to the priest who had the church
under his care, and gave him two marks of silver to ring in the
Sabbath as soon as the king's table was taken away.  When the
king had drunk as much as he wished the tables were removed. 
Then said the king, that it was now time for the slaves to go to
the murderer and put him to death.  In the same moment the bell
rang in the Sabbath.

Then Thorarin went before the king, and said, "The Sabbath-peace
this man must have, although he has done evil."

The king said, "Do thou take care, Thorarin, that he do not
escape."

The king then went to the church, and attended the vesper
service, and Thorarin sat the whole day with Asbjorn.  On Sunday
the bishop visited Asbjorn, confessed him, and gave him orders to
hear high mass.  Thorarin then went to the king, and asked him to
appoint men to guard the murderer.  "I will now," he said, "be
free of this charge."  The king thanked him for his care, and
ordered men to watch over Asbjorn, who was again laid in chains.
When the people went to high mass Asbjorn was led to the church,
and he stood outside of the church with his guard; but the king
and all the people stood in the church at mass.



127. ERLING'S RECONCILIATION WITH KING OLAF.

Now we must again take up our story where we left it, -- that
Erling and his son Skjalg held a council on this affair, and
according to the resolution of Erling, and of Skjalg and his
other sons, it was determined to assemble a force and send out
message-tokens.  A great multitude of people accordingly came
together.  They got ready with all speed, rigged their ships, and
when they reckoned upon their force they found they had nearly
1500 men.  With this war-force they set off, and came on Sunday
to Augvaldsnes on Karmt Island.  They went straight up to the
house with all the men, and arrived just as the Scripture lesson
was read.  They went directly to the church, took Asbjorn, and
broke off his chains.  At the tumult and clash of arms all who
were outside of the church ran into it; but they who were in the
church looked all towards them, except the king, who stood still,
without looking around him.  Erling and his sons drew up their
men on each side of the path which led from the church to the
hall, and Erling with his sons stood next to the hall.  When high
mass was finished the king went immediately out of the church,
and first went through the open space between the ranks drawn up,
and then his retinue, man by man; and as he came to the door
Erling placed himself before the door, bowed to the king, and
saluted him.  The king saluted him in return, and prayed God to
help him.  Erling took up the word first, and said, "My relation,
Asbjorn, it is reported to me, has been guilty of misdemeanor,
king; and it is a great one, if he has done anything that incurs
your displeasure.  Now I am come to entreat for him peace, and
such penalties as you yourself may determine; but that thereby he
redeem life and limb, and his remaining here in his native land."

The king replies, "It appears to me, Erling, that thou thinkest
the case of Asbjorn is now in thy own power, and I do not
therefore know why thou speakest now as if thou wouldst offer
terms for him.  I think thou hast drawn together these forces
because thou are determined to settle what is between us."

Erling replies, "Thou only, king, shalt determine, and determine
so that we shall be reconciled."

The king: "Thinkest thou, Erling, to make me afraid?  And art
thou come here in such force with that expectation?  No, that
shall not be; and if that be thy thought, I must in no way turn
and fly."

Erling replies, "Thou hast no occasion to remind me how often I
have come to meet thee with fewer men than thou hadst.  But now I
shall not conceal what lies in my mind, namely, that it is my
will that we now enter into a reconciliation; for otherwise I
expect we shall never meet again."  Erling was then as red as
blood in the face.

Now Bishop Sigurd came forward to the king and said, "Sire, I
entreat you on God Almighty's account to be reconciled with
Erling according to his offer, -- that the man shall retain life
and limb, but that thou shalt determine according to thy pleasure
all the other conditions."

The king replies, "You will determine."

Then said the bishop, "Erling, do thou give security for Asbjorn,
such as the king thinks sufficient, and then leave the conditions
to the mercy of the king, and leave all in his power."

Erling gave a surety to the king on his part, which he accepted.

Thereupon Asbjorn received his life and safety, and delivered
himself into the king's power, and kissed his hand.

Erling then withdrew with his forces, without exchanging
salutation with the king; and the king went into the hall,
followed by Asbjorn.  The king thereafter made known the terms of
reconciliation to be these: -- "In the first place, Asbjorn, thou
must submit to the law of the land, which commands that the man
who kills a servant of the king must undertake his service, if
the king will.  Now I will that thou shalt undertake the office
of bailiff which Thorer Sel had, and manage my estate here in
Augvaldsnes."  Asbjorn replies, that it should be according to
the king's will; "but I must first go home to my farm, and put
things in order there."  The king was satisfied with this, and
proceeded to another guest-quarter.  Asbjorn made himself ready
with his comrades, who all kept themselves concealed in a quiet
creek during the time Asbjorn was away from them.  They had had
their spies out to learn how it went with him, and would not
depart without having some certain news of him.



128. OF THORER HUND AND ASBJORN SELSBANE.

Asbjorn then set out on his voyage, and about spring (A.D. 1023)
got home to his farm.  After this exploit he was always called
Asbjorn Selsbane.  Asbjorn had not been long at home before he
and his relation Thorer met and conversed together, and Thorer
asked Asbjorn particularly all about his journey, and about all
the circumstances which had happened on the course of it. 
Asbjorn told everything as it had taken place.

Then said Thorer, "Thou thinkest that thou hast well rubbed out
the disgrace of having been plundered in last harvest."

"I think so," replies Asbjorn; "and what is thy opinion, cousin?"

"That I will soon tell thee," said Thorer.  "Thy first expedition
to the south of the country was indeed very disgraceful, and that
disgrace has been redeemed; but this expedition is both a
disgrace to thee and to thy family, if it end in thy becoming the
king's slave, and being put on a footing with that worst of men,
Thorer Sel.  Show that thou art manly enough to sit here on thy
own property, and we thy relations shall so support thee that
thou wilt never more come into such trouble."

Asbjorn found this advice much to his mind; and before they
parted it was firmly, determined that Asbjorn should remain on
his farm, and not go back to the king or enter into his service. 
And he did so, and sat quietly at home on his farm.



129. KING OLAF BAPTIZES IN VORS AND VALDERS.

After King Olaf and Erling Skjalgson had this meeting at
Augvaldsnes, new differences arose between them, and increased
so much that they ended in perfect enmity.  In spring (A.D. 1023)
the king proceeded to guest-quarters in Hordaland, and went up
also to Vors, because he heard there was but little of the true
faith among the people there.  He held a Thing with the bondes at
a place called Vang, and a number of bondes came to it fully
armed.  The king ordered them to adopt Christianity; but they
challenged him to battle, and it proceeded so far that the men
were drawn up on both sides.  But when it came to the point such
a fear entered into the blood of the bondes that none would
advance or command, and they chose the part which was most to
their advantage; namely, to obey the king and receive
Christianity; and before the king left them they were all
baptized.  One day it happened that the king was riding on his
way a singing of psalms, and when he came right opposite some
hills he halted and said, "Man after man shall relate these my
words, that I think it not advisable for any king of Norway to
travel hereafter between these hills."  And it is a saying among
the people that the most kings since that time have avoided it.
The king proceeded to Ostrarfjord, and came to his ships, with
which he went north to Sogn, and had his living in guest-quarters
there in summer (A.D. 1023); when autumn approached he turned in
towards the Fjord district, and went from thence to Valders,
where the people were still heathen.  The king hastened up to the
lake in Valders, came unexpectedly on the bondes, seized their
vessels, and went on board of them with all his men.  He then
sent out message-tokens, and appointed a Thing so near the lake
that he could use the vessels if he found he required them.  The
bondes resorted to the Thing in a great and well-armed host; and
when he commanded them to accept Christianity the bondes shouted
against him, told him to be silent, and made a great uproar and
clashing of weapons.  But when the king saw that they would not
listen to what he would teach them, and also that they had too
great a force to contend with, he turned his discourse, and asked
if there were people at the Thing who had disputes with each
other which they wished him to settle.  It was soon found by the
conversation of the bondes that they had many quarrels among
themselves, although they had all joined in speaking against
Christianity.  When the bondes began to set forth their own
cases, each endeavored to get some upon his side to support him;
and this lasted the whole day long until evening, when the Thing
was concluded.  When the bondes had heard that the king had
travelled to Valders, and was come into their neighborhood, they
had sent out message-tokens summoning the free and the unfree to
meet in arms, and with this force they had advanced against the
king; so that the neighbourhood all around was left without
people.  When the Thing was concluded the bondes still remained
assembled; and when the king observed this he went on board his
ships, rowed in the night right across the water, landed in the
country there, and began to plunder and burn.  The day after the
king's men rowed from one point of land to another, and over all
the king ordered the habitations to be set on fire.  Now when the
bondes who were assembled saw what the king was doing, namely,
plundering and burning, and saw the smoke and flame of their
houses, they dispersed, and each hastened to his own home to see
if he could find those he had left.  As soon as there came a
dispersion among the crowd, the one slipped away after the other,
until the whole multitude was dissolved.  Then the king rowed
across the lake again, burning also on that side of the country.
Now came the bondes to him begging for mercy, and offering to
submit to him.  He gave every man who came to him peace if he
desired it, and restored to him his goods; and nobody refused to
adopt Christianity.  The king then had the people christened, and
took hostages from the bondes.  He ordered churches to be built
and consecrated, and placed teachers in them.  He remained a long
time here in autumn, and had his ships drawn across the neck of
land between the two lakes.  The king did not go far from the
sides of the lakes into the country, for he did not much trust
the bondes.  When the king thought that frost might be expected,
he went further up the country, and came to Thoten.  Arnor, the
earl's skald, tells how King Olaf burnt in the Uplands, in the
poem he composed concerning the king's brother King Harald: --

     "Against the Upland people wroth,
     Olaf, to most so mild, went forth:
          The houses burning,
          All people mourning;
          Who could not fly
          Hung on gallows high.
     It was, I think, in Olaf's race
     The Upland people to oppress."

Afterwards King Olaf went north through the valleys to
Dovrefield, and did not halt until he reached the Throndhjem
district and arrived at Nidaros, where he had ordered winter
provision to be collected, and remained all winter (A.D. 1024).
This was the tenth year of his reign.



130. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

The summer before Einar Tambaskelfer left the country, and went
westward to England (A.D. 1023).  There he met his relative Earl
Hakon, and stayed some time with him.  He then visited King
Canute, from whom he received great presents.  Einar then went
south all the way to Rome, and came back the following summer
(A.D. 1024), and returned to his house and land.  King Olaf and
Einar did not meet this time.



131. THE BIRTH OF KING MAGNUS.

There was a girl whose name was Alfhild, and who was usually
called the king's slave-woman, although she was of good descent.
She was a remarkably handsome girl, and lived in King Olaf's
court.  It was reported this spring that Alfhild was with child,
and the king's confidential friends knew that he was father of
the child.  It happened one night that Alfhild was taken ill, and
only few people were at hand; namely, some women, priests, Sigvat
the skald, and a few others.  Alfhild was so ill that she was
nearly dead; and when she was delivered of a man-child, it was
some time before they could discover whether the child was in
life.  But when the infant drew breath, although very weak, the
priest told Sigvat to hasten to the king, and tell him of the
event.

He replies, "I dare not on any account waken the king; for he has
forbid that any man should break his sleep until he awakens of
himself."

The priest replies, "It is of necessity that this child be
immediately baptized, for it appears to me there is but little
life in it."

Sigvat said, "I would rather venture to take upon me to let thee
baptize the child, than to awaken the king; and I will take it
upon myself if anything be amiss, and will give the child a
name."

They did so; and the child was baptized, and got the name of
Magnus.  The next morning, when the king awoke and had dressed
himself, the circumstance was told him.  He ordered Sigvat to be
called, and said. "How camest thou to be so bold as to have my
child baptized before I knew anything about it?"

Sigvat replies, "Because I would rather give two men to God than
one to the devil."

The king -- "What meanest thou?"

Sigvat -- "The child was near death, and must have been the
devil's if it had died as a heathen, and now it is God's.  And I
knew besides that if thou shouldst be so angry on this account
that it affected my life, I would be God's also."

The king asked, "But why didst thou call him Magnus, which is not
a name of our race?"

Sigvat -- "I called him after King Carl Magnus, who, I knew, had
been the best man in the world."

Then said the king, "Thou art a very lucky man, Sigvat; but it is
not wonderful that luck should accompany understanding.  It is
only wonderful how it sometimes happens that luck attends
ignorant men, and that foolish counsel turns out lucky."  The
king was overjoyed at the circumstance.  The boy grew up, and
gave good promise as he advanced in age.



132. THE MURDER OF ASBJORN SELSBANE.

The same spring (A.D. 1024) the king gave into the hands of
Asmund Grankelson the half of the sheriffdom of the district of
Halogaland, which Harek of Thjotta had formerly held, partly in
fief, partly for defraying the king's entertainment in guest-
quarters.  Asmund had a ship manned with nearly thirty well-armed
men.  When Asmund came north he met Harek, and told him what the
king had determined with regard to the district, and produced to
him the tokens of the king's full powers.  Harek said, "The king
had the right to give the sheriffdom to whom he pleased; but the
former sovereigns had not been in use to diminish our rights who
are entitled by birth to hold powers from the king, and to give
them into the hands of the peasants who never before held such
offices."  But although it was evident that it was against
Harek's inclination, he allowed Asmund to take the sheriffdom
according to the king's order.  Then Asmund proceeded home to his
father, stayed there a short time, and then went north to
Halogaland to his sheriffdom; and he came north to Langey Island,
where there dwelt two brothers called Gunstein and Karle, both
very rich and respectable men.  Gunstein, the eldest of the
brothers, was a good husbandman.  Karle was a handsome man in
appearance, and splendid in his dress; and both were, in many
respects, expert in all feats.  Asmund was well received by them,
remained with them a while, and collected such revenues of his
sheriffdom as he could get.  Karle spoke with Asmund of his wish
to go south with him and take service in the court of King Olaf,
to which Asmund encouraged him much, promising his influence with
the king for obtaining for Karle such a situation as he desired;
and Karle accordingly accompanied Asmund.  Asmund heard that
Asbjorn, who had killed Thorer Sel, had gone to the market-
meeting of Vagar with a large ship of burden manned with nearly
twenty men, and that he was now expected from the south.  Asmund
and his retinue proceeded on their way southwards along the coast
with a contrary wind, but there was little of it.  They saw some
of the fleet for Vagar sailing towards them; and they privately
inquired of them about Asbjorn, and were told he was upon the way
coming from the south.  Asmund and Karle were bedfellows, and
excellent friends.  One day, as Asmund and his people were rowing
through a sound, a ship of burden came sailing towards them.  The
ship was easily known, having high bulwarks, was painted with
white and red colours, and coloured cloth was woven in the sail.
Karle said to Asmund, "Thou hast often said thou wast curious to
see Asbjorn who killed Thorer Sel; and if I know one ship from
another, that is his which is coming sailing along."

Asmund replies, "Be so good, comrade, and tell me which is he
when thou seest him."

When the ships came alongside of each other, "That is Asbjorn,"
said Karle; "the man sitting at the helm in a blue cloak."

Asmund replies, "I shall make his blue cloak red;" threw a spear
at Asbjorn, and hit him in the middle of the body, so that it
flew through and through him, and stuck fast in the upper part of
the stern-post; and Asbjorn fell down dead from the helm.  Then
each vessel sailed on its course, and Asbjorn's body was carried
north to Thrandarnes.  Then Sigrid sent a message to Bjarkey Isle
to Thorer Hund, who came to her while they were, in the usual
way, dressing the corpse of Asbjorn.  When he returned Sigrid
gave presents to all her friends, and followed Thorer to his
ship; but before they parted she said, "It has so fallen out,
Thorer, that my son has suffered by thy friendly counsel, but he
did not retain life to reward thee for it; but although I have
not his ability yet will I show my good will.  Here is a gift I
give thee, which I expect thou wilt use.  Here is the spear which
went through Asbjorn my son, and there is still blood upon it, to
remind thee that it fits the wound thou hast seen on the corpse
of thy brother's son Asbjorn.  It would be a manly deed, if thou
shouldst throw this spear from thy hand so that it stood in
Olaf's breast; and this I can tell thee, that thou wilt be named
coward in every man's mouth, if thou dost not avenge Asbjorn." 
Thereupon she turned about, and went her way.

Thorer was so enraged at her words that he could not speak.  He
neither thought of casting the spear from him, nor took notice of
the gangway; so that he would have fallen into the sea, if his
men had not laid hold of him as he was going on board his ship.
It was a feathered spear; not large, but the handle was gold-
mounted.  Now Thorer rowed away with his people, and went home to
Bjarkey Isle.  Asmund and his companions also proceeded on their
way until they came south to Throndhjem, where they waited on
King Olaf; and Asmund related to the king all that had happened
on the voyage.  Karle became one of the king's court-men, and the
friendship continued between him and Asmund.  They did not keep
secret the words that had passed between Asmund and Karle before
Asbjorn was killed; for they even told them to the king.  But
then it happened, according to the proverb, that every one has a
friend in the midst of his enemies.  There were some present who
took notice of the words, and they reached Thorer Hund's ears.



133. OF KING OLAF.

When spring (A.D. 1024) was advanced King Olaf rigged out his
ships, and sailed southwards in summer along the land.  He held
Things with the bondes on the way, settled the law business of
the people, put to rights the faith of the country, and collected
the king's taxes wherever he came.  In autumn he proceeded south
to the frontier of the country; and King Olaf had now made the
people Christians in all the great districts, and everywhere, by
laws, had introduced order into the country.  He had also, as
before related, brought the Orkney Islands under his power, and
by messages had made many friends in Iceland, Greenland, and the
Farey Islands.  King Olaf had sent timber for building a church
to Iceland, of which a church was built upon the Thing-field
where the General Thing is held, and had sent a bell for it,
which is still there.  This was after the Iceland people had
altered their laws, and introduced Christianity, according to the
word King Olaf had sent them.  After that time, many considerable
persons came from Iceland, and entered into King Olaf's service;
as Thorkel Eyjolfson, and Thorleif Bollason, Thord Kolbeinson,
Thord Barkarson, Thorgeir Havarson, Thormod Kalbrunar-skald. 
King Olaf had sent many friendly presents to chief people in
Iceland; and they in return sent him such things as they had
which they thought most acceptable.  Under this show of
friendship which the king gave Iceland were concealed many things
which afterwards appeared.



134. KING OLAF'S MESSAGE TO ICELAND, AND THE COUNSELS OF THE
     ICELANDERS.

King Olaf this summer (A.D. 1024) sent Thorarin Nefiulfson to
Iceland on his errands; and Thorarin went out of Throndhjem fjord
along with the king, and followed him south to More.  From thence
Thorarin went out to sea, and got such a favourable breeze that
after four days sail he landed at the Westman Isles, in Iceland.
He proceeded immediately to the Althing, and came just as the
people were upon the Lawhillock, to which he repaired.  When the
cases of the people before the Thing had been determined
according to law, Thorarin Nefiulfson took up the word as
follows: -- "We parted four days ago from King Olaf Haraldson,
who sends God Almighty's and his own salutation to all the chiefs
and principal men of the land; as also to all the people in
general, men and women, young and old, rich and poor.  He also
lets you know that he will be your sovereign if ye will become
his subjects, so that he and you will be friends, assisting each
other in all that is good."

The people replied in a friendly way, that they would gladly be
the king's friends, if he would be a friend of the people of
their country.

Then Thorarin again took up the word: -- "This follows in
addition to the king's message, that he will in friendship desire
of the people of the north district that they give him the
island, or out-rock, which lies at the mouth of Eyfjord, and is
called Grimsey, for which he will give you from his country
whatever good the people of the district may desire.  He sends
this message particularly to Gudmund of Modruvellir to support
this matter, because he understands that Gudmund has most
influence in that quarter."

Gudmund replies, "My inclination is greatly for King Olaf's
friendship, and that I consider much more useful than the out-
rock he desires.  But the king has not heard rightly if he think
I have more power in this matter than any other, for the island
is a common.  We, however, who have the most use of the isle,
will hold a meeting among ourselves about it."

Then the people went to their tent-houses; and the Northland
people had a meeting among themselves, and talked over the
business, and every one spoke according to his judgment.  Gudmund
supported the matter, and many others formed their opinions by
his.  Then some asked why his brother Einar did not speak on the
subject.  "We think he has the clearest insight into most
things."

Einar answers, "I have said so little about the matter because
nobody has asked me about it; but if I may give my opinion, our
countrymen might just as well make themselves at once liable to
land-scat to King Olaf, and submit to all his exactions as he has
them among his people in Norway; and this heavy burden we will
lay not only upon ourselves, but on our sons, and their sons, and
all our race, and on all the community dwelling and living in
this land, which never after will be free from this slavery.  Now
although this king is a good man, as I well believe him to be,
yet it must be hereafter, when kings succeed each other, that
some will be good. and some bad.  Therefore if the people of this
country will preserve the freedom they have enjoyed since the
land was first inhabited, it is not advisable to give the king
the smallest spot to fasten himself upon the country by, and not
to give him any kind of scat or service that can have the
appearance of a duty.  On the other hand, I think it very proper
that the people send the king such friendly presents of hawks or
horses, tents or sails, or such things which are suitable gifts;
and these are well applied if they are repaid with friendship.
But as to Grimsey Isle, I have to say, that although nothing is
drawn from it that can serve for food, yet it could support a
great war-force cruising from thence in long-ships; and then, I
doubt not, there would be distress enough at every poor peasant's
door."

When Einar had thus explained the proper connection of the
matter, the whole community were of one mind that such a thing
should not be permitted; and Thorarin saw sufficiently well what
the result of his errand was to be.



135. THE ANSWER OF THE ICELANDERS.

The day following, Thorarin went again to the Lawhill, and
brought forward his errand in the following words: -- "King Olaf
sends his message to his friends here in the country, among whom
he reckons Gudmund Eyjolfson, Snorre Gode, Thorkel Eyjolfson,
Skapte the lagman, and Thorstein Halson, and desires them by me
to come to him on a friendly visit; and adds, that ye must not
excuse yourselves, if you regard his friendship as worth
anything."  In their answer they thanked the king for his message
and added, that they would afterwards give a reply to it by
Thorarin when they had more closely considered the matter with
their friends.  The chiefs now weighed the matter among
themselves, and each gave his own opinion about the journey. 
Snorre and Skapte dissuaded from such a dangerous proceeding with
the people of Norway; namely, that all the men who had the most
to say in the country should at once leave Iceland.  They added,
that from this message, and from what Einar had said, they had
the suspicion that the king intended to use force and strong
measures against the Icelanders if he ruled in the country.
Gudmund and Thorkel Eyjolfson insisted much that they should
follow King Olaf's invitation, and called it a journey of honour.
But when they had considered the matter on all sides, it was at
last resolved that they should not travel themselves, but that
each of them should send in his place a man whom they thought
best suited for it.  After this determination the Thing was
closed, and there was no journey that summer.  Thorarin made two
voyages that summer, and about harvest was back again at King
Olaf's, and reported the result of his mission, and that some of
the chiefs, or their sons, would come from Iceland according to
his message.



136. OF THE PEOPLE OF THE FAREY ISLANDS.

The same summer (A.D. 1024) there came from the Farey Islands to
Norway, on the king's invitation, Gille the lagman, Leif
Ossurson, Thoralf of Dimun, and many other bondes' sons.  Thord
of Gata made himself ready for the voyage; but just as he was
setting out he got a stroke of palsy, and could not come, so he
remained behind.  Now when the people from the Farey Isles
arrived at King Olaf's, he called them to him to a conference,
and explained the purpose of the journey he had made them take,
namely, that he would have scat from the Farey Islands, and also
that the people there should be subject to the laws which the
king should give them.  In that meeting it appeared from the
king's words that he would make the Farey people who had come
answerable, and would bind them by oath to conclude this union.
He also offered to the men whom he thought the ablest to take
them into his service, and bestow honour and friendship on them.
These Farey men understood the king's words so, that they must
dread the turn the matter might take if they did not submit to
all that the king desired.  Although they held several meetings
about the business before it ended, the king's desire at last
prevailed.  Leif, Gille, and Thoralf went into the king's
service, and became his courtmen; and they, with all their
travelling companions, swore the oath to King Olaf, that the law
and land privilege which he set them should be observed in the
Farey Islands, and also the scat be levied that he laid upon
them.  Thereafter the Farey people prepared for their return
home, and at their departure the king gave those who had entered
into his service presents in testimony of his friendship, and
they went their way.  Now the king ordered a ship to be rigged,
manned it, and sent men to the Farey Islands to receive the scat
from the inhabitants which they should pay him.  It was late
before they were ready; but they set off at last: and of their
journey all that is to be told is, that they did not come back,
and no scat either, the following summer; for nobody had come to
the Farey Isles, and no man had demanded scat there.



137. OF THE MARRIAGE OF KETIL AND OF THORD TO THE KING'S SISTERS.

King Olaf proceeded about harvest time to Viken, and sent a
message before him to the Uplands that they should prepare guest-
quarters for him, as he intended to be there in winter. 
Afterwards he made ready for his journey, and went to the
Uplands, and remained the winter there; going about in guest-
quarters, and putting things to rights where he saw it needful,
advancing also the cause of Christianity wheresoever it was
requisite.  It happened while King Olaf was in Hedemark that
Ketil Kalf of Ringanes courted Gunhild, a daughter of Sigurd Syr
and of King Olaf's mother Asta.  Gunhild was a sister of King
Olaf, and therefore it belonged to the king to give consent and
determination to the business.  He took it in a friendly way; for
he know Ketil, that he was of high birth, wealthy, and of good
understanding, and a great chief; and also he had long been a
great friend of King Olaf, as before related.  All these
circumstances induced the king to approve of the match, and so it
was that Ketil got Gunhild.  King Olaf was present at the
wedding.  From thence the king went north to Gudbrandsdal, where
he was entertained in guest-quarters.  There dwelt a man, by name
Thord Guthormson, on a farm called Steig; and he was the most
powerful man in the north end of the valley.  When Thord and the
king met, Thord made proposals for Isrid, the daughter of
Gudbrand, and the sister of King Olaf's mother, as it belonged to
the king to give consent.  After the matter was considered, it
was determined that the marriage should proceed, and Thord got
Isrid.  Afterwards Thord was the king's faithful friend, and also
many of Thord's relations and friends, who followed his
footsteps.  From thence King Olaf returned south through Thoten
and Hadaland, from thence to Ringerike, and so to Viken.  In
spring (A.D. 1025) he went to Tunsberg, and stayed there while
there was the market-meeting, and a great resort of people.  He
then had his vessels rigged out, and had many people about him.



138. OF THE ICELANDERS.

The same summer (A.D. 1025) came Stein, a son of the lagman
Skapte, from Iceland, in compliance with King Olaf's message; and
with him Thorod, a son of Snorre the gode, and Geller, a son of
Thorkel Eyjolfson, and Egil, a son of Hal of Sida, brother of
Thorstein Hal.  Gudmund Eyjolfson had died the winter before.
These Iceland men repaired to King Olaf as soon as they had
opportunity; and when they met the king they were well received,
and all were in his house.  The same summer King Olaf heard that
the ship was missing which he had sent the summer before to the
Farey Islands after the scat, and nobody knew what had become of
it.  The king fitted out another ship, manned it, and sent it to
the Farey Islands for the scat.  They got under weigh, and
proceeded to sea; but as little was ever heard of this vessel as
of the former one, and many conjectures were made about what had
become of them.



139. HERE BEGINS THE STORY OF CANUTE THE GREAT.

During this time Canute the Great, called by some Canute the Old,
was king of England and Denmark.  Canute the Great was a son of
Svein Haraldson Forkedbeard, whose forefathers, for a long course
of generations, had ruled over Denmark.  Harald Gormson, Canute's
grandfather, had conquered Norway after the fall of Harald
Grafeld, Gunhild's son, had taken scat from it, and had placed
Earl Hakon the Great to defend the country.  The Danish King,
Svein Haraldson, ruled also over Norway, and placed his son-in-
law Earl Eirik, the son of Earl Hakon, to defend the country. 
The brothers Eirik and Svein, Earl Hakon's sons, ruled the land
until Earl Eirik went west to England, on the invitation of his
brother-in-law Canute the Great, when he left behind his son Earl
Hakon, sister's son of Canute the Great, to govern Norway.  But
when Olaf the Thick came first to Norway, as before related, he
took prisoner Earl Hakon the son of Eirik, and deposed him from
the kingdom.  Then Hakon proceeded to his mother's brother,
Canute the Great, and had been with him constantly until the time
to which here in our saga we have now come.  Canute the Great had
conquered England by blows and weapons, and had a long struggle
before the people of the land were subdued.  But when he had set
himself perfectly firm in the government of the country, he
remembered that he also had right to a kingdom which he had not
brought under his authority; and that was Norway.  He thought he
had hereditary right to all Norway; and his sister's son Hakon,
who had held a part of it, appeared to him to have lost it with
disgrace.  The reason why Canute and Hakon had remained quiet
with respect to their claims upon Norway was, that when King Olaf
Haraldson landed in Norway the people and commonalty ran together
in crowds, and would hear of nothing but that Olaf should be king
over all the country, although some afterwards, who thought that
the people upon account of his power had no self-government left
to them, went out of the country.  Many powerful men, or rich
bondes sons, had therefore gone to Canute the Great, and
pretended various errands; and every one who came to Canute and
desired his friendship was loaded with presents.  With Canute,
too, could be seen greater splendour and pomp than elsewhere,
both with regard to the multitude of people who were daily in
attendance, and also to the other magnificent things about the
houses he owned and dwelt in himself.  Canute the Great drew scat
and revenue from the people who were the richest of all in
northern lands; and in the same proportion as he had greater
revenues than other kings, he also made greater presents than
other kings.  In his whole kingdom peace was so well established,
that no man dared break it.  The people of the country kept the
peace towards each other, and had their old country law: and for
this he was greatly celebrated in all countries.  And many of
those who came from Norway represented their hardships to Earl
Hakon, and some even to King Canute himself; and that the Norway
people were ready to turn back to the government of King Canute,
or Earl Hakon, and receive deliverance from them.  This
conversation suited well the earl's inclination, and he carried
it to the king, and begged of him to try if King Olaf would not
surrender the kingdom, or at least come to an agreement to divide
it; and many supported the earl's views.



140. CANUTE'S MESSAGE TO KING OLAF.

Canute the Great sent men from the West, from England, to Norway,
and equipped them magnificently for the journey.  They were
bearers of the English king Canute's letter and seal.  They came
about spring (A.D. 1025) to the king of Norway, Olaf Haraldson,
in Tunsberg.  Now when it was told the king that ambassadors had
arrived from Canute the Great he was ill at ease, and said that
Canute had not sent messengers hither with any messages that
could be of advantage to him or his people; and it was some days
before the ambassadors could come before the king.  But when they
got permission to speak to him they appeared before the king, and
made known King Canute's letter, and their errand which
accompanied it; namely, "that King Canute considers all Norway as
his property, and insists that his forefathers before him have
possessed that kingdom; but as King Canute offers peace to all
countries, he will also offer peace to all here, if it can be so
settled, and will not invade Norway with his army if it can be
avoided.  Now if King Olaf Haraldson wishes to remain king of
Norway, he will come to King Canute, and receive his kingdom as a
fief from him, become his vassal, and pay the scat which the
earls before him formerly paid."  Thereupon they presented their
letters, which contained precisely the same conditions.

Then King Olaf replies, "I have heard say, by old stories, that
the Danish king Gorm was considered but a small king of a few
people, for he ruled over Denmark alone; but the kings who
succeeded him thought that was too little.  It has since come so
far that King Canute rules over Denmark and England, and has
conquered for himself a great part of Scotland.  Now he claims
also my paternal heritage, and will then show some moderation in
his covetousness.  Does he wish to rule over all the countries of
the North?  Will he eat up all the kail in England?  He shall do
so, and reduce that country to a desert, before I lay my head in
his hands, or show him any other kind of vassalage.  Now ye shall
tell him these my words, -- I will defend Norway with battle-axe
and sword as long as life is given me, and will pay scat to no
man for my kingdom."

After this answer King Canute's ambassadors made themselves ready
for their journey home, and were by no means rejoiced at the
success of their errand.

Sigvat the skald had been with King Canute, who had given him a
gold ring that weighed half a mark.  The skald Berse
Skaldtorfason was also there, and to him King Canute gave two
gold rings, each weighing two marks, and besides a sword inlaid
with gold.  Sigvat made this song about it: --

     "When we came o'er the wave, you cub,
          When we came o'er the wave,
     To me one ring, to thee two rings,
          The mighty Canute gave:
     One mark to me,
     Four marks to thee, --
          A sword too, fine and brave.
     Now God knows well,
     And skalds can tell,
          What justice here would crave."

Sigvat the skald was very intimate with King Canute's messengers,
and asked them many questions.  They answered all his inquiries
about their conversation with King Olaf, and the result of their
message.  They said the king listened unwillingly to their
proposals.  "And we do not know," say they, "to what he is
trusting when he refuses becoming King Canute's vassal, and going
to him, which would be the best thing he could do; for King
Canute is so mild that however much a chief may have done against
him, he is pardoned if he only show himself obedient.  It is but
lately that two kings came to him from the North, from Fife in
Scotland, and he gave up his wrath against them, and allowed them
to retain all the lands they had possessed before, and gave them
besides very valuable gifts."  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "From the North land, the midst of Fife,
     Two kings came begging peace and life;
     Craving from Canute life and peace, --
     May Olaf's good luck never cease!
     May he, our gallant Norse king, never
     Be brought, like these, his head to offer
     As ransom to a living man
     For the broad lands his sword has won."

King Canute's ambassadors proceeded on their way back, and had a
favourable breeze across the sea.  They came to King Canute, and
told him the result of their errand, and King Olaf's last words.
King Canute replies, "King Olaf guesses wrong, if he thinks I
shall eat up all the kail in England; for I will let him see that
there is something else than kail under my ribs, and cold kail it
shall be for him."  The same summer (A.D. 1025) Aslak and Skjalg,
the sons of Erling of Jadar, came from Norway to King Canute, and
were well received; for Aslak was married to Sigrid, a daughter
of Earl Svein Hakonson, and she and Earl Hakon Eirikson were
brothers' children.  King Canute gave these brothers great fiefs
over there, and they stood in great favour.



141. KING OLAF'S ALLIANCE WITH ONUND THE KING OF SVITHJOD.

King Olaf summoned to him all the lendermen, and had a great many
people about him this summer (A.D. 1025), for a report was abroad
that King Canute would come from England.  People had heard from
merchant vessels that Canute was assembling a great army in
England.  When summer was advanced, some affirmed and others
denied that the army would come.  King Olaf was all summer in
Viken, and had spies out to learn if Canute was come to Denmark.
In autumn (A.D. 1025) he sent messengers eastward to Svithjod to
his brother-in-law King Onund, and let him know King Canute's
demand upon Norway; adding, that, in his opinion, if Canute
subdued Norway, King Onund would not long enjoy the Swedish
dominions in peace.  He thought it advisable, therefore, that
they should unite for their defence.  "And then," said he, "we
will have strength enough to hold out against Canute."  King
Onund received King Olaf's message favourably, and replied to it,
that he for his part would make common cause with King Olaf, so
that each of them should stand by the one who first required help
with all the strength of his kingdom.  In these messages between
them it was also determined that they should have a meeting, and
consult with each other.  The following winter (A.D. 1026) King
Onund intended to travel across West Gautland, and King Olaf made
preparations for taking his winter abode at Sarpsborg.



142. KING CANUTE'S AMBASSADORS TO ONUND OF SVITHJOD.

In autumn King Canute the Great came to Denmark, and remained
there all winter (A.D. 1026) with a numerous army.  It was told
him that ambassadors with messages had been passing between the
Swedish and Norwegian kings, and that some great plans must be
concerting between them.  In winter King Canute sent messengers
to Svithjod, to King Onund, with great gifts and messages of
friendship.  He also told Onund that he might sit altogether
quiet in this strife between him and Olaf the Thick; "for thou,
Onund," says he, "and thy kingdom, shall be in peace as far as I
am concerned."  When the ambassadors came to King Onund they
presented the gifts which King Canute sent him, together with the
friendly message.  King Onund did not hear their speech very
willingly, and the ambassadors could observe that King Onund was
most inclined to a friendship with King Olaf.  They returned
accordingly, and told King Canute the result of their errand, and
told him not to depend much upon the friendship of King Onund.



143. THE EXPEDITION TO BJARMALAND.

This winter (A.D. 1026) King Olaf sat in Sarpsborg, and was
surrounded by a very great army of people.  He sent the
Halogalander Karle to the north country upon his business.  Karle
went first to the Uplands, then across the Dovrefield, and came
down to Nidaros, where he received as much money as he had the
king's order for, together with a good ship, such as he thought
suitable for the voyage which the king had ordered him upon; and
that was to proceed north to Bjarmaland.  It was settled that the
king should be in partnership with Karle, and each of them have
the half of the profit.  Early in spring Karle directed his
course to Halogaland, where his brother Gunstein prepared to
accompany him, having his own merchant goods with him.  There
were about twenty-five men in the ship; and in spring they sailed
north to Finmark.  When Thorer Hund heard this, he sent a man to
the brothers with the verbal message that he intended in summer
to go to Bjarmaland, and that he would sail with them, and that
they should divide what booty they made equally between them.
Karle sent him back the message that Thorer must have twenty-five
men as they had, and they were willing to divide the booty that
might be taken equally, but not the merchant goods which each had
for himself.  When Thorer's messenger came back he had put a
stout long-ship he owned into the water, and rigged it, and he
had put eighty men on board of his house-servants.  Thorer alone
had the command over this crew, and he alone had all the goods
they might acquire on the cruise.  When Thorer was ready for sea
he set out northwards along the coast, and found Karle a little
north of Sandver.  They then proceeded with good wind.  Gunstein
said to his brother, as soon as they met Thorer, that in his
opinion Thorer was strongly manned.  "I think," said he, "we had
better turn back than sail so entirely in Thorer's power, for I
do not trust him."  Karle replies, "I will not turn back,
although if I had known when we were at home on Langey Isle that
Thorer Hund would join us on this voyage with so large a crew as
he has, I would have taken more hands with us."  The brothers
spoke about it to Thorer, and asked what was the meaning of his
taking more people with him than was agreed upon between them. 
He replies, "We have a large ship which requires many hands, and
methinks there cannot be too many brave lads for so dangerous a
cruise."  They went in summer as fast in general as the vessels
could go.  When the wind was light the ship of the brothers
sailed fastest, and they separated; but when the wind freshened
Thorer overtook them.  They were seldom together, but always in
sight of each other.  When they came to Bjarmaland they went
straight to the merchant town, and the market began.  All who had
money to pay with got filled up with goods.  Thorer also got a
number of furs, and of beaver and sable skins.  Karle had a
considerable sum of money with him, with which he purchased skins
and furs.  When the fair was at an end they went out of the Vina
river, and then the truce of the country people was also at an
end.  When they came out of the river they held a seaman's
council, and Thorer asked the crews if they would like to go on
the land and get booty.

They replied, that they would like it well enough, if they saw
the booty before their eyes.

Thorer replies, that there was booty to be got, if the voyage
proved fortunate; but that in all probability there would be
danger in the attempt.

All said they would try, if there was any chance of booty. 
Thorer explained, that it was so established in this land, that
when a rich man died all his movable goods were divided between
the dead man and his heirs.  He got the half part, or the third
part, or sometimes less, and that part was carried out into the
forest and buried, -- sometimes under a mound, sometimes in the
earth, and sometimes even a house was built over it.  He tells
them at the same time to get ready for this expedition at the
fall of day.  It was resolved that one should not desert the
other, and none should hold back when the commander ordered them
to come on board again.  They now left people behind to take care
of the ships, and went on land, where they found flat fields at
first, and then great forests.  Thorer went first, and the
brothers Karle and Gunstein in rear.  Thorer commanded the people
to observe the utmost silence.  "And let us peel the bark off the
trees," says he, "so that one tree-mark can be seen from the
other."  They came to a large cleared opening, where there was a
high fence upon which there was a gate that was locked.  Six men
of the country people held watch every night at this fence, two
at a time keeping guard, each two for a third part of the night,
when Thorer and his men came to the fence the guard had gone
home, and those who should relieve them had not yet come upon
guard.  Thorer went to the fence, stuck his axe up in it above
his head, hauled himself up by it, and so came over the fence,
and inside the gate.  Karle had also come over the fence, and to
the inside of the gate; so that both came at once to the port,
took the bar away, and opened the port; and then the people got
in within the fence.  Then said Thorer, "Within this fence there
is a mound in which gold, and silver, and earth are all mixed
together: seize that.  But within here stands the Bjarmaland
people's god Jomala: let no one be so presumptuous as to rob
him."  Thereupon they went to the mound and took as much of the
money as they could carry away in their clothes, with which, as
might be expected, much earth was mixed.  Thereafter Thorer said
that the people now should retreat.  "And ye brothers, Karle and
Gunstein," says he, "do ye lead the way, and I will go last."
They all went accordingly out of the gate: but Thorer went back
to Jomala, and took a silver bowl that stood upon his knee full
of silver money.  He put the silver in his purse, and put his arm
within the handle of the bowl, and so went out of the gate.  The
whole troop had come without the fence; but when they perceived
that Thorer had stayed behind, Karle returned to trace him, and
when they met upon the path Thorer had the silver bowl with him.
Thereupon Karle immediately ran to Jomala; and observing he had a
thick gold ornament hanging around his neck, he lifted his axe,
cut the string with which the ornament was tied behind his neck,
and the stroke was so strong that the head of Jomala rang with
such a great sound that they were all astonished.  Karle seized
the ornament, and they all hastened away.  But the moment the
sound was made the watchmen came forward upon the cleared space,
and blew their horns.  Immediately the sound of the loor (1) was
heard all around from every quarter, calling the people together.
They hastened to the forest, and rushed into it; and heard the
shouts and cries on the other side of the Bjarmaland people in
pursuit.  Thorer Hund went the last of the whole troop; and
before him went two men carrying a great sack between them, in
which was something that was like ashes.  Thorer took this in his
hand, and strewed it upon the footpath, and sometimes over the
people.  They came thus out of the woods, and upon the fields,
but heard incessantly the Bjarmaland people pursuing with shouts
and dreadful yells.  The army of the Bjarmaland people rushed out
after them upon the field, and on both sides of them; but neither
the people nor their weapons came so near as to do them any harm:
from which they perceived that the Bjarmaland people did not see
them.  Now when they reached their ships Karle and his brother
went on board; for they were the foremost, and Thorer was far
behind on the land.  As soon as Karle and his men were on board
they struck their tents, cast loose their land ropes, hoisted
their sails, and their ship in all haste went to sea.  Thorer and
his people, on the other hand, did not get on so quickly, as
their vessel was heavier to manage; so that when they got under
sail, Karle and his people were far off from land.  Both vessels
sailed across the White sea (Gandvik) . The nights were clear, so
that both ships sailed night and day; until one day, towards the
time the day turns to shorten, Karle and his people took up the
land near an island, let down the sail, cast anchor, and waited
until the slack-tide set in, for there was a strong rost before
them.  Now Thorer came up, and lay at anchor there also.  Thorer
and his people then put out a boat, went into it, and rowed to
Karle's ship.  Thorer came on board, and the brothers saluted
him.  Thorer told Karle to give him the ornament.  "I think,"
said he, "that I have best earned the ornaments that have been
taken, for methinks ye have to thank me for getting away without
any loss of men; and also I think thou, Karle, set us in the
greatest fright."

Karle replies, "King Olaf has the half part of all the goods I
gather on this voyage, and I intend the ornament for him.  Go to
him, if you like, and it is possible he will give thee the
ornament, although I took it from Jomala."

Then Thorer insisted that they should go upon the island, and
divide the booty.

Gunstein says, "It is now the turn of the tide, and it is time to
sail."  Whereupon they began to raise their anchor.

When Thorer saw that, he returned to his boat and rowed to his
own ship.  Karle and his men had hoisted sail, and were come a
long way before Thorer got under way.  They now sailed so that
the brothers were always in advance, and both vessels made all
the haste they could.  They sailed thus until they came to
Geirsver, which is the first roadstead of the traders to the
North.  They both came there towards evening, and lay in the
harbour near the landing-place.  Thorer's ship lay inside, and
the brothers' the outside vessel in the port.  When Thorer had
set up his tents he went on shore, and many of his men with him.
They went to Karle's ship, which was well provided.  Thorer
hailed the ship, and told the commanders to come on shore; on
which the brothers, and some men with them, went on the land. 
Now Thorer began the same discourse, and told them to bring the
goods they got in booty to the land to have them divided.  The
brothers thought that was not necessary, until they had arrived
at their own neighbourhood.  Thorer said it was unusual not to
divide booty but at their own home, and thus to be left to the
honour of other people.  They spoke some words about it, but
could not agree.  Then Thorer turned away; but had not gone far
before he came back, and tells his comrades to wait there. 
Thereupon he calls to Karle, and says he wants to speak with him
alone.  Karle went to meet him; and when he came near, Thorer
struck at him with a spear, so that it went through him. 
"There," said Thorer, "now thou hast learnt to know a Bjarkey
Island man.  I thought thou shouldst feel Asbjorn's spear." 
Karle died instantly, and Thorer with his people went immediately
on board their ship.  When Gunstein and his men saw Karle fall
they ran instantly to him, took his body and carried it on board
their ship, struck their tents, and cast off from the pier, and
left the land.  When Thorer and his men saw this, they took down
their tents and made preparations to follow.  But as they were
hoisting the sail the fastenings to the mast broke in two, and
the sail fell down across the ship, which caused a great delay
before they could hoist the sail again.  Gunstein had already got
a long way ahead before Thorer's ship fetched way, and now they
used both sails and oars.  Gunstein did the same.  On both sides
they made great way day and night; but so that they did not gain
much on each other, although when they came to the small sounds
among the islands Gunstein's vessel was lighter in turning.  But
Thorer's ship made way upon them, so that when they came up to
Lengjuvik, Gunstein turned towards the land, and with all his men
ran up into the country, and left his ship.  A little after
Thorer came there with his ship, sprang upon the land after them,
and pursued them.  There was a woman who helped Gunstein to
conceal himself, and it is told that she was much acquainted with
witchcraft.  Thorer and his men returned to the vessels, and took
all the goods out of Gunstein's vessel, and put on board stones
in place of the cargo, and then hauled the ship out into the
fjord, cut a hole in its bottom, and sank it to the bottom.
Thereafter Thorer, with his people, returned home to Bjarkey
Isle.  Gunstein and his people proceeded in small boats at first,
and lay concealed by day, until they had passed Bjarkey, and had
got beyond Thorer's district.  Gunstein went home first to Langey
Isle for a short time, and then proceeded south without any halt,
until he came south to Throndhjem, and there found King Olaf, to
whom he told all that had happened on this Bjarmaland expedition.
The king was ill-pleased with the voyage, but told Gunstein to
remain with him, promising to assist him when opportunity
offered.  Gunstein took the invitation with thanks, and stayed
with King Olaf.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Ludr -- the loor -- is a long tube or roll of birch-bark
     used as a horn by the herdboys in the mountains in Norway.
     -- L.



144. MEETING OF KING OLAF AND KING ONUND.

King Olaf was, as before related, in Sarpsborg the winter (A.D.
1026) that King Canute was in Denmark.  The Swedish king Onund
rode across West Gautland the same winter, and had thirty hundred
(3600) men with him.  Men and messages passed between them; and
they agreed to meet in spring at Konungahella.  The meeting had
been postponed, because they wished to know before they met what
King Canute intended doing.  As it was now approaching towards
winter, King Canute made ready to go over to England with his
forces, and left his son Hardaknut to rule in Denmark, and with
him Earl Ulf, a son of Thorgils Sprakaleg.  Ulf was married to
Astrid, King Svein's daughter, and sister of Canute the Great.
Their son Svein was afterwards king of Denmark.  Earl Ulf was a
very distinguished man.  When the kings Olaf and Onund heard that
Canute the Great had gone west to England, they hastened to hold
their conference, and met at Konungahella, on the Gaut river.
They had a joyful meeting, and had many friendly conversations,
of which something might become known to the public; but they
also spake often a great deal between themselves, with none but
themselves two present, of which only some things afterwards were
carried into effect, and thus became known to every one.  At
parting the kings presented each other with gifts, and parted the
best of friends.  King Onund went up into Gautland, and Olaf
northwards to Viken, and afterwards to Agder, and thence
northwards along the coast, but lay a long time at Egersund
waiting a wind.  Here he heard that Erling Skjalgson, and the
inhabitants of Jadar with him, had assembled a large force.  One
day the king's people were talking among themselves whether the
wind was south or south-west, and whether with that wind they
could sail past Jadar or not.  The most said it was impossible to
fetch round.  Then answers Haldor Brynjolfson, "I am of opinion
that we would go round Jadar with this wind fast enough if Erling
Skjalgson had prepared a feast for us at Sole."  Then King Olaf
ordered the tents to be struck, and the vessels to be hauled out,
which was done.  They sailed the same day past Jadar with the
best wind, and in the evening reached Hirtingsey, from whence the
king proceeded to Hordaland, and was entertained there in guest-
quarters.



145. THORALF'S MURDER.

The same summer (A.D. 1026) a ship sailed from Norway to the
Farey Islands, with messengers carrying a verbal message from
King Olaf, that one of his court-men, Leif Ossurson, or Lagman
Gille, or Thoralf of Dimun, should come over to him from the
Farey Islands.  Now when this message came to the Farey Islands,
and was delivered to those whom it concerned, they held a meeting
among themselves, to consider what might lie under this message,
and they were all of opinion that the king wanted to inquire into
the real state of the event which some said had taken place upon
the islands; namely, the failure and disappearance of the former
messengers of the king, and the loss of the two ships, of which
not a man had been saved.  It was resolved that Thoralf should
undertake the journey.  He got himself ready, and rigged out a
merchant-vessel belonging to himself, manned with ten or twelve
men.  When it was ready, waiting a wind, it happened, at Austrey,
in the house of Thrand of Gata, that he went one fine day into
the room where his brother's two sons, Sigurd and Thord, sons of
Thorlak, were lying upon the benches in the room.  Gaut the Red
was also there, who was one of their relations and a man of
distinction.  Sigurd was the oldest, and their leader in all
things.  Thord had a distinguished name, and was called Thord the
Low, although in reality he was uncommonly tall, and yet in
proportion more strong than large.  Then Thrand said, "How many
things are changed in the course of a man's life!  When we were
young, it was rare for young people who were able to do anything
to sit or lie still upon a fine day, and our forefathers would
scarcely have believed that Thoralf of Dimun would be bolder and
more active than ye are.  I believe the vessel I have standing
here in the boat-house will be so old that it will rot under its
coat of tar.  Here are all the houses full of wool, which is
neither used nor sold.  It should not be so if I were a few
winters younger."  Sigurd sprang up, called upon Gaut and Thord,
and said he would not endure Thrand's scoffs.  They went out to
the houseservants, and launched the vessel upon the water,
brought down a cargo, and loaded the ship.  They had no want of a
cargo at home, and the vessel's rigging was in good order, so
that in a few days they were ready for sea.  There were ten or
twelve men in the vessel.  Thoralf's ship and theirs had the same
wind, and they were generally in sight of each other.  They came
to the land at Herna in the evening, and Sigurd with his vessel
lay outside on the strand, but so that there was not much
distance between the two ships.  It happened towards evening,
when it was dark, that just as Thoralf and his people were
preparing to go to bed, Thoralf and another went on shore for a
certain purpose.  When they were ready, they prepared to return
on board.  The man who had accompanied Thoralf related afterwards
this story, -- that a cloth was thrown over his head, and that he
was lifted up from the ground, and he heard a great bustle.  He
was taken away, and thrown head foremost down; but there was sea
under him, and he sank under the water.  When he got to land, he
went to the place where he and Thoralf had been parted, and there
he found Thoralf with his head cloven down to his shoulders, and
dead.  When the ship's people heard of it they carried the body
out to the ship, and let it remain there all night.  King Olaf
was at that time in guest-quarters at Lygra, and thither they
sent a message.  Now a Thing was called by message-token, and the
king came to the Thing.  He had also ordered the Farey people of
both vessels to be summoned, and they appeared at the Thing.  Now
when the Thing was seated, the king stood up and said, "Here an
event has happened which (and it is well that it is so) is very
seldom heard of.  Here has a good man been put to death, without
any cause.  Is there any man upon the Thing who can say who has
done it?"

Nobody could answer.

"Then," said the king, "I cannot conceal my suspicion that this
deed has been done by the Farey people themselves.  It appears to
me that it has been done in this way, -- that Sigurd Thorlakson
has killed the man, and Thord the Low has cast his comrade into
the sea.  I think, too, that the motives to this must have been
to hinder Thoralf from telling about the misdeed of which he had
information; namely, the murder which I suspect was committed
upon my messengers."

When he had ended his speech, Sigurd Thorlakson stood up, and
desired to be heard.  "I have never before," said he, "spoken at
a Thing, and I do not expect to be looked upon as a man of ready
words.  But I think there is sufficient necessity before me to
reply something to this.  I will venture to make a guess that the
speech the king has made comes from some man's tongue who is of
far less understanding and goodness than he is, and has evidently
proceeded from those who are our enemies.  It is speaking
improbabilities to say that I could be Thoralf's murderer; for
he was my foster-brother and good friend.  Had the case been
otherwise, and had there been anything outstanding between me and
Thoralf, yet I am surely born with sufficient understanding to
have done this deed in the Farey Islands, rather than here
between your hands, sire.  But I am ready to clear myself, and my
whole ship's crew, of this act, and to make oath according to
what stands in your laws.  Or, if ye find it more satisfactory, I
offer to clear myself by the ordeal of hot iron; and I wish,
sire, that you may be present yourself at the proof."

When Sigurd had ceased to speak there were many who supported his
case, and begged the king that Sigurd might be allowed to clear
himself of this accusation.  They thought that Sigurd had spoken
well, and that the accusation against him might be untrue.

The king replies, "It may be with regard to this man very
differently, and if he is belied in any respect he must be a good
man; and if not, he is the boldest I have ever met with: and I
believe this is the case, and that he will bear witness to it
himself."

At the desire of the people, the king took Sigurd's obligation to
take the iron ordeal; he should come the following day to Lygra,
where the bishop should preside at the ordeal; and so the Thing
closed.  The king went back to Lygra, and Sigurd and his comrades
to their ship.

As soon as it began to be dark at night Sigurd said to his ship's
people.  "To say the truth, we have come into a great misfortune;
for a great lie is got up against us, and this king is a
deceitful, crafty man.  Our fate is easy to be foreseen where he
rules; for first he made Thoralf be slain, and then made us the
misdoers, without benefit of redemption by fine.  For him it is
an easy matter to manage the iron ordeal, so that I fear he will
come ill off who tries it against him.  Now there is coming a
brisk mountain breeze, blowing right out of the sound and off the
land; and it is my advice that we hoist our sail, and set out to
sea.  Let Thrand himself come with his wool to market another
summer; but if I get away, it is my opinion I shall never think
of coming to Norway again."

His comrades thought the advice good, hoisted their sail, and in
the night-time took to the open sea with all speed.  They did not
stop until they came to Farey, and home to Gata.  Thrand was ill-
pleased with their voyage, and they did not answer him in a very
friendly way; but they remained at home, however, with Thrand.
The morning after, King Olaf heard of Sigurd's departure, and
heavy reports went round about this case; and there were many who
believed that the accusation against Sigurd was true, although
they had denied and opposed it before the king.  King Olaf spoke
but little about the matter, but seemed to know of a certainty
that the suspicion he had taken up was founded in truth.  The
king afterwards proceeded in his progress, taking up his abode
where it was provided for him.



146. OF THE ICELANDERS.

King Olaf called before him the men who had come from Iceland,
Thorod Snorrason, Geller Thorkelson, Stein Skaptason, and Egil
Halson, and spoke to them thus: -- "Ye have spoken to me much in
summer about making yourselves ready to return to Iceland, and I
have never given you a distinct answer.  Now I will tell you what
my intention is.  Thee, Geller, I propose to allow to return, if
thou wilt carry my message there; but none of the other
Icelanders who are now here may go to Iceland before I have heard
how the message which thou, Geller, shalt bring thither has been
received."

When the king had made this resolution known, it appeared to
those who had a great desire to return, and were thus forbidden,
that they were unreasonably and hardly dealt with, and that they
were placed in the condition of unfree men.  In the meantime
Geller got ready for his journey, and sailed in summer (A.D.
1026) to Iceland, taking with him the message he was to bring
before the Thing the following summer (A.D. 1027).  The king's
message was, that he required the Icelanders to adopt the laws
which he had set in Norway, also to pay him thane-tax and nose-
tax (1); namely, a penny for every nose, and the penny at the
rate of ten pennies to the yard of wadmal (2).  At the same time
he promised them his friendship if they accepted, and threatened
them with all his vengeance if they refused his proposals.

The people sat long in deliberation on this business; but at last
they were unanimous in refusing all the taxes and burdens which
were demanded of them.  That summer Geller returned back from
Iceland to Norway to King Olaf, and found him in autumn in the
east in Viken, just as he had come from Gautland; of which I
shall speak hereafter in this story of King Olaf.  Towards the
end of autumn King Olaf repaired north to Throndhjem, and went
with his people to Nidaros, where he ordered a winter residence
to be prepared for him.  The winter (A.D. 1027) that he passed
here in the merchant-town of Nidaros was the thirteenth year of
his reign.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Nefgildi (nef=nose), a nose-tax or poll-tax payable to the
     king.  This ancient "nose-tax" was also imposed by the
     Norsemen on conquered countries, the penalty for defaulters
     being the loss of their nose.
(2)  Wadmal was the coarse woollen cloth made in Iceland, and so
     generally used for clothing that it was a measure of value
     in the North, like money, for other commodities. -- L.



147. OF THE JAMTALAND PEOPLE.

There was once a man called Ketil Jamte, a son of Earl Onund of
Sparby, in the Throndhjem district.  He fled over the ridge of
mountains from Eystein Illrade, cleared the forest, and settled
the country now called the province of Jamtaland.  A great many
people joined him from the Throndhjem land, on account of the
disturbances there; for this King Eystein had laid taxes on the
Throndhjem people, and set his dog, called Saur, to be king over
them.  Thorer Helsing was Ketil's grandson, and he colonised the
province called Helsingjaland, which is named after him.  When
Harald Harfager subdued the kingdom by force, many people fled
out of the country from him, both Throndhjem people and Naumudal
people, and thus new settlements were added to Jamtaland; and
some settlers went even eastwards to Helsingjaland and down to
the Baltic coast, and all became subjects of the Swedish king.
While Hakon Athelstan's foster-son was over Norway there was
peace, and merchant traffic from Throndhjem to Jamtaland; and, as
he was an excellent king, the Jamtalanders came from the east to
him, paid him scat, and he gave them laws and administered
justice.  They would rather submit to his government than to the
Swedish king's, because they were of Norwegian race; and all the
Helsingjaland people, who had their descent from the north side
of the mountain ridge, did the same.  This continued long after
those times, until Olaf the Thick and the Swedish king Olaf
quarrelled about the boundaries.  Then the Jamtaland and
Helsingjaland people went back to the Swedish king; and then the
forest of Eid was the eastern boundary of the land, and the
mountain ridge, or keel of the country, the northern: and the
Swedish king took scat of Helsingjaland, and also of Jamtaland.
Now, thought the king of Norway, Olaf, in consequence of the
agreement between him and the Swedish king, the scat of Jamtaland
should be paid differently than before; although it had long been
established that the Jamtaland people paid their scat to the
Swedish king, and that he appointed officers over the country.
The Swedes would listen to nothing, but that all the land to the
east of the keel of the country belonged to the Swedish king. 
Now this went so, as it often happens, that although the kings
were brothers-in-law and relations, each would hold fast the
dominions which he thought he had a right to.  King Olaf had sent
a message round in Jamtaland, declaring it to be his will that
the Jamtaland people should be subject to him, threatening them
with violence if they refused; but the Jamtaland people preferred
being subjects of the Swedish king.



148. STEIN'S STORY.

The Icelanders, Thorod Snorrason and Stein Skaptason, were ill-
pleased at not being allowed to do as they liked.  Stein was a
remarkably handsome man, dexterous at all feats, a great poet,
splendid in his apparel, and very ambitious of distinction.  His
father, Skapte, had composed a poem on King Olaf, which he had
taught Stein, with the intention that he should bring it to King
Olaf.  Stein could not now restrain himself from making the king
reproaches in word and speech, both in verse and prose.  Both he
and Thorod were imprudent in their conversation, and said the
king would be looked upon as a worse man than those who, under
faith and law, had sent their sons to him, as he now treated them
as men without liberty.  The king was angry at this.  One day
Stein stood before the king, and asked if he would listen to the
poem which his father Skapte had composed about him.  The king
replies, "Thou must first repeat that, Stein, which thou hast
composed about me."  Stein replies, that it was not the case that
he had composed any.  "I am no skald, sire," said he; "and if I
even could compose anything, it, and all that concerns me, would
appear to thee of little value."  Stein then went out, but
thought he perceived what the king alluded to.  Thorgeir, one of
the king's land-bailiffs, who managed one of his farms in
Orkadal, happened to be present, and heard the conversation of
the king and Stein, and soon afterwards Thorgeir returned home.
One night Stein left the city, and his footboy with him.  They
went up Gaularas and into Orkadal.  One evening they came to one
of the king's farms which Thorgeir had the management of, and
Thorgeir invited Stein to pass the night there, and asked where
he was travelling to.  Stein begged the loan of a horse and
sledge, for he saw they were just driving home corn.

Thorgeir replies, "I do not exactly see how it stands with thy
journey, and if thou art travelling with the king's leave.  The
other day, methinks, the words were not very sweet that passed
between the king and thee."

Stein said, "If it be so that I am not my own master for the
king, yet I will not submit to such treatment from his slaves;"
and, drawing his sword, he killed the landbailiff. Then he took
the horse, put the boy upon him, and sat himself in the sledge,
and so drove the whole night.  They travelled until they came to
Surnadal in More.  There they had themselves ferried across the
fjord, and proceeded onwards as fast as they could.  They told
nobody about the murder, but wherever they came called themselves
king's men, and met good entertainment everywhere.  One day at
last they came towards evening to Giske Isle, to Thorberg
Arnason's house.  He was not at home himself, but his wife
Ragnhild, a daughter of Erling Skjalgson, was.  There Stein was
well received, because formerly there had been great friendship
between them.  It had once happened, namely, that Stein, on his
voyage from Iceland with his own vessel, had come to Giske from
sea, and had anchored at the island.  At that time Ragnhild was
in the pains of childbirth, and very ill, and there was no priest
on the island, or in the neighbourhood of it.  There came a
message to the merchant-vessel to inquire if, by chance, there
was a priest on board.  There happened to be a priest in the
vessel, who was called Bard; but he was a young man from
Westfjord, who had little learning.  The messengers begged the
priest to go with them, but he thought it was a difficult matter:
for he knew his own ignorance, and would not go.  Stein added his
word to persuade the priest.  The priest replies, "I will go if
thou wilt go with me; for then I will have confidence, if I
should require advice."  Stein said he was willing; and they went
forthwith to the house, and to where Ragnhild was in labour. 
Soon after she brought forth a female child, which appeared to be
rather weak.  Then the priest baptized the infant, and Stein held
it at the baptism, at which it got the name of Thora; and Stein
gave it a gold ring.  Ragnhild promised Stein her perfect
friendship, and bade him come to her whenever he thought he
required her help.  Stein replied that he would hold no other
female child at baptism, and then they parted.  Now it was come
to the time when Stein required this kind promise of Ragnhild to
be fulfilled, and he told her what had happened, and that the
king's wrath had fallen upon him.  She answered, that all the aid
she could give should stand at his service; but bade him wait for
Thorberg's arrival.  She then showed him to a seat beside her son
Eystein Orre, who was then twelve years old.  Stein presented
gifts to Ragnhild and Eystein.  Thorberg had already heard how
Stein had conducted himself before he got home, and was rather
vexed at it.  Ragnhild went to him, and told him how matters
stood with Stein, and begged Thorberg to receive him, and take
care of him.

Thorberg replies, "I have heard that the king, after sending out
a message-token, held a Thing concerning the murder of Thorgeir,
and has condemned Stein as having fled the country, and likewise
that the king is highly incensed: and I have too much sense to
take the cause of a foreigner in hand, and draw upon myself the
king's wrath.  Let Stein, therefore, withdraw from hence as
quickly as thou canst."

Ragnhild replied, that they should either both go or both stay.

Thorberg told her to go where she pleased. "For I expect," said
he, "that wherever thou goest thou wilt soon come back, for here
is thy importance greatest."

Her son Eystein Orre then stood forward, and said he would not
stay behind if Ragnhild goes.

Thorberg said that they showed themselves very stiff and
obstinate in this matter.  "And it appears that ye must have your
way in it, since ye take it so near to heart; but thou art
reckoning too much, Ragnhild, upon thy descent, in paying so
little regard to King Olaf's word."

Ragnhild replied, "If thou art so much afraid to keep Stein with
thee here, go with him to my father Erling, or give him
attendants, so that he may get there in safety."  Thorberg said
he would not send Stein there; "for there are enough of things
besides to enrage the king against Erling."  Stein thus remained
there all winter (A.D. 1027).

After Yule a king's messenger came to Thorberg, with the order
that Thorberg should come to him before midsummer; and the order
was serious and severe.  Thorberg laid it before his friends, and
asked their advice if he should venture to go to the king after
what had taken place.  The greater number dissuaded him, and
thought it more advisable to let Stein slip out of his hands than
to venture within the king's power: but Thorberg himself had
rather more inclination not to decline the journey.  Soon after
Thorberg went to his brother Fin, told him the circumstances, and
asked him to accompany him.  Fin replied, that he thought it
foolish to be so completely under woman's influence that he dared
not, on account of his wife, keep the fealty and law of his
sovereign.

"Thou art free," replied Thorberg, "to go with me or not; but I
believe it is more fear of the king than love to him that keeps
thee back."  And so they parted in anger.

Then Thorberg went to his brother Arne Arnason, and asked him to
go with him to the king.  Arne says, "It appears to me wonderful
that such a sensible, prudent man, should fall into such a
misfortune, without necessity, as to incur the king's
indignation.  It might be excused if it were thy relation or
foster-brother whom thou hadst thus sheltered; but not at all
that thou shouldst take up an Iceland man, and harbour the king's
outlaw, to the injury of thyself and all thy relations."

Thorberg replies, "It stands good, according to the proverb, -- a
rotten branch will be found in every tree.  My father's greatest
misfortune evidently was that he had such ill luck in producing
sons that at last he produced one incapable of acting, and
without any resemblance to our race, and whom in truth I never
would have called brother, if it were not that it would have been
to my mother's shame to have refused."

Thorberg turned away in a gloomy temper, and went home.
Thereafter he sent a message to his brother Kalf in the
Throndhjem district, and begged him to meet him at Agdanes; and
when the messengers found Kalf he promised, without more ado, to
make the journey.  Ragnhild sent men east to Jadar to her father
Erling, and begged him to send people.  Erling's sons, Sigurd and
Thord, came out, each with a ship of twenty benches of rowers and
ninety men.  When they came north Thorberg received them
joyfully, entertained them well, and prepared for the voyage with
them.  Thorberg had also a vessel with twenty benches, and they
steered their course northwards.  When they came to the mouth of
the Throndhjem fjord Thorberg's two brothers, Fin and Arne, were
there already, with two ships each of twenty benches.  Thorberg
met his brothers with joy, and observed that his whetstone had
taken effect; and Fin replied he seldom needed sharpening for
such work.  Then they proceeded north with all their forces to
Throndhjem, and Stein was along with them.  When they came to
Agdanes, Kaff Arnason was there before them; and he also had a
wellmanned ship of twenty benches.  With this war-force they
sailed up to Nidaros, where they lay all night.  The morning
after they had a consultation with each other.  Kalf and Erling's
sons were for attacking the town with all their forces, and
leaving the event to fate; but Thorberg wished that they should
first proceed with moderation, and make an offer; in which
opinion Fin and Arne also concurred.  It was accordingly resolved
that Fin and Arne, with a few men, should first wait upon the
king.  The king had previously heard that they had come so strong
in men, and was therefore very sharp in his speech.  Fin offered
to pay mulct for Thorberg, and also for Stein, and bade the king
to fix what the penalties should be, however large; stipulating
only for Thorberg safety and his fiefs, and for Stein life and
limb.

The king replies, "It appears to me that ye come from home so
equipped that ye can determine half as much as I can myself, or
more; but this I expected least of all from you brothers, that ye
should come against me with an army; and this counsel, I can
observe, has its origin from the people of Jadar; but ye have no
occasion to offer me money in mulct."

Fin replies, "We brothers have collected men, not to offer
hostility to you, sire, but to offer rather our services; but if
you will bear down Thorberg altogether, we must all go to King
Canute the Great with such forces as we have."

Then the king looked at him, and said, "If ye brothers will give
your oaths that ye will follow me in the country and out of the
country, and not part from me without my leave and permission,
and shall not conceal from me any treasonable design that may
come to your knowledge against me, then will I agree to a peace
with you brothers."

Then Fin returned to his forces, and told the conditions which
the king had proposed to them.  Now they held a council upon it,
and Thorberg, for his part, said he would accept the terms
offered.  "I have no wish," says he, "to fly from my property,
and seek foreign masters; but, on the contrary, will always
consider it an honour to follow King Olaf, and be where he is."
Then says Kalf, "I will make no oath to King Olaf, but will be
with him always, so long as I retain my fiefs and dignities, and
so long as the king will be my friend; and my opinion is that we
should all do the same."  Fin says, "we will venture to let King
Olaf himself determine in this matter."  Arne Arnason says, "I
was resolved to follow thee, brother Thorberg, even if thou hadst
given battle to King Olaf, and I shall certainly not leave thee
for listening to better counsel; so I intend to follow thee and
Fin, and accept the conditions ye have taken."

Thereupon the brothers Thorberg, Fin, and Arne, went on board a
vessel, rowed into the fjord, and waited upon the king.  The
agreement went accordingly into fulfillment, so that the brothers
gave their oaths to the king.  Then Thorberg endeavored to make
peace for Stein with the king; but the king replied that Stein
might for him depart in safety, and go where he pleased, but "in
my house he can never be again."  Then Thorberg and his brothers
went back to their men.  Kalf went to Eggja, and Fin to the king;
and Thorberg, with the other men, went south to their homes.
Stein went with Erling's sons; but early in the spring (A.D.
1027) he went west to England into the service of Canute the
Great, and was long with him, and was treated with great
distinction.



149. FIN ARNASON"S EXPEDITION TO HALOGALAND.

Now when Fin Arnason had been a short time with King Olaf, the
king called him to a conference, along with some other persons he
usually held consultation with; and in this conference the king
spoke to this effect: -- "The decision remains fixed in my mind
that in spring I should raise the whole country to a levy both of
men and ships, and then proceed, with all the force I can muster,
against King Canute the Great: for I know for certain that he
does not intend to treat as a jest the claim he has awakened upon
my kingdom.  Now I let thee know my will, Fin Arnason, that thou
proceed on my errand to Halogaland, and raise the people there to
an expedition, men and ships, and summon that force to meet me at
Agdanes."  Then the king named other men whom he sent to
Throndhjem, and some southwards in the country, and he commanded
that this order should be circulated through the whole land.  Of
Fin's voyage we have to relate that he had with him a ship with
about thirty men, and when he was ready for sea he prosecuted his
journey until he came to Halogaland.  There he summoned the
bondes to a Thing, laid before them his errand, and craved a
levy.  The bondes in that district had large vessels, suited to a
levy expedition, and they obeyed the king's message, and rigged
their ships.  Now when Fin came farther north in Halogaland he
held a Thing again, and sent some of his men from him to crave a
levy where he thought it necessary.  He sent also men to Bjarkey
Island to Thorer Hund, and there, as elsewhere, craved the quota
to the levy.  When the message came to Thorer he made himself
ready, and manned with his house-servants the same vessel he had
sailed with on his cruise to Bjarmaland, and which he equipped at
his own expense.  Fin summoned all the people of Halogaland who
were to the north to meet at Vagar.  There came a great fleet
together in spring, and they waited there until Fin returned from
the North.  Thorer Hund had also come there.  When Fin arrived he
ordered the signal to sound for all the people of the levy to
attend a House-Thing; and at it all the men produced their
weapons, and also the fighting men from each ship-district were
mustered.  When that was all finished Fin said, "I have also to
bring thee a salutation, Thorer Hund, from King Olaf, and to ask
thee what thou wilt offer him for the murder of his court-man
Karle, or for the robbery in taking the king's goods north in
Lengjuvik.  I have the king's orders to settle that business, and
I wait thy answer to it."

Thorer looked about him, and saw standing on both sides many
fully armed men, among whom were Gunstein and others of Karle's
kindred.  Then said Thorer, "My proposal is soon made.  I will
refer altogether to the king's pleasure the matter he thinks he
has against me."

Fin replies, "Thou must put up with a less honour; for thou must
refer the matter altogether to my decision, if any agreement is
to take place."

Thorer replies, "And even then I think it will stand well with my
case, and therefore I will not decline referring it to thee." 

Thereupon Thorer came forward, and confirmed what he said by
giving his hand upon it; and Fin repeated first all the words he
should say.

Fin now pronounced his decision upon the agreement, -- that
Thorer should pay to the king ten marks of gold, and to Gunstein
and the other kindred ten marks, and for the robbery and loss of
goods ten marks more; and all which should be paid immediately.

Thorer says, "This is a heavy money mulct."

"Without it," replies Fin, "there will be no agreement."

Thorer says, there must time be allowed to gather so much in loan
from his followers; but Fin told him to pay immediately on the
spot; and besides, Thorer should lay down the great ornament
which he took from Karle when he was dead.  Thorer asserted that
he had not got the ornament.  Then Gunstein pressed forward, and
said that Karle had the ornament around his neck when they
parted, but it was gone when they took up his corpse.  Thorer
said he had not observed any ornament; but if there was any such
thing, it must be lying at home in Bjarkey.  Then Fin put the
point of his spear to Thorer's breast, and said that he must
instantly produce the ornament; on which Thorer took the ornament
from his neck and gave it to Fin.  Thereafter Thorer turned away,
and went on board his ship.  Fin, with many other men, followed
him, went through the whole vessel, and took up the hatches.  At
the mast they saw two very large casks; and Fin asked, "What are
these puncheons?"

Thorer replies, "It is my liquor."

Fin says, "Why don't you give us something to drink then,
comrade, since you have so much liquor?"

Thorer ordered his men to run off a bowlfull from the puncheons,
from which Fin and his people got liquor of the best quality. 
Now Fin ordered Thorer to pay the mulcts.  Thorer went backwards
and forwards through the ship, speaking now to the one, now to
the other, and Fin calling out to produce the pence.  Thorer
begged him to go to the shore, and said he would bring the money
there, and Fin with his men went on shore.  Then Thorer came and
paid silver; of which, from one purse, there were weighed ten
marks.  Thereafter Thorer brought many knotted nightcaps; and in
some was one mark, in others half a mark, and in others some
small money.  "This is money my friends and other good people
have lent me," said he; "for I think all my travelling money is
gone."  Then Thorer went back again to his ship, and returned,
and paid the silver by little and little; and this lasted so long
that the day was drawing towards evening.  When the Thing had
closed the people had gone to their vessels, and made ready to
depart; and as fast as they were ready they hoisted sail and set
out, so that most of them were under sail.  When Fin saw that
they were most of them under sail, he ordered his men to get
ready too; but as yet little more than a third part of the mulct
had been paid.  Then Fin said, "This goes on very slowly, Thorer,
with the payment.  I see it costs thee a great deal to pay money.
I shall now let it stand for the present, and what remains thou
shalt pay to the king himself."  Fin then got up and went away.

Thorer replies, "I am well enough pleased, Fin, to part now; but
the good will is not wanting to pay this debt, so that both thou
and the king shall say it is not unpaid."

Then Fin went on board his ship, and followed the rest of his
fleet.  Thorer was late before he was ready to come out of the
harbour.  When the sails were hoisted he steered out over
Westfjord, and went to sea, keeping south along the land so far
off that the hill-tops were half sunk, and soon the land
altogether was sunk from view by the sea.  Thorer held this
course until he got into the English sea, and landed in England.
He betook himself to King Canute forthwith, and was well received
by him.  It then came out that Thorer had with him a great deal
of property; and, with other things, all the money he and Karle
had taken in Bjarmaland.  In the great liquor-casks there were
sides within the outer sides, and the liquor was between them.
The rest of the casks were filled with furs, and beaver and sable
skins.  Thorer was then with King Canute.  Fin came with his
forces to King Olaf, and related to him how all had gone upon his
voyage, and told at the same time his suspicion that Thorer had
left the country, and gone west to England to King Canute.  "And
there I fear he will cause as much trouble."

The king replies, "I believe that Thorer must be our enemy, and
it appears to me always better to have him at a distance than
near."



150. DISPUTE BETWEEN HAREK AND ASMUND.

Asmund Grankelson had been this winter (A.D. 1027) in Halogaland
in his sheriffdom, and was at home with his father Grankel. 
There lies a rock out in the sea, on which there is both seal and
bird catching, and a fishing ground, and egg-gathering; and from
old times it had been an appendage to the farm which Grankel
owned, but now Harek of Thjotta laid claim to it.  It had gone so
far, that some years he had taken by force all the gain of this
rock; but Asmund and his father thought that they might expect
the king's help in all cases in which the right was upon their
side.  Both father and son went therefore in spring to Harek, and
brought him a message and tokens from King Olaf that he should
drop his claim.  Harek answered Asmund crossly, because he had
gone to the king with such insinuations -- "for the just right is
upon my side.  Thou shouldst learn moderation, Asmund, although
thou hast so much confidence in the king's favour.  It has
succeeded with thee to kill some chiefs, and leave their
slaughter unpaid for by any mulct; and also to plunder us,
although we thought ourselves at least equal to all of equal
birth, and thou art far from being my equal in family."

Asmund replies, "Many have experienced from thee, Harek, that
thou art of great connections, and too great power; and many in
consequence have suffered loss in their property through thee.
But it is likely that now thou must turn thyself elsewhere, and
not against us with thy violence, and not go altogether against
law, as thou art now doing."  Then they separated.

Harek sent ten or twelve of his house-servants with a large
rowing boat, with which they rowed to the rock, took all that was
to be got upon it, and loaded their boat.  But when they were
ready to return home, Asmund Grankelson came with thirty men, and
ordered them to give up all they had taken.  Harek's house-
servants were not quick in complying, so that Asmund attacked
them.  Some of Harek's men were cudgelled, some wounded, some
thrown into the sea, and all they had caught was taken from on
board of their boat, and Asmund and his people took it along with
them.  Then Harek's servants came home, and told him the event.
Harek replies, "That is called news indeed that seldom happens;
never before has it happened that my people have been beaten."

The matter dropped.  Harek never spoke about it, but was very
cheerful.  In spring, however, Harek rigged out a cutter of
twenty seats of rowers, and manned it with his house-servants,
and the ship was remarkably well fitted out both with people and
all necessary equipment; and Harek went to the levy; but when he
came to King Olaf, Asmund was there before him.  The king
summoned Harek and Asmund to him, and reconciled them so that
they left the matter entirely to him.  Asmund then produced
witnesses to prove that Grankel had owned the rock, and the king
gave judgment accordingly.  The case had a one-sided result.  No
mulct was paid for Harek's house-servants, and the rock was
declared to be Grankel's.  Harek observed it was no disgrace to
obey the king's decision, whatever way the case itself was
decided.



151. THOROD'S STORY.

Thorod Snorrason had remained in Norway, according to King Olaf's
commands, when Geller Thorkelson got leave to go to Iceland, as
before related.  He remained there (A.D. 1027) with King Olaf,
but was ill pleased that he was not free to travel where he
pleased.  Early in winter, King Olaf, when he was in Nidaros,
made it known that he would send people to Jamtaland to collect
the scat; but nobody had any great desire to go on this business,
after the fate of those whom King Olaf had sent before, namely,
Thrand White and others, twelve in number, who lost their lives,
as before related; and the Jamtalanders had ever since been
subject to the Swedish king.  Thorod Snorrason now offered to
undertake this journey, for he cared little what became of him if
he could but become his own master again.  The king consented,
and Thorod set out with eleven men in company.  They came east to
Jamtaland, and went to a man called Thorar, who was lagman, and a
person in high estimation.  They met with a hospitable reception;
and when they had been there a while, they explained their
business to Thorar.  He replied, that other men and chiefs of the
country had in all respects as much power and right to give an
answer as he had, and for that purpose he would call together a
Thing.  It was so done; the message-token was sent out, and a
numerous Thing assembled.  Thorar went to the Thing, but the
messengers in the meantime remained at home.  At the Thing,
Thorar laid the business before the people, but all were
unanimous that no scat should be paid to the king of Norway; and
some were for hanging the messengers, others for sacrificing them
to the gods.  At last it was resolved to hold them fast until the
king of Sweden's sheriffs arrived, and they could treat them as
they pleased with consent of the people; and that, in the
meantime, this decision should be concealed, and the messengers
treated well, and detained under pretext that they must wait
until the scat is collected; and that they should be separated,
and placed two and two, as if for the convenience of boarding
them.  Thorod and another remained in Thorar's house.  There was
a great Yule feast and ale-drinking, to which each brought his
own liquor; for there were many peasants in the village, who all
drank in company together at Yule.  There was another village not
far distant, where Thorar's brother-in-law dwelt, who was a rich
and powerful man, and had a grown-up son.  The brothers-in-law
intended to pass the Yule in drinking feasts, half of it at the
house of the one and half with the other; and the feast began at
Thorar's house.  The brothers-in-law drank together, and Thorod
and the sons of the peasants by themselves; and it was a drinking
match.  In the evening words arose, and comparisons between the
men of Sweden and of Norway, and then between their kings both of
former times and at the present, and of the manslaughters and
robberies that had taken place between the countries.  Then said
the peasants sons, "If our king has lost most people, his
sheriffs will make it even with the lives of twelve men when they
come from the south after Yule; and ye little know, ye silly
fools, why ye are kept here."  Thorod took notice of these words,
and many made jest about it, and scoffed at them and their king.
When the ale began to talk out of the hearts of the Jamtalanders,
what Thorod had before long suspected became evident.  The day
after Thorod and his comrade took all their clothes and weapons,
and laid them ready; and at night, when the people were all
asleep, they fled to the forest.  The next morning, when the
Jamtalanders were aware of their flight, men set out after them
with dogs to trace them, and found them in a wood in which they
had concealed themselves.  They brought them home to a room in
which there was a deep cellar, into which they were thrown, and
the door locked upon them.  They had little meat, and only the
clothes they had on them.  In the middle of Yule, Thorar, with
all his freeborn men, went to his brother's-in-law, where he was
to be a guest until the last of Yule.  Thorar's slaves were to
keep guard upon the cellar, and they were provided with plenty of
liquor; but as they observed no moderation in drinking, they
became towards evening confused in the head with the ale.  As
they were quite drunk, those who had to bring meat to the
prisoners in the cellar said among themselves that they should
want for nothing.  Thorod amused the slaves by singing to them.
They said he was a clever man, and gave him a large candle that
was lighted; and the slaves who were in went to call the others
to come in; but they were all so confused with the ale, that in
going out they neither locked the cellar nor the room after them.
Now Thorod and his comrades tore up their skin clothes in strips,
knotted them together, made a noose at one end, and threw up the
rope on the floor of the room.  It fastened itself around a
chest, by which they tried to haul themselves up.  Thorod lifted
up his comrade until he stood on his shoulders, and from thence
scrambled up through the hatchhole.  There was no want of ropes
in the chamber, and he threw a rope down to Thorod; but when he
tried to draw him up, he could not move him from the spot.  Then
Thorod told him to cast the rope over a cross-beam that was in
the house, make a loop in it, and place as much wood and stones
in the loop as would outweigh him; and the heavy weight went down
into the cellar, and Thorod was drawn up by it.  Now they took as
much clothes as they required in the room; and among other things
they took some reindeer hides, out of which they cut sandals, and
bound them under their feet, with the hoofs of the reindeer feet
trailing behind.  But before they set off they set fire to a
large corn barn which was close by, and then ran out into the
pitch-dark night.  The barn blazed, and set fire to many other
houses in the village.  Thorod and his comrade travelled the
whole night until they came to a lonely wood, where they
concealed themselves when it was daylight.  In the morning they
were missed.  There was chase made with dogs to trace the
footsteps all round the house; but the hounds always came back to
the house, for they had the smell of the reindeer hoofs, and
followed the scent back on the road that the hoofs had left, and
therefore could not find the right direction.  Thorod and his
comrade wandered long about in the desert forest, and came one
evening to a small house, and went in.  A man and a woman were
sitting by the fire.  The man called himself Thorer, and said it
was his wife who was sitting there, and the hut belonged to them.
The peasant asked them to stop there, at which they were well
pleased.  He told them that he had come to this place, because he
had fled from the inhabited district on account of a murder.
Thorod and his comrade were well received, and they all got their
supper at the fireside; and then the benches were cleared for
them, and they lay down to sleep, but the fire was still burning
with a clear light.  Thorod saw a man come in from another house,
and never had he seen so stout a man.  He was dressed in a
scarlet cloak beset with gold clasps, and was of very handsome
appearance.  Thorod heard him scold them for taking guests, when
they had scarcely food for themselves.  The housewife said, "Be
not angry, brother; seldom such a thing happens; and rather do
them some good too, for thou hast better opportunity to do so
than we."  Thorod heard also the stout man named by the name of
Arnliot Gelline, and observed that the woman of the house was his
sister.  Thorod had heard speak of Arnliot as the greatest-of
robbers and malefactors.  Thorod and his companion slept the
first part of the night, for they were wearied with walking; but
when a third of the night was still to come, Arnliot awoke them,
told them to get up, and make ready to depart.  They arose
immediately, put on their clothes, and some breakfast was given
them; and Arnliot gave each of them also a pair of skees. 
Arnliot made himself ready to accompany them, and got upon his
skees, which were both broad and long; but scarcely had he swung
his skee-staff before he was a long way past them.  He waited for
them, and said they would make no progress in this way, and told
them to stand upon the edge of his skees beside him.  They did
so.  Thorod stood nearest to him, and held by Arnliot's belt, and
his comrade held by him.  Arnliot strode on as quickly with them
both, as if he was alone and without any weight.  The following
day they came, towards night, to a lodge for travellers, struck
fire, and prepared some food; but Arnliot told them to throw away
nothing of their food, neither bones nor crumbs.  Arnliot took a
silver plate out of the pocket of his cloak, and ate from it.
When they were done eating, Arnliot gathered up the remains of
their meal, and they prepared to go to sleep.  In the other end
of the house there was a loft upon cross-beams, and Arnliot and
the others went up, and laid themselves down to sleep.  Arnliot
had a large halberd, of which the upper part was mounted with
gold, and the shaft was so long that with his arm stretched out
he could scarcely touch the top of it; and he was girt with a
sword.  They had both their weapons and their clothes up in the
loft beside them.  Arnliot, who lay outermost in the loft, told
them to be perfectly quiet.  Soon after twelve men came to the
house, who were merchants going with their wares to Jamtaland;
and when they came into the house they made a great disturbance,
were merry, and made a great fire before them; and when they took
their supper they cast away all the bones around them.  They then
prepared to go to sleep, and laid themselves down upon the
benches around the fire.  When they, had been asleep a short
time, a huge witch came into the house; and when she came in, she
carefully swept together all the bones and whatever was of food
kind into a heap, and threw it into her mouth.  Then she gripped
the man who was nearest to her, riving and tearing him asunder,
and threw him upon the fire.  The others awoke in dreadful
fright, and sprang up, but she took them, and put them one by one
to death, so that only one remained in life.  He ran under the
loft calling for help, and if there was any one on the loft to
help him.  Arnliot reached down his hand, seized him by the
shoulder, and drew him up into the loft.  The witch-wife had
turned towards the fire, and began to eat the men who were
roasting.  Now Arnliot stood up, took his halberd, and struck her
between the shoulders, so that the point came out at her breast.
She writhed with it, gave a dreadful shriek, and sprang up.  The
halberd slipped from Arnliot's hands, and she ran out with it.
Arnliot then went in; cleared away the dead corpses out of the
house; set the door and the door-posts up, for she had torn them
down in going out; and they slept the rest of the night.  When
the day broke they got up; and first they took their breakfast.
When they had got food, Arnliot said, "Now we must part here.  Ye
can proceed upon the new-traced path the merchants have made in
coming here yesterday.  In the meantime I will seek after my
halberd, and in reward for my labour I will take so much of the
goods these men had with them as I find useful to me.  Thou,
Thorod, must take my salutation to King Olaf; and say to him that
he is the man I am most desirous to see, although my salutation
may appear to him of little worth."  Then he took his silver
plate, wiped it dry with a cloth, and said, "Give King Olaf this
plate; salute him, and say it is from me."  Then they made
themselves ready for their journey, and parted.  Thorod went on
with his comrade and the man of the merchants company who had
escaped.  He proceeded until he came to King Olaf in the town
(Nidaros); told the king all that had happened, and presented to
him the silver plate.  The king said it was wrong that Arnliot
himself had not come to him; "for it is a pity so brave a hero,
and so distinguished a man, should have given himself up to
misdeeds."

Thorod remained the rest of the winter with the king, and in
summer got leave to return to Iceland; and he and King Olaf
parted the best of friends.



152. KING OLAF'S LEVY OF MEN.

King Olaf made ready in spring (A.D. 1027) to leave Nidaros, and
many people were assembled about him, both from Throndhjem and
the Northern country; and when he was ready he proceeded first
with his men to More, where he gathered the men of the levy, and
did the same at Raumsdal.  He went from thence to South More.  He
lay a long time at the Herey Isles waiting for his forces; and he
often held House-things, as many reports came to his ears about
which he thought it necessary to hold councils.  In one of these
Things he made a speech, in which he spoke of the loss he
suffered from the Farey islanders.  "The scat which they promised
me," he said, "is not forthcoming; and I now intend to send men
thither after it."  Then he proposed to different men to
undertake this expedition; but the answer was, that all declined
the adventure.

Then there stood up a stout and very remarkable looking man in
the Thing.  He was clad in a red kirtle, had a helmet on his
head, a sword in his belt, and a large halberd in his hands.  He
took up the word and said, "In truth here is a great want of men.
Ye have a good king; but ye are bad servants who say no to this
expedition he offers you, although ye have received many gifts of
friendship and tokens of honour from him.  I have hitherto been
no friend of the king, and he has been my enemy, and says,
besides, that he has good grounds for being so.  Now, I offer,
sire, to go upon this expedition, if no better will undertake
it."

The king answers, "Who is this brave man who replies to my offer?
Thou showest thyself different from the other men here present,
in offering thyself for this expedition from which they excuse
themselves, although I expected they would willingly have
undertaken it; but I do not know thee in the least, and do not
know thy name."

He replies, "My name, sire, is not difficult to know, and I think
thou hast heard my name before.  I am Karl Morske."

The king -- "So this is Karl!  I have indeed heard thy name
before; and, to say the truth, there was a time when our meeting
must have been such, if I had had my will; that thou shouldst not
have had to tell it now.  But I will not show myself worse than
thou, but will join my thanks and my favour to the side of the
help thou hast offered me.  Now thou shalt come to me, Karl, and
be my guest to-day; and then we shall consult together about this
business."  Karl said it should be so.



153. KARL MORSKE'S STORY.

Karl Morske had been a viking, and a celebrated robber.  Often
had the king sent out men against him, and wished to make an end
of him; but Karl, who was a man of high connection, was quick in
all his doing's, and besides a man of great dexterity, and expert
in all feats.  Now when Karl had undertaken this business the
king was reconciled to him, gave him his friendship, and let him
be fitted out in the best manner for this expedition.  There were
about twenty men in the ship; and the king sent messages to his
friends in the Farey Islands, and recommended him also to Leif
Ossurson and Lagman Gille, for aid and defence; and for this
purpose furnished Karl with tokens of the full powers given him.
Karl set out as soon as he was ready; and as he got a favourable
breeze soon came to the Farey Islands, and landed at Thorshavn,
in the island Straumey.  A Thing was called, to which there came
a great number of people.  Thrand of Gata came with a great
retinue, and Leif and Gille came there also, with many in their
following.  After they had set up their tents, and put themselves
in order, they went to Karl Morske, and saluted each other on
both sides in a friendly way.  Then Karl produced King Olaf's
words, tokens, and friendly message to Leif and Gille, who
received them in a friendly manner, invited Karl to come to them,
and promised him to support his errand, and give him all the aid
in their power, for which he thanked them.  Soon after came
Thrand of Gata, who also received Karl in the most friendly
manner, and said he was glad to see so able a man coming to their
country on the king's business, which they were all bound to
promote.  "I will insist, Karl," says he, "on thy taking-up thy
winter abode with me, together with all those of thy people who
may appear to thee necessary for thy dignity."

Karl replies, that he had already settled to lodge with Leif;
"otherwise I would with great pleasure have accepted thy
invitation."

"Then fate has given great honour to Leif," says Thrand; "but is
there any other way in which I can be of service?"

Karl replies, that he would do him a great service by collecting
the scat of the eastern island, and of all the northern islands.

Thrand said it was both his duty and interest to assist in the
king's business, and thereupon Thrand returned to his tent; and
at that Thing nothing else worth speaking of occurred.  Karl took
up his abode with Leif Ossurson, and was there all winter (A.D.
1028).  Leif collected the scat of Straumey Island, and all the
islands south of it.  The spring after Thrand of Gata fell ill,
and had sore eyes and other complaints; but he prepared to attend
the Thing, as was his custom.  When he came to the Thing he had
his tent put up, and within it another black tent, that the light
might not penetrate.  After some days of the Thing had passed,
Leif and Karl came to Thrand's tent, with a great many people,
and found some persons standing outside.  They asked if Thrand
was in the tent, and were told he was.  Leif told them to bid
Thrand come out, as he and Karl had some business with him.  They
came back, and said that Thrand had sore eyes, and could not come
out; "but he begs thee, Leif, to come to him within."  Leif told
his comrades to come carefully into the tent, and not to press
forward, and that he who came last in should go out first.  Leif
went in first, followed by Karl, and then his comrades; and all
fully armed as if they were going into battle.  Leif went into
the black tent and asked if Thrand was there.  Thrand answered
and saluted Leif.  Leif returned his salutation, and asked if he
had brought the scat from the northern islands, and if he would
pay the scat that had been collected.  Thrand replies, that he
had not forgotten what had been spoken of between him and Karl,
and that he would now pay over the scat. "Here is a purse, Leif,
full of silver, which thou canst receive."  Leif looked around,
and saw but few people in the tent, of whom some were lying upon
the benches, and a few were sitting up.  Then Leif went to
Thrand, and took the purse, and carried it into the outer tent,
where it was light, turned out the money on his shield, groped
about in it with his hand, and told Karl to look at the silver.
When they had looked at it a while, Karl asked Leif what he
thought of the silver.  He replied, "I am thinking where the bad
money that is in the north isles can have come from."  Thrand
heard this, and said, "Do you not think, Leif, the silver is
good?"  "No," says he.  Thrand replies, "Our relations, then, are
rascals not to be trusted.  I sent them in spring to collect the
scat in the north isles, as I could not myself go anywhere, and
they have allowed themselves to be bribed by the bondes to take
false money, which nobody looks upon as current and good; it is
better, therefore, Leif, to look at this silver which has been
paid me as land-rent."  Leif thereupon carried back this silver,
and received another bag, which he carried to Karl, and they
looked over the money together.  Karl asked Leif what he thought
of this money.  He answered, that it appeared to him so bad that
it would not be taken in payment, however little hope there might
be of getting a debt paid in any other way: "therefore I will not
take this money upon the king's account."  A man who had been
lying on the bench now cast the skin coverlet off which he had
drawn over his head, and said, "True is the old word, -- he grows
worse who grows older: so it is with thee, Thrand, who allowest
Karl Morske to handle thy money all the day."  This was Gaut the
Red.  Thrand sprang up at Gaut's words, and reprimanded his
relation with many angry words.  At last he said that Leif should
leave this silver, and take a bag which his own peasants had
brought him in spring.  "And although I am weak-sighted, yet my
own hand is the truest test."  Another man who was lying on the
bench raised himself now upon his elbow; and this was Thord the
Low.  He said, "These are no ordinary reproaches we suffer from
Karl Morske, and therefore he well deserves a reward for them."
Leif in the meantime took the bag, and carried it to Karl; and
when they cast their eyes on the money, Leif said, "We need not
look long at this silver, for here the one piece of money is
better than the other; and this is the money we will have.  Let a
man come to be present at the counting it out."  Thrand says that
he thought Leif was the fittest man to do it upon his account.
Leif and Karl thereupon went a short way from the tent, sat down.
and counted and weighed the silver.  Karl took the helmet off his
head, and received in it the weighed silver.  They saw a man
coming to them who had a stick with an axe-head on it in his
hand, a hat low upon his head, and a short green cloak.  He was
bare-legged, and had linen breeches on tied at the knee.  He laid
his stick down in the field, and went to Karl and said, "Take
care, Karl Morske, that thou does not hurt thyself against my
axe-stick."  Immediately a man came running and calls with great
haste to Leif Ossurson, telling him to come as quickly as
possible to Lagman Gille's tent; "for," says he, "Sirurd
Thorlakson ran in just now into the mouth of the tent, and gave
one of Gille's men a desperate wound."  Leif rose up instantly,
and went off to Gille's tent along with his men.  Karl remained
sitting, and the Norway people stood around in all corners.  Gaut
immediately sprang up, and struck with a hand-axe over the heads
of the people, and the stroke came on Karl's head; but the wound
was slight.  Thord the Low seized the stick-axe, which lay in the
field at his side, and struck the axe-blade right into Karl's
skull.  Many people now streamed out of Thrand's tent.  Karl was
carried away dead.  Thrand was much grieved at this event, and
offered money-mulcts for his relations; but Leif and Gille, who
had to prosecute the business, would accept no mulct.  Sigurd was
banished the country for having wounded Gille's tent comrade, and
Gaut and Thord for the murder of Karl.  The Norway people rigged
out the vessel which Karl had with him, and sailed eastward to
Olaf, and gave him these tidings.  He was in no pleasant humour
at it, and threatened a speedy vengeance; but it was not allotted
by fate to King Olaf to revenge himself on Thrand and his
relations, because of the hostilities which had begun in Norway,
and which are now to be related.  And there is nothing more to be
told of what happened after King Olaf sent men to the Farey
Islands to take scat of them.  But great strife arose after
Karl's death in the Farey Islands between the family of Thrand of
Gata and Leif Ossurson, and of which there are great sagas.



154. KING OLAF'S EXPEDITION WITH HIS LEVY.

Now we must proceed with the relation we began before, -- that
King Olaf set out with his men, and raised a levy over the whole
country (A.D. 1027).  All lendermen in the North followed him
excepting Einar Tambaskelfer, who sat quietly at home upon his
farm since his return to the country, and did not serve the king.
Einar had great estates and wealth, although he held no fiefs
from the king, and he lived splendidly.  King Olaf sailed with
his fleet south around Stad, and many people from the districts
around joined him.  King Olaf himself had a ship which he had got
built the winter before (A.D. 1027), and which was called the
Visund (1).  It was a very large ship, with a bison's head gilded
all over upon the bow.  Sigvat the skald speaks thus of it: --

     "Trygvason's Long Serpent bore,
     Grim gaping o'er the waves before,
     A dragon's head with open throat,
     When last the hero was afloat:
          His cruise was closed,
          As God disposed.
     Olaf has raised a bison's head,
     Which proudly seems the waves to tread.
     While o'er its golden forehead dashing
     The waves its glittering horns are washing:
          May God dispose
          A luckier close."

The king went on to Hordaland; there he heard the news that
Erling Skjalgson had left the country with a great force, and
four or five ships.  He himself had a large war-ship, and his
sons had three of twenty rowing-banks each; and they had sailed
westward to England to Canute the Great.  Then King Olaf sailed
eastward along the land with a mighty war-force, and he inquired
everywhere if anything was known of Canute's proceedings; and all
agreed in saying he was in England but added that he was fitting
out a levy, and intended coming to Norway.  As Olaf had a large
fleet, and could not discover with certainty where he should go
to meet King Canute, and as his people were dissatisfied with
lying quiet in one place with so large an armament, he resolved
to sail with his fleet south to Denmark, and took with him all
the men who were best appointed and most warlike; and he gave
leave to the others to return home.  Now the people whom he
thought of little use having gone home, King Olaf had many
excellent and stout men-at-arms besides those who, as before
related, had fled the country, or sat quietly at home; and most
of the chief men and lendermen of Norway were along with him.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Visundr is the buffalo; although the modern bison, or
     American animal of that name, might have been known through
     the Greenland colonists, who in this reign had visited some
     parts of America. -- L.



155. OF KING OLAF AND KING ONUND.

When King Olaf sailed to Denmark, he set his course for Seeland;
and when he came there he made incursions on the land, and began
to plunder.  The country people were severely treated; some were
killed, some bound and dragged to the ships.  All who could do so
took to flight, and made no opposition.  King Olaf committed
there the greatest ravages.  While Olaf was in Seeland, the news
came that King Onund Olafson of Sweden had raised a levy, and
fallen upon Scania, and was ravaging there; and then it became
known what the resolution had been that the two kings had taken
at the Gaut river, where they had concluded a union and
friendship, and had bound themselves to oppose King Canute.  King
Onund continued his march until he met his brother-in-law King
Olaf.  When they met they made proclamation both to their own
people and to the people of the country, that they intended to
conquer Denmark; and asked the support of the people of the
country for this purpose.  And it happened, as we find examples
of everywhere, that if hostilities are brought upon the people of
a country not strong enough to withstand, the greatest number
will submit to the conditions by which peace can be purchased at
any rate.  So it happened here that many men went into the
service of the kings, and agreed to submit to them.  Wheresoever
they went they laid the country all round subjection to them, and
otherwise laid waste all with fire and sword.

Of this foray Sigvat the skald speaks, in a ballad he composed
concerning King Canute the Great: --

          "`Canute is on the sea!'
          The news is told,
          And the Norsemen bold
     Repeat it with great glee.
     And it runs from mouth to mouth --
          `On a lucky day
          We came away
     From Throndhjem to the south.'
     Across the cold East sea,
          The Swedish king
          His host did bring,
     To gain great victory.
     King Onund came to fight,
          In Seeland's plains,
          Against the Danes,
     With his steel-clad men so bright.
     Canute is on the land;
          Side to side
          His long-ships ride
     Along the yellow strand.
     Where waves wash the green banks,
          Mast to mast,
          All bound fast,
     His great fleet lies in ranks."



154. OF KING CANUTE THE GREAT.

King Canute had heard in England that King Olaf of Norway had
called out a levy, and had gone with his forces to Denmark, and
was making great ravages in his dominions there.  Canute began to
gather people, and he had speedily collected a great army and a
numerous fleet.  Earl Hakon was second in command over the whole.

Sigvat the skald came this summer (A.D. 1027) from the West, from
Ruda (Rouen) in Valland, and with him was a man called Berg. 
They had made a merchant voyage there the summer before.  Sigvat
had made a little poem about this journey, called "The Western
Traveller's Song," which begins thus: --

     "Berg! many a merry morn was pass'd,
     When our vessel was made fast,
     And we lay on the glittering tide
     or Rouen river's western side."

When Sigvat came to England he went directly to King Canute, and
asked his leave to proceed to Norway; for King Canute had
forbidden all merchant vessels to sail until he himself was ready
with his fleet.  When Sigvat arrived he went to the house in
which the king was lodged; but the doors were locked, and he had
to stand a long time outside, but when he got admittance he
obtained the permission he desired.  He then sang: --

     "The way to Jutland's king I sought;
     A little patience I was taught.
     The doors were shut -- all full within;
     The udaller could not get in.
     But Gorm's great son did condescend
     To his own chamber me to send,
     And grant my prayer -- although I'm one
     Whose arms the fetters' weight have known."

When Sigvat became aware that King Canute was equipping an
armament against King Olaf, and knew what a mighty force King
Canute had, he made these lines: --

     "The mighty Canute, and Earl Hakon,
     Have leagued themselves, and counsel taken
     Against King Olaf's life,
     And are ready for the strife.
     In spite of king and earl, I say,
     `I love him well -- may he get away:'
     On the Fields, wild and dreary,
     With him I'd live, and ne'er be weary."

Sigvat made many other songs concerning this expedition of Canute
and Hakon.  He made this among others: --

     "`Twas not the earl's intention then
     'Twixt Olaf and the udalmen
     Peace to establish, and the land
     Upright to hold with Northman's hand;
     But ever with deceit and lies
     Eirik's descendant, Hakon, tries
     To make ill-will and discontent,
     Till all the udalmen are bent
     Against King Olaf's rule to rise."



157. OF KING CANUTE'S SHIP THE DRAGON.

Canute the Great was at last ready with his fleet, and left the
land; and a vast number of men he had, and ships frightfully
large.  He himself had a dragon-ship, so large that it had sixty
banks of rowers, and the head was gilt all over.  Earl Hakon had
another dragon of forty banks, and it also had a gilt figure-
head.  The sails of both were in stripes of blue, red, and green,
and the vessels were painted all above the water-stroke; and all
that belonged to their equipment was most splendid.  They had
also many other huge ships remarkably well fitted out, and grand.
Sigvat the skald talks of this in his song on Canute: --

     "Canute is out beneath the sky --
     Canute of the clear blue eye!
     The king is out on the ocean's breast,
     Leading his grand fleet from the West.
     On to the East the ship-masts glide,
     Glancing and bright each long-ship's side.
     The conqueror of great Ethelred,
     Canute, is there, his foemen's dread:
     His dragon with her sails of blue,
     All bright and brilliant to the view,
     High hoisted on the yard arms wide,
     Carries great Canute o'er the tide.
     Brave is the royal progress -- fast
     The proud ship's keel obeys the mast,
     Dashes through foam, and gains the land,
     Raising a surge on Limfjord's strand."

It is related that King Canute sailed with this vast force from
England, and came with all his force safely to Denmark, where he
went into Limfjord, and there he found gathered besides a large
army of the men of the country.



158. HARDAKNUT TAKEN TO BE KING IN DENMARK.

Earl Ulf Sprakalegson had been set as protector over Denmark when
King Canute went to England, and the king had intrusted his son
Hardaknut in the earl's hands.  This took place the summer before
(A.D. 1026), as we related.  But the earl immediately gave it out
that King Canute had, at parting, made known to him his will and
desire that the Danes should take his son Hardaknut as king over
the Danish dominions.  "On that account," says the earl, "he gave
the matter into our hands; as I, and many other chiefs and
leading men here in the country, have often complained to King
Canute of the evil consequences to the country of being without a
king, and that former kings thought it honour and power enough to
rule over the Danish kingdom alone; and in the times that are
past many kings have ruled over this kingdom.  But now there are
greater difficulties than have ever been before; for we have been
so fortunate hitherto as to live without disturbance from foreign
kings, but now we hear the king of Norway is going to attack us,
to which is added the fear of the people that the Swedish king
will join him; and now King Canute is in England."  The earl then
produced King Canute's letter and seal, confirming all that the
earl asserted.  Many other chiefs supported this business; and in
consequence of all these persuasions the people resolved to take
Hardaknut as king, which was done at the same Thing.  The Queen
Emma had been principal promoter of this determination; for she
had got the letter to be written, and provided with the seal,
having cunningly got hold of the king's signet; but from him it
was all concealed.  Now when Hardaknut and Earl Ulf heard for
certain that King Olaf was come from Norway with a large army,
they went to Jutland, where the greatest strength of the Danish
kingdom lies, sent out message-tokens, and summoned to them a
great force; but when they heard the Swedish king was also come
with his army, they thought they would not have strength enough
to give battle to both, and therefore kept their army together in
Jutland, and resolved to defend that country against the kings.
The whole of their ships they assembled in Limfjord, and waited
thus for King Canute.  Now when they heard that King Canute had
come from the West to Limfjord they sent men to him, and to Queen
Emma, and begged her to find out if the king was angry at them or
not, and to let them know.  The queen talked over the matter with
him, and said, "Your son Hardaknut will pay the full mulct the
king may demand, if he has done anything which is thought to be
against the king."  He replies, that Hardaknut has not done this
of his own judgement.  "And therefore," says he, "it has turned
out as might have been expected, that when he, a child, and
without understanding, wanted to be called king, the country,
when any evil came and an enemy appeared, must be conquered by
foreign princes, if our might had not come to his aid.  If he
will have any reconciliation with me let him come to me, and lay
down the mock title of king he has given himself."  The queen
sent these very words to Hardaknut, and at the same time she
begged him not to decline coming; for, as she truly observed, he
had no force to stand against his father.  When this message came
to Hardaknut he asked the advice of the earl and other chief
people who were with him; but it was soon found that when the
people heard King Canute the Old was arrived they all streamed to
him, and seemed to have no confidence but in him alone.  Then
Earl Ulf and his fellows saw they had but two roads to take;
either to go to the king and leave all to his mercy, or to fly
the country.  All pressed Hardaknut to go to his father, which
advice he followed.  When they met he fell at his father's feet,
and laid his seal, which accompanied the kingly title, on his
knee.  King Canute took Hardaknut by the hand, and placed him in
as high a seat as he used to sit in before.  Earl UIf sent his
son Svein, who was a sister's son of King Canute, and the same
age as Hardaknut, to the king.  He prayed for grace and
reconciliation for his father, and offered himself as hostage for
the earl.  King Canute ordered him to tell the earl to assemble
his men and ships, and come to him, and then they would talk of
reconciliation.  The earl did so.



159. FORAY IN SCANIA.

When King Olaf and King Onund heard that King Canute was come
from the West, and also that he had a vast force, they sailed
east to Scania, and allowed themselves to ravage and burn in the
districts there, and then proceeded eastward along the land to
the frontier of Sweden.  As soon as the country people heard that
King Canute was come from the West, no one thought of going into
the service of the two kings.

Now the kings sailed eastward along the coast, and brought up in
a river called Helga, and remained there some time.  When they
heard that King Canute was coming eastward with his forces
against them, they held a council; and the result was, that King
Olaf with his people went up the country to the forest, and to
the lake out of which the river Helga flows.  There at the
riverhead they made a dam of timber and turf, and dammed in the
lake.  They also dug a deep ditch, through which they led several
waters, so that the lake waxed very high.  In the river-bed they
laid large logs of timber.  They were many days about this work,
and King Olaf had the management of this piece of artifice; but
King Onund had only to command the fleet and army. When King
Canute heard of the proceedings of the two kings, and of the
damage they had done to his dominions, he sailed right against
them to where they lay in Helga river.  He had a War-force which
was one half greater than that of both the kings together. 
Sigvat speaks of these things: --

     "The king, who shields
     His Jutland fields
     From scaith or harm
     By foeman's arm,
     Will not allow
     Wild plundering now:
     `The greatest he,
     On land or sea.'"



160. BATTLE IN HELGA RIVER.

One day, towards evening, King Onund's spies saw King Canute
coming sailing along, and he was not far off.  Then King Onund
ordered the war-horns to sound; on which his people struck their
tents, put on their weapons, rowed out of the harbour and east
round the land, bound their ships together, and prepared for
battle.  King Onund made his spies run up the country to look for
King Olaf, and tell him the news.  Then King Olaf broke up the
dam, and let the river take its course.  King Olaf travelled down
in the night to his ships.  When King Canute came outside the
harbour, he saw the forces of the kings ready for battle.  He
thought that it would be too late in the day to begin the fight
by the time his forces could be ready; for his fleet required a
great deal of room at sea, and there was a long distance between
the foremost of his ships and the hindmost, and between those
outside and those nearest the land, and there was but little
wind.  Now, as Canute saw that the Swedes and Norwegians had
quitted the harbour, he went into it with as many ships as it
could hold; but the main strength of the fleet lay without the
harbour.  In the morning, when it was light, a great part of the
men went on shore; some for amusement, some to converse with the
people of other ships.  They observed nothing until the water
came rushing over them like a waterfall, carrying huge trees,
which drove in among their ships, damaging all they struck; and
the water covered all the fields.  The men on shore perished, and
many who were in the ships.  All who could do it cut their
cables; so that the ships were loose, and drove before the
stream, and were scattered here and there.  The great dragon,
which King Canute himself was in, drove before the stream; and as
it could not so easily be turned with oars, drove out among
Olaf's and Onund's ships.  As they knew the ship, they laid her
on board on all quarters.  But the ship was so high in the hull,
as if it were a castle, and had besides such a numerous and
chosen crew on board, well armed and exercised, that it was not
easy to attack her.  After a short time also Earl Ulf came up
with his fleet; and then the battle began, and King Canute's
fleet gathered together from all quarters.  But the kings Olaf
and Onund, seeing they had for this time got all the victory that
fate permitted them to gain, let their ships retreat, cast
themselves loose from King Canute's ship, and the fleets
separated.  But as the attack had not been made as King Canute
had determined, he made no further attempt; and the kings on each
side arranged their fleets and put their ships in order.  When
the fleets were parted, and each sailing its course, Olaf and
Onund looked over their forces, and found they had suffered no
loss of men.  In the meantime they saw that if they waited until
King Canute got his large fleet in order to attack them, the
difference of force was so great that for them there was little
chance of victory.  It was also evident that if the battle was
renewed, they must suffer a great loss of men.  They took the
resolution, therefore, to row with the whole fleet eastward along
the coast.  Observing that King Canute did not pursue them, they
raised up their masts and set sail.  Ottar Svarte tells thus of
it in the poem he composed upon King Canute the Great: --

     "The king, in battle fray,
     Drove the Swedish host away:
     The wolf did not miss prey,
     Nor the raven on that day.
     Great Canute might deride
     Two kings if he had pride,
     For at Helga river's side
     They would not his sword abide."

Thord Sjarekson also sang these lines in his death song of King
Olaf: --

     "King Olaf, Agder's lord,
          Ne'er shunned the Jutland king,
     But with his blue-edged sword
          Broke many a panzer ring.
     King Canute was not slow:
          King Onund filled the plain
     With dead, killed by his bow:
          The wolf howled o'er the slain."



161. KING OLAF AND KING ONUND'S PLANS.

King Olaf and King Onund sailed eastward to the Swedish king's
dominions; and one day, towards evening, landed at a place called
Barvik, where they lay all night.  But then it was observed of
the Swedes that they were home-sick; for the greater part of
their forces sailed eastward along the land in the night, and did
not stop their course until they came home to their houses.  Now
when King Onund observed this he ordered, as soon as the day
dawned, to sound the signal for a House-thing; and the whole
people went on shore, and the Thing sat down.  Then King Onund
took up the word, and spake thus: "So it is, King Olaf, that, as
you know, we have been assembled in summer, and have forayed wide
around in Denmark, and have gained much booty, but no land.  I
had 350 vessels, and now have not above 100 remaining with me. 
Now it appears to me we can make no greater progress than we have
made, although you have still the 60 vessels which have followed
you the whole summer.  It therefore appears to me best that we
come back to my kingdom; for it is always good to drive home with
the wagon safe.  In this expedition we have won something, and
lost nothing.  Now I will offer you, King Olaf, to come with me,
and we shall remain assembled during the winter.  Take as much of
my kingdom as you will, so that you and the men who follow you
may support yourselves well; and when spring comes let us take
such measures as we find serviceable.  If you, however, will
prefer to travel across our country, and go overland to Norway,
it shall be free for you to do so."

King Olaf thanked King Onund for his friendly offer.  "But if I
may advise," says he, "then we should take another resolution,
and keep together the forces we have still remaining.  I had in
the first of summer, before I left Norway, 350 ships; but when I
left the country I chose from among the whole war-levy those I
thought to be the best, and with them I manned 60 ships; and
these I still have.  Now it appears to me that the part of your
war-force which has now run away is the most worthless, and of
least resistance; but now I see here all your chiefs and leaders,
and I know well that the people who belong to the court-troops
(1) are by far the best suited to carry arms.  We have here
chosen men and superb ships, and we can very well lie all winter
in our ships, as viking's custom is.  But Canute cannot lie long
in Helga river; for the harbour will not hold so many vessels as
he has.  If he steers eastward after us, we can escape from him,
and then people will soon gather to us; but if he return to the
harbours where his fleet can lie, I know for certain that the
desire to return home will not be less in his army than in ours.
I think, also, we have ravaged so widely in summer, that the
villagers, both in Scania and in Halland, know well whose favour
they have to seek.  Canute's army will thus be dispersed so
widely, that it is uncertain to whom fate may at the last give
the victory; but let us first find out what resolution he takes."

Thus King Olaf ended his speech, and it found much applause, and
his advice was followed.  Spies were sent into King Canute's
army, and both the kings Olaf and Onund remained lying where they
were.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The thingmen, or hired body-guard attending the court. -- L.



162. OF KING CANUTE AND EARL ULF.

When King Canute saw that the kings of Norway and Sweden steered
eastward with their forces along the coast, he sent men to ride
night and day on the land to follow their movements.  Some spies
went forward, others returned; so that King Canute had news every
day of their progress.  He had also spies always in their army.
Now when he heard that a great part of the fleet had sailed away
from the kings, he turned back with his forces to Seeland, and
lay with his whole fleet in the Sound; so that a part lay on the
Scania side, and a part on the Seeland side.  King Canute
himself, the day before Michaelmas, rode with a great retinue to
Roeskilde.  There his brother-in-law, Earl Ulf, had prepared a
great feast for him.  The earl was the most agreeable host, but
the king was silent and sullen.  The earl talked to him in every
way to make him cheerful, and brought forward everything which he
thought would amuse him; but the king remained stern, and
speaking little.  At last the earl proposed to him a game at
chess, which he agreed to; and a chess-board was produced, and
they played together.  Earl Ulf was hasty in temper, stiff, and
in nothing yielding; but everything he managed went on well in
his hands; and he was a great warrior, about whom there are many
stories.  He was the most powerful man in Denmark next to the
king.  Earl Ulf's sister Gyda was married to Earl Gudin (Godwin)
Ulfnadson; and their sons were Harald king of England, and Earl
Toste, Earl Valthiof, Earl Morukare, and Earl Svein.  Gyda was
the name of their daughter, who was married to the English king
Edward the Good.



163. OF THE EARL'S MURDER.

When they had played a while the king made a false move, at which
the earl took a knight from the king; but the king set the piece
again upon the board, and told the earl to make another move; but
the earl grew angry, threw over the chess-board, stood up, and
went away.  The king said, "Runnest thou away, Ulf the coward?"
The earl turned round at the door and said, "Thou wouldst have
run farther at Helga river, if thou hadst come to battle there.
Thou didst not call me Ulf the coward, when I hastened to thy
help while the Swedes were beating thee like a dog."  The earl
then went out, and went to bed.  A little later the king also
went to bed.  The following morning while the king was putting on
his clothes he said to his footboy, "Go thou to Earl Ulf, and
kill him."

The lad went, was away a while, and then came back.

The king said, "Hast thou killed the earl?"

"I did not kill him, for he was gone to Saint Lucius' church."

There was a man called Ivar White, a Norwegian by birth, who was
the king's courtman and chamberlain.  The king said to him, "Go
thou and kill the earl."

Ivar went to the church, and in at the choir, and thrust his
sword through the earl, who died on the spot.  Then Ivar went to
the king, with the bloody sword in his hand.

The king said, "Hast thou killed the earl?"

"I have killed him," says he.

"Thou didst well."

After the earl was killed the monks closed the church, and locked
the doors.  When that was told the king he sent a message to the
monks, ordering them to open the church and sing high mass.  They
did as the king ordered; and when the king came to the church he
bestowed on it great property, so that it had a large domain, by
which that place was raised very high; and these lands have since
always belonged to it.  King Canute rode down to his ships, and
lay there till late in harvest with a very large army.



164. OF KING OLAF AND THE SWEDES.

When King Olaf and King Onund heard that King Canute had sailed
to the Sound, and lay there with a great force, the kings held a
House-thing, and spoke much about what resolution they should
adopt.  King Olaf wished they should remain there with all the
fleet, and see what King Canute would at last resolve to do.  But
the Swedes held it to be unadvisable to remain until the frost
set in, and so it was determined; and King Onund went home with
all his army, and King Olaf remained lying after them.



165. OF EGIL AND TOFE.

While King Olaf lay there, he had frequently conferences and
consultations with his people.  One night Egil Halson and Tofe
Valgautson had the watch upon the king's ship.  Tofe came from
West Gautland, and was a man of high birth.  While they sat on
watch they heard much lamentation and crying among the people who
had been taken in the war, and who lay bound on the shore at
night.  Tofe said it made him ill to hear such distress, and
asked Egil to go with him, and let loose these people.  This work
they set about, cut the cords, and let the people escape, and
they looked upon it as a piece of great friendship; but the king
was so enraged at it, that they themselves were in the greatest
danger.  When Egil afterwards fell sick the king for a long time
would not visit him, until many people entreated it of him.  It
vexed Egil much to have done anything the king was angry at, and
he begged his forgiveness.  The king now dismissed his wrath
against Egil, laid his hands upon the side on which Egil's pain
was, and sang a prayer; upon which the pain ceased instantly, and
Egil grew better.  Tofe came, after entreaty, into reconciliation
with the king, on condition that he should exhort his father
Valgaut to come to the king.  He was a heathen; but after
conversation with the king he went over to Christianity, and died
instantly when he was baptized.



166. TREACHERY TOWARDS KING OLAF.

King Olaf had now frequent conferences with his people, and asked
advice from them, and from his chiefs, as to what he should
determine upon.  But there was no unanimity among them -- some
considering that unadvisable which others considered highly
serviceable; and there was much indecision in their councils.
King Canute had always spies in King Olaf's army, who entered
into conversation with many of his men, offering them presents
and favour on account of King Canute.  Many allowed themselves to
be seduced, and gave promises of fidelity, and to be King
Canute's men, and bring the country into his hands if he came to
Norway.  This was apparent, afterwards, of many who at first kept
it concealed.  Some took at once money bribes, and others were
promised money afterwards; and a great many there were who had
got great presents of money from him before: for it may be said
with truth of King Canute, that every man who came to him, and
who he thought had the spirit of a man and would like his favour,
got his hands full of gifts and money.  On this account he was
very popular, although his generosity was principally shown to
foreigners, and was greatest the greater distance they came from.



167. KING OLAF'S CONSULTATIONS.

King Olaf had often conferences and meetings with his people, and
asked their counsel; but as he observed they gave different
opinions, he had a suspicion that there must be some who spoke
differently from what they really thought advisable for him, and
he was thus uncertain if all gave him due fidelity in council.
Some pressed that with the first fair wind they should sail to
the Sound, and so to Norway.  They said the Danes would not dare
to attack them, although they lay with so great a force right in
the way.  But the king was a man of too much understanding not to
see that this was impracticable.  He knew also that Olaf
Trygvason had found it quite otherwise, as to the Danes not
daring to fight, when he with a few people went into battle
against a great body of them.  The king also knew that in King
Canute's army there were a great many Norwegians; therefore he
entertained the suspicion that those who gave this advice were
more favourable to King Canute than to him.  King Olaf came at
last to the determination, from all these considerations, that
the people who would follow him should make themselves ready to
proceed by land across Gautland, and so to Norway.  "But our
ships," said he, "and all things that we cannot take with us, I
will send eastward to the Swedish king's dominions, and let them
be taken care of for us there."



168. HAREK OF THJOTTA'S VOYAGE.

Harek of Thjotta replied thus to the king's speech: "It is
evident that I cannot travel on foot to Norway.  I am old and
heavy, and little accustomed to walking.  Besides, I am unwilling
to part with my ship; for on that ship and its apparel I have
bestowed so much labour, that it would go much against my
inclination to put her into the hands of my enemies."  The king
said, "Come along with us, Harek, and we shall carry thee when
thou art tired of walking."  Then Harek sang these lines :--

     "I'11 mount my ocean steed,
     And o'er the sea I'll speed;
     Forests and hills are not for me, --
     I love the moving sea,
     Though Canute block the Sound,
     Rather than walk the ground,
     And leave my ship, I'll see
     What my ship will do for me."

Then King Olaf let everything be put in order for the journey.
The people had their walking clothing and weapons, but their
other clothes and effects they packed upon such horses as they
could get.  Then he sent off people to take his ships east to
Calmar.  There he had the vessels laid up, and the ships' apparel
and other goods taken care of.  Harek did as he had said, and
waited for a wind, and then sailed west to Scania, until, about
the decline of the day, he came with a fresh and fair wind to the
eastward of Holar.  There he let the sail and the vane, and flag
and mast be taken down, and let the upper works of the ship be
covered over with some grey tilt-canvas, and let a few men sit at
the oars in the fore part and aft, but the most were sitting low
down in the vessel.

When Canute's watchmen saw the ship, they talked with each other
about what ship it might be, and made the guess that it must be
one loaded with herrings or salt, as they only saw a few men at
the oars; and the ship, besides, appeared to them grey, and
wanting tar, as if burnt up by the sun, and they saw also that it
was deeply loaded.  Now when Harek came farther through the
Sound, and past the fleet, he raised the mast, hoisted sail, and
set up his gilded vane.  The sail was white as snow, and in it
were red and blue stripes of cloth interwoven.  When the king's
men saw the ship sailing in this state, they told the king that
probably King Olaf had sailed through them.  But King Canute
replies, that King Olaf was too prudent a man to sail with a
single ship through King Canute's fleet, and thought it more
likely to be Harek of Thjotta, or the like of him.  Many believed
the truth to be that King Canute knew of this expedition of
Harek, and that it would not have succeeded so if they had not
concluded a friendship beforehand with each other; which seemed
likely, after King Canute's and Harek's friendly understanding
became generally known.

Harek made this song as he sailed northward round the isle of
Vedrey: --

     "The widows of Lund may smile through their tears,
     The Danish girls may have their jeers;
          They may laugh or smile,
          But outside their isle
     Old Harek still on to his North land steers."

Harek went on his way, and never stopped till he came north to
Halogaland, to his own house in Thjotta.



169. KING OLAF'S COURSE FROM SVITHJOD.

When King Olaf began his journey, he came first into Smaland, and
then into West Gautland.  He marched quietly and peaceably, and
the country people gave him all assistance on his journey.  Thus
he proceeded until he came into Viken, and north through Viken to
Sarpsborg, where he remained, and ordered a winter abode to be
prepared (A.D. 1028).  Then he gave most of the chiefs leave to
return home, but kept the lendermen by him whom he thought the
most serviceable.  There were with him also all the sons of Arne
Arnmodson, and they stood in great favour with the king.  Geller
Thorkelson, who the summer before had come from Iceland, also
came there to the king, as before related.



170. OF SIGVAT THE SKALD.

Sigvat the skald had long been in King Olaf's household, as
before related, and the king made him his marshal.  Sigvat had no
talent for speaking in prose; but in skaldcraft he was so
practised, that the verses came as readily from his tongue as if
he were speaking in usual language.  He had made a mercantile
journey to Normandy, and in the course of it had come to England,
where he met King Canute, and obtained permission from him to
sail to Norway, as before related.  When he came to Norway he
proceeded straight to King Olaf, and found him at Sarpsborg.  He
presented himself before the king just as he was sitting down to
table.  Sigvat saluted him.  The king looked at Sigvat and was
silent.  Then Sigvat sang: --

     "Great king!  thy marshal is come home,
     No more by land or sea to roam,
          But by thy side
          Still to abide.
     Great king!  what seat here shall be take
     For the king's honour -- not his sake?
          For all seats here
          To me are dear."

Then was verified the old saying, that "many are the ears of a
king;" for King Olaf had heard all about Sigvat's journey, and
that he had spoken with Canute.  He says to Sigvat, "I do not
know if thou art my marshal, or hast become one of Canute's men."
Sigvat said: --

     "Canute, whose golden gifts display
     A generous heart, would have me stay,
     Service in his great court to take,
     And my own Norway king forsake.
     Two masters at a time, I said,
     Were one too many for men bred
     Where truth and virtue, shown to all,
     Make all men true in Olaf's hall."

Then King Olaf told Sigvat to take his seat where he before used
to sit; and in a short time Sigvat was in as high favour with the
king as ever.



171. OF ERLING SKJALGSON AND HIS SONS.

Erling Skjalgson and all his sons had been all summer in King
Canute's army, in the retinue of Earl Hakon.  Thorer Hund was
also there, and was in high esteem.  Now when King Canute heard
that King Olaf had gone overland to Norway, he discharged his
army, and gave all men leave to go to their winter abodes.  There
was then in Denmark a great army of foreigners, both English,
Norwegians, and men of other countries, who had joined the
expedition in summer.  In autumn (A.D. 1027) Erling Skjalgson
went to Norway with his men, and received great presents from
King Canute at parting; but Thorer Hund remained behind in King
Canute's court.  With Erling went messengers from King Canute
well provided with money; and in winter they travelled through
all the country, paying the money which King Canute had promised
to many in autumn for their assistance.  They gave presents in
money, besides, to many whose friendship could be purchased for
King Canute.  They received much assistance in their travels from
Erling.  In this way it came to pass that many turned their
support to King Canute, promised him their services, and agreed
to oppose King Olaf.  Some did this openly, but many more
concealed it from the public.  King Olaf heard this news, for
many had something to tell him about it; and the conversation in
the court often turned upon it.  Sigvat the skald made a song
upon it: --

     "The base traitors ply
          With purses of gold,
     Wanting to buy
          What is not to be sold, --
     The king's life and throne
          Wanting to buy:
     But our souls are our own,
          And to hell we'll not hie.
     No pleasure in heaven,
          As we know full well,
     To the traitor is given, --
          His soul is his hell."

Often also the conversation turned upon how ill it beseemed Earl
Hakon to raise his hand in arms against King Olaf, who had given
him his life when he fell into the king's power; but Sigvat was a
particular friend of Earl Hakon, and when he heard the earl
spoken against he sang: --

     "Our own court people we may blame,
     If they take gold to their own shame,
     Their king and country to betray.
     With those who give it's not the same,
     From them we have no faith to claim:
     'Tis we are wrong, if we give way."



172. OF KING OLAF'S PRESENTS AT YULE.

King Olaf gave a great feast at Yule, and many great people had
come to him.  It was the seventh day of Yule, that the king, with
a few persons, among whom was Sigvat, who attended him day and
night, went to a house in which the king's most precious
valuables were kept.  He had, according to his custom, collected
there with great care the valuable presents he was to make on New
Year's eve.  There was in the house no small number of gold-
mounted swords; and Sigvat sang: --

     "The swords stand there,
     All bright and fair, --
     Those oars that dip in blood:
     If I in favour stood,
     I too might have a share.
     A sword the skald would gladly take,
     And use it for his master's sake:
     In favour once he stood,
     And a sword has stained in blood."

The king took a sword of which the handle was twisted round with
gold, and the guard was gold-mounted, and gave it to him.  It was
a valuable article; but the gift was not seen without envy, as
will appear hereafter.

Immediately after Yule (1028) the king began his journey to the
Uplands; for he had a great many people about him, but had
received no income that autumn from the North country, for there
had been an armament in summer, and the king had laid out all the
revenues he could command; and also he had no vessels with which
he and his people could go to the North.  At the same time he had
news from the North, from which he could see that there would be
no safety for him in that quarter, unless he went with a great
force.  For these reasons he determined to proceed through the
Uplands, although it was not so long a time since he had been
there in guest-quarters as the law prescribes, and as the kings
usually had the custom of observing in their visits.  When he
came to the Uplands the lendermen and the richest bondes invited
him to be their guest, and thus lightened his expenses.



173. OF BJORN THE BAILIFF.

There was a man called Bjorn who was of Gautland family, and a
friend and acquaintance of Queen Astrid, and in some way related
to her.  She had given him farm-management and other offices in
the upper part of Hedemark.  He had also the management of
Osterdal district.  Bjorn was not in esteem with the king, nor
liked by the bondes.  It happened in a hamlet which Bjorn ruled
over, that many swine and cattle were missing: therefore Bjorn
ordered a Thing to be called to examine the matter.  Such pillage
he attributed chiefly to the people settled in forest-farms far
from other men; by which he referred particularly to those who
dwelt in Osterdal, for that district was very thinly inhabited,
and full of lakes and forest-cleanings, and but in few places was
any great neighbourhood together.



174. OF RAUD'S SONS.

There was a man called Raud who dwelt in Osterdal.  His wife was
called Ragnhild; and his sons, Dag and Sigurd, were men of great
talent.  They were present at the Thing, made a reply in defence
of the Osterdal people, and removed the accusation from them.
Bjorn thought they were too pert in their answer, and too fine in
their clothes and weapons; and therefore turned his speech
against these brothers, and said it was not unlikely they may
have committed these thefts.  They denied it, and the Thing
closed.  Soon after King Olaf, with his retinue, came to guest-
quarters in the house of bailiff Bjorn.  The matter which had
been before the Thing was then complained of to the king; and
Bjorn said that Raud's sons appeared to him to have committed
these thefts.  A messenger was sent for Raud's sons; and when
they appeared before the king he said they had not at all the
appearance of thieves, and acquitted them.  Thereupon they
invited the king, with all his retinue, to a three days'
entertainment at their father's; and although Bjorn dissuaded him
from it, the king went.  At Raud's there was a very excellent
feast.  The king asked Raud what people he and his wife were.
Raud answered that he was originally a Swedish man, rich and of
high birth; "but I ran away with the wife I have ever since had,
and she is a sister of King Hring Dagson."  The king then
remembered both their families.  He found that father and sons
were men of understanding, and asked them what they could do.
Sigurd said he could interpret dreams, and determine the time of
the day although no heavenly bodies could be seen.  The king made
trial of his art, and found it was as Sigurd had said.  Dag
stated, as his accomplishment, that he could see the misdeeds and
vices of every man who came under his eye, when he chose to
observe him closely.  The king told him to declare what faults of
disposition he saw in the king himself.  Dag mentioned a fault
which the king was sensible he really had.  Then the king asked
what fault the bailiff Bjorn had.  Dag said Bjorn was a thief;
and told also where Bjorn had concealed on his farm the bones,
horns, and hides of the cattle he had stolen in autumn; "for he
committed," said Dag, "all the thefts in autumn which he accuses
other people of."  Dag also told the king the places where the
king should go after leaving them.  When the king departed from
Raud's house he was accompanied on the way, and presented with
friendly gifts; and Raud's sons remained with the king.  The king
went first to Bjorn's, and found there that all Dag had told him
was true.  Upon which he drove Bjorn out of the country; and he
had to thank the queen that he preserved life and limbs.



175. THORER'S DEATH.

Thorer, a son of Olver of Eggja, a stepson of Kalf Arnason, and a
sister's son of Thorer Hund, was a remarkably handsome man, stout
and strong.  He was at this time eighteen years old; had made a
good marriage in Hedemark, by which he got great wealth; and was
besides one of the most popular of men, and formed to be a chief.
He invited the king and his retinue home to him to a feast.  The
king accepted the invitation, went to Thorer's, and was well
received.  The entertainment was very splendid; they were
excellently treated, and all that was set before the guests was
of the best that could be got.  The king and his people talked
among themselves of the excellence of everything, and knew not
what they should admire the most, -- whether Thorer's house
outside, or the inside furniture, the table service, or the
liquors, or the host who gave them such a feast.  But Dag said
little about it.  The king used often to speak to Dag, and ask
him about various things; and he had proved the truth of all that
Dag had said, both of things that had happened or were to happen,
and therefore the king had much confidence in what he said.  The
king called Dag to him to have a private conversation together,
and spoke to him about many things.  Afterwards the king turned
the conversation on Thorer, -- what an excellent man Thorer was,
and what a superb feast he had made for them.  Dag answered but
little to this, but agreed it was true what the king said.  The
king then asked Dag what disposition or faith he found in Thorer.
Dag replied that he must certainly consider Thorer of a good
disposition, if he be really what most people believe him to be.
The king told him to answer direct what he was asked, and said
that it was his duty to do so.  Dag replies, "Then thou must
allow me to determine the punishment if I disclose his faith."
The king replied that he would not submit his decision to another
man, but again ordered Dag to reply to what he asked.

Dag replies, "The sovereign's order goes before all.  I find this
disposition in Thorer, as in so many others, that he is too
greedy of money."

The king: "Is he then a thief, or a robber?"

"He is neither."

"What is he then?"

"To win money he is a traitor to his sovereign.  He has taken
money from King Canute the Great for thy head."

The king asks, "What proof hast thou of the truth of this?"

Dag: "He has upon his right arm, above the elbow, a thick gold
ring, which King Canute gave him, and which he lets no man see."

This ended their conference, and the king was very wroth.  Now as
the king sat at table, and the guests had drunk a while with
great mirth, and Thorer went round to see the guests well served,
the king ordered Thorer to be called to him.  He went up before
the table, and laid his hands upon it.

The king asked, "How old a man art thou, Thorer?"

He answered, "I am eighteen years old."

"A stout man thou art for those years, and thou hast been
fortunate also."

Then the king took his right hand, and felt it towards the elbow.

Thorer said, "Take care, for I have a boil upon my arm."

The king held his hand there, and felt there was something hard
under it.  "Hast thou not heard," said he, "that I am a
physician?  Let me see the boil."

As Thorer saw it was of no use to conceal it longer, he took off
the ring and laid it on the table.

The king asked if that was the gift of King Canute.

Thorer replied that he could not deny it was.

The king ordered him to be seized and laid in irons.  Kalf came
up and entreated for mercy, and offered money for him, which also
was seconded by many; but the king was so wroth that nobody could
get in a word.  He said Thorer should suffer the doom he had
prepared for himself.  Thereupon he ordered Thorer to be killed.
This deed was much detested in the Uplands, and not less in the
Throndhjem country, where many of Thorer's connections were. 
Kalf took the death of this man much to heart, for he had been
his foster-son in childhood.



176. THE FALL OF GRJOTGARD.

Grjotgard Olverson, Thorer's brother, and the eldest of the 
brothers, was a very wealthy man, and had a great troop of people
about him.  He lived also at this time in Hedemark.  When he
heard that Thorer had been killed, he made an attack upon the
places where the king's goods and men were; but, between whiles,
he kept himself in the forest and other secret places.  When the
king heard of this disturbance, he had inquiry made about
Grjotgard's haunts, and found out that he had taken up night-
quarters not far from where the king was.  King Olaf set out in
the night-time, came there about day-dawn, and placed a circle of
men round the house in which Grjotgard was sleeping.  Grjotgard
and his men, roused by the stir of people and clash of arms, ran
to their weapons, and Grjotgard himself sprang to the front room.
He asked who commanded the troop; and it was answered him, "King
Olaf was come there."  Grjotgard asked if the king would hear his
words.  The king, who stood at the door, said that Grjotgard
might speak what he pleased, and he would hear his words. 
Grjotgard said, "I do not beg for mercy;" and at the same moment
he rushed out, having his shield over his head, and his drawn
sword in his hand.  It was not so much light that he could see
clearly.  He struck his sword at the king; but Arnbjorn ran in,
and the thrust pierced him under his armour into his stomach, and
Arnbjorn got his deathwound.  Grjotgard was killed immediately,
and most of his people with him.  After this event the king
turned back to the south to Viken.



177. KING OLAF SENDS FOR HIS SHIPS AND GOODS.

Now when the king came to Tunsberg he sent men out to all the
districts, and ordered the people out upon a levy.  He had but a
small provision of shipping, and there were only bondes' vessels
to be got.  From the districts in the near neighbourhood many
people came to him, but few from any distance; and it was soon
found that the people had turned away from the king.  King Olaf
sent people to Gautland for his ships, and other goods and wares
which had been left there in autumn; but the progress of these
men was very slow, for it was no better now than in autumn to
sail through the Sound, as King Canute had in spring fitted out
an army throughout the whole of the Danish dominions, and had no
fewer than 1200 vessels.



178. KING OLAF'S COUNSELS.

The news came to Norway that King Canute had assembled an immense
armament through all Denmark, with which he intended to conquer
Norway.  When this became known the people were less willing to
join King Olaf, and he got but little aid from the bondes.  The
king's men often spoke about this among themselves. Sigvat tells
of it thus: --

     "Our men are few, our ships are small,
     While England's king is strong in all;
     But yet our king is not afraid --
     O!  never be such king betrayed!
     'Tis evil counsel to deprive
     Our king of countrymen to strive
     To save their country, sword in hand:
     Tis money that betrays our land."

The king held meetings with the men of the court, and sometimes
House-things with all his people, and consulted with them what
they should, in their opinion, undertake.  "We must not conceal
from ourselves," said he, "that Canute will come here this
summer; and that he has, as ye all know, a large force, and we
have at present but few men to oppose to him; and, as matters now
stand, we cannot depend much on the fidelity of the country
people."  The king's men replied to his speech in various ways;
but it is said that Sigvat the skald replied thus, advising
flight, as treachery, not cowardice, was the cause of it: --

     "We may well fly, when even our foe
     Offers us money if we go.
     I may be blamed, accused of fear;
     But treachery, not faith, rules here.
     Men may retire who long have shown
     Their faith and love, and now alone
     Retire because they cannot save --
     This is no treachery in the brave."



179. HAREK OF THJOTTA BURNS GRANKEL AND HIS MEN.

The same spring (A.D. 1028) it happened in Halogaland that Harek
of Thjotta remembered how Asmund Grankelson had plundered and
beaten his house-servants.  A cutter with twenty rowing-benches,
which belonged to Harek, was afloat in front of the house, with
tent and deck, and he spread the report that he intended to go
south to Throndhjem.  One evening Harek went on board with his
house-servants, about eighty men, who rowed the whole night; and
he came towards morning to Grankel's house, and surrounded it
with his men.  They then made an attack on the house, and set
fire to it; and Grankel with his people were burnt, and some were
killed outside; and in all about thirty men lost their lives.
After this deed Harek returned home, and sat quietly in his farm.
Asmund was with King Olaf when he heard of it; therefore there
was nobody in Halogaland to sue Harek for mulct for this deed,
nor did he offer any satisfaction.



180. KING CANUTE'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

Canute the Great collected his forces, and went to Limfjord. 
When he was ready with his equipment he sailed from thence with
his whole fleet to Norway; made all possible speed, and did not
land to the eastward of the Fjords, but crossed Folden, and
landed in Agder, where he summoned a Thing.  The bondes came down
from the upper country to hold a Thing with Canute, who was
everywhere in that country accepted as king.  Then he placed men
over the districts, and took hostages from the bondes, and no man
opposed him.  King Olaf was in Tunsberg when Canute's fleet
sailed across the mouth of the fjord.  Canute sailed northwards
along the coast, and people came to him from all the districts,
and promised him fealty.  He lay a while in Egersund, where
Erling Skjalgson came to him with many people, and King Canute
and Erling renewed their league of friendship.  Among other
things, Canute promised Erling the whole country between Stad and
Rygiarbit to rule over.  Then King Canute proceeded; and, to be
short in our tale, did not stop until he came to Throndhjem, and
landed at Nidaros.  In Throndhjem he called together a Thing for
the eight districts, at which King Canute was chosen king of all
Norway.  Thorer Hund, who had come with King Canute from Denmark,
was there, and also Harek of Thjotta; and both were made sheriffs
of the king, and took the oath of fealty to him.  King Canute
gave them great fiefs, and also right to the Lapland trade, and
presented them besides with great gifts.  He enriched all men who
were inclined to enter into friendly accord with him both with
fiefs and money, and gave them greater power than they had
before.



181. OF KING CANUTE.

When King Canute had laid the whole of Norway trader his
authority, he called together a numerous Thing, both of his own
people and of the people of the country; and at it he made
proclamation, that he made his relation Earl Hakon the governor-
in-chief of all the land in Norway that he had conquered in this
expedition.  In like manner he led his son Hardaknut to the high-
seat at his side, gave him the title of king, and therewith the
whole Danish dominion.  King Canute took as hostages from all
lendermen and great bondes in Norway either their sons, brothers,
or other near connections, or the men who were dearest to them
and appeared to him most suitable; by which he, as before
observed, secured their fidelity to him.  As soon as Earl Hakon
had attained this power in Norway his brother-in-law, Einar
Tambaskelfer, made an agreement with him, and received back all
the fiefs he formerly had possessed while the earls ruled the
country.  King Canute gave Einar great gifts, and bound him by
great kindness to his interests; and promised that Einar should
be the greatest and most important man in Norway, among those who
did not hold the highest dignity, as long as he had power over
the country.  He added to this, that Einar appeared to him the
most suitable man to hold the highest title of honour in Norway
if no earls remained, and his son Eindride also, on account of
his high birth.  Einar placed a great value on these promises,
and, in return, promised the greatest fidelity.  Einar's
chiefship began anew with this.



182. OF THORARIN LOFTUNGA.

There was a man by name Thorarin Loftunga, an Icelander by birth,
and a great skald, who had been much with the kings and other
great chiefs.  He was now with King Canute the Great, and had
composed a flock, or short poem, in his praise.  When the king
heard of this he was very angry, and ordered him to bring the
next day a drapa, or long poem, by the time he went to table; and
if he failed to do so, said the king, "he shall be hanged for his
impudence in composing such a small poem about King Canute." 
Thorarin then composed a stave as a refrain, which he inserted in
the poem, and also augmented it with several other strophes or
verses.  This was the refrain: --

     "Canute protects his realm, as Jove,
     Guardian of Greece, his realm above."

King Canute rewarded him for the poem with fifty marks of silver.
The poem was called the "Headransom" ("Hofudlausn").  Thorarin
composed another poem about King Canute, which was called the
"Campaign Poem" ("Togdrapa"); and therein he tells King Canute's
expedition when he sailed from Denmark to Norway; and the
following are strophes from one of the parts of this poem: --

     "Canute with all his men is out,
     Under the heavens in war-ships stout, --
     'Out on the sea, from Limfjord's green,
     My good, my brave friend's fleet is seen.
     The men of Adger on the coast
     Tremble to see this mighty host:
     The guilty tremble as they spy
     The victor's fleet beneath the sky.

     "The sight surpasses far the tale,
     As glacing in the sun they sail;
     The king's ship glittering all with gold,
     And splendour there not to be told.
     Round Lister many a coal-black mast
     Of Canute's fleet is gliding past.
     And now through Eger sound they ride,
     Upon the gently heaving tide.

     "And all the sound is covered o'er
     With ships and sails, from shore to shore,
     A mighty king, a mighty host,
     Hiding the sea on Eger coast.
     And peaceful men in haste now hie
     Up Hiornagla-hill the fleet to spy,
     As round the ness where Stad now lies
     Each high-stemmed ship in splendour flies.

     "Nor seemed the voyage long, I trow,
     To warrior on the high-built bow,
     As o'er the ocean-mountains riding
     The land and hill seem past him gliding.
     With whistling breeze and flashing spray
     Past Stein the gay ships dashed away;
     In open sea, the southern gale
     Filled every wide out-bellying sail.

     "Still on they fly, still northward go,
     Till he who conquers every foe,
     The mighty Canute, came to land,
     Far in the north on Throndhjem's strand.
     There this great king of Jutland race,
     Whose deeds and gifts surpass in grace
     All other kings, bestowed the throne
     Of Norway on his sister's son.

     "To his own son he gave the crown
     (This I must add to his renown)
     Of Denmark -- land of shadowy vales,
     In which the white swan trims her sails."

Here it is told that King Canute's expedition was grander than
saga can tell; but Thorarin sang thus because he would pride
himself upon being one of King Canute's retinue when he came to
Norway.



153. OF THE MESSENGERS SENT BY KING OLAF FOR HIS SHIPS.

The men whom King Olaf had sent eastwards to Gautland after his
ships took with them the vessels they thought the best, and burnt
the rest.  The ship-apparel and other goods belonging to the king
and his men they also took with them; and when they heard that
King Canute had gone to Norway they sailed west through the
Sound, and then north to Viken to King Olaf, to whom they
delivered his ships.  He was then at Tunsberg.  When King Olaf
learnt that King Canute was sailing north along the coast, King
Olaf steered with his fleet into Oslo fjord, and into a branch of
it called Drafn, where he lay quiet until King Canute's fleet had
sailed southwards again.  On this expedition which King Canute
made from the North along the coast, he held a Thing in each
district, and in every Thing the country was bound by oath in
fealty to him, and hostages were given him.  He went eastward
across the mouths of the fjords to Sarpsborg, and held a Thing
there, and, as elsewhere, the country was surrendered to him
under oath of fidelity.  King Canute then returned south to
Denmark, after having conquered Norway without stroke of sword,
and he ruled now over three kingdoms.  So says Halvard
Hareksblese when he sang of King Canute: --

     "The warrior-king, whose blood-stain'd shield
     Has shone on many a hard-fought field,
     England and Denmark now has won,
     And o'er three kingdoms rules alone.
     Peace now he gives us fast and sure,
     Since Norway too is made secure
     By him who oft, in days of yore,
     Glutted the hawk and wolf with gore."



154. OF KING OLAF IN HIS PROCEEDINGS.

King Olaf sailed with his ships out to Tunsberg, as soon as he
heard that King Canute had turned back, and was gone south to
Denmark.  He then made himself ready with the men who liked to
follow him, and had then thirteen ships.  Afterwards he sailed
out along Viken; but got little money, and few men, as those only
followed him who dwelt in islands, or on outlying points of land.
The king landed in such places, but got only the money and men
that fell in his way; and he soon perceived that the country had
abandoned him.  He proceeded on according to the winds.  This was
in the beginning of winter (A.D. 1029).  The wind turned very
late in the season in their favour, so that they lay long in the
Seley islands, where they heard the news from the North, through
merchants, who told the king that Erling Skjalgson had collected
a great force in Jadar, and that his ship lay fully rigged
outside of the land, together with many other vessels belonging
to
the bondes; namely, skiffs, fisher-yachts, and great row-boats.
Then the king sailed with his fleet from the East, and lay a
while in Egersund.  Both parties heard of each other now, and
Erling assembled all the men he could.



155. OF KING OLAF'S VOYAGE.

On Thomasmas, before Yule (Dec. 21), the king left the harbour as
soon as day appeared.  With a good but rather strong gale he
sailed northwards past Jadar.  The weather was rainy, with dark
flying clouds in the sky.  The spies went immediately in through
the Jadar country when the king sailed past it; and as soon as
Erling heard that the king was sailing past from the East, he let
the war-horn call all the people on board, and the whole force
hastened to the ships, and prepared for battle.  The king's ship
passed by Jadar at a great rate; but thereafter turned in towards
the land, intending to run up the fjords to gather men and money.
Erling Skjalgson perceived this, and sailed after him with a
great force and many ships.  Swiftly their vessels flew, for they
had nothing on board but men and arms: but Erling's ship went
much faster than the others; therefore he took in a reef in the
sails, and waited for the other vessels.  Then the king saw that
Erling with his fleet gained upon him fast; for the king's ships
were heavily laden, and were besides water-soaked, having been in
the sea the whole summer, autumn, and winter, up to this time. 
He saw also that there would be a great want of men, if he should
go against the whole of Erling's fleet when it was assembled.  He
hailed from ship to ship the orders to let the sails gently sink,
and to unship the booms and outriggers, which was done.  When
Erling saw this he calls out to his people, and orders them to
get on more sail.  "Ye see," says he, "that their sails are
diminishing, and they are getting fast away from our sight."  He
took the reef out of the sails of his ship, and outsailed all the
others immediately; for Erling was very eager in his pursuit of
King Olaf.



186. OF ERLING SKJALGSON'S FALL.

King Olaf then steered in towards the Bokn fjord, by which the
ships came out of sight of each other.  Thereafter the king
ordered his men to strike the sails, and row forwards through a
narrow sound that was there, and all the ships lay collected
within a rocky point.  Then all the king's men put on their
weapons.  Erling sailed in through the sound, and observed
nothing until the whole fleet was before him, and he saw the
king's men rowing towards him with all their ships at once.
Erling and his crew let fall the sails, and seized their weapons;
but the king's fleet surrounded his ship on all sides.  Then the
fight began, and it was of the sharpest; but soon the greatest
loss was among Erling's men.  Erling stood on the quarter-deck of
his ship.  He had a helmet on his head, a shield before him, and
a sword in his hand.  Sigvat the skald had remained behind in
Viken, and heard the tidings.  He was a great friend of Erling,
had received presents from him, and had been at his house. 
Sigvat composed a poem upon Erling's fall, in which there is the
following verse: --

     "Erling has set his ship on sea --
     Against the king away is he:
     He who oft lets the eagle stain
     Her yellow feet in blood of slain.
     His little war-ship side by side
     With the king's fleet, the fray will bide.
     Now sword to sword the fight is raging,

     Which Erling with the king is waging."

Then Erling's men began to fall, and at the same moment his ship
was carried by boarding, and every man of his died in his place.
The king himself was amongst the foremost in the fray.  So says
Sigvat: --

     "The king's men hewed with hasty sword, --
     The king urged on the ship to board, --
     All o'er the decks the wounded lay:
     Right fierce and bloody was that fray.
     In Tungur sound, on Jadar shore,
     The decks were slippery with red gore;
     Warm blood was dropping in the sound,
     Where the king's sword was gleaming round."

So entirely had Erling's men fallen, that not a man remained
standing in his ship but himself alone; for there was none who
asked for quarter, or none who got it if he did ask.  There was
no opening for flight, for there lay ships all around Erling's
ship on every side, and it is told for certain that no man
attempted to fly; and Sigvat says: --

     "All Erling's men fell in the fray,
     Off Bokn fjord, this hard-fought day.
     The brave king boarded, onward cheered,
     And north of Tungur the deck was cleared.
     Erling alone, the brave, the stout,
     Cut off from all, yet still held out;
     High on the stern -- a sight to see --
     In his lone ship alone stood he."

Then Erling was attacked both from the forecastle and from the
other ships.  There was a large space upon the poop which stood
high above the other ships, and which nobody could reach but by
arrow-shot, or partly with the thrust of spear, but which he
always struck from him by parrying.  Erling defended himself so
manfully, that no example is known of one man having sustained
the attack of so many men so long.  Yet he never tried to get
away, nor asked for quarter.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Skjalg's brave son no mercy craves, --
     The battle's fury still he braves;
     The spear-storm, through the air sharp singing,
     Against his shield was ever ringing.
     So Erling stood; but fate had willed
     His life off Bokn should be spilled.
     No braver man has, since his day,
     Past Bokn fjord ta'en his way."

When Olaf went back a little upon the fore-deck he saw Erling's
behaviour; and the king accosted him thus: -- "Thou hast turned
against me to-day, Erling." 

He replies, "The eagle turns his claws in defence when torn
asunder."  Sigvat the skald tells thus of these words of Erling:
--

     "Erling. our best defence of old, --
     Erling the brave, the brisk, the bold, --
     Stood to his arms, gaily crying,
     `Eagles should show their claws, though dying:'
     The very words which once before
     To Olaf he had said on shore,
     At Utstein when they both prepared
     To meet the foe, and danger shared."

Then said the king, "Wilt thou enter into my service, Erling?"

"That I will," said he; took the helmet off his head, laid down
his sword and shield, and went forward to the forecastle deck.

The king struck him in the chin with the sharp point of his
battle-axe, and said, "I shall mark thee as a traitor to thy
sovereign."

Then Aslak Fitiaskalle rose up, and struck Erling in the head
with an axe, so that it stood fast in his brain, and was
instantly his death-wound.  Thus Erling lost his life.

The king said to Aslak, "May all ill luck attend thee for that
stroke; for thou hast struck Norway out of my hands."

Aslak replied, "It is bad enough if that stroke displease thee,
for I thought it was striking Norway into thy hands; and if I
have given thee offence, sire, by this stroke, and have thy ill-
will for it, it will go badly with me, for I will get so many
men's ill-will and enmity for this deed that I would need all
your protection and favour."

The king replied that he should have it.

Thereafter the king ordered every man to return to his ship, and
to get ready to depart as fast as he could.  "We will not plunder
the slain," says he, "and each man may keep what he has taken."
The men returned to the ships and prepared themselves for the
departure as quickly as possible; and scarcely was this done
before the vessels of the bondes ran in from the south into the
sound.  It went with the bonde-army as is often seen, that the
men, although many in numbers, know not what to do when they have
experienced a check, have lost their chief, and are without
leaders.  None of Erling's sons were there, and the bondes
therefore made no attack, and the king sailed on his way
northwards.  But the bondes took Erling's corpse, adorned it, and
carried it with them home to Sole, and also the bodies of all who
had fallen.  There was great lamentation over Erling; and it has
been a common observation among people, that Erling Skjalgson was
the greatest and worthiest man in Norway of those who had no high
title.  Sigvat made these verses upon the occasion: --

     "Thus Erling fell -- and such a gain
     To buy with such a loss was vain;
     For better man than he ne'er died,
     And the king's gain was small beside.
     In truth no man I ever knew
     Was, in all ways, so firm and true;
     Free from servility and pride,
     Honoured by all, yet thus he died."

Sigvat also says that Aslak had very unthinkingly committed this
murder of his own kinsman: --

     "Norway's brave defender's dead!
     Aslak has heaped on his own head
     The guilt of murdering his own kin:
     May few be guilty of such sin!
     His kinsman's murder on him lies --
     Our forefathers, in sayings wise,
     Have said, what is unknown to few,
     `Kinsmen to kinsmen should be true.'"



187. OF THE INSURRECTION OF AGDER DISTRICT.

Of Erling's sons some at that time were north in Throndhjem, some
in Hordaland, and some in the Fjord district, for the purpose of
collecting men.  When Erling's death was reported, the news came
also that there was a levy raising in Agder, Hordaland, and
Rogaland.  Forces were raised and a great army assembled, under
Erling's sons, to pursue King Olaf.

When King Olaf retired from the battle with Erling he went
northward through the sounds, and it was late in the day.  It is
related that the king then made the following verses: --

     "This night, with battle sounds wild ringing,
     Small joy to the fair youth is bringing
     Who sits in Jadar, little dreaming
     O'er what this night the raven's screaming.
     The far-descended Erling's life
     Too soon has fallen; but, in the strife
     He met the luck they well deserve
     Who from their faith and fealty swerve."

Afterwards the king sailed with his fleet along the land
northwards, and got certain tidings of the bondes assembling an
army.  There were many chiefs and lendermen at this time with
King Olaf, and all the sons of Arne.  Of this Bjarne
Gullbrarskald speaks in the poem he composed about Kalf Arnason:
--

     "Kalf!  thou hast fought at Bokn well;
     Of thy brave doings all men tell:
     When Harald's son his men urged on
     To the hard strife, thy courage shone.
     Thou soon hadst made a good Yule feast
     For greedy wolf there in the East:
     Where stone and spear were flying round,
     There thou wast still the foremost found.
     The people suffered in the strife
     When noble Erling lost his life,
     And north of Utstein many a speck
     Of blood lay black upon the deck.
     The king, 'tis clear, has been deceived,
     By treason of his land bereaved;
     And Agder now, whose force is great.
     Will rule o'er all parts of the state."


King O1af continued his voyage until he came north of Stad, and
brought up at the Herey Isles.  Here he heard the news that Earl
Hakon had a great war-force in Throndhjem, and thereupon the king
held a council with his people.  Kalf Arnason urged much to
advance to Throndhjem, and fight Earl Hakon, notwithstanding the
difference of numbers.  Many others supported this advice, but
others dissuaded from it, and the matter was left to the king's
judgment.



188. DEATH OF ASLAK FITIASKALLE.

Afterwards the king went into Steinavag, and remained there all
night; but Aslak Fitiaskalle ran into Borgund, where he remained
the night, and where Vigleik Arnason was before him.  In the
morning, when Aslak was about returning on board, Vigleik
assaulted him, and sought to avenge Erling's murder.  Aslak fell
there.  Some of the king's court-men, who had been home all
summer, joined the king here.  They came from Frekeysund, and
brought the king tidings that Earl Hakon, and many lendermen with
him, had come in the morning to Frekeysund with a large force;
"and they will end thy days, sire, if they have strength enough."
Now the king sent his men up to a hill that was near; and when
they came to the top, and looked northwards to Bjarney Island,
they perceived that a great armament of many ships was coming
from the north, and they hastened back to the king with this
intelligence.  The king, who was lying there with only twelve
ships, ordered the war-horn to sound, the tents to be taken down
on his ships, and they took to their oars.  When they were quite
ready, and were leaving the harbour, the bonde army sailed north
around Thiotande with twenty-five ships.  The king then steered
inside of Nyrfe Island, and inside of Hundsver.  Now when King
Olaf came right abreast of Borgund, the ship which Aslak had
steered came out to meet him, and when they found the king they
told him the tidings, -- that Vigleik Arnason had killed Aslak
Fitiaskalle, because he had killed Erling Skjalgson.  The king
took this news very angrily, but could not delay his voyage on
account of the enemy and he sailed in by Vegsund and Skor.  There
some of his people left him; among others, Kalf Arnason, with
many other lendermen and ship commanders, who all went to meet
Earl Hakon.  King Olaf, however, proceeded on his way without
stopping until he came to Todar fjord, where he brought up at
Valdal, and landed from his ship.  He had then five ships with
him, which he drew up upon the shore, and took care of their
sails and materials.  Then he set up his land-tent upon a point
of land called Sult, where there are pretty flat fields, and set
up a cross near to the point of land.  A bonde, by name Bruse,
who dwelt there in More, and was chief over the valley, came down
to King Olaf, together with many other bondes, and received him
well, and according to his dignity; and he was friendly, and
pleased with their reception of him.  Then the king asked if
there was a passable road up in the country from the valley to
Lesjar; and Bruse replied, that there was an urd in the valley
called Skerfsurd not passable for man or beast.  King Olaf
answers, "That we must try, bonde, and it will go as God pleases.
Come here in the morning with your yoke, and come yourself with
it, and let us then see.  When we come to the sloping precipice,
what chance there may be, and if we cannot devise some means of
coming over it with horses and people."



189. CLEARING OF THE URD.

Now when day broke the bondes drove down with their yokes, as the
king had told them.  The clothes and weapons were packed upon
horses, but the king and all the people went on foot.  He went
thus until he came to a place called Krosbrekka, and when he came
up upon the hill he rested himself, sat down there a while,
looked down over the fjord, and said, "A difficult expedition ye
have thrown upon my hands, ye lendermen, who have now changed
your fealty, although but a little while ago ye were my friends
and faithful to me."  There are now two crosses erected upon the
bank on which the king sat.  Then the king mounted a horse, and
rode without stopping up the valley, until he came to the
precipice.  Then the king asked Bruse if there was no summer hut
of cattle-herds in the neighbourhood, where they could remain. 
He said there was.  The king ordered his land-tent to be set up,
and remained there all night.  In the morning the king ordered
them to drive to the urd, and try if they could get across it
with the waggons.  They drove there, and the king remained in the
meantime in his tent.  Towards evening the king's court-men and
the bondes came back, and told how they had had a very fatiguing
labour, without making any progress, and that there never could
be a road made that they could get across: so they continued
there the second night, during which, for the whole night, the
king was occupied in prayer.  As soon as he observed day dawning
he ordered his men to drive again to the urd, and try once more
if they could get across it with the waggons; but they went very
unwillingly, saying nothing could be gained by it.  When they
were gone the man who had charge of the king's kitchen came, and
said there were only two carcasses of young cattle remaining of
provision: "Although you, sire, have 400 men, and there are 100
bondes besides."  Then the king ordered that he should set all
the kettles on the fire, and put a little bit of meat in each
kettle, which was done.  Then the king went there, and made the
sign of the cross over each kettle, and told them to make ready
the meat.  The king then went to the urd called Skerfsurd, where
a road should be cleared.  When the king came all his people were
sitting down, quite worn out with the hard labour.  Bruse said,
"I told you, sire, but you would not believe me, that we could
make nothing of this urd."  The king laid aside his cloak, and
told them to go to work once more at the urd.  They did so, and
now twenty men could handle stones which before 100 men could not
move from the place; and thus before midday the road was cleared
so well that it was as passable for men, and for horses with
packs, as a road in the plain fields.  The king, after this, went
down again to where the meat was, which place is called Olaf's
Rock.  Near the rock is a spring, at which Olaf washed himself;
and therefore at the present day, when the cattle in the valley
are sick, their illness is made better by their drinking at this
well.  Thereafter the king sat down to table with all the others;
and when he was satisfied he asked if there was any other
sheeling on the other side of the urd, and near the mountains,
where they could pass the night.  Bruse said there was such a
sheeling, called Groningar; but that nobody could pass the night
there on account of witchcraft, and evil beings who were in the
sheeling.  Then the king said they must get ready for their
journey, as he wanted to be at the sheeling for the night.  Then
came the kitchen-master to the king, and tells that there was
come an extraordinary supply of provisions, and he did not know
where it had come from, or how.  The king thanked God for this
blessing, and gave the bondes who drove down again to their
valley some rations of food, but remained himself all night in
the sheeling.  In the middle of the night, while the people were
asleep, there was heard in the cattle-fold a dreadful cry, and
these words: "Now Olaf's prayers are burning me," says the
spirit, "so that I can no longer be in my habitation; now must I
fly, and never more come to this fold."  When the king's people
awoke in the morning the king proceeded to the mountains, and
said to Bruse, "Here shall now a farm be settled, and the bonde
who dwells here shall never want what is needful for the support
of life; and never shall his crop be destroyed by frost, although
the crops be frozen on the farms both above it and below it."
Then the king proceeded over the mountains, and came to a farm
called Einby, where he remained for the night.  King Olaf had
then been fifteen years king of Norway (A.D. 1015-1029),
including the year both he and Svein were in the country, and
this year we have now been telling about.  It was, namely, a
little past Yule when the king left his ships and took to the
land, as before related.  Of this portion of his reign the priest
Are Thorgilson the Wise was the first who wrote; and he was both
faithful in his story, of a good memory, and so old a man that he
could remember the men, and had heard their accounts, who were so
old that through their age they could remember these
circumstances as he himself wrote them in his books, and he named
the men from whom he received his information.  Otherwise it is
generally said that King Olaf had been fifteen years king of
Norway when he fell; but they who say so reckon to Earl Svein's
government, the last year he was in the country, for King Olaf
lived fifteen years afterwards as king.



190. OLAF'S PROPHECIES.

When the king had been one night at Lesjar he proceeded on his
journey with his men, day by day; first into Gudbrandsdal, and
from thence out to Redemark.  Now it was seen who had been his
friends, for they followed him; but those who had served him with
less fidelity separated from him, and some showed him even
indifference, or even full hostility, which afterwards was
apparent; and also it could be seen clearly in many Upland people
that they took very ill his putting Thorer to death, as before
related.  King Olaf gave leave to return home to many of his men
who had farms and children to take care of; for it seemed to them
uncertain what safety there might be for the families and
property of those who left the country with him.  Then the king
explained to his friends his intention of leaving the country,
and going first east into Svithjod, and there taking his
determination as to where he should go; but he let his friends
know his intention to return to the country, and regain his
kingdoms, if God should grant him longer life; and he did not
conceal his expectation that the people of Norway would again
return to their fealty to him.  "I think," says he, "that Earl
Hakon will have Norway but a short time under his power, which
many will not think an extraordinary expectation, as Earl Hakon
has had but little luck against me; but probably few people will
trust to my prophecy, that Canute the Great will in the course of
a few years die, and his kingdoms vanish; and there will he no
risings in favour of his race."  When the king had ended his
speech, his men prepared themselves for their departure.  The
king, with the troop that followed him, turned east to Eid
forest.  And there were along with him the Queen Astrid; their
daughter Ulfhild; Magnus, King Olaf's son; Ragnvald Brusason; the
three sons of Arne, Thorberg, Fin, and Arne, with many lendermen;
and the king's attendants consisted of many chosen men.  Bjorn
the marshal got leave to go home, and he went to his farm, and
many others of the king's friends returned home with his
permission to their farms.  The king begged them to let him know
the events which might happen in the country, and which it might
be important for him to know; and now the king proceeded on his
way.



191. KING OLAF PROCEEDS TO RUSSIA.

It is to be related of King Olaf's journey, that he went first
from Norway eastward through Eid forest to Vermaland, then to
Vatnsby, and through the forests in which there are roads, until
he came out in Nerike district.  There dwelt a rich and powerful
man in that part called Sigtryg, who had a son, Ivar, who
afterwards became a distinguished person.  Olaf stayed with
Sigtryg all spring (A.D. 1029); and when summer came he made
ready for a journey, procured a ship for himself, and without
stopping went on to Russia to King Jarisleif and his queen
Ingegerd; but his own queen Astrid, and their daughter Ulfhild,
remained behind in Svithjod, and the king took his son Magnus
eastward with him.  King Jarisleif received King Olaf in the
kindest manner, and made him the offer to remain with him, and to
have so much land as was necessary for defraying the expense of
the entertainment of his followers.  King Olaf accepted this
offer thankfully, and remained there.  It is related that King
Olaf was distinguished all his life for pious habits, and zeal in
his prayers to God.  But afterwards, when he saw his own power
diminished, and that of his adversaries augmented, he turned all
his mind to God's service; for he was not distracted by other
thoughts, or by the labour he formerly had upon his hands, for
during all the time he sat upon the throne he was endeavouring to
promote what was most useful: and first to free and protect the
country from foreign chiefs' oppressions, then to convert the
people to the right faith; and also to establish law and the
rights of the country, which he did by letting justice have its
way, and punishing evil-doers.



192. CAUSES OF THE REVOLT AGAINST KING OLAF.

It had been an old custom in Norway that the sons of lendermen,
or other great men, went out in war-ships to gather property, and
they marauded both in the country and out of the country.  But
after King Olaf came to the sovereignty he protected the country,
so that he abolished all plundering there; and even if they were
the sons of powerful men who committed any depredation, or did
what the king considered against law, he did not spare them at
all, but they must suffer in life or limbs; and no man's
entreaties, and no offer of money-penalties, could help them.  So
says Sigvat: --

     "They who on viking cruises drove
     With gifts of red gold often strove
     To buy their safety -- but our chief
     Had no compassion for the thief.
     He made the bravest lose his head
     Who robbed at sea, and pirates led;
     And his just sword gave peace to all,
     Sparing no robber, great or small."

And he also says: --

     "Great king!  whose sword on many a field
     Food to the wandering wolf did yield,
     And then the thief and pirate band
     Swept wholly off by sea and land --
     Good king!  who for the people's sake
     Set hands and feet upon a stake,
     When plunderers of great name and bold
     Harried the country as of old.
     The country's guardian showed his might
     When oft he made his just sword bite
     Through many a viking's neck and hair,
     And never would the guilty spare.
     King Magnus' father, I must say,
     Did many a good deed in his day.
     Olaf the Thick was stern and stout,
     Much good his victories brought out."

He punished great and small with equal severity, which appeared
to the chief people of the country too severe; and animosity rose
to the highest when they lost relatives by the king's just
sentence, although they were in reality guilty.  This was the
origin of the hostility of the great men of the country to King
Olaf, that they could not bear his just judgments.  He again
would rather renounce his dignity than omit righteous judgment.
The accusation against him, of being stingy with his money, was
not just, for he was a most generous man towards his friends; but
that alone was the cause of the discontent raised against him,
that he appeared hard and severe in his retributions.  Besides,
King Canute offered great sums of money, and the great chiefs
were corrupted by this, and by his offering them greater
dignities than they had possessed before.  The inclinations of
the people, also, were all in favour of Earl Hakon, who was much
beloved by the country folks when he ruled the country before.



193. OF JOKUL BARDSON.

Earl Hakon had sailed with his fleet from Throndhjem, and gone
south to More against King Olaf, as before related.  Now when the
king bore away, and ran into the fjord, the earl followed him
thither; and then Kalf Arnason came to meet him, with many of the
men who had deserted King Olaf.  Kalf was well received.  The
earl steered in through Todar fjord to Valdal, where the king had
laid up his ships on the strand.  He took the ships which
belonged to the king, had them put upon the water and rigged, and
cast lots, and put commanders in charge of them according to the
lots.  There was a man called Jokul, who was an Icelander, a son
of Bard Jokulson of Vatnsdal; the lot fell upon Jokul to command
the Bison, which King Olaf himself had commanded.  Jokul made
these verses upon it: --

     "Mine is the lot to take the helm
     Which Olaf owned, who owned the realm;
     From Sult King Olaf's ship to steer
     (Ill luck I dread on his reindeer).
     My girl will never hear the tidings,
     Till o'er the wild wave I come riding
     In Olaf's ship, who loved his gold,
     And lost his ships with wealth untold."

We may here shortly tell what happened a long time after. -- that
this Jokul fell in with King Olaf's men in the island of Gotland,
and the king ordered him to be taken out to be beheaded.  A
willow twig accordingly was plaited in with his hair, and a man
held him fast by it.  Jokul sat down upon a bank, and a man swung
the axe to execute him; but Jokul hearing the sound, raised his
head, and the blow struck him in the head, and made a dreadful
wound.  As the king saw it would be his death-wound, he ordered
them to let him lie with it.  Jokul raised himself up, and he
sang: --

     "My hard fate I mourn, --
     Alas! my wounds burn,
     My red wounds are gaping,
     My life-blood escaping.
     My wounds burn sore;
     But I suffer still more
     From the king's angry word,
     Than his sharp-biting sword."



194. OF KALF ARNASON.

Kalf Arnason went with Earl Hakon north to Throndhjem, and the
earl invited him to enter into his service.  Kalf said he would
first go home to his farm at Eggja, and afterwards make his
determination; and Kalf did so.  When he came home he found his
wife Sigrid much irritated; and she reckoned up all the sorrow
inflicted on her, as she insisted, by King Olaf.  First, he had
ordered her first husband Olver to be killed.  "And now since,"
says she, "my two sons; and thou thyself, Kalf, wert present when
they were cut off, and which I little expected from thee."  Kalf
says, it was much against his will that Thorer was killed.  "I
offered money-penalty for him," says he; "and when Grjotgard was
killed I lost my brother Arnbjorn at the same time."  She
replies, "It is well thou hast suffered this from the king; for
thou mayest perhaps avenge him, although thou wilt not avenge my
injuries.  Thou sawest how thy foster-son Thorer was killed, with
all the regard of the king for thee."  She frequently brought out
such vexatious speeches to Kalf, to which he often answered
angrily; but yet he allowed himself to be persuaded by her to
enter into the earl's service, on condition of renewing his fiefs
to him.  Sigrid sent word to the earl how far she had brought the
matter with Kalf.  As soon as the earl heard of it, he sent a
message to Kalf that he should come to the town to him.  Kalf did
not decline the invitation, but came directly to Nidaros, and
waited on the earl, who received him kindly.  In their
conversation it was fully agreed upon that Kalf should go into
the earl's service, and should receive great fiefs.  After this
Kalf returned home, and had the greater part of the interior of
the Throndhjem country under him.  As soon as it was spring Kalf
rigged out a ship that belonged to him, and when she was ready he
put to sea, and sailed west to England; for he had heard that in
spring King Canute was to sail from Denmark to England, and that
King Canute had given Harald, a son of Thorkel the High, an
earldom in Denmark.  Kalf Arnason went to King Canute as soon as
he arrived in England.  Bjarne Gullbrarskald tells of this: --

     "King Olaf eastward o'er the sea
     To Russia's monarch had to flee;
     Our Harald's brother ploughed the main,
     And furrowed white its dark-blue plain.
     Whilst thou -- the truth I still will say,
     Nor fear nor favour can me sway --
     Thou to King Canute hastened fast,
     As soon as Olaf's luck was past."

Now when Kalf came to King Canute the king received him
particularly well, and had many conversations with him.  Among
other things, King Canute, in a conference, asked Kalf to bind
himself to raise a warfare against King Olaf, if ever he should
return to the country.  "And for which," says the king, "I will
give thee the earldom, and place thee to rule over Norway; and my
relation Hakon shall come to me, which will suit him better, for
he is so honourable and trustworthy that I believe he would not
even throw a spear against the person of King Olaf if he came
back to the country."  Kalf lent his ear to what the king
proposed, for he had a great desire to attain this high dignity;
and this conclusion was settled upon between King Canute and
Kalf.  Kalf then prepared to return home, and on his departure he
received splendid presents from King Canute.  Bjarne the skald
tells of these circumstances: --

     "Sprung from old earls! -- to England's lord
     Thou owest many a thankful word
     For many a gift: if all be true,
     Thy interest has been kept in view;
     For when thy course was bent for home,
     (Although that luck is not yet come,)
     `That Norway should be thine,' 'tis said,
     The London king a promise made."

Kalf thereafter returned to Norway, and came to his farm.



195. OF THE DEATH OF EARL HAKON.

Earl Hakon left the country this summer (A.D. 1029), and went to
England, and when he came there was well received by the king. 
The earl had a bride in England, and he travelled to conclude
this marriage, and as he intended holding his wedding in Norway,
he came to procure those things for it in England which it was
difficult to get in Norway.  In autumn he made ready for his
return, but it was somewhat late before he was clear for sea; but
at last he set out.  Of his voyage all that can be told is, that
the vessel was lost, and not a man escaped.  Some relate that the
vessel was seen north of Caithness in the evening in a heavy
storm, and the wind blowing out of Pentland Firth.  They who
believe this report say the vessel drove out among the breakers
of the ocean; but with certainty people knew only that Earl Hakon
was missing in the ocean, and nothing belonging to the ship ever
came to land.  The same autumn some merchants came to Norway, who
told the tidings that were going through the country of Earl
Hakon being missing; and all men knew that he neither came to
Norway nor to England that autumn, so that Norway that winter was
without a head.



196. OF BJORN THE MARSHAL.

Bjorn the marshal sat at home on his farm after his parting from
King Olaf.  Bjorn was a celebrated man; therefore it was soon
reported far and wide that he had set himself down in quietness.
Earl Hakon and the other chiefs of the country heard this also,
and sent persons with a verbal message to Bjorn.  When the
messengers arrived Bjorn received them well; and afterwards Bjorn
called them to him to a conference, and asked their business.  He
who was their foreman presented to Bjorn the salutations of King
Canute, Earl Hakon, and of several chiefs.  "King Canute," says
he, "has heard much of thee, and that thou hast been long a
follower of King Olaf the Thick, and hast been a great enemy of
King Canute; and this he thinks not right, for he will be thy
friend, and the friend of all worthy men, if thou wilt turn from
thy friendship to King Olaf and become his enemy.  And the only
thing now thou canst do is to seek friendship and protection
there where it is most readily to be found, and which all men in
this northern world think it most honourable to be favoured with.
Ye who have followed Olaf the Thick should consider how he is now
separated from you; and that now ye have no aid against King
Canute and his men, whose lands ye plundered last summer, and
whose friends ye murdered.  Therefore ye ought to accept, with
thanks, the friendship which the king offers you; and it would
become you better if you offered money even in mulct to obtain
it."

When he had ended his speech Bjorn replies, "I wish now to sit
quietly at home, and not to enter into the service of any chief."

The messenger answers, "Such men as thou art are just the right
men to serve the king; and now I can tell thee there are just two
things for thee to choose, -- either to depart in peace from thy
property, and wander about as thy comrade Olaf is doing; or,
which is evidently better, to accept King Canute's and Earl
Hakon's friendship, become their man, and take the oaths of
fealty to them.  Receive now thy reward."  And he displayed to
him a large bag full of English money.

Bjorn was a man fond of money, and self-interested; and when he
saw the silver he was silent, and reflected with himself what
resolution he should take.  It seemed to him much to abandon his
property, as he did not think it probable that King Olaf would
ever have a rising in his favour in Norway.  Now when the
messenger saw that Bjorn's inclinations were turned towards the
money, he threw down two thick gold rings, and said, "Take the
money at once, Bjorn, and swear the oaths to King Canute; for I
can promise thee that this money is but a trifle, compared to
what thou wilt receive if thou followest King Canute."

By the heap of money, the fine promises, and the great presents,
he was led by covetousness, took the money, went into King
Canute's service, and gave the oaths of fealty to King Canute and
Earl Hakon, and then the messengers departed.



197. BJORN THE MARSHAL'S JOURNEY.

When Bjorn heard the tidings that Earl Hakon was missing he soon
altered his mind, and was much vexed with himself for having been
a traitor in his fidelity to King Olaf.  He thought, now, that
he was freed from the oath by which he had bound himself to Earl
Hakon.  It seemed to Bjorn that now there was some hope that King
Olaf might again come to the throne of Norway if he came back, as
the country was without a head.  Bjorn therefore immediately made
himself ready to travel, and took some men with him.  He then set
out on his journey, travelling night and day, on horseback when
he could, and by ship when he found occasion; and never halted
until he came, after Yule, east to Russia to King Olaf, who was
very glad to see Bjorn.  Then the king inquired much about the
news from Norway.  Bjorn tells him that Earl Hakon was missing,
and the kingdom left without a head.  At this news the men who
had followed King Olaf were very glad, -- all who had left
property, connections, and friends in Norway; and the longing for
home was awakened in them.  Bjorn told King Olaf much news from
Norway, and very anxious the king was to know, and asked much how
his friends had kept their fidelity towards him.  Bjorn answered,
it had gone differently with different people.

Then Bjorn stood up, fell at the king's feet, held his foot, and
said, "All is in your power, sire, and in God's!  I have taken
money from King Canute's men, and sworn them the oaths of fealty;
but now will I follow thee, and not part from thee so long as we
both live."

The king replies, "Stand up, Bjorn' thou shalt be reconciled with
me; but reconcile thy perjury with God.  I can see that but few
men in Norway have held fast by their fealty, when such men as
thou art could be false to me.  But true it is also that people
sit in great danger when I am distant, and they are exposed to
the wrath of my enemies."

Bjorn then reckoned up those who had principally bound themselves
to rise in hostility against the king and his men; and named,
among others, Erling's son in Jadar and their connections, Einar
Tambaskelfer, Kalf Arnason, Thorer Hund, and Harek of Thjotta.



105. OF KING OLAF.

After King Olaf came to Russia he was very thoughtful, and
weighed what counsel he now should follow.  King Jarisleif and
Queen Ingegerd offered him to remain with them, and receive a
kingdom called Vulgaria, which is a part of Russia, and in which
land the people were still heathen.  King Olaf thought over this
offer; but when he proposed it to his men they dissuaded him from
settling himself there, and urged the king to betake himself to
Norway to his own kingdom: but the king himself had resolved
almost in his own mind to lay down his royal dignity, to go out
into the world to Jerusalem, or other holy places, and to enter
into some order of monks.  But yet the thought lay deep in his
soul to recover again, if there should be any opportunity for
him, his kingdom in Norway.  When he thought over this, it
recurred to his mind how all things had gone prosperously with
him during the first ten years of his reign, and how afterwards
every thing he undertook became heavy, difficult, and hard; and
that he had been unlucky, on all occasions in which he had tried
his luck.  On this account he doubted if it would be prudent to
depend so much upon his luck, as to go with so little strength
into the hands of his enemies, seeing that all the people of the
country had taken part with them to oppose King Olaf.  Such cares
he had often on his mind, and he left his cause to God, praying
that He would do what to Him seemed best.  These thoughts he
turned over in his mind, and knew not what to resolve upon; for
he saw how evidently dangerous that was which his inclination was
most bent upon.



199. OF KING OLAF'S DREAM.

One night the king lay awake in his bed, thinking with great
anxiety about his determination, and at last, being tired of
thinking, sleep came over him towards morning; but his sleep was
so light that he thought he was awake, and could see all that was
doing in the house.  Then he saw a great and superb man, in
splendid clothes, standing by his bed; and it came into the
king's mind that this was King Olaf Trygvason who had come to
him.  This man said to him, "Thou are very sick of thinking about
thy future resolutions; and it appears to me wonderful that these
thoughts should be so tumultuous in thy soul that thou shouldst
even think of laying down the kingly dignity which God hath given
thee, and of remaining here and accepting of a kingdom from
foreign and unknown kings.  Go back rather to that kingdom which
thou hast received in heritage, and rule over it with the
strength which God hath given thee, and let not thy inferiors
take it from thee.  It is the glory of a king to be victorious
over his enemies, and it is a glorious death to die in battle. 
Or art thou doubtful if thou hast right on thy side in the strife
with thine enemies?  Thou must have no doubts, and must not
conceal the truth from thyself.  Thou must go back to thy
country, and God will give open testimony that the kingdom is
thine by property."  When the king awoke he thought he saw the
man's shoulders going out.  From this time the king's courage
rose, and he fixed firmly his resolution to return to Norway; to
which his inclination also tended most, and which he also found
was the desire of all his men.  He bethought himself also that
the country being without a chief could be easily attacked, from
what he had heard, and that after he came himself many would turn
back towards him.  When the king told his determination to his
people they all gave it their approbation joyfully.



200. OF KING OLAF'S HEALING POWERS.

It is related that once upon a time, while King Olaf was in
Russia, it happened that the son of an honest widow had a sore
boil upon his neck, of which the lad lay very ill; and as he
could not swallow any food, there was little hope of his life.
The boy's mother went to Queen Ingegerd, with whom she was
acquainted, and showed her the lad.  The queen said she knew no
remedy for it.  "Go," said she, "to King Olaf, he is the best
physician here; and beg him to lay his hands on thy lad, and
bring him my words if he will not otherwise do it."  She did as
the queen told her; and when she found the king she says to him
that her son is dangerously ill of a boil in his neck, and begs
him to lay his hand on the boil.  The king tells her he is not a
physician, and bids her go to where there were physicians.  She
replies, that the queen had told her to come to him; "and told me
to add the request from her, that you would would use the remedy
you understood, and she said that thou art the best physician
here in the town."  Then the king took the lad, laid his hands
upon his neck, and felt the boil for a long time, until the boy
made a very wry face.  Then the king took a piece of bread, laid
it in the figure of the cross upon the palm of his hand, and put
it into the boy's mouth.  He swallowed it down, and from that
time all the soreness left his neck, and in a few days he was
quite well, to the great joy of his mother and all his relations.
Then first came Olaf into the repute of having as much healing
power in his hands as is ascribed to men who have been gifted by
nature with healing by the touch; and afterwards when his
miracles were universally acknowledged, this also was considered
one of his miracles.



201. KING OLAF BURNS THE WOOD SHAVINGS ON HIS HAND FOR HIS
     SABBATH BREACH.

It happened one Sunday that the king sat in his highseat at the
dinner table, and had fallen into such deep thought that he did
not observe how time went.  In one hand he had a knife, and in
the other a piece of fir-wood from which he cut splinters from
time to time.  The table-servant stood before him with a bowl in
his hands; and seeing what the king was about, and that he was
involved in thought, he said, "It is Monday, sire, to-morrow."
The king looked at him when he heard this, and then it came into
his mind what he was doing on the Sunday.  Then the king ordered
a lighted candle to be brought him, swept together all the
shavings he had made, set them on fire, and let them burn upon
his naked hand; showing thereby that he would hold fast by God's
law and commandment, and not trespass without punishment on what
he knew to be right.



202. OF KING OLAF.

When King Olaf had resolved on his return home, he made known his
intention to King Jarisleif and Queen Ingegerd.  They dissuaded
him from this expedition, and said he should receive as much
power in their dominions as he thought desirable; but begged him
not to put himself within the reach of his enemies with so few
men as he had.  Then King Olaf told them of his dream; adding,
that he believed it to be God's will and providence that it
should be so.  Now when they found he was determined on
travelling to Norway, they offered him all the assistance to his
journey that he would accept from them.  The king thanked them in
many fine words for their good will; and said that he accepted
from them, with no ordinary pleasure, what might be necessary for
his undertaking.



203. OF KING OLAF'S JOURNEY FROM RUSSIA.

Immediately after Yule (A.D. 1080), King Olaf made himself ready;
and had about 200 of his men with him.  King Jarisleif gave him
all the horses, and whatever else he required; and when he was
ready he set off.  King Jarisleif and Queen Ingegerd parted from
him with all honour; and he left his son Magnus behind with the
king.  The first part of his journey, down to the sea-coast, King
Olaf and his men made on the ice; but as spring approached, and
the ice broke up, they rigged their vessels, and when they were
ready and got a wind they set out to sea, and had a good voyage.
When Olaf came to the island of Gotland with his ships he heard
the news -- which was told as truth, both in Svithjod, Denmark,
and over all Norway -- that Earl Hakon was missing, and Norway
without a head.  This gave the king and his men good hope of the
issue of their journey.  From thence they sailed, when the wind
suited, to Svithjod, and went into the Maelar lake, to Aros, and
sent men to the Swedish King Onund appointing a meeting.  King
Onund received his brother-in-law's message in the kindest
manner, and went to him according to his invitation.  Astrid also
came to King Olaf, with the men who had attended her; and great
was the joy on all sides at this meeting.  The Swedish king also
received his brother-in-law King Olaf with great joy when they
met.



204. OF THE LENDERMEN IN NORWAY.

Now we must relate what, in the meantime, was going on in Norway.
Thorer Hund, in these two winters (A.D. 1029-1030), had made a
Lapland journey, and each winter had been a long time on the
mountains, and had gathered to himself great wealth by trading in
various wares with the Laplanders.  He had twelve large coats of
reindeer-skin made for him, with so much Lapland witchcraft that
no weapon could cut or pierce them any more than if they were
armour of ring-mail, nor so much.  The spring thereafter Thorer
rigged a long-ship which belonged to him, and manned it with his
house-servants.  He summoned the bondes, demanded a levy from the
most northern Thing district, collected in this way a great many
people, and proceeded with this force southwards.  Harek of
Thjotta had also collected a great number of people; and in this
expedition many people of consequence took a part, although these
two were the most distinguished.  They made it known publicly
that with this war-force they were going against King Olaf, to
defend the country against him, in case he should come from the
eastward.



205. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

Einar Tambaskelfer had most influence in the outer part of the
Throndhjem country after Earl Hakon's death was no longer
doubtful; for he and his son Eindride appeared to be the nearest
heirs to the movable property the earl had possessed.  Then Einar
remembered the promises and offers of friendship which King
Canute had made him at parting; and he ordered a good vessel
which belonged to him to be got ready, and embarked with a great
retinue, and when he was ready sailed southwards along the coast,
then set out to sea westwards, and sailed without stopping until
he came to England.  He immediately waited on King Canute, who
received him well and joyfully.  Then Einar opened his business
to the king, and said he was come there to see the fulfillment of
the promises the king had made him; namely, that he, Einar,
should have the highest title of honour in Norway if Earl Hakon
were no more.  King Canute replies, that now the circumstances
were altered.  "I have now," said he, "sent men and tokens to my
son Svein in Denmark, and promised him the kingdom of Norway; but
thou shalt retain my friendship, and get the dignity and title
which thou art entitled by birth to hold.  Thou shalt be
lenderman with great fiefs, and be so much more raised above
other lendermen as thou art more able than they."  Einar saw
sufficiently how matters stood with regard to his business, and
got ready to return home; but as he now knew the king's
intentions, and thought it probable if King Olaf came from the
East the country would not be very peaceable, it came into his
mind that it would be better to proceed slowly, and not to be
hastening his voyage, in order to fight against King Olaf,
without his being advanced by it to any higher dignity than he
had before.  Einar accordingly went to sea when he was ready; but
only came to Norway after the events were ended which took place
there during that summer.



206. OF THE CHIEF PEOPLE IN NORWAY.

The chiefs in Norway had their spies east in Svithjod, and south
in Denmark, to find out if King Olaf had come from Russia.  As
soon as these men could get across the country, they heard the
news that King Olaf was arrived in Svithjod; and as soon as full
certainty of this was obtained, the war message-token went round
the land.  The whole people were called out to a levy, and a
great army was collected.  The lendermen who were from Agder,
Rogaland, and Hordaland, divided themselves, so that some went
towards the north, and some towards the east; for they thought
they required people on both sides.  Erling's sons from Jadar
went eastward, with all the men who lived east of them, and over
whom they were chiefs; Aslak of Finey, and Erlend of Gerde, with
the lendermen north of them, went towards the north.  All those
now named had sworn an oath to King Canute to deprive Olaf of
life, if opportunity should offer.



207. OF HARALD SIGURDSON'S PROCEEDINGS.

Now when it was reported in Norway that King Olaf was come from
the East to Svithjod, his friends gathered together to give him
aid.  The most distinguished man in this flock was Harald
Sigurdson, a brother of King Olaf, who then was fifteen years of
age, very stout, and manly of growth as if he were full-grown.
Many other brave men were there also; and there were in all 600
men when they proceeded from the uplands, and went eastward with
their force through Eid forest to Vermaland.  From thence they
went eastward through the forests to Svithjod and made inquiry
about King Olaf's proceedings.



208. OF KING OLAF'S PROCEEDINGS IN SVITHJOD.

King Olaf was in Svithjod in spring (A.D. 1030), and had sent
spies from thence to Norway.  All accounts from that quarter
agreed that there was no safety for him if he went there, and the
people who came from the north dissuaded him much from
penetrating into the country.  But he had firmly resolved within
himself, as before stated, to go into Norway; and he asked King
Onund what strength King Onund would give him to conquer his
kingdom.  King Onund replied, that the Swedes were little
inclined to make an expedition against Norway.  "We know," says
he, "that the Northmen are rough and warlike, and it is dangerous
to carry hostility to their doors, but I will not be slow in
telling thee what aid I can give.  I will give thee 400 chosen
men from my court-men, active and warlike, and well equipt for
battle; and moreover will give thee leave to go through my
country, and gather to thyself as many men as thou canst get to
follow thee."  King Olaf accepted this offer, and got ready for
his march.  Queen Astrid, and Ulfhild the king's daughter,
remained behind in Svithjod.



209. KING OLAF ADVANCES TO JARNBERALAND.

Just as King Olaf began his journey the men came to him whom the
Swedish king had given, in all 400 men, and the king took the
road the Swedes showed him.  He advanced upwards in the country
to the forests, and came to a district called Jarnberaland.  Here
the people joined him who had come out of Norway to meet him, as
before related; and he met here his brother Harald, and many
other of his relations, and it was a joyful meeting.  They made
out together 1200 men.



210. OF DAG HRINGSON.

There was a man called Dag, who is said to have been a son of
King Hring, who fled the country from King Olaf.  This Hring, it
is said further, had been a son of Dag, and grandson of Hring,
Harald Harfager's son.  Thus was Dag King Olaf's relative.  Both
Hring the father, and Dag the son, had settled themselves in
Svithjod, and got land to rule over.  In spring, when Olaf came
from the East to Svithjod, he sent a message to his relation Dag,
that he should join him in this expedition with all the force he
could collect; and if they gained the country of Norway again,
Dag should have no smaller part of the kingdom under him than his
forefathers had enjoyed.  When this message came to Dag it suited
his inclination well, for he had a great desire to go to Norway
and get the dominion his family had ruled over.  He was not slow,
therefore, to reply, and promised to come.  Dag was a quick-
speaking, quick-resolving man, mixing himself up in everything;
eager, but of little understanding.  He collected a force of
almost 1200 men, with which he joined King Olaf.



211. OF KING OLAF'S JOURNEY.

King Olaf sent a message before him to all the inhabited places
he passed through, that the men who wished to get goods and
money, and share of booty, and the lands besides which now were
in the hands of his enemies, should come to him, and follow him.
Thereafter King Olaf led his army through forests, often over
desert moors, and often over large lakes; and they dragged, or
carried the boats, from lake to lake.  On the way a great many
followers joined the king, partly forest settlers, partly
vagabonds.  The places at which he halted for the night are since
called Olaf's Booths.  He proceeded without any break upon his
journey until he came to Jamtaland, from which he marched north
over the keel or ridge of the land.  The men spread themselves
over the hamlets, and proceeded, much scattered, so long as no
enemy was expected; but always, when so dispersed, the Northmen
accompanied the king.  Dag proceeded with his men on another line
of march, and the Swedes on a third with their troop.



212. OF VAGABOND-MEN.

There were two men, the one called Gauka-Thorer, the other
Afrafaste, who were vagabonds and great robbers, and had a
company of thirty men such as themselves.  These two men were
larger and stronger than other men, and they wanted neither
courage nor impudence.  These men heard speak of the army that
was crossing the country, and said among themselves it would be a
clever counsel to go to the king, follow him to his country, and
go with him into a regular battle, and try themselves in this
work; for they had never been in any battle in which people were
regularly drawn up in line, and they were curious to see the
king's order of battle.  This counsel was approved of by their
comrades, and accordingly they went to the road on which King
Olaf was to pass.  When they came there they presented themselves
to the king, with their followers, fully armed.  They saluted
him, and he asked what people they were.  They told their names,
and said they were natives of the place; and told their errand,
and that they wished to go with the king.  The king said, it
appeared to him there was good help in such folks.  "And I have a
great inclination," said he, "to take such; but are ye Christian
men?"

Gauka-Thorer replies, that he is neither Christian nor heathen.
"I and my comrades have no faith but on ourselves, our strength,
and the luck of victory; and with this faith we slip through
sufficiently well."

The king replies, "A great pity it is that such brave
slaughtering fellows did not believe in Christ their Creator."

Thorer replies, "Is there any Christian man, king, in thy
following, who stands so high in the air as we two brothers?"

The king told them to let themselves be baptized, and to accept
the true faith.  "Follow me then, and I will advance you to great
dignities; but if ye will not do so, return to your former
vocation."

Afrafaste said he would not take on Christianity, and he turned
away.

Then said Gauka-Thorer, "It is a great shame that the king drives
us thus away from his army, and I never before came where I was
not received into the company of other people, and I shall never
return back on this account."  They joined accordingly the rear
with other forest-men, and followed the troops.  Thereafter the
king proceeded west up to the keel-ridge of the country.



213. OF KING OLAF'S VISION.

Now when King Olaf, coming from the east, went over the keel-
ridge and descended on the west side of the mountain, where it
declines towards the sea, he could see from thence far over the
country.  Many people rode before the king and many after, and he
himself rode so that there was a free space around him.  He was
silent, and nobody spoke to him, and thus he rode a great part of
the day without looking much about him.  Then the bishop rode up
to him, asked him why he was so silent, and what he was thinking
of; for, in general, he was very cheerful, and very talkative on
a journey to his men, so that all who were near him were merry.
The king replied, full of thought, "Wonderful things have come
into my mind a while ago.  As I just now looked over Norway, out
to the west from the mountains, it came into my mind how many
happy days I have had in that land.  It appeared to me at first
as if I saw over all the Throndhjem country, and then over all
Norway; and the longer this vision was before my eyes the
farther, methought, I saw, until I looked over the whole wide
world, both land and sea.  Well I know the places at which I have
been in former days; some even which I have only heard speak of,
and some I saw of which I had never heard, both inhabited and
uninhabited, in this wide world."  The bishop replied that this
was a holy vision, and very remarkable.



214. OF THE MIRACLE ON THE CORN LAND.

When the king had come lower down on the mountain, there lay a
farm before him called Sula, on the highest part of Veradal
district; and as they came nearer to the house the corn-land
appeared on both sides of the path.  The king told his people to
proceed carefully, and not destroy the corn to the bondes.  The
people observed this when the king was near; but the crowd behind
paid no attention to it, and the people ran over the corn, so
that it was trodden flat to the earth.  There dwelt a bonde there
called Thorgeir Flek, who had two sons nearly grown up.  Thorgeir
received the king and his people well, and offered all the
assistance in his power.  The king was pleased with his offer,
and asked Thorgeir what was the news of the country, and if any
forces were assembled against him.  Thorgeir says that a great
army was drawn together in the Throndhjem country, and that there
were some lendermen both from the south of the country, and from
Halogaland in the north; "but I do not know," says he. "if they
are intended against you, or going elsewhere."  Then he
complained to the king of the damage and waste done him by the
people breaking and treading down all his corn fields.  The king
said it was ill done to bring upon him any loss.  Then the king
rode to where the corn had stood, and saw it was laid flat on the
earth; and he rode round the field, and said, "I expect, bonde,
that God will repair thy loss, so that the field, within a week,
will be better;" and it proved the best of the corn, as the king
had said.  The king remained all night there, and in the morning
he made himself ready, and told Thorgeir the bonde to accompany
him and Thorgear offered his two sons also for the journey; and
although the king said that he did not want them with him, the
lads would go.  As they would not stay behind, the king's court-
men were about binding them; but the king seeing it said, "Let
them come with us; the lads will come safe back again."  And it
was with the lads as the king foretold.



215. OF THE BAPTISM OF THE VAGABOND FOREST-MEN.

Thereafter the army advanced to Staf, and when the king reached
Staf's moor he halted.  There he got the certain information that
the bondes were advancing with an army against him, and that he
might soon expect to have a battle with them.  He mustered his
force here, and, after reckoning them up, found there were in
the army 900 heathen men, and when he came to know it he ordered
them to allow themselves to be baptized, saying that he would
have no heathens with him in battle.  "We must not," says he,
"put our confidence in numbers, but in God alone must we trust;
for through his power and favour we must be victorious, and I
will not mix heathen people with my own."  When the heathens
heard this, they held a council among themselves, and at last 400
men agreed to be baptized; but 500 men refused to adopt
Christianity, and that body returned home to their land.  Then
the brothers Gauka-Thorer and Afrafaste presented themselves to
the king, and offered again to follow him.  The king asked if
they had now taken baptism.  Gauka-Thorer replied that they had
not.  Then the king ordered them to accept baptism and the true
faith, or otherwise to go away.  They stepped aside to talk with
each other on what resolution they should take.  Afrafaste said,
"To give my opinion, I will not turn back, but go into the
battle, and take a part on the one side or the other; and I don't
care much in which army I am."  Gauka-Thorer replies, "If I go
into battle I will give my help to the king, for he has most need
of help.  And if I must believe in a God, why not in the white
Christ as well as in any other?  Now it is my advice, therefore,
that we let ourselves be baptized, since the king insists so much
upon it, and then go into the battle with him."  They all agreed
to this, and went to the king, and said they would receive
baptism.  Then they were baptized by a priest, and the baptism
was confirmed by the bishop.  The king then took them into the
troop of his court-men, and said they should fight under his
banner in the battle.



216. KING OLAF'S SPEECH.

King Olaf got certain intelligence now that it would be but a
short time until he had a battle with the bondes; and after he
had mustered his men, and reckoned up the force, he had more than
3000 men, which appears to be a great army in one field.  Then
the king made the following speech to the people: "We have a
great army, and excellent troops; and now I will tell you, my
men, how I will have our force drawn up.  I will let my banner go
forward in the middle of the army, and my-court-men, and
pursuivants shall follow it, together with the war forces that
joined us from the Uplands, and also those who may come to us
here in the Throndhjem land.  On the right hand of my banner
shall be Dag Hringson, with all the men he brought to our aid;
and he shall have the second banner.  And on the left hand of our
line shall the men be whom the Swedish king gave us, together
with all the people who came to us in Sweden; and they shall have
the third banner.  I will also have the people divide themselves
into distinct flocks or parcels, so that relations and
acquaintances should be together; for thus they defend each other
best, and know each other.  We will have all our men
distinguished by a mark, so as to be a field-token upon their
helmets and shields, by painting the holy cross thereupon with
white colour.  When we come into battle we shall all have one
countersign and field-cry, -- `Forward, forward, Christian men!
cross men!  king's men!'  We must draw up our meal in thinner
ranks, because we have fewer people, and I do not wish to let
them surround us with their men.  Now let the men divide
themselves into separate flocks, and then each flock into ranks;
then let each man observe well his proper place, and take notice
what banner he is drawn up under.  And now we shall remain drawn
up in array; and our men shall be fully armed, night and day,
until we know where the meeting shall be between us and the
bondes."  When the king had finished speaking, the army arrayed,
and arranged itself according to the king's orders.



217. KING OLAF'S COUNSEL.

Thereafter the king had a meeting with the chiefs of the
different divisions, and then the men had returned whom the king
had sent out into the neighbouring districts to demand men from
the bondes.  They brought the tidings from the inhabited places
they had gone through, that all around the country was stripped
of all men able to carry arms, as all the people had joined the
bondes' army; and where they did find any they got but few to
follow them, for the most of them answered that they stayed at
home because they would not follow either party: they would not
go out against the king, nor yet against their own relations.
Thus they had got but few people.  Now the king asked his men
their counsel, and what they now should do.  Fin Arnason answered
thus to the king's question: "I will say what should be done, if
I may advise.  We should go with armed hand over all the
inhabited places, plunder all the goods, and burn all the
habitations, and leave not a hut standing, and thus punish the
bondes for their treason against their sovereign.  I think many a
man will then cast himself loose from the bondes' army, when he
sees smoke and flame at home on his farm, and does not know how
it is going with children, wives. or old men, fathers, mothers,
and other connections.  I expect also," he added, "that if we
succeed in breaking the assembled host, their ranks will soon be
thinned; for so it is with the bondes, that the counsel which is
the newest is always the dearest to them all, and most followed."
When Fin had ended his speech it met with general applause; for
many thought well of such a good occasion to make booty, and all
thought the bondes well deserved to suffer damage; and they also
thought it probable, what Fin said, that many would in this way
be brought to forsake the assembled army of the bondes.

Now when the king heard the warm expressions of his people he
told them to listen to him, and said, "The bondes have well
deserved that it should be done to them as ye desire.  They also
know that I have formerly done so, burning their habitations, and
punishing them severely in many ways; but then I proceeded
against them with fire and sword because they rejected the true
faith, betook themselves to sacrifices, and would not obey my
commands.  We had then God's honour to defend.  But this treason
against their sovereign is a much less grievous crime, although
it does not become men who have any manhood in them to break the
faith and vows they have sworn to me.  Now, however, it is more
in my power to spare those who have dealt ill with me, than those
whom God hated.  I will, therefore, that my people proceed
gently, and commit no ravage.  First, I will proceed to meet the
bondes; if we can then come to a reconciliation, it is well; but
if they will fight with us, then there are two things before us;
either we fail in the battle, and then it will be well advised
not to have to retire encumbered with spoil and cattle; or we
gain the victory, and then ye will be the heirs of all who fight
now against us; for some will fall, and others will fly, but both
will have forfeited their goods and properties, and then it will
be good to enter into full houses and well-stocked farms; but
what is burnt is of use to no man, and with pillage and force
more is wasted than what turns to use.  Now we will spread out
far through the inhabited places, and take with us all the men we
can find able to carry arms.  Then men will also capture cattle
for slaughter, or whatever else of provision that can serve for
food; but not do any other ravage.  But I will see willingly that
ye kill any spies of the bonde army ye may fall in with.  Dag and
his people shall go by the north side down along the valley, and
I will go on along the country road, and so we shall meet in the
evening, and all have one night quarter."



218. OF KING OLAF'S SKALDS.

It is related that when King Olaf drew up his men in battle
order, he made a shield rampart with his troop that should defend
him in battle, for which he selected the strongest and boldest.
Thereafter he called his skalds, and ordered them to go in within
the shield defence.  "Ye shall." says the king, "remain here, and
see the circumstances which may take place, and then ye will not
have to follow the reports of others in what ye afterwards tell
or sing concerning it."  There were Thormod Kolbrunarskald,
Gissur Gulbraskald, a foster-son of Hofgardaref, and Thorfin Mun.
Then said Thormod to Gissur, "Let us not stand so close together,
brother, that Sigvat the skald should not find room when he
comes.  He must stand before the king, and the king will not have
it otherwise."  The king heard this, and said, "Ye need not sneer
at Sigvat, because he is not here.  Often has he followed me
well, and now he is praying for us, and that we greatly need."
Thormod replies, "It may be, sire, that ye now require prayers
most; but it would be thin around the banner-staff if all thy
court-men were now on the way to Rome.  True it was what we spoke
about, that no man who would speak with you could find room for
Sigvat."

Thereafter the skalds talked among themselves that it would be
well to compose a few songs of remembrance about the events which
would soon be taking place.

Then Gissur sang: --

     "From me shall bende girl never hear
     A thought of sorrow, care, or fear:
     I wish my girl knew how gay
     We arm us for our viking fray.
     Many and brave they are, we know,
     Who come against us there below;
     But, life or death, we, one and all,
     By Norway's king will stand or fall."

And Thorfin Mun made another song, viz.: --

     "Dark is the cloud of men and shields,
     Slow moving up through Verdal's fields:
     These Verdal folks presume to bring
     Their armed force against their king.
     On!  let us feed the carrion crow, --
     Give her a feast in every blow;
     And, above all, let Throndhjem's hordes
     Feel the sharp edge of true men's swords."

And Thorrood sang: --

     "The whistling arrows pipe to battle,
     Sword and shield their war-call rattle.
     Up!  brave men, up!  the faint heart here
     Finds courage when the danger's near.
     Up!  brave men, up!  with Olaf on!
     With heart and hand a field is won.
     One viking cheer! -- then, stead of words,
     We'll speak with our death-dealing swords."

These songs were immediately got by heart by the army.



219. OF KING OLAF'S GIFTS FOR THE SOULS OF THOSE WHO SHOULD BE
     SLAIN.

Thereafter the king made himself ready, and marched down through
the valley.  His whole forces took up their night-quarter in one
place, and lay down all night under their shields; but as soon as
day broke the king again put his army in order, and that being
done they proceeded down through the valley.  Many bondes then
came to the king, of whom the most joined his army; and all, as
one man, told the same tale, -- that the lendermen had collected
an enormous army, with which they intended to give battle to the
king.

The king took many marks of silver, and delivered them into the
hands of a bonde, and said, "This money thou shalt conceal, and
afterwards lay out, some to churches, some to priests, some to
alms-men, -- as gifts for the life and souls of those who fight
against us, and may fall in battle."

The bonde replies, "Should you not rather give this money for the
soul-mulct of your own men?"

The king says, "This money shall be given for the souls of those
who stand against us in the ranks of the bondes' army, and fall
by the weapons of our own men.  The men who follow us to battle,
and fall therein, will all be saved together with ourself."



220. OF THORMOD KOLBRUNARSKALD.

This night the king lay with his army around him on the field, as
before related, and lay long awake in prayer to God, and slept
but little.  Towards morning a slumber fell on him, and when he
awoke daylight was shooting up.  The king thought it too early to
awaken the army, and asked where Thormod the skald was.  Thormod
was at hand, and asked what was the king's pleasure. "Sing us a
song," said the king.  Thormod raised himself up, and sang so
loud that the whole army could hear him.  He began to sing the
old "Bjarkamal", of which these are the first verses: --

     "The day is breaking, --
     The house cock, shaking
     His rustling wings,
     While priest-bell rings,
     Crows up the morn,
     And touting horn
     Wakes thralls to work and weep;
     Ye sons of Adil, cast off sleep,
     Wake up!  wake up!
     Nor wassail cup,
     Nor maiden's jeer,
     Awaits you here.
     Hrolf of the bow!
     Har of the blow!
     Up in your might!  the day is breaking;
     'Tis Hild's game (1) that bides your waking."

Then the troops awoke, and when the song was ended the people
thanked him for it; and it pleased many, as it was suitable to
the time and occasion, and they called it the house-carle's whet.
The king thanked him for the pleasure, and took a gold ring that
weighed half a mark and gave it him.  Thormod thanked the king
for the gift, and said, "We have a good king; but it is not easy
to say how long the king's life may be.  It is my prayer, sire,
that thou shouldst never part from me either in life or death."
The king replies, "We shall all go together so long as I rule,
and as ye will follow me."

Thormod says, "I hope, sire, that whether in safety or danger I
may stand near you as long as I can stand, whatever we may hear
of Sigvat travelling with his gold-hilted sword."  Then Thormod
made these lines: --

     "To thee, my king, I'll still be true,
     Until another skald I view,
     Here in the field with golden sword,
     As in thy hall, with flattering word.
     Thy skald shall never be a craven,
     Though he may feast the croaking raven,
     The warrior's fate unmoved I view, --
     To thee, my king, I'll still be true."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hild's game is the battle, from the name of the war-goddess
     Hild. -- L.



221. KING OLAF COMES TO STIKLESTAD.

King O1af led his army farther down through the valley, and Dag
and his men went another way, and the king did not halt until he
came to Stiklestad.  There he saw the bonde army spread out all
around; and there were so great numbers that people were going on
every footpath, and great crowds were collected far and near. 
They also saw there a troop which came down from Veradal, and had
been out to spy.  They came so close to the king's people that
they knew each other.  It was Hrut of Viggia, with thirty men.
The king ordered his pursuivants to go out against Hrut, and make
an end of him, to which his men were instantly ready.  The king
said to the Icelanders, "It is told me that in Iceland it is the
custom that the bondes give their house-servants a sheep to
slaughter; now I give you a ram to slaughter (1).  The Icelanders
were easily invited to this, and went out immediately with a few
men against Hrut, and killed him and the troop that followed him.
When the king came to Stiklestad he made a halt, and made the
army stop, and told his people to alight from their horses and
get ready for battle; and the people did as the king ordered. 
Then he placed his army in battle array, and raised his banner.
Dag was not yet arrived with his men, so that his wing of the
battle array was wanting.  Then the king said the Upland men
should go forward in their place, and raise their banner there.
"It appears to me advisable," says the king, "that Harald my
brother should not be in the battle, for he is still in the years
of childhood only."  Harald replies, "Certainly I shall be in the
battle, for I am not so weak that I cannot handle the sword; and
as to that, I have a notion of tying the sword-handle to my hand.
None is more willing than I am to give the bondes a blow; so I
shall go with my comrades."  It is said that Harald made these
lines: --

     "Our army's wing, where I shall stand,
     I will hold good with heart and hand;
     My mother's eye shall joy to see
     A battered, blood-stained shield from me.
     The brisk young skald should gaily go
     Into the fray, give blow for blow,
     Cheer on his men, gain inch by inch,
     And from the spear-point never flinch."

Harald got his will, and was allowed to be in the battle.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hrut means a young ram. -- L.



222. OF THORGILS HALMASON.

A bonde, by name Thorgils Halmason, father to Grim the Good,
dwelt in Stiklestad farm.  Thorgils offered the king his
assistance, and was ready to go into battle with him.  The king
thanked him for the offer.  "I would rather," says the king,
"thou shouldst not be in the fight.  Do us rather the service to
take care of the people who are wounded, and to bury those who
may fall, when the battle is over.  Should it happen, bonde, that
I fall in this battle, bestow the care on my body that may be
necessary, if that be not forbidden thee."  Thorgils promised the
king what he desired.



223. OLAF'S SPEECH.

Now when King Olaf had drawn up his army in battle array he made
a speech, in which he told the people to raise their spirit, and
go boldly forward, if it came to a battle.  "We have," says he,
"many men, and good; and although the bondes may have a somewhat
larger force than we, it is fate that rules over victory.  This I
will make known to you solemnly, that I shall not fly from this
battle, but shall either be victorious over the bondes, or fall
in the fight.  I will pray to God that the lot of the two may
befall me which will be most to my advantage.  With this we may
encourage ourselves, that we have a more just cause than the
bondes; and likewise that God must either protect us and our
cause in this battle, or give us a far higher recompense for what
we may lose here in the world than what we ourselves could ask.
Should it be my lot to have anything to say after the battle,
then shall I reward each of you according to his service, and to
the bravery he displays in the battle; and if we gain the
victory, there must be land and movables enough to divide among
you, and which are now in the hands of your enemies.  Let us at
the first make the hardest onset, for then the consequences are
soon seen.  There being a great difference in the numbers, we
have to expect victory from a sharp assault only; and, on the
other hand, it will be heavy work for us to fight until we are
tired, and unable to fight longer; for we have fewer people to
relieve with than they, who can come forward at one time and
retreat and rest at another.  But if we advance so hard at the
first attack that those who are foremost in their ranks must turn
round, then the one will fall over the other, and their
destruction will be the greater the greater numbers there are
together."  When the king had ended his speech it was received
with loud applause, and the one encouraged the other.



224. OF THORD FOLASON.

Thord Folason carried King Olaf's banner.  So says Sigvat the
skald, in the death-song which he composed about King Olaf, and
put together according to resurrection saga: --

     "Thord. I have heard, by Olaf's side,
     Where raged the battle's wildest tide,
     Moved on, and, as by one accord
     Moved with them every heart and sword.
     The banner of the king on high,
     Floating all splendid in the sky
     From golden shaft, aloft he bore, --
     The Norsemen's rallying-point of yore."



225. OF KING OLAF'S ARMOUR.

King Olaf was armed thus: -- He had a gold-mounted helmet on his
head; and had in one hand a white shield, on which the holy cross
was inlaid in gold.  In his other hand he had a lance, which to
the present day stands beside the altar in Christ Church.  In his
belt he had a sword, which was called Hneiter, which was
remarkably sharp, and of which the handle was worked with gold.
He had also a strong coat of ring-mail.  Sigvat the skald, speaks
of this: --

     "A greater victory to gain,
     Olaf the Stout strode o'er the plain
     In strong chain armour, aid to bring
     To his brave men on either wing.
     High rose the fight and battle-heat, --
     the clear blood ran beneath the feet
     Of Swedes, who from the East came there,
     In Olaf's gain or loss to share."



226. KING OLAF'S DREAM.

Now when King Olaf had drawn up his men the army of the bondes
had not yet come near upon any quarter, so the king said the
people should sit down and rest themselves.  He sat down himself,
and the people sat around him in a widespread crowd.  He leaned
down, and laid his head upon Fin Arnason's knee.  There a slumber
came upon him, and he slept a little while; but at the same time
the bondes' army was seen advancing with raised banners, and the
multitude of these was very great.

Then Fin awakened the king, and said that the bonde-army advanced
against them.

The king awoke, and said, "Why did you waken me, Fin, and did not
allow me to enjoy my dream?"

Fin: "Thou must not be dreaming; but rather thou shouldst be
awake, and preparing thyself against the host which is coming
down upon us; or, dost thou not see that the whole bonde-crowd is
coming?"

The king replies, "They are not yet so near to us, and it would
have been better to have let me sleep."

Then said Fin, "What was the dream, sire, of which the loss
appears to thee so great that thou wouldst rather have been left
to waken of thyself?"

Now the king told his dream, -- that he seemed to see a high
ladder, upon which he went so high in the air that heaven was
open: for so high reached the ladder.  "And when you awoke me, I
was come to the highest step towards heaven."

Fin replies, "This dream does not appear to me so good as it does
to thee.  I think it means that thou art fey (1); unless it be
the mere want of sleep that has worked upon thee."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Fey means doomed to die.



227. OF ARNLJOT GELLINE'S BAPTISM.

When King Olaf was arrived at Stiklestad, it happened, among
other circumstances, that a man came to him; and although it was
nowise wonderful that there came many men from the districts, yet
this must be regarded as unusual, that this man did not appear
like the other men who came to him.  He was so tall that none
stood higher than up to his shoulders: very handsome he was in
countenance, and had beautiful fair hair.  He was well armed; had
a fine helmet, and ring armour; a red shield; a superb sword in
his belt; and in his hand a gold-mounted spear, the shaft of it
so thick that it was a handful to grasp.  The man went before the
king, saluted him, and asked if the king would accept his
services.

The king asked his name and family, also what countryman he was.

He replies, "My family is in Jamtaland and Helsingjaland, and my
name is Arnljot Gelline; but this I must not forget to tell you,
that I came to the assistance of those men you sent to Jamtaland
to collect scat, and I gave into their hands a silver dish, which
I sent you as a token that I would be your friend."

Then the king asked Arnljot if he was a Christian or not.  He
replied, "My faith has been this, to rely upon my power and
strength, and which faith hath hitherto given me satisfaction;
but now I intend rather to put my faith, sire, in thee."

The king replies, "If thou wilt put faith in me thou must also
put faith in what I will teach thee.  Thou must believe that
Jesus Christ has made heaven and earth, and all mankind, and to
him shall all those who are good and rightly believing go after
death."

Arnljot answers, "I have indeed heard of the white Christ, but
neither know what he proposes, nor what he rules over; but now I
will believe all that thou sayest to me, and lay down my lot in
your hands."

Thereupon Arnljot was baptized.  The king taught him so much of
the holy faith as appeared to him needful, and placed him in the
front rank of the order of battle, in advance of his banner,
where also Gauka-Thorer and Afrafaste, with their men, were.



228. CONCERNING THE ARMY COLLECTED IN NORWAY.

Now shall we relate what we have left behind in our tale, -- that
the lendermen and bondes had collected a vast host as soon as it
was reported that King Olaf was come from Russia, and had arrived
in Svithjod; but when they heard that he had come to Jamtaland,
and intended to proceed westwards over the keel-ridge to Veradal,
they brought their forces into the Throndhjem country, where they
gathered together the whole people, free and unfree, and
proceeded towards Veradal with so great a body of men that there
was nobody in Norway at that time who had seen so large a force
assembled.  But the force, as it usually happens in so great a
multitude, consisted of many different sorts of people.  There
were many lendermen, and a great many powerful bondes; but the
great mass consisted of labourers and cottars.  The chief
strength of this army lay in the Throndhjem land, and it was the
most warm in enmity and opposition to the king.



229. OF BISHOP SIGURD.

When King Canute had, as before related, laid all Norway under
his power, he set Earl Hakon to manage it, and gave the earl a
court-bishop, by name Sigurd, who was of Danish descent, and had
been long with King Canute.  This bishop was of a very hot
temper, and particularly obstinate, and haughty in his speech;
but supported King Canute all he could in conversation, and was a
great enemy of King Olaf.  He was now also in the bondes' army,
spoke often before the people, and urged them much to
insurrection against King Olaf.



230. BISHOP SIGURD'S SPEECH.

At a House-thing, at which a great many people were assembled,
the bishop desired to be heard, and made the following speech:
"Here are now assembled a great many men, so that probably there
will never be opportunity in this poor country of seeing so great
a native army; but it would be desirable if this strength and
multitude could be a protection; for it will all be needed, if
this Olaf does not give over bringing war and strife upon you.
From his very earliest youth he has been accustomed to plunder
and kill: for which purposes he drove widely around through all
countries, until he turned at last against this, where he began
to show hostilities against the men who were the best and most
powerful; and even against King Canute, whom all are bound to
serve according to their ability, and in whose scat-lands he set
himself down.  He did the same to Olaf the Swedish king.  He
drove the earls Svein and Hakon away from their heritages; and
was even most tyrannical towards his own connections, as he drove
all the kings out of the Uplands: although, indeed, it was but
just reward for having been false to their oaths of fealty to
King Canute, and having followed this King Olaf in all the folly
he could invent; so their friendship ended according to their
deserts, by this king mutilating some of them, taking their
kingdoms himself, and ruining every man in the country who had an
honourable name.  Ye know yourselves how he has treated the
lendermen, of whom many of the worthlest have been murdered, and
many obliged to fly from their country; and how he has roamed far
and wide through the land with robber-bands, burning and
plundering houses, and killing people.  Who is the man among us
here of any consideration who has not some great injury from him
to avenge?  Now he has come hither with a foreign troop,
consisting mostly of forest-men, vagabonds, and such marauders.
Do ye think he will now be more merciful to you, when he is
roaming about with such a bad crew, after committing devastations
which all who followed him dissuaded him from?  Therefore it is
now my advice, that ye remember King Canute's words when he told
you, if King Olaf attempted to return to the country ye should
defend the liberty King Canute had promised you, and should
oppose and drive away such a vile pack.  Now the only thing to be
done is to advance against them, and cast forth these malefactors
to the wolves and eagles, leaving their corpses on the spot they
cover, unless ye drag them aside to out-of-the-way corners in the
woods or rocks.  No man would be so imprudent as to remove them
to churches, for they are all robbers and evil-doers."  When he
had ended his speech it was hailed with the loudest applause, and
all unanimously agreed to act according to his recommendation.



231. OF THE LENDERMEN.

The lendermen who had come together appointed meetings with each
other, and consulted together how they should draw up their
troops, and who should be their leader.  Kalf Arnason said that
Harek of Thjotta was best fitted to be the chief of this army,
for he was descended from Harald Harfager's race.  "The king also
is particularly enraged against him on account of the murder of
Grankel, and therefore he would be exposed to the severest fate
if Olaf recovered the kingdom; and Harek withal is a man
experienced in battles, and a man who does much for honour
alone."

Harek replies, that the men are best suited for this who are in
the flower of their age.  "I am now," says he, "an old and
decaying man, not able to do much in battle: besides, there is
near relationship between me and King Olaf; and although he seems
not to put great value upon that tie, it would not beseem me to
go as leader of the hostilities against him, before any other in
this meeting.  On the other hand, thou, Thorer, art well suited
to be our chief in this battle against King Olaf; and thou hast
distinct grounds for being so, both because thou hast to avenge
the death of thy relation, and also hast been driven by him as an
outlaw from thy property.  Thou hast also promised King Canute,
as well as thy connections, to avenge the murder of thy relative
Asbjorn; and dost thou suppose there ever will be a better
opportunity than this of taking vengeance on Olaf for all these
insults and injuries?"

Thorer replies thus to his speech: "I do not confide in myself so
much as to raise the banner against King Olaf, or, as chief, to
lead on this army; for the people of Throndhjem have the greatest
part in this armament, and I know well their haughty spirit, and
that they would not obey me, or any other Halogaland man,
although I need not be reminded of my injuries to be roused to
vengeance on King Olaf.  I remember well my heavy loss when King
Olaf slew four men, all distinguished both by birth and personal
qualities; namely, my brother's son Asbjorn, my sister's sons
Thorer and Grjotgard, and their father Olver; and it is my duty
to take vengeance for each man of them.  I will not conceal that
I have selected eleven of my house-servants for that purpose, and
of those who are the most daring; and I do not think we shall be
behind others in exchanging blows with King Olaf, should
opportunity be given."



232. KALF ARNASON'S SPEECH.

Then Kalf Arnason desired to speak.  "It is highly necessary,"
says he, "that this business we have on hand do not turn out a
mockery and child-work, now that an army is collected.  Something
else is needful, if we are to stand battle with King Olaf, than
that each should shove the danger from himself; for we must
recollect that although King Olaf has not many people compared to
this army of ours, the leader of them is intrepid, and the whole
body of them will be true to him, and obedient in the battle. 
But if we who should be the leaders of this army show any fear,
and will not encourage the army and go at the head of it, it must
happen that with the great body of our people the spirit will
leave their hearts, and the next thing will be that each will
seek his own safety.  Although we have now a great force
assembled, we shall find our destruction certain, when we meet
King Olaf and his troops, if we, the chiefs of the people, are
not confident in our cause, and have not the whole army
confidently and bravely going along with us.  If it cannot be so,
we had better not risk a battle; and then it is easy to see that
nothing would be left us but to shelter ourselves under King
Olaf's mercy, however hard it might be, as then we would be less
guilty than we now may appear to him to be.  Yet I know there are
men in his ranks who would secure my life and peace if I would
seek it.  Will ye now adopt my proposal -- then shalt thou,
friend Thorer, and thou, Harek, go under the banner which we will
all of us raise up, and then follow.  Let us all be speedy and
determined in the resolution we have taken, and put ourselves so
at the head of the bondes' army that they see no distrust in us;
for then will the common man advance with spirit when we go
merrily to work in placing the army in battle-order, and in
encouraging the people to the strife."

When Kalf had ended they all concurred in what he proposed, and
all would do what Kalf thought of advantage.  All desired Kalf to
be the leader of the army, and to give each what place in it he
chose.



233. HOW THE LENDERMEN SET UP THEIR BANNERS.

Kalf Arnason then raised his banner, and drew up his house-
servants along with Harek of Thjotta and his men.  Thorer Hund,
with his troop, was at the head of the order of battle in front
of the banner; and on both sides of Thorer was a chosen body of
bondes, all of them the most active and best armed in the forces.
This part of the array was long and thick, and in it were drawn
up the Throndhjem people and the Halogalanders.  On the right
wing was another array; and on the left of the main array were
drawn up the men from Rogaland, Hordaland, the Fjord districts,
and Scgn, and they had the third banner.



234. OF THORSTEIN KNARRARSMID.

There was a man called Thorstein Knarrarsmid, who was a merchant
and master ship-carpenter, stout and strong, very passionate, and
a great manslayer.  He had been in enmity against King Olaf, who
had taken from him a new and large merchant-vessel he had built,
on account of some manslaughter-mulct, incurred in the course of
his misdeeds, which he owed to the king.  Thorstein, who was with
the bondes' army, went forward in front of the line in which
Thorer Hund stood, and said, "Here I will be, Thorer, in your
ranks; for I think, if I and King Olaf meet, to be the first to
strive a weapon at him, if I can get so near, to repay him for
the robbery of the ship he took from me, which was the best that
ever went on merchant voyage."  Thorer and his men received
Thorstein, and he went into their ranks.



235. OF THE PREPARATIONS OF THE BONDES.

When the bondes' men and array were drawn up the lendermen
addressed the men, and ordered them to take notice of the place
to which each man belonged, under which banner each should be,
who there were in front of the banner, who were his side-men, and
that they should be brisk and quick in taking up their places in
the array; for the army had still to go a long way, and the array
might be broken in the course of march.  Then they encouraged the
people; and Kalf invited all the men who had any injury to avenge
on King Olaf to place themselves under the banner which was
advancing against King Olaf's own banner.  They should remember
the distress he had brought upon them; and, he said, never was
there a better opportunity to avenge their grievances, and to
free themselves from the yoke and slavery he had imposed on them.
"Let him," says he, "be held a useless coward who does not fight
this day boldly; and they are not innocents who are opposed to
you, but people who will not spare you if ye spare them."

Kalf's speech was received with loud applause, and shouts of
encouragement were heard through the whole army.



236. OF THE KING'S AND THE BONDES' ARMIES.

Thereafter the bondes' army advanced to Stiklestad, where King
Olaf was already with his people.  Kalf and Harek went in front,
at the head of the army under their banners.  But the battle did
not begin immediately on their meeting; for the bondes delayed
the assault, because all their men were not come upon the plain,
and they waited for those who came after them.  Thorer Hund had
come up with his troop the last, for he had to take care that the
men did not go off behind when the battlecry was raised, or the
armies were closing with each other; and therefore Kalf and Harek
waited for Thorer.  For the encouragement of their men in the
battle the bondes had the field-cry -- "Forward, forward,
bondemen!"  King Olaf also made no attack, for he waited for Dag
and the people who followed him.  At last the king saw Dag and
his men approaching.  It is said that the army of the bondes was
not less on this day than a hundred times a hundred men.  Sigvat
the skald speaks thus of the numbers: --

     "I grieve to think the king had brought
     Too small a force for what he sought:
     He held his gold too fast to bring
     The numbers that could make him king.
     The foemen, more than two to one,
     The victory by numbers won;
     And this alone, as I've heard say,
     Against King Olaf turned the day."



237. MEETING OF THE KING AND THE BONDES.

As the armies on both sides stood so near that people knew each
other, the king said, "Why art thou here, Kalf, for we parted
good friends south in More?  It beseems thee ill to fight against
us, or to throw a spear into our army; for here are four of thy
brothers."

Kalf replied, "Many things come to pass differently from what may
appear seemly.  You parted from us so that it was necessary to
seek peace with those who were behind in the country.  Now each
must remain where he stands; but if I might advise, we should be
reconciled."

Then Fin, his brother, answered, "This is to be observed of Kalf,
that when he speaks fairly he has it in his mind to do ill."

The king answered, "It may be, Kalf, that thou art inclined to
reconciliation; but, methinks, the bondes do not appear so
peaceful."

Then Thorgeir of Kviststad said, "You shall now have such peace
as many formerly have received at your hands, and which you shall
now pay for."

The king replies, "Thou hast no occasion to hasten so much to
meet us; for fate has not decreed to thee to-day a victory over
me, who raised thee to power and dignity from a mean station."



238. BEGINNING OF THE BATTLE OF STIKLESTAD.

Now came Thorer Hund, went forward in front of the banner with
his troop, and called out, "Forward, forward, bondemen!" 
Thereupon the bondemen raised the war-cry, and shot their arrows
and spears.  The king's men raised also a war-shout; and that
done, encouraged each other to advance, crying out, "Forward,
forward, Christ-men!  cross-men!  king's men!"  When the bondes
who stood outermost on the wings heard it, they repeated the same
cry; but when the other bondes heard them they thought these were
king's men, turned their arms against them, and they fought
together, and many were slain before they knew each other.  The
weather was beautiful, and the sun shone clear; but when the
battle began the heaven and the sun became red, and before the
battle ended it became as dark as at night.  King Olaf had drawn
up his army upon a rising ground, and it rushed down from thence
upon the bonde-army with such a fierce assault, that the bondes'
array went before it; so that the breast of the king's array came
to stand upon the ground on which the rear of the bondes' array
had stood, and many of the bondes' army were on the way to fly,
but the lendermen and their house-men stood fast, and the battle
became very severe.  So says Sigvat: --

     "Thundered the ground beneath their tread,
     As, iron-clad, thick-tramping, sped
     The men-at-arms, in row and rank,
     Past Stiklestad's sweet grassy bank.
     The clank of steel, the bowstrings' twang,
     The sounds of battle, loudly rang;
     And bowman hurried on advancing,
     Their bright helms in the sunshine glancing."

The lendermen urged their men, and forced them to advance. 
Sigvat speaks of this: --

     "Midst in their line their banner flies,
     Thither the stoutest bonde hies:
     But many a bonde thinks of home,
     And many wish they ne'er had come."

Then the bonde-army pushed on from all quarters.  They who stood
in front hewed down with their swords; they who stood next thrust
with their spears; and they who stood hindmost shot arrows, cast
spears, or threw stones, hand-axes, or sharp stakes.  Soon there
was a great fall of men in the battle.  Many were down on both
sides.  In the first onset fell Arnljot Gelline, Gauka-Thorer,
and Afrafaste, with all their men, after each had killed a man or
two, and some indeed more.  Now the ranks in front of the king's
banner began to be thinned, and the king ordered Thord to carry
the banner forward, and the king himself followed it with the
troop he had chosen to stand nearest to him in battle; and these
were the best armed men in the field, and the most expert in the
use of their weapons.  Sigvat the skald tells of this: --

     "Loud was the battle-storm there,
     Where the king's banner flamed in air.
     The king beneath his banner stands,
     And there the battle he commands."

Olaf came forth from behind the shield-bulwark, and put himself
at the head of the army; and when the bondes looked him in the
face they were frightened, and let their hands drop.  So says
Sigvat: --

     "I think I saw them shrink with fear
     Who would not shrink from foeman's spear,
     When Olaf's lion-eye was cast
     On them, and called up all the past.
     Clear as the serpent's eye -- his look
     No Throndhjem man could stand, but shook
     Beneath its glance, and skulked away,
     Knowing his king, and cursed the day."

The combat became fierce, and the king went forward in the fray.
So says Sigvat: --

     "When on they came in fierce array,
     And round the king arose the fray,
     With shield on arm brave Olaf stood,
     Dyeing his sword in their best blood.
     For vengeance on his Throndhjem foes,
     On their best men he dealt his blows;
     He who knew well death's iron play,
     To his deep vengeance gave full sway."



239. THORGEIR OF KVISTSTAD'S FALL.

King Olaf fought most desperately.  He struck the lenderman
before mentioned (Thorgeir of Kviststad) across the face, cut off
the nose-piece of his helmet, and clove his head down below the
eyes so that they almost fell out.  When he fell the king said,
"Was it not true, Thorgeir, what I told thee, that thou shouldst
not be victor in our meeting?"  At the same instant Thord stuck
the banner-pole so fast in the earth that it remained standing.
Thord had got his death-wound, and fell beneath the banner. 
There also fell Thorfin Mun, and also Gissur Gullbrarskald, who
was attacked by two men, of whom he killed one, but only wounded
the other before he fell.  So says Hofgardaref: --

     "Bold in the Iron-storm was he,
     Firm and stout as forest tree,
     The hero who, 'gainst two at once,
     Made Odin's fire from sword-edge glance;
     Dealing a death-blow to the one,
     Known as a brave and generous man,
     Wounding the other, ere he fell, --
     His bloody sword his deeds showed well."

It happened then, as before related, that the sun, although the
air was clear, withdrew from the sight, and it became dark.  Of
this Sigvat the skald speaks: --

     "No common wonder in the sky
     Fell out that day -- the sun on high,
     And not a cloud to see around,
     Shone not, nor warmed Norway's ground.
     The day on which fell out this fight
     Was marked by dismal dusky light,
     This from the East I heard -- the end
     Of our great king it did portend."

At the same time Dag Hringson came up with his people, and began
to put his men in array, and to set up his banner; but on account
of the darkness the onset could not go on so briskly, for they
could not see exactly whom they had before them.  They turned,
however, to that quarter where the men of Hordaland and Rogaland
stood.  Many of these circumstances took place at the same time,
and some happened a little earlier, and some a little later.



240. KING OLAF'S FALL.

On the one side of Kalf Arnason stood his two relations, Olaf and
Kalf, with many other brave and stout men.  Kalf was a son of
Arnfin Arnmodson, and a brother's son of Arne Arnmodson.  On the
other side of Kalf Arnason stood Thorer Hund.  King Olaf hewed at
Thorer Hund, and struck him across the shoulders; but the sword
would not cut, and it was as if dust flew from his reindeer-skin
coat.  So says Sigvat: --

     "The king himself now proved the power
     Of Fin-folk's craft in magic hour,
     With magic song; for stroke of steel
     Thor's reindeer coat would never feel,
     Bewitched by them it turned the stroke
     Of the king's sword, -- a dust-like smoke
     Rose from Thor's shoulders from the blow
     Which the king though would end his foe."

Thorer struck at the king, and they exchanged some blows; but the
king's sword would not cut where it met the reindeer skin,
although Thorer was wounded in the hands.  Sigvat sang thus of
it: --

     "Some say that Thorer's not right bold;
     Why never yet have I been told
     Of one who did a bolder thing
     Than to change blows with his true king.
     Against his king his sword to wield,
     Leaping across the shield on shield
     Which fenced the king round in the fight,
     Shows the dog's (1) courage -- brave, not bright."

The king said to Bjorn the marshal, "Do thou kill the dog on whom
steel will not bite."  Bjorn turned round the axe in his hands,
and gave Thorer a blow with the hammer of it on the shoulder so
hard that he tottered.  The king at the same moment turned
against Kalf and his relations, and gave Olaf his death-wound.
Thorer Hund struck his spear right through the body of Marshal
Bjorn, and killed him outright; and Thorer said, "It is thus we
hunt the bear." (2)  Thorstein Knarrarsmid struck at King Olaf
with his axe, and the blow hit his left leg above the knee.  Fin
Arnason instantly killed Thorstein.  The king after the wound
staggered towards a stone, threw down his sword, and prayed God
to help him.  Then Thorer Hund struck at him with his spear, and
the stroke went in under his mail-coat and into his belly.  Then
Kalf struck at him on the left side of the neck.  But all are not
agreed upon Kalf having been the man who gave him the wound in
the neck.  These three wounds were King Olaf's death; and after
the king's death the greater part of the forces which had
advanced with him fell with the king.  Bjarne Gullbrarskald sang
these verses about Kalf Arnason: --

     "Warrior!  who Olaf dared withstand,
     Who against Olaf held the land,
     Thou hast withstood the bravest, best,
     Who e'er has gone to his long rest.
     At Stiklestad thou wast the head;
     With flying banners onwards led
     Thy bonde troops, and still fought on,
     Until he fell -- the much-mourned one."

Sigvat also made these verses on Bjorn: --

     "The marshal Bjorn, too, I find,
     A great example leaves behind,
     How steady courage should stand proof,
     Though other servants stand aloof.
     To Russia first his steps he bent,
     To serve his master still intent;
     And now besides his king he fell, --
     A noble death for skalds to tell."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Thorer's name was Hund -- the dog; and a play upon Thorer
     Hund's name was intended by the skald. -- L.
(2)  Bjorn, the marshal's name, signifies a bear. -- L.



241. BEGINNING OF DAG HRINGSON'S ATTACK.

Dag Hringson still kept up the battle, and made in the beginning
so fierce an assault that the bondes gave way, and some betook
themselves to flight.  There a great number of the bondes fell,
and these lendermen, Erlend of Gerde and Aslak of Finey; and the
banner also which they had stood under was cut down.  This onset
was particularly hot, and was called Dag's storm.  But now Kalf
Arnason, Harek of Thjotta, and Thorer Hund turned against Dag,
with the array which had followed them, and then Dag was
overwhelmed with numbers; so he betook himself to flight with the
men still left him.  There was a valley through which the main
body of the fugitives fled, and men lay scattered in heaps on
both sides; and many were severely wounded, and many so fatigued
that they were fit for nothing.  The bondes pursued only a short
way; for their leaders soon returned back to the field of battle,
where they had their friends and relations to look after.



240. KING OLAF'S MIRACLE SHOWN TO THORER HUND.

Thorer Hund went to where King Olaf's body lay, took care of it,
laid it straight out on the ground, and spread a cloak over it. 
He told since that when he wiped the blood from the face it was
very beautiful; and there was red in the cheeks, as if he only
slept, and even much clearer than when he was in life.  The
king's blood came on Thorer's hand, and ran up between his
fingers to where he had been wounded, and the wound grew up so
speedily that it did not require to be bound up.  This
circumstance was testified by Thorer himself when King Olaf's
holiness came to be generally known among the people; and Thorer
Hund was among the first of the king's powerful opponents who
endeavoured to spread abroad the king's sanctity.



243. OF KALF ARNASON'S BROTHERS.

Kalf Arnason searched for his brothers who had fallen, and found
Thorberg and Fin.  It is related that Fin threw his dagger at
him, and wanted to kill him, giving him hard words, and calling
him a faithless villain, and a traitor to his king.  Kalf did not
regard it, but ordered Fin and Thorberg to be carried away from
the field.  When their wounds were examined they were found not
to be deadly, and they had fallen from fatigue, and under the
weight of their weapons.  Thereafter Kalf tried to bring his
brothers down to a ship, and went himself with them.  As soon as
he was gone the whole bonde-army, having their homes in the
neighbourhood, went off also, excepting those who had friends or
relations to look after, or the bodies of the slain to take care
of.  The wounded were taken home to the farms, so that every
house was full of them; and tents were erected over some.  But
wonderful as was the number collected in the bonde-army, no less
wonderful was the haste with which this vast body was dispersed
when it was once free; and the cause of this was, that the most
of the people gathered together from the country places were
longing for their homes.



244. OF THE BONDES OF VERADAL.

The bondes who had their homes in Veradal went to the chiefs
Harek and Thorer, and complained of their distress, saying, "The
fugitives who have escaped from the battle have proceeded up over
the valley of Veradal, and are destroying our habitations, and
there is no safety for us to travel home so long as they are in
the valley.  Go after them with war-force, and let no mother's
son of them escape with life; for that is what they intended for
us if they had got the upper hand in the battle, and the same
they would do now if they met us hereafter, and had better luck
than we.  It may also be that they will linger in the valley if
they have nothing to be frightened for, and then they would not
proceed very gently in the inhabited country."  The bondes made
many words about this, urging the chiefs to advance directly, and
kill those who had escaped.  Now when the chiefs talked over this
matter among themselves, they thought there was much truth in
what the bondes said.  They resolved, therefore, that Thorer Hund
should undertake this expedition through Veradal, with 600 men of
his own troops.  Then, towards evening, he set out with his men;
and Thorer continued his march without halt until he came in the
night to Sula, where he heard the news that Dag Hringson had come
there in the evening, with many other flocks of the king's men,
and had halted there until they took supper, but were afterwards
gone up to the mountains.  Then Thorer said he did not care to
pursue them up through the mountains, and he returned down the
valley again, and they did not kill many of them this time.  The
bondes then returned to their homes, and the following day
Thorer, with his people, went to their ships.  The part of the
king's men who were still on their legs concealed themselves in
the forests, and some got help from the people.



245. OF THE KING'S BROTHER, HARALD SIGURDSON.

Harald Sigurdson was severely wounded; but Ragnvald Brusason
brought him to a bonde's the night after the battle, and the
bonde took in Harald, and healed his wound in secret, and
afterwards gave him his son to attend him.  They went secretly
over the mountains, and through the waste forests, and came out
in Jamtaland.  Harald Sigurdson was fifteen years old when King
Olaf fell.  In Jamtaland Harald found Ragnvald Brusason; and they
went both east to King Jarisleif in Russia, as is related in the
Saga of Harald Sigurdson.



246. OF THORMOD KOLBRUNARSKALD.

Thormod Kolbrunarskald was under King Olaf's banner in the
battle; but when the king had fallen, the battle was raging so
that of the king's men the one fell by the side of the other, and
the most of those who stood on their legs were wounded.  Thormod
was also severely wounded, and retired, as all the others did,
back from where there was most danger of life, and some even
fled.  Now when the onset began which is called Dag's storm, all
of the king's men who were able to combat went there; but Thormod
did not come into that combat, being unable to fight, both from
his wound and from weariness, but he stood by the side of his
comrade in the ranks, although he could do nothing.  There he was
struck by an arrow in the left side; but he broke off the shaft
of the arrow, went out of the battle, and up towards the houses,
where he came to a barn which was a large building.  Thormod had
his drawn sword in his hand; and as he went in a man met him,
coming out, and said, "It is very bad there with howling and
screaming; and a great shame it is that brisk young fellows
cannot bear their wounds: it may be that the king's men have done
bravely to-day, but they certainly bear their wounds very ill." 

Thormod asks. "What is thy name?"

He called himself Kimbe.

Thormod: "Wast thou in the battle, too?"

"I was with the bondes, which was the best side," says he.

"And art thou wounded any way?" says Thormod.

"A little," said Kimbe.  "And hast thou been in the battle too?"

Thormod replied, "I was with them who had the best."

"Art thou wounded?" says Kimbe.

"Not much to signify," replies Thormod.

As Kimbe saw that Thormod had a gold ring on his arm, he said,
"Thou art certainly a king's man.  Give me thy gold ring, and I
will hide thee.  The bondes will kill thee if thou fallest in
their way."

Thormod says, "Take the ring if thou canst get it: I have lost
that which is more worth."

Kimbe stretched out his hand, and wanted to take the ring; but
Thormod, swinging his sword, cut off his hand; and it is related
that Kimbe behaved himself no better under his wound than those
he had been blaming just before.  Kimbe went off, and Thormod sat
down in the barn, and listened to what people were saying.  The
conversation was mostly about what each had seen in the battle,
and about the valour of the combatants.  Some praised most King
Olaf's courage, and some named others who stood nowise behind him
in bravery.  Then Thormod sang these verses: --

     "Olaf was brave beyond all doubt, --
     At Stiklestad was none so stout;
     Spattered with blood, the king, unsparing,
     Cheered on his men with deed and daring.
     But I have heard that some were there
     Who in the fight themselves would spare;
     Though, in the arrow-storm, the most
     Had perils quite enough to boast."



247. THORMOD'S DEATH.

Thormod went out, and entered into a chamber apart, in which
there were many wounded men, and with them a woman binding their
wounds.  There was fire upon the floor, at which she warmed water
to wash and clean their wounds.  Thormod sat himself down beside
the door, and one came in, and another went out, of those who
were busy about the wounded men.  One of them turned to Thormod,
looked at him, and said, "Why art thou so dead-pale?  Art thou
wounded?  Why dost thou not call for the help of the wound-
healers?"  Thormod then sang these verses: --

     "I am not blooming, and the fair
     And slender girl loves to care
     For blooming youths -- few care for me;
     With Fenja's meal I cannot fee.
     This is the reason why I feel
     The slash and thrust of Danish steel;
     And pale and faint, and bent with pain,
     Return from yonder battle-plain."

Then Thormod stood up and went in towards the fire, and stood
there awhile.  The young woman said to him, "Go out, man, and
bring in some of the split firewood which lies close beside the
door."  He went out and brought in an armful of wood, which he
threw down upon the floor.  Then the nurse-girl looked him in the
face, and said, "Dreadfully pale is this man -- why art thou so?"
Then Thormod sang: --

     "Thou wonderest, sweet sprig, at me,
     A man so hideous to see:
     Deep wounds but rarely mend the face,
     The crippling blow gives little grace.
     The arrow-drift o'ertook me, girl, --
     A fine-ground arrow in the whirl
     Went through me, and I feel the dart
     Sits, lovely girl, too near my heart."

The girl said, "Let me see thy wound, and I will bind it." 
Thereupon Thormod sat down, cast off his clothes, and the girl
saw his wounds, and examined that which was in his side, and felt
that a piece of iron was in it, but could not find where the iron
had gone in.  In a stone pot she had stirred together leeks and
other herbs, and boiled them, and gave the wounded men of it to
eat, by which she discovered if the wounds had penetrated into
the belly; for if the wound had gone so deep, it would smell of
leek.  She brought some of this now to Thormod, and told him to
eat of it.  He replied, "Take it away, I have no appetite for my
broth."  Then she took a large pair of tongs, and tried to pull
out the iron; but it sat too fast, and would in no way come, and
as the wound was swelled, little of it stood out to lay hold of.
Now said Thormod, "Cut so deep in that thou canst get at the iron
with the tongs, and give me the tongs and let me pull."  She did
as he said.  Then Thormod took a gold ring from his hand, gave it
to the nurse-woman, and told her to do with it what she liked. 
"It is a good man's gift," said he: "King Olaf gave me the ring
this morning."  Then Thormod took the tongs, and pulled the iron
out; but on the iron there was a hook, at which there hung some
morsels of flesh from the heart, -- some white, some red.  When
he saw that, he said, "The king has fed us well.  I am fat, even
at the heart-roots;" and so saying he leant back, and was dead.
And with this ends what we have to say about Thormod.



248. OF SOME CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE BATTLE.

King Olaf fell on Wednesday, the 29th of July (A.D. 1030).  It
was near mid-day when the two armies met, and the battle began
before half-past one, and before three the king fell.  The
darkness continued from about half-past one to three also. 
Sigvat the skald speaks thus of the result of the battle: --

     "The loss was great to England's foes,
     When their chief fell beneath the blows
     By his own thoughtless people given, --
     When the king's shield in two was riven.
     The people's sovereign took the field,
     The people clove the sovereign's shield.
     Of all the chiefs that bloody day,
     Dag only came out of the fray."

And he composed these: --

     "Such mighty bonde-power, I ween,
     With chiefs or rulers ne'er was seen.
     It was the people's mighty power
     That struck the king that fatal hour.
     When such a king, in such a strife,
     By his own people lost his life,
     Full many a gallant man must feel
     The death-wound from the people's steel."

The bondes did not spoil the slain upon the field of battle, for
immediately after the battle there came upon many of them who had
been against the king a kind of dread as it were; yet they held
by their evil inclination, for they resolved among themselves
that all who had fallen with the king should not receive the
interment which belongs to good men, but reckoned them all
robbers and outlaws.  But the men who had power, and had
relations on the field, cared little for this, but removed their
remains to the churches, and took care of their burial.



249. A MIRACLE ON A BLIND MAN.

Thorgils Halmason and his son Grim went to the field of battle
towards evening when it was dusk, took King Olaf's corpse up, and
bore it to a little empty houseman's hut which stood on the other
side of their farm.  They had light and water with them.  Then
they took the clothes off the body, swathed it in a linen cloth,
laid it down in the house, and concealed it under some firewood
so that nobody could see it, even if people came into the hut.
Thereafter they went home again to the farmhouse.  A great many
beggars and poor people had followed both armies, who begged for
meat; and the evening after the battle many remained there, and
sought lodging round about in all the houses, great or small.  It
is told of a blind man who was poor, that a boy attended him and
led him.  They went out around the farm to seek a lodging, and
came to the same empty house, of which the door was so low that
they had almost to creep in.  Now when the blind man had come in,
he fumbled about the floor seeking a place where he could lay
himself down.  He had a hat on his head, which fell down over his
face when he stooped down.  He felt with his hands that there was
moisture on the floor, and he put up his wet hand to raise his
hat, and in doing so put his fingers on his eyes.  There came
immediately such an itching in his eyelids, that he wiped the
water with his fingers from his eyes, and went out of the hut,
saying nobody could lie there, it was so wet.  When he came out
of the hut he could distinguish his hands, and all that was near
him, as far as things can be distinguished by sight in the
darkness of light; and he went immediately to the farm-house into
the room, and told all the people he had got his sight again, and
could see everything, although many knew he had been blind for a
long time, for he had been there, before, going about among the
houses of the neighbourhood.  He said he first got his sight when
he was coming out of a little ruinous hut which was all wet
inside.  "I groped in the water," said he, "and rubbed my eyes
with my wet hands."  He told where the hut stood.  The people who
heard him wondered much at this event, and spoke among themselves
of what it could be that produced it: but Thorgils the peasant
and his son Grim thought they knew how this came to pass; and as
they were much afraid the king's enemies might go there and
search the hut, they went and took the body out of it, and
removed it to a garden, where they concealed it, and then
returned to the farm, and slept there all night.



250. OF THORER HUND.

The fifth day (Thursday), Thorer Hund came down the valley of
Veradal to Stiklestad; and many people, both chiefs and bondes,
accompanied him.  The field of battle was still being cleared,
and people were carrying away the bodies of their friends and
relations, and were giving the necessary help to such of the
wounded as they wished to save; but many had died since the
battle.  Thorer Hund went to where the king had fallen, and
searched for his body; but not finding it, he inquired if any one
could tell him what had become of the corpse, but nobody could
tell him where it was.  Then he asked the bonde Thorgils, who
said, "I was not in the battle, and knew little of what took
place there; but many reports are abroad, and among others that
King Olaf has been seen in the night up at Staf, and a troop of
people with him: but if he fell in the battle, your men must
have concealed him in some hole, or under some stone-heap."  Now
although Thorer Hund knew for certain that the king had fallen,
many allowed themselves to believe, and to spread abroad the
report, that the king had escaped from the battle, and would in a
short time come again upon them with an army.  Then Thorer went
to his ships, and sailed down the fjord, and the bonde-army
dispersed, carrying with them all the wounded men who could bear
to be removed.



251. OF KING OLAF'S BODY.

Thorgils Halmason and his son Grim had King Olaf's body, and were
anxious about preserving it from falling into the hands of the
king's enemies, and being ill-treated; for they heard the bondes
speaking about burning it, or sinking it in the sea.  The father
and son had seen a clear light burning at night over the spot on
the battlefield where King Olaf's body lay, and since, while they
concealed it, they had always seen at night a light burning over
the corpse; therefore they were afraid the king's enemies might
seek the body where this signal was visible.  They hastened,
therefore, to take the body to a place where it would be safe.
Thorgils and his son accordingly made a coffin, which they
adorned as well as they could, and laid the king's body in it;
and afterwards made another coffin in which they laid stones and
straw, about as much as the weight of a man, and carefully closed
the coffins.  As soon as the whole bonde-army had left
Stiklestad, Thorgils and his son made themselves ready, got a
large rowing-boat, and took with them seven or eight men, who
were all Thorgil's relations or friends, and privately took the
coffin with the king's body down to the boat, and set it under
the foot-boards.  They had also with them the coffin containing
the stones, and placed it in the boat where all could see it; and
then went down the fjord with a good opportunity of wind and
weather, and arrived in the dusk of the evening at Nidaros, where
they brought up at the king's pier.  Then Thorgils sent some of
his men up to the town to Bishop Sigurd, to say that they were
come with the king's body.  As soon as the bishop heard this
news, he sent his men down to the pier, and they took a small
rowing-boat, came alongside of Thorgil's ship, and demanded the
king's body.  Thorgils and his people then took the coffin which
stood in view, and bore it into the boat; and the bishop's men
rowed out into the fjord, and sank the coffin in the sea.  It was
now quite dark.  Thorgils and his people now rowed up into the
river past the town, and landed at a place called Saurhlid, above
the town.  Then they carried the king's body to an empty house
standing at a distance from other houses, and watched over it for
the night, while Thorgils went down to the town, where he spoke
with some of the best friends of King Olaf, and asked them if
they would take charge of the king's body; but none of them dared
to do so.  Then Thorgils and his men went with the body higher up
the river, buried it in a sand-hill on the banks, and levelled
all around it so that no one could observe that people had been
at work there.  They were ready with all this before break of
day, when they returned to their vessel, went immediately out of
the river, and proceeded on their way home to Stiklestad.



252. OF THE BEGINNING OF KING SVEIN ALFIFASON'S GOVERNMENT.

Svein, a son of King Canute, and of Alfifa, a daughter of Earl
Alfrin, had been appointed to govern Jomsborg in Vindland.  There
came a message to him from his father King Canute, that he should
come to Denmark; and likewise that afterwards he should proceed
to Norway, and take that kingdom under his charge, and assume, at
the same time, the title of king of Norway.  Svein repaired to
Denmark, and took many people with him from thence, and also Earl
Harald and many other people of consequence attended him.
Thorarin Loftunga speaks of this in the song he composed about
King Svein, called the "Glelogn Song": --

     "'Tis told by fame,
     How grandly came
     The Danes to tend
     Their young king Svein.
     Grandest was he,
     That all could see;
     Then, one by one,
     Each following man
     More splendour wore
     Than him before."

Then Svein proceeded to Norway, and his mother Alfifa was with
him; and he was taken to be king at every Law-thing in the
country.  He had already come as far as Viken at the time the
battle was fought at Stiklestad, and King Olaf fell.  Svein
continued his journey until he came north, in autumn, to the
Throndhjem country; and there, as elsewhere, he was received as
king.



253. OF KING SVEIN'S LAWS.

King Svein introduced new laws in many respects into the country,
partly after those which were in Denmark, and in part much more
severe.  No man must leave the country without the king's
permission; or if he did, his property fell to the king.  Whoever
killed a man outright, should forfeit all his land and movables.
If any one was banished the country, and all heritage fell to
him, the king took his inheritance.  At Yule every man should pay
the king a meal of malt from every harvest steading, and a leg of
a three-year old ox, which was called a friendly gift, together
with a spand of butter; and every house-wife a rock full of
unspun lint, as thick as one could span with the longest fingers
of the hand.  The bondes were bound to build all the houses the
king required upon his farms.  Of every seven males one should be
taken for the service of war, and reckoning from the fifth year
of age; and the outfit of ships should be reckoned in the same
proportion.  Every man who rowed upon the sea to fish should pay
the king five fish as a tax, for the land defence, wherever he
might come from.  Every ship that went out of the country should
have stowage reserved open for the king in the middle of the
ship.  Every man, foreigner or native, who went to Iceland,
should pay a tax to the king.  And to all this was added, that
Danes should enjoy so much consideration in Norway, that one
witness of them should invalidate ten of Northmen (1).

When these laws were promulgated the minds of the people were
instantly raised against them, and murmurs were heard among them.
They who had not taken part against King Olaf said, "Now take
your reward and friendship from the Canute race, ye men of the
interior Throndhjem who fought against King Olaf, and deprived
him of his kingdom.  Ye were promised peace and justice, and now
ye have got oppression and slavery for your great treachery and
crime."  Nor was it very easy to contradict them, as all men saw
how miserable the change had been.  But people had not the
boldness to make an insurrection against King Svein, principally
because many had given King Canute their sons or other near
relations as hostages; and also because no one appeared as leader
of an insurrection.  They very soon, however, complained of King
Svein; and his mother Alfifa got much of the blame of all that
was against their desire.  Then the truth, with regard to Olaf,
became evident to many.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This may probably have referred not to witnesses of an act,
     but to the class of witnesses in the jurisprudence of the
     Middle Ages called compurgators, who testified not the fact,
     but their confidence in the statements of the accused; and
     from which, possibly, our English bail for offenders arose.
     -- L.



254. OF KING OLAF'S SANCTITY.

This winter (A.D. 1031) many in the Throndhjem land began to
declare that Olaf was in reality a holy man, and his sanctity was
confirmed by many miracles.  Many began to make promises and
prayers to King Olaf in the matters in which they thought they
required help, and many found great benefit from these
invocations.  Some in respect of health, others of a journey, or
other circumstances in which such help seemed needful.



255. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

Einar Tambaskelfer was come home from England to his farm, and
had the fiefs which King Canute had given him when they met in
Throndhjem, and which were almost an earldom.  Einar had not been
in the strife against King Olaf, and congratulated himself upon
it.  He remembered that King Canute had promised him the earldom
over Norway, and at the same time remembered that King Canute had
not kept his promise.  He was accordingly the first great person
who looked upon King Olaf as a saint.



256. OF THE SONS OF ARNE.

Fin Arnason remained but a short time at Eggja with his brother
Kalf; for he was in the highest degree ill-pleased that Kalf had
been in the battle against King Olaf, and always made his brother
the bitterest reproaches on this account.  Thorberg Arnason was
much more temperate in his discourse than Fin; but yet he
hastened away, and went home to his farm.  Kalf gave the two
brothers a good long-ship, with full rigging and other
necessaries, and a good retinue.  Therefore they went home to
their farms, and sat quietly at home.  Arne Arnason lay long ill
of his wounds, but got well at last without injury of any limb,
and in winter he proceeded south to his farm.  All the brothers
made their peace with King Svein, and sat themselves quietly down
in their homes.



257. BISHOP SIGURD'S FLIGHT.

The summer after (A.D. 1031) there was much talk about King
Olaf's sanctity, and there was a great alteration in the
expressions of all people concerning him.  There were many who
now believed that King Olaf must be a saint, even among those who
had persecuted him with the greatest animosity, and would never
in their conversation allow truth or justice in his favour.
People began then to turn their reproaches against the men who
had principally excited opposition to the king; and on this
account Bishop Sigurd in particular was accused.  He got so many
enemies, that he found it most advisable to go over to England to
King Canute.  Then the Throndhjem people sent men with a verbal
message to the Uplands, to Bishop Grimkel, desiring him to come
north to Throndhjem.  King Olaf had sent Bishop Grimkel back to
Norway when he went east into Russia, and since that time Grimkel
had been in the Uplands.  When the message came to the bishop he
made ready to go, and it contributed much to this journey that
the bishop considered it as true what was told of King Olaf's
miracles and sanctity.



258. KING OLAF THE SAINT'S REMAINS DISINTERRED.

Bishop Grimkel went to Einar Tambaskelfer, who received him
joyfully.  They talked over many things, and, among others, of
the important events which had taken place in the country; and
concerning these they were perfectly agreed.  Then the bishop
proceeded to the town (Nidaros), and was well received by all the
community.  He inquired particularly concerning the miracles of
King Olaf that were reported, and received satisfactory accounts
of them.  Thereupon the bishop sent a verbal message to
Stiklestad to Thorgils and his son Grim, inviting them to come to
the town to him.  They did not decline the invitation, but set
out on the road immediately, and came to the town and to the
bishop.  They related to him all the signs that had presented
themselves to them, and also where they had deposited the king"s
body.  The bishop sent a message to Einar Tambaskelfer, who came
to the town.  Then the bishop and Einar had an audience of the
king and Alfifa, in which they asked the king's leave to have
King Olaf's body taken up out of the earth.  The king gave his
permission, and told the bishop to do as he pleased in the
matter.  At that time there were a great many people in the town.
The bishop, Einar, and some men with them, went to the place
where the king's body was buried, and had the place dug; but the
coffin had already raised itself almost to the surface of the
earth.  It was then the opinion of many that the bishop should
proceed to have the king buried in the earth at Clement's church;
and it was so done.  Twelve months and five days (Aug. 3, A.D.
1031), after King Olaf's death his holy remains were dug up, and
the coffin had raised itself almost entirely to the surface of
the earth; and the coffin appeared quite new, as if it had but
lately been made.  When Bishop Grimkel came to King Olaf's opened
coffin, there was a delightful and fresh smell.  Thereupon the
bishop uncovered the king's face, and his appearance was in no
respect altered, and his cheeks were as red as if he had but just
fallen asleep.  The men who had seen King Olaf when he fell
remarked, also, that his hair and nails had grown as much as if
he had lived on the earth all the time that had passed since his
fall.  Thereupon King Svein, and all the chiefs who were at the
place, went out to see King Olaf's body.  Then said Alfifa,
"People buried in sand rot very slowly, and it would not have
been so if he had been buried in earth."  Afterwards the bishop
took scissors, clipped the king's hair, and arranged his beard;
for he had had a long beard, according to the fashion of that
time.  Then said the bishop to the king and Alfifa, "Now the
king's hair and beard are such as when he gave up the ghost, and
it has grown as much as ye see has been cut off."  Alfifa
answers, "I will believe in the sanctity of his hair, if it will
not burn in the fire; but I have often seen men's hair whole and
undamaged after lying longer in the earth than this man's."  Then
the bishop had live coals put into a pan, blessed it, cast
incense upon it, and then laid King Olaf's hair on the fire. 
When all the incense was burnt the bishop took the hair out of
the fire, and showed the king and the other chiefs that it was
not consumed.  Now Alfifa asked that the hair should be laid upon
unconsecrated fire; but Einar Tambaskelfer told her to be silent,
and gave her many severe reproaches for her unbelief.  After the
bishop's recognition, with the king's approbation and the
decision of the Thing, it was determined that King Olaf should be
considered a man truly holy; whereupon his body was transported
into Clement's church, and a place was prepared for it near the
high altar.  The coffin was covered with costly cloth, and stood
under a gold embroidered tent.  Many kinds of miracles were soon
wrought by King Olaf's holy remains.



259. OF KING OLAF'S MIRACLES.

In the sand-hill where King Olaf's body had lain on the ground a
beautiful spring of water came up and many human ailments and
infirmities were cured by its waters.  Things were put in order
around it, and the water ever since has been carefully preserved.
There was first a chapel built, and an altar consecrated, where
the king's body had lain; but now Christ's church stands upon the
spot.  Archbishop Eystein had a high altar raised upon the spot
where the king's grave had been, when he erected the great temple
which now stands there; and it is the same spot on which the
altar of the old Christ church had stood.  It is said that Olaf's
church stands on the spot on which the empty house had stood in
which King Olaf's body had been laid for the night.  The place
over which the holy remains of King Olaf were carried up from the
vessel is now called Olaf's Road, and is now in the middle of the
town.  The bishop adorned King Olaf's holy remains, and cut his
nails and hair; for both grew as if he had still been alive.  So
says Sigvat the skald: --

     "I lie not, when I say the king
     Seemed as alive in every thing:
     His nails, his yellow hair still growing,
     And round his ruddy cheek still flowing,
     As when, to please the Russian queen,
     His yellow locks adorned were seen;
     Or to the blind he cured he gave
     A tress, their precious sight to save."

Thorarin Loftunga also composed a song upon Svein Alfifason,
called the "Glelogn Song", in which are these verses: --

     "Svein, king of all,
     In Olaf's hall
     Now sits on high;
     And Olaf's eye
     Looks down from heaven,
     Where it is given
     To him to dwell:
     Or here in cell,
     As heavenly saint,
     To heal men's plaint,
     May our gold-giver
     Live here for ever!

     "King Olaf there
     To hold a share
     On earth prepared,
     Nor labour spared
     A seat to win
     From heaven's great King;
     Which he has won
     Next God's own Son.

     "His holy form,
     Untouched by worm,
     Lies at this day
     Where good men pray,
     And nails and hair
     Grow fresh and fair;
     His cheek is red,
     His flesh not dead.

     "Around his bier,
     Good people hear
     The small bells ring
     Over the king,
     Or great bell toll;
     And living soul
     Not one can tell
     Who tolls the bell.

     "Tapers up there,
     (Which Christ holds dear,)
     By day and night
     The altar light:
     Olaf did so,
     And all men know
     In heaven he
     From sin sits free.

     "And crowds do come,
     The deaf and dumb,
     Cripple and blind,
     Sick of all kind,
     Cured to be
     On bended knee;
     And off the ground
     Rise whole and sound.

     "To Olaf pray
     To eke thy day,
     To save thy land
     From spoiler's hand.
     God's man is he
     To deal to thee
     Good crops and peace;
     Let not prayer cease.

     "Book-prayers prevail,
     If, nail for nail (1),
     Thou tellest on,
     Forgetting none."

Thorarin Loftunga was himself with King Svein, and heard these
great testimonials of King Olaf's holiness, that people, by the
heavenly power, could hear a sound over his holy remains as if
bells were ringing, and that candles were lighted of themselves
upon the altar as by a heavenly fire.  But when Thorarin says
that a multitude of lame, and blind, and other sick, who came to
the holy Olaf, went back cured, he means nothing more than that
there were a vast number of persons who at the beginning of King
Olaf's miraculous working regained their health.  King Olaf's
greatest miracles are clearly written down, although they
occurred somewhat later.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Before the entrance of the temples or churches were posts
     called Ondveigis-sulor, with nails called Rigin-naglar --
     the gods' nails -- either for ornament, or, as Schoning
     suggests, to assist the people in reckoning weeks, months,
     festivals, and in reckoning or keeping tale of prayers
     repeated, and to recall them to memory, in the same way as
     beads are used still by the common people in Catholic
     countries for the same purpose. -- L.



260. OF KING OLAF'S AGE AND REIGN.

It is reckoned by those who have kept an exact account, that Olaf
the Saint was king of Norway for fifteen years from the time Earl
Svein left the country; but he had received the title of king
from the people of the Uplands the winter before.  Sigvat the
skald tells this: --

     "For fifteen winters o'er the land
     King Olaf held the chief command,
     Before he fell up in the North:
     His fall made known to us his worth.
     No worthier prince before his day
     In our North land e'er held the sway,
     Too short he held it for our good;
     All men wish now that he had stood."

Saint Olaf was thirty-five years old when he fell, according to
what Are Frode the priest says, and he had been in twenty pitched
battles.  So says Sigvat the skald: --

     "Some leaders trust in God -- some not;
     Even so their men; but well I wot
     God-fearing Olaf fought and won
     Twenty pitched battles, one by one,
     And always placed upon his right
     His Christian men in a hard fight.
     May God be merciful, I pray,
     To him -- for he ne'er shunned his fray."

We have now related a part of King Olaf's story, namely, the
events which took place while he ruled over Norway; also his
death, and how his holiness was manifested.  Now shall we not
neglect to mention what it was that most advanced his honour.
This was his miracles; but these will come to be treated of
afterwards in this book.



261. OF THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE.

King Svein, the son of Canute the Great, ruled over Norway for
some years; but was a child both in age and understanding.  His
mother Alfifa had most sway in the country; and the people of the
country were her great enemies, both then and ever since.  Danish
people had a great superiority given them within the country, to
the great dissatisfaction of the people; and when conversation
turned that way, the people of the rest of Norway accused the
Throndhjem people of having principally occasioned King Olaf the
Holy's fall, and also that the men of Norway were subject,
through them, to the ill government by which oppression and
slavery had come upon all the people, both great and small;
indeed upon the whole community.  They insisted that it was the
duty of the Throndhjem people to attempt opposition and
insurrection, and thus relieve the country from such tyranny;
and, in the opinion of the common people, Throndhjem was also
the chief seat of the strength of Norway at that time, both on
account of the chiefs and of the population of that quarter. 
When the Throndhjem people heard these remarks of their
countrymen, they could not deny that there was much truth in
them, and that in depriving King Olaf of life and land they had
committed a great crime, and at the same time the misdeed had
been ill paid.  The chiefs began to hold consultations and
conferences with each other, and the leader of these was Einar
Tambaskelfer.  It was likewise the case with Kalf Arnason, who
began to find into what errors he had been drawn by King Canute's
persuasion.  All the promises which King Canute had made to Kalf
had been broken; for he had promised him the earldom and the
highest authority in Norway: and although Kalf had been the
leader in the battle against King Olaf, and had deprived him of
his life and kingdom, Kalf had not got any higher dignity than he
had before.  He felt that he had been deceived, and therefore
messages passed between the brothers Kalf, Fin, Thorberg, and
Arne, and they renewed their family friendship.



262. OF KING SVEIN'S LEVY.

When King Svein had been three years in Norway (A.D. 1031-33),
the news was received that a force was assembled in the western
countries, under a chief who called himself Trygve, and gave out
that he was a son of Olaf Trygvason and Queen Gyda of England. 
Now when King Svein heard that foreign troops had come to the
country, he ordered out the people on a levy in the north, and
the most of the lendermen hastened to him; but Einar Tambaskelfer
remained at home, and would not go out with King Svein.  When
King Svein's order came to Kalf Arnason at Eggja, that he should
go out on a levy with King Svein, he took a twenty-benched ship
which he owned, went on board with his house-servants, and in all
haste proceeded out of the fjord, without waiting for King Svein,
sailed southwards to More, and continued his voyage south until
he came to Giske to his brother Thorberg.  Then all the brothers,
the sons of Arne, held a meeting, and consulted with each other.
After this Kalf returned to the north again; but when he came to
Frekeysund, King Svein was lying in the sound before him.  When
Kalf came rowing from the south into the sound they hailed each
other, and the king's men ordered Kalf to bring up with his
vessel, and follow the king for the defence of the country.  Kalf
replies, "I have done enough, if not too much, when I fought
against my own countrymen to increase the power of the Canute
family."  Thereupon Kalf rowed away to the north until he came
home to Eggja.  None of these Arnasons appeared at this levy to
accompany the king.  He steered with his fleet southwards along
the land; but as he could not hear the least news of any fleet
having come from the west, he steered south to Rogaland, and all
the way to Agder; for many guessed that Trygve would first make
his attempt on Viken, because his forefathers had been there, and
had most of their strength from that quarter, and he had himself
great strength by family connection there.



263. KING TRYGVE OLAFSON'S FALL.

When Trygve came from the west he landed first on the coast of
Hordaland, and when he heard King Svein had gone south he went
the same way to Rogaland.  As soon as Svein got the intelligence
that Trygve had come from the west he returned, and steered north
with his fleet; and both fleets met within Bokn in Soknarsund,
not far from the place where Erling Skjalgson fell.  The battle,
which took place on a Sunday, was great and severe.  People tell
that Trygve threw spears with both hands at once.  "So my
father," said he, "taught me to celebrate mass."  His enemies had
said that he was the son of a priest; but the praise must be
allowed him that he showed himself more like a son of King Olaf
Trygvason, for this Trygve was a slaughtering man.  In this
battle King Trygve fell, and many of his men with him; but some
fled, and some received quarter and their lives.  It is thus
related in the ballad of Trygve: --

     "Trygve comes from the northern coast,
     King Svein turns round with all his host;
     To meet and fight, they both prepare,
     And where they met grim death was there.
     From the sharp strife I was not far, --
     I heard the din and the clang of war;
     And the Hordaland men at last gave way,
     And their leader fell, and they lost the day."

This battle is also told of in the ballad about King Svein, thus:
--

     "My girl!  it was a Sunday morn,
     And many a man ne'er saw its eve,
     Though ale and leeks by old wives borne
     The bruised and wounded did relieve.
     'Twas Sunday morn, when Svein calls out,
     `Stem to stem your vessels bind;'
     The raven a mid-day feast smells out,
     And he comes croaking up the wind."

After this battle King Svein ruled the country for some time, and
there was peace in the land.  The winter after it (A.D. 1034) he
passed in the south parts of the country.



264. OF THE COUNSELS OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER AND KALF ARNASON.

Einar Tambaskelfer and Kalf Arnason had this winter meetings and
consultations between themselves in the merchant town (1).  Then
there came a messenger from King Canute to Kalf Arnason, with a
message to send him three dozen axes, which must be chosen and
good.  Kalf replies, "I will send no axes to King Canute.  Tell
him I will bring his son Svein so many, that he shall not think
he is in want of any."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Nidaros, or Throndhjem, is usually called merely the
     merchant town. -- L.



265. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER AND KALF ARNASON'S JOURNEY.

Early in spring (A.D. 1034) Einar Tambaskelfer and Kalf Arnason
made themselves ready for a journey, with a great retinue of the
best and most select men that could be found in the Throndhjem
country.  They went in spring eastward over the ridge of the
country to Jamtaland, from thence to Helsingjaland, and came to
Svithjod, where they procured ships, with which in summer they
proceeded east to Russia, and came in autumn to Ladoga.  They
sent men up to Novgorod to King Jarisleif, with the errand that
they offered Magnus, the son of King Olaf the Saint, to take him
with them, follow him to Norway, and give him assistance to
attain his father's heritage and be made king over the country.
When this message came to King Jarisleif he held a consultation
with the queen and some chiefs, and they all resolved unanimously
to send a message to the Northmen, and ask them to come to King
Jarisleif and Magnus; for which journey safe conduct was given
them.  When they came to Novgorod it was settled among them that
the Northmen who had come there should become Magnus's men, and
be his subjects; and to this Kalf and the other men who had been
against King Olaf at Stiklestad were solemnly bound by oath.  On
the other hand, King Magnus promised them, under oath, secure
peace and full reconciliation; and that he would be true and
faithful to them all when he got the dominions and kingdom of
Norway.  He was to become Kalf Arnason's foster-son; and Kalf
should be bound to do all that Magnus might think necessary for
extending his dominion, and making it more independent than
formerly.



SAGA OF MAGNUS THE GOOD.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Magnus reigned from A.D. 1035 to 1047, when he died.  During the
last year of his reign his half-brother Harald Sigurdson was his
co-regent.

The history of Magnus is treated in "Agrip.", ch. 28-32; in
"Fagrskinna", ch. 119-146; in "Fornmannasogur", part vi., and in
"Knytlinga Saga".

The skalds quoted in this saga are: Arnor the earls' skald 
(Arnor Jarlaskald), Sigvat, Thjodulf, Bjarne Gullbrarskald,
Thorgeir Flek, Od Kikinaskald.



1. MAGNUS OLAFSON'S JOURNEY FROM THE WEST.

After Yule Magnus Olafson began his journey from the East from
Novgorod to Ladoga, where he rigged out his ships as soon as the
ice was loosened in spring (A.D. 1035).  Arnor, the earls' skald,
tells of this in the poem on Magnus: --

     "It is no loose report that he,
     Who will command on land and sea,
     In blood will make his foeman feel
     Olaf's sword Hneiter's sharp blue steel.
     This generous youth, who scatters gold,
     Norway's brave son, but ten years old,
     Is rigging ships in Russia's lake,
     His crown, with friend's support, to take."

In spring Magnus sailed from the East to Svithjod.  So says
Arnor: --

     "The young sword-stainer called a Thing,
     Where all his men should meet their king:
     Heroes who find the eagle food
     Before their lord in arms stood.
     And now the curved plank of the bow
     Cleaves the blue sea; the ocean-plough
     By grey winds driven across the main,
     Reaches Sigtuna's grassy plain."

Here it is related that when King Magnus and his fellow-
travellers sailed from the East to Svithjod, they brought up at
Sigtuna.  Emund Olafson was then king in Svithjod.  Queen Astrid,
who had been married to King Olaf the Saint, was also there.  She
received very gladly and well her stepson King Magnus, and
summoned immediately a numerous Thing of Swedes at a place called
Hangtar.  At the Thing Queen Astrid spoke these words: "Here is
come to us a son of Olaf the Saint, called Magnus, who intends to
make an expedition to Norway to seek his father's heritage.  It
is my great duty to give him aid towards this expedition; for he
is my stepson, as is well known to all, both Swedes and
Norwegians.  Neither shall he want men or money, in so far as I
can procure them or have influence, in order that his strength
may be as great as possible; and all the men who will support
this cause of his shall have my fullest friendship; and I would
have it known that I intend myself to go with him on this
attempt, that all may see I will spare nothing that is in my
power to help him."  She spoke long and cleverly in this strain;
but when she had ended many replied thus: "The Swedes made no
honourable progress in Norway when they followed King Olaf his
father, and now no better success is to be expected, as this man
is but in years of boyhood; and therefore we have little
inclination for this expedition."  Astrid replies, "All men who
wish to be thought of true courage must not be deterred by such
considerations.  If any have lost connections at the side of King
Olaf, or been themselves wounded, now is the time to show a man's
heart and courage, and go to Norway to take vengeance."  Astrid
succeeded so far with words and encouragement that many men
determined to go with her, and follow King Magnus to Norway. 
Sigvat the skald speaks of this:--

     "Now Astrtd, Olaf's widowed Queen, --
     She who so many a change had seen, --
     Took all the gifts of happier days,
     Jewels and rings, all she could raise,
     And at a Thing at Hangrar, where
     The Swedes were numerous, did declare
     What Olaf's son proposed to do,
     And brought her gifts -- their pay -- in view.

     "And with the Swedes no wiser plan,
     To bring out every brave bold man,
     Could have been found, had Magnus been
     The son himself of the good queen.
     With help of Christ, she hoped to bring
     Magnus to be the land's sole king,
     As Harald was, who in his day
     Obtained o'er all the upper sway.

     "And glad are we so well she sped, --
     The people's friend is now their head;
     And good King Magnus always shows
     How much be to Queen Astrid owes.
     Such stepmothers as this good queen
     In truth are very rarely seen;
     And to this noble woman's praise
     The skald with joy his song will raise."

Thiodolf the skald also says in his song of Magnus: --

     "When thy brave ship left the land,
     The bending yard could scarce withstand
     The fury of the whistling gale,
     That split thy many-coloured sail;
     And many a stout ship, tempest-tost,
     Was in that howling storm lost
     That brought them safe to Sigtuna's shore,
     Far from the sound of ocean's roar."



2. MAGNUS'S EXPEDITION FROM SVITHJOD.

King Magnus set out on his journey from Sigtuna with a great
force, which he had gathered in Svithjod.  They proceeded through
Svithjod on foot to Helsingjaland.  So says Arnor, the earl's
skald: --

     "And many a dark-red Swedish shield
     Marched with thee from the Swedish field.
     The country people crowded in,
     To help Saint Olaf's son to win;
     And chosen men by thee were led,
     Men who have stained the wolf's tongue red.
     Each milk-white shield and polished spear
     Came to a splendid gathering there."

Magnus Olafson went from the East through Jamtaland over the
keel-ridge of the country and came down upon the Throndhjem
district, where all men welcomed the king with joy.  But no
sooner did the men of King Svein, the son of Alfifa, hear that
King Magnus Olafson was come to the country, than they fled on
all sides and concealed themselves, so that no opposition was
made to King Magnus; for King Svein was in the south part of the
country.  So says Arnor, the earls' skald: --

     "He who the eagle's talons stains
     Rushed from the East on Throndhjem's plains;
     The terror of his plumed helm
     Drove his pale foemen from the realm.
     The lightning of thy eye so near,
     Great king!  thy foemen could not bear,
     Scattered they fled -- their only care
     If thou their wretched lives wilt spare."



3. MAGNUS MADE KING.

Magnus Olafson advanced to the town (Nidaros), where he was
joyfully received.  He then summoned the people to the Eyra-
thing (1); and when the bondes met at the Thing, Magnus was taken
to be king over the whole land, as far as his father Olaf had
possessed it.  Then the king selected a court, and named
lendermen, and placed bailiffs and officers in all domains and
offices.  Immediately after harvest King Magnus ordered a levy
through all Throndhjem land, and he collected men readily; and
thereafter he proceeded southwards along the coast.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Eyra Thing, held on the ayr of the river Nid, that is, on
     the spit of sand, still called an ayr in the north of
     Scotland, dividing a lake, pond, or river-mouth from the
     sea.  At the Thing held here the kings of Norway were chosen
     and proclaimed.  It was held to be the proper Thing for
     settling disputes between kings in Norway. -- L.



4. KING SVEIN'S FLIGHT.

King Svein Alfifason was staying in South Hordaland when he heard
this news of war.  He immediately sent out war-tokens to four
different quarters, summoned the bondes to him, and made it known
to all that they should join him with men and ships to defend the
country.  All the men who were in the neighbourhood of the king
presented themselves; and the king formed a Thing, at which in a
speech he set forth his business, and said he would advance
against Magnus O1afson and have a battle with him, if the bondes
would aid his cause.  The king's speech was not very long, and
was not received with much approbation by the bondes.  Afterwards
the Danish chiefs who were about the king made long and clever
speeches; but the bondes then took up the word, and answered
them; and although many said they would follow Svein, and fight
on his side, some refused to do so bluntly, some were altogether
silent, and some declared they would join King Magnus as soon as
they had an opportunity.  Then King Svein says, "Methinks very
few of the bondes to whom we sent a message have appeared here;
and of those who have come, and tell us to our face that they
will join King Magnus as soon as they can, we shall have as
little benefit as of those who say they will sit at home quietly.
It is the same with those who say nothing at all.  But as to
those who promise to help us, there are not more than every other
man; and that force will avail us little against King Magnus.  It
is my counsel, therefore, that we do not trust to these bondes;
but let us rather go to the land where all the people are sure
and true to us, and where we will obtain forces to conquer this
country again."  As soon as the king had made known this
resolution all his men followed it, turned their ship's bows, and
hoisted sail.  King Svein sailed eastward along the land, and
then set right over to Denmark without delay, and Hardaknut
received his brother Svein very kindly.  At their first meeting
Hardaknut offered King Svein to divide the kingdom of Denmark
with him, which offer King Svein accepted.



5. KING MAGNUS'S JOURNEY TO NORWAY.

In autumn (A.D. 1035) King Magnus proceeded eastward to the end
of the country, and was received as king throughout the whole
land, and the country people were rejoiced at his arrival.



6. DEATH OF KING CANUTE THE GREAT AND HIS SON SVEIN.

King Svein, Canute's son, went to Denmark, as before related, and
took part in the government with his brother Hardaknut.  In the
same autumn King Canute the Great died in England, the 13th
November, forty years old, and was buried at Winchester.  He had
been king of Denmark for twenty-seven years, and over Denmark and
England together twenty-four years, and also over Norway for
seven years.  King Canute's son Harald was then made king in
England.  The same winter (A.D. 1036) King Svein, Alfifa's son,
died in Denmark.  Thiodolf the skald made these lines concerning
King Magnus: --

     "Through Sweden's dirty roads the throng
     Followed the king in spearmen strong.
     Svein doth fly, in truth afraid,
     And partly by his men betrayed;
     Flying to Denmark o'er the sea,
     He leaves the land quite clear to thee."

Bjarne Gullbrarskald composed the following lines concerning Kalf
Arnason: --

     "By thee the kings got each his own, --
     Magnus by thee got Norway's throne;
     And Svein in Denmark got a seat,
     When out of Norway he was beat.
     Kalf!  It was you who showed the way
     To our young king, the battle-lover, --
     From Russia to his father's sway
     You showed the way, and brought him over."

King Magnus ruled over Norway this winter (A.D. 1036), and
Hardaknut over Denmark.



7. RECONCILIATION BETWEEN HARDAKNUT AND KING MAGNUS.

The following spring (A.D. 1036) the kings on both sides ordered
out a levy, and the news was that they would have a battle at the
Gaut river; but when the two armies approached each other, the
lendermen in the one army sent messengers to their connections
and friends in the other; and it came to a proposal for a
reconciliation between the two kings, especially as, from both
kings being but young and childish, some powerful men, who had
been chosen in each of the countries for that purpose, had the
rule of the country on their account.  It thus was brought about
that there was a friendly meeting between the kings, and in this
meeting a peace was proposed; and the peace was to be a brotherly
union under oath to keep the peace towards each other to the end
of their lives; and if one of them should die without leaving a
son, the longest liver should succeed to the whole land and
people.  Twelve of the principal men in each kingdom swore to the
kings that this treaty should be observed, so long as any one of
them was in life.  Then the kings separated, and each returned
home to his kingdom; and the treaty was kept as long as both
lived.



8. OF QUEEN ASTRID.

Queen Astrid, who had been married to King Olaf the Saint, came
to Norway with King Magnus her stepson, as before related, and
was held by him deservedly in great honour and esteem.  Then came
also Alfhild, King Magnus's mother, to the court, and the king
received her with the greatest affection, and showed her great
respect.  But it went with Alfhild, as it does with many who come
to power and honour, that pride keeps pace with promotion.  She
was ill pleased that Queen Astrid was treated with more respect,
had a higher seat, and more attention.  Alfhild wanted to have a
seat next to the king, but Astrid called Alfhild her slave-woman,
as indeed she had formerly been when Astrid was queen of Norway
and King Olaf ruled the land, and therefore would on no account
let her have a seat beside her, and they could not lodge in the
same house.



9. OF SIGVAT THE SKALD.

Sigvat the skald had gone to Rome, where he was at the time of
the battle of Stiklestad.

He was on his way back from the South when he heard tidings of
King O1af's fall, which gave him great  grief.  He then sang
these lines: --

     "One morning early on a hill,
     The misty town asleep and still,
     Wandering I thought upon the fields.
     Strewed o'er with broken mail and shields,
     Where our king fell, -- our kind good king,
     Where now his happy youthful spring?
     My father too! -- for Thord was then
     One of the good king's chosen men."

One day Sigvat went through a village, and heard a husband
lamenting grievously over the loss of his wife, striking his
breast, tearing his clothes, weeping bitterly, and saying he
wanted to die; and Sigvat sang these lines: --

     "This poor man mourns a much-loved wife,
     Gladly would he be quit of life.
     Must love be paid for by our grief?
     The price seems great for joy so brief.
     But the brave man who knows no fear
     Drops for his king a silent tear,
     And feels, perhaps, his loss as deep
     As those who clamour when they weep."

Sigvat came home to Norway to the Throndhjem country, where he
had a farm and children.  He came from the South along the coast
in a merchant vessel, and as they lay in Hillarsund they saw a
great many ravens flying about.  Then Sigvat said: --

     "I see here many a croaking raven
     Flying about the well-known haven:
     When Olaf's ship was floating here,
     They knew that food for them was near;
     When Olaf's ship lay here wind-bound,
     Oft screamed the erne o'er Hillar sound,
     Impatient for the expected prey,
     And wont to follow to the fray."

When Sigvat came north to the town of Throndhjem King Svein was
there before him.  He invited Sigvat to stay with him, as Sigvat
had formerly been with his father King Canute the Great; but
Sigvat said he would first go home to his farm.  One day, as
Sigvat was walking in the street, he saw the king's men at play,
and he sang: --

     "One day before I passed this way,
     When the king's guards were at their play,
     Something there was -- I need not tell --
     That made me pale, and feel unwell.
     Perhaps it was I thought, just then,
     How noble Olaf with his men,
     In former days, I oft have seen
     In manly games upon this green."

Sigvat then went to his farm; and as he heard that many men
upbraided him with having deserted King Olaf, he made these
verses: --

     "May Christ condemn me still to burn
     In quenchless fire, if I did turn,
     And leave King Olaf in his need, --
     My soul is free from such base deed.
     I was at Rome, as men know well
     Who saw me there, and who can tell
     That there in danger I was then:
     The truth I need not hide from men."

Sigvat was ill at ease in his home.  One day he went out and
sang: --

     "While Olaf lived, how smiled the land!
     Mountain and cliff, and pebbly strand.
     All Norway then, so fresh, so gay,
     On land or sea, where oft I lay.
     But now to me all seems so dready,
     All black and dull -- of life I'm weary;
     Cheerless to-day, cheerless to-morrow --
     Here in the North we have great sorrow."

Early in winter Sigvat went westward over the ridge of the
country to Jamtaland, and onwards to Helsingjaland, and came to
Svithjod.  He went immediately to Queen Astrid, and was with her
a long time, and was a welcome guest.  He was also with her
brother King Emund, and received from him ten marks of proved
silver, as is related in the song of Canute.  Sigvat always
inquired of the merchants who traded to Novgorod if they could
tell him any news of Magnus Olafson.  Sigvat composed these lines
at that time: --

     "I ask the merchant oft who drives
     His trade to Russia, `How he thrives,
     Our noble prince?  How lives he there?
     And still good news -- his praise -- I hear.
     To little birds, which wing their way
     Between the lands, I fain would say,
     How much we long our prince to see,
     They seem to hear a wish from me."



10. OF KING MAGNUS'S FIRST ARRIVAL IN SVITHJOD.

Immediately after Magnus Olafson came to Svithjod from Russia,
Sigvat met him at Queen Astrid's house, and glad they all were at
meeting.  Sigvat then sang: --

     "Thou art come here, prince, young and bold!
     Thou art come home! With joy behold
     Thy land and people.  From this hour
     I join myself to thy young power.
     I could not o'er to Russie hie, --
     Thy mother's guardian here was I.
     It was my punishment for giving
     Magnus his name, while scarcely living."

Afterwards Sigvat travelled with Queen Astrid, and followed
Magnus to Norway.  Sigvat sang thus: --

     "To the crowds streaming to the Thing,
     To see and hear Magnus their king,
     Loudly, young king, I'll speak my mind --
     `God to His people has been kind.'
     If He, to whom be all the praise,
     Give us a son in all his ways
     Like to his sire, no folk on earth
     Will bless so much a royal birth."

Now when Magnus became king of Norway Sigvat attended him, and
was his dearest friend.  Once it happened that Queen Astrid and
Alfhild the king's mother had exchanged some sharp words with
each other, and Sigvat said: --

     "Alfhild!  though it was God's will
     To raise thee -- yet remember still
     The queen-born Astrid should not be
     Kept out of due respect by thee."



11. KING OLAF'S SHRINE.

King Magnus had a shrine made and mounted with gold and silver,
and studded with jewels.  This shrine was made so that in shape
and size it was like a coffin.  Under it was an arched way, and
above was a raised roof, with a head and a roof-ridge.  Behind
were plaited hangings; and before were gratings with padlocks,
which could be locked with a key.  In this shrine King Magnus had
the holy remains of King Olaf deposited, and many were the
miracles there wrought.  Of this Sigvat speaks: --

     "For him a golden shrine is made,
     For him whose heart was ne'er afraid
     Of mortal man -- the holy king,
     Whom the Lord God to heaven did bring.
     Here many a man shall feel his way,
     Stone-blind, unconscious of the day,
     And at the shrine where Olaf lies
     Give songs of praise for opened eyes."

It was also appointed by law that King Olaf's holy day should be
held sacred over all Norway, and that day has been kept ever
afterwards as the greatest of Church days.  Sigvat speaks of it:
--

     "To Olaf, Magnus' father, raise,
     Within my house, the song of praise!
     With joy, yet grief, we'll keep the day
     Olaf to heaven was called away. 
     Well may I keep within my breast
     A day for him in holy rest, --
     My upraised hands a golden ring
     On every branch (1) bear from that king."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The fingers, the branches of the hand, bore golden fruits
     from the generosity of the king. -- L.



12. OF THORER HUND.

Thorer Hund left the country immediately after King Olaf's fall. 
He went all the way to Jerusalem, and many people say he never
came back.  Thorer Hund had a son called Sigurd, father of
Ranveig who was married to Joan, a son of Arne Arnason.  Their
children were Vidkun of Bjarkey, Sigurd Hund, Erling, and
Jardthrud.



13. OF THE MURDER OF HAREK OF THJOTTA.

Harek of Thjotta sat at home on his farm, till King Magnus
Olafson came to the country and was made king.  Then Harek went
south to Throndhjem to King Magnus.  At that time Asmund
Grankelson was in the king's house.  When Harek came to Nidaros,
and landed out of the ship, Asmund was standing with the king in
the gallery outside the loft, and both the king and Asmund knew
Harek when they saw him.  "Now," says Asmund to the king, "I will
pay Harek for my father's murder."  He had in his hand a little
thin hatchet.  The king looked at him, and said, "Rather take
this axe of mine."  It was thick, and made like a club.  "Thou
must know, Asmund," added he, "that there are hard bones in the
old fellow."  Asmund took the axe, went down, and through the
house, and when he came down to the cross-road Harek and his men
coming up met him.  Asmund struck Harek on the head, so that the
axe penetrated to the brains; and that was Harek's death-wound.
Asmund turned back directly to the king's house, and the whole
edge of the axe was turned with the blow.  Then said the king,
"What would thy axe have done, for even this one, I think, is
spoilt?"  King Magnus afterwards gave him a fief and office in
Halogaland, and many are the tales about the strife between
Asmund and Harek's sons.



14. OF THORGEIR FLEK.

Kalf Arnason had at first, for some time, the greatest share of
the government of the country under King Magnus; but afterwards
there were people who reminded the king of the part Kalf had
taken at Stiklestad, and then it became difficult for Kalf to
give the king satisfaction in anything.  Once it happened there
were many men with the king bringing their affairs before him;
and Thorgeir Flek from Sula in Veradal, of whom mention is made
before in the history of King Olaf the Saint, came to him about
some needful business.  The king paid no attention to his words,
but was listening to people who stood near him.  Then Thorgeir
said to the king, so loud that all who were around him could
hear: --

     "Listen, my lord, to my plain word.
     I too was there, and had to bear
     A bloody head from Stiklestad:
     For I was then with Olaf's men.
     Listen to me: well did I see
     The men you're trusting the dead corpse thrusting
     Out of their way, as dead it lay;
     And striking o'er your father's gore."

There was instantly a great uproar, and some told Thorgeir to go
out; but the king called him, and not only despatched his
business to his satisfaction, but promised him favour and
friendship.



115. KALF ARNASON FLIES THE COUNTRY

Soon after this the king was at a feast at the farm of Haug in
Veradel, and at the dinner-table Kalf Arnason sat upon one side
of him, and Einar Tambaskelfer on the other.  It was already come
so far that the king took little notice of Kalf, but paid most
attention to Einar.  The king said to Einar, "Let us ride to-day
to Stiklestad.  I should like to see the memorials of the things
which took place there."  Einar replies, "I can tell thee nothing
about it; but take thy foster-father Kalf with thee; he can give
thee information about all that took place."  When the tables
were removed, the king made himself ready, and said to Kalf,
"Thou must go with me to Stiklestad."

Kalf replied, "That is really not my duty."

Then the king stood up in a passion, and said, "Go thou shalt,
Kalf!" and thereupon he went out.

Kalf put on his riding clothes in all haste, and said to his
foot-boy, "Thou must ride directly to Eggja, and order my house-
servants to ship all my property on board my ship before sunset."

King Magnus now rides to Stiklestad, and Kalf with him.  They
alighted from horseback, and went to the place where the battle
had been.  Then said the king to Kalf, "Where is the spot at
which the king fell?"

Kalf stretched out his spear-shaft, and said, "There he lay when
he fell."

The king: "And where wast thou, Kalf?"

Kalf: "Here where I am now standing."

The king turned red as blood in the face, and said, "Then thy axe
could well have reached him."

Kalf replied, "My axe did not come near him;" and immediately
went to his horse, sprang on horseback, and rode away with all
his men; and the king rode back to Haug.  Kalf did not stop until
he got home in the evening to Eggja.  There his ship lay ready at
the shore side, and all his effects were on board, and the vessel
manned with his house-servants.  They set off immediately by
night down the fjord, and afterwards proceeded day and night,
when the wind suited.  He sailed out into the West sea, and was
there a long time plundering in Ireland, Scotland, and the
Hebudes.  Bjarne Gullbrarskald tells of this in the song about
Kalf: --

     "Brother of Thorberg, who still stood
     Well with the king!  in angry mood
     He is the first to break with thee,
     Who well deserves esteemed to be;
     He is the first who friendship broke,
     For envious men the falsehood spoke;
     And he will he the first to rue
     The breach of friendship 'twixt you two."



16. OF THE THREATS OF THE BONDES.

King Magnus added to his property Veggia, which Hrut had been
owner of, and Kviststad, which had belonged to Thorgeir, and also
Eggja, with all the goods which Kalf had left behind him; and
thus he confiscated to the king's estate many great farms, which
had belonged to those of the bonde-army who had fallen at
Stiklestad.  In like manner, he laid heavy fined upon many of
those who made the greatest opposition to King Olaf.  He drove
some out of the country, took large sums of money from others,
and had the cattle of others slaughtered for his use.  Then the
bondes began to murmur, and to say among themselves, "Will he go
on in the same way as his father and other chiefs, whom we made
an end of when their pride and lawless proceedings became
insupportable?"  This discontent spread widely through the
country.  The people of Sogn gathered men, and, it was said, were
determined to give battle to King Magnus, if he came into the
Fjord district.  King Magnus was then in Hordaland, where he had
remained a long time with a numerous retinue, and was now come to
the resolution to proceed north to Sogn.  When the king's friends
observed this, twelve men had a meeting, and resolved to
determine by casting lots which of them should inform the king of
the discontent of the people; and it so happened that the lot
fell upon Sigvat.



17. OF THE FREE-SPEAKING SONG ("BERSOGLISVISUR").

Sigvat accordingly composed a poem, which he called the "Free-
speaking Song", which begins with saying the king had delayed too
long to pacify the people, who were threatening to rise in tumult
against him.  He said: --

     "Here in the south, from Sogn is spread
     The news that strife draws to a head:
     The bondes will the king oppose --
     Kings and their folk should ne'er be foes.
     Let us take arms, and briskly go
     To battle, if it must be so;
     Defend our king -- but still deplore
     His land plunged in such strife once more."

In this song are also these verses: --

     "Hakon. who at Fitiar died, --
     Hakon the Good, could not abide
     The viking rule. or robber train,
     And all men's love he thus did gain.
     The people since have still in mind
     The laws of Hakon, just and kind;
     And men will never see the day
     When Hakon's laws have passed away.

     "The bondes ask but what is fair;
     The Olafs and the Earls, when there
     Where Magnus sits, confirmed to all
     Their lands and gear -- to great and small,
     Bold Trygve's son, and Harald's heir,
     The Olafs, while on earth they were,
     Observed the laws themselves had made,
     And none was for his own afraid.

     "Let not thy counsellors stir thy wrath
     Against the man who speaks the truth;
     Thy honour lies in thy good sword,
     But still more in thy royal word;
     And, if the people do not lie,
     The new laws turn out not nigh
     So Just and mild, as the laws given
     At Ulfasund in face of heaven.

     "Dread king!  who urges thee to break
     Thy pledged word, and back to take
     Thy promise given?  Thou warrior bold;
     With thy own people word to hold,
     Thy promise fully to maintain,
     Is to thyself the greatest gain:
     The battle-storm raiser he
     Must by his own men trusted be.

     "Who urges thee, who seek'st renown,
     The bondes' cattle to cut down?
     No king before e'er took in hand
     Such viking-work in his own land.
     Such rapine men will not long bear,
     And the king's counsellors will but share
     In their ill-will: when once inflamed,
     The king himself for all is blamed.

     "Do cautious, with this news of treason
     Flying about -- give them no reason.
     We hange the thief, but then we use
     Consideration of the excuse.
     I think, great king (who wilt rejoice
     Eagle and wolf with battle voice),
     It would be wise not to oppose
     Thy bondes, and make them thy foes.

     "A dangerous sign it is, I fear,
     That old grey-bearded men appear
     In corners whispering at the Thing,
     As if they had bad news to bring.
     The young sit still, -- no laugh, or shout, --
     More looks than words passing shout;
     And groups of whispering heads are seen,
     On buttoned breasts, with lowering mien.

     "Among the udalmen, they say
     The king, if he could have his way,
     Would seize the bondes' udal land,
     And free-born men must this withstand.
     In truth the man whose udal field,
     By any doom that law can yield
     From him adjudged the king would take,
     Could the king's throne and power shake."

This verse is the last: --

     "A holy bond between us still
     Makes me wish speedy end to ill:
     The sluggard waits till afternoon, --
     At once great Magnus!  grant our boon.
     Then we will serve with heart and hand,
     With thee we'll fight by sea or land:
     With Olaf's sword take Olaf's mind, 
     And to thy bondes be more kind."

In this song the king was exhorted to observe the laws which his
father had established.  This exhortation had a good effect on
the king, for many others held the same language to him.  So at
last the king consulted the most prudent men, who ordered all
affairs according to law.  Thereafter King Magnus had the law-
book composed in writing which is still in use in Throndhjem
district, and is called "The Grey Goose" (1).  King Magnus
afterwards became very popular, and was beloved by all the
country people, and therefore he was called Magnus the Good.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  "The Grey Goose", so called probably from the colour of the
     parchment on which it is written, is one of the most curious
     relics of the Middle Ages, and give us an unexpected view of
     the social condition of the Northmen in the eleventh
     century.  Law appears to have been so far advanced among
     them that the forms were not merely established, but the
     slightest breach of the legal forms of proceeding involved
     the loss of the case.  The "Grey Goose" embraces subjects
     not dealt with probably by any other code in Europe at that
     period.  The provision for the poor, the  equality of
     weights and measures, police of markets and of sea havens,
     provision for illegitimate children of the poor, inns for
     travellers, wages of servants and support of them in
     sickness, protection of pregnant women and even of domestic
     animals from injury, roads, bridges, vagrants, beggars, are
     subjects treated of in this code. -- "Schlegel." -- L.



18. OF THE ENGLISH KINGS.

The king of the English, King Harald, died (A.D. 1040) five years
after his father King Canute, and was buried beside his father at
Winchester.  After his death his brother Hardaknut, the second
son of the old King Canute, was king of England, and was thus
king both of Denmark and England.  He ruled these kingdoms two
years, and then died of sickness in England, leaving no children.
He was buried at Winchester beside his father.  After his death
Edward the Good, a son of the English king Ethelred (and Emma, a
daughter of Richard earl of Rouen), was chosen king in England.
King Edward the Good was, on his mother's side, a brother of
Harald and Hardaknut, the sons of Canute the Great; and the
daughter of Canute and Queen Emma was Gunhild, who was married to
the Emperor Henry of Germany, who was called Henry the Mild.
Gunhild had been three years in Germamy when she fell sick, and
she died five years after the death of her father King Canute the
Great.



19. OF KING MAGNUS OLAFSON.

When King Magnus Olafson heard of Hardaknut's death, he
immediately sent people south to Denmark, with a message to the
men who had bound themselves by oath to the peace and agreement
which was made between King Magnus and Hardaknut, and reminded
them of their pledge.  He added, as a conclusion, that in summer
(A.D. 1042.) he would come with his army to Denmark to take
possession of his Danish dominions, in terms of the agreement, or
to fall in the field with his army.  So says Arnor, the earls'
skald: --

     "Wise were the words, exceeding wise,
     Of him who stills the hungriest cries
     Of beasts of prey -- the earl's lord;
     And soon fulfilled will be his word:
     `With his good sword he'll Denmark gain,
     Or fall upon a bloody plain;
     And rather than give up his cause,
     Will leave his corpse to raven's claws.'"



20. KING MAGNUS'S ARMAMENT.

Thereafter King Magnus gathered together a great army, and
summoned to him all lendermen and powerful bondes, and collected
war-ships.  When the army was assembled it was very handsome, and
well fitted out.  He had seventy large vessels when he sailed
from Norway.  So says Thiodolf the skald: --

     "Brave king!  the terror of the foe,
     With thee will many a long-ship go.
     Full seventy sail are gathered here,
     Eastward with their great king to steer.
     And southward now the bright keel glides;
     O'er the white waves the Bison rides.
     Sails swell, yards crack, the highest mast
     O'er the wide sea scarce seen at last."

Here it related that King Magnus had the great Bison, which his
father King Olaf had built.  It had more than thirty banks of
rowers; and forward on the bow was a great buffalo head, and aft
on the stern-post was its tail.  Both the head and the tail, and
both sides of the ship, were gilded over.  Of this speaks Arnor,
the earls' skald: --

     "The white foam lashing o'er the deck
     Oft made the glided head to shake;
     The helm down, the vessel's heel
     Oft showed her stem's bright-glacing steel.
     Around Stavanger-point careering,
     Through the wild sea's white flames steering,
     Tackle loud singing to the strain,
     The storm-horse flies to Denmark's plain."

King Magnus set out to sea from Agder, and sailed over to
Jutland.  So says Arnor: --

     "I can relate how through the gale
     The gallant Bison carried sail.
     With her lee gunwale in the wave,
     The king on board, Magnus the brave!
     The iron-clad Thingmen's chief to see
     On Jutland's coast right glad were we, --
     Right glad our men to see a king
     Who in the fight his sword could swing."



21. KING MAGNUS COMES TO DENMARK.

When King Magnus came to Denmark he was joyfully received.  He
appointed a Thing without delay, to which he summoned the people
of the country, and desired they would take him as king,
according to the agreement which had been entered into.  As the
highest of the chiefs of the country were bound by oath to King
Magnus, and were desirous of keeping their word and oath, they
endeavoured zealously to promote the cause with the people.  It
contributed also that King Canute the Great, and all his
descendants, were dead; and a third assistance was, that his
father King Olaf's sanctity and miracles were become celebrated
in all countries.



22. KING MAGNUS CHOSEN KING OF DENMARK.

King Magnus afterwards ordered the people to be summoned to
Viborg to a Thing.  Both in older and later times, the Danes
elected their kings at the Viborg Thing.  At this Thing the Danes
chose Magnus Olafson to be king of all the Danish dorninions.
King Magnus remained long in Denmark during the summer (A.D.
1042); and wherever he came the people received him joyfully, and
obeyed him willingly.  He divided the country into baronies and
districts, and gave fiefs to men of power in the land.  Late in
autumn he returned with his fleet to Norway, but lay for some
time at the Gaut river.



23. OF SVEIN ULFSON.

There was a man, by name Svein, a son of Earl Ulf, and grandson
of Thorgils Sprakaleg.  Svein's mother was Astrid, a daughter of
King Svein Forkbeard.  She was a sister of Canute the Great by
the father's side, and of the Swedish King Olaf Eirikson by the
mother's side; for her mother was Queen Sigrid the Haughty, a
daughter of Skoglar Toste.  Svein Ulfson had been a long time
living with his relation the Swedish king, ever since King Canute
had ordered his father Ulf to be killed, as is related in the
saga of old King Canute, that he had his brother-in-law, Earl
Ulf, murdered in Roskilde; and on which account Svein had not
since been in Denmark.  Svein Ulfson was one of the handsomest
men that could be seen; he was very stout and strong, and very
expert in all exercises, and a well-spoken man withal.  Every one
who knew him said he had every quality which became a good chief.
Svein Ulfson waited upon King Magnus while he lay in the Gaut
river, as before mentioned, and the king received him kindly, as
he was by many advised to do; for Svein was a particularly
popular man.  He could also speak for himself to the king well
and cleverly; so that it came at lasf to Svein's entering into
King Magnus's service, and becoming his man.  They often talked
together afterwards in private concerning many affairs.



24. SVEIN ULFSON CREATED AN EARL.

One day, as King Magnus sat in his high-seat and many people were
around him, Svein Ulfson sat upon a footstool before the king. 
The king then made a speech: "Be it known to you, chiefs, and the
people in general, that I have taken the following resolution.
Here is a distinguished man, both for family and for his own
merits, Svein Ulfson, who has entered into my service, and given
me promise of fidelity.  Now, as ye know, the Danes have this
summer become my men, so that when I am absent from the country
it is without a head; and it is not unknown to you how it is
ravaged by the people of Vindland, Kurland, and others from the
Baltic, as well as by Saxons.  Therefore I promised them a chief
who could defend and rule their land; and I know no man better
fitted, in all respects, for this than Svein Ulfson, who is of
birth to be chief of the country.  I will therefore make him my
earl, and give him the government of my Danish dominions while I
am in Norway; just as King Canute the Great set his father, Earl
Ulf, over Denmark while he was in England."

Then Einar Tambaskelfer said, "Too great an earl -- too great an
earl, my foster-son!"

The king replied in a passion, "Ye have a poor opinion of my
judgment, I think.  Some consider that ye are too great earls,
and others that ye are fit for nothing."

Then the king stood up, took a sword, and girt it on the earl's
loins, and took a shield and fastened it on his shoulders, put a
helmet upon his head, and gave him the title of earl, with the
same fiefs in Denmark which his father Earl Ulf had formerly
held.  Afterwards a shrine was brought forth containing holy
relics, and Svein laid his hand hereon, and swore the oath of
fidelity to King Magnus; upon which the king led the earl to the
highseat by his side.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Twas at the Gaut river's shore,
     With hand on shrine Svein Ulfson swore.
     King Magnus first said o'er the oath,
     With which Svein Ulfson pledged his troth.
     The vows by Svein solemnly given,
     On holy bones of saints in heaven,
     To Magnus seemed both fair and fast;
     He found they were too fair to last."

Earl Svein went thereafter to Denmark, and the whole nation
received him well.  He established a court about him, and soon
became a great man.  In winter (A.D. 1043), he went much about
the country, and made friends among the powerful chiefs; and,
indeed, he was beloved by all the people of the land.



25. KING MAGNUS'S FORAY.

King Magnus proceeded northward to Norway with his fleet, and
wintered there; but when the spring set in (A.D. 1048) he
gathered a large force, with which he sailed south to Demnark,
having heard the news from Vindland that the Vindland people in
Jomsborg had withdrawn from their submission to him.  The Danish
kings had formerly had a very large earldom there, and they first
founded Jomsborg; and now the place was become a very strong
fortress.  When King Magnus heard of this, he ordered a large
fleet and army to be levied in Denmark, and sailed in summer to
Vindland with all his forces, which made a very large army
altogether.  Arnor, the earls' skald, tells of it thus: --

     "Now in this strophe, royal youth!
     I tell no more than the plain truth.
     Thy armed outfit from the strand
     Left many a keel-trace on the sand,
     And never did a king before
     SO many ships to any shore
     Lead on, as thou to Vindland's isle:
     The Vindland men in fright recoil."

Now when King Magnus came to Vindland he attacked Jomsborg, and
soon took the fortress, killing' many people, burning and
destroying both in the town and in the courttry all around, and
making the greatest havoc.  So says Arnor, the earl's skald: --

     "The robbers, hemmed 'twixt death and fire,
     Knew not how to escape thy ire;
     O'er Jomsborg castle's highest towers
     Thy wrath the whirlwind-fire pours.
     The heathen on his false gods calls,
     And trembles even in their halls;
     And by the light from its own flame
     The king this viking-hold o'ercame."

Many people in Vindland submitted to King Magnus, but many more
got out of the way and fled.  King Magnus returned to Denmark,
and prepared to take his winter abode there, and sent away the
Danish, and also a great many of the Norwegian people he had
brought with him.



26. SVEIN RECEIVES THE TITLE OF KING.

The same winter (A.D. 1043), in which Svein Ulfson was raised to
the government of the whole Danish dominions, and had made
friends of a great number of the principal chiefs in Denmark, and
obtained the affections of the people, he assumed by the advice
of many of the chiefs the title of king.  But when in the spring
thereafter he heard that King Magnus had come from the north with
a great army, Svein went over to Scania, from thence up to
Gautland, and so on to Svithjod to his relation, King Emund,
where he remained all summer, and sent spies out to Denmark, to
inquire about the king's proceedings and the number of his men.
Now when Svein heard that King Magnus had let a great part of his
army go away, and also that he was south in Jutland, he rode from
Svithjod with a great body of peopie which the Swedish king had
given him.  When Svein came to Scania the people of that country
received him well, treated him as their king, and men joined him
in crowds.  He then went on to Seeland, where he was also well
received, and the whole country joined  him.  He then went to
Fyen, and laid all the islands under his power; and as the people
also joined him, he collected a great army and many ships of war.



27. OF KING MAGNUS'S MILITARY FORCE.

King Magnus heard this news, and at the same time that the people
of Vindland had a large force on foot.  He summoned people
therefore to come to him, and drew together a great army in
Jutland.  Otto, also, the Duke of Brunsvik, who had married
Ulfhild, King Olaf the Saint's daughter, and the sister of King
Magnus, came to him with a great troop.  The Danish chiefs
pressed King Magnus to advance against the Vindland army, and not
allow pagans to march over and lay waste the country; so it was
resolved that the king with his army should proceed south to
Heidaby.  While King Magnus lay at Skotborg river, on Hlyrskog
Heath, he got intelligence concerning the Vindland army, and that
it was so numerous it could not be counted; whereas King Magnus
had so few, that there seemed no chance for him but to fly.  The
king, however, determined on fighting, if there was any
possibility of gaining the victory; but the most dissuaded him
from venturing on an engagement, and all, as one man, said that
the Vindland people had undoubtedly a prodigious force.  Duke
Otto, however, pressed much to go to battle.  Then the king
ordered the whole army to be gathered by the war trumpets into
battle array, and ordered all the men to arm, and to lie down for
the night under their shields; for he was told the enemy's army
had come to the neighbourhood.  The king was very thoughtful; for
he was vexed that he should be obliged to fly, which fate he had
never experienced before.  He slept but little all night, and
chanted his prayers.



28. OF KING OLAF'S MIRACLE.

The following day was Michaelmas eve.  Towards dawn the king
slumbered, and dreamt that his father, King Olaf the Saint,
appeared to him, and said, "Art thou so melancholy and afraid,
because the Vindland people come against thee with a great army?
Be not afraid of heathens, although they be many; for I shall be
with thee in the battle.  Prepare, therefore, to give battle to
the Vindlanders, when thou hearest my trumpet."  When the king
awoke he told his dream to his men, and the day was then dawning.
At that moment all the people heard a ringing of bells in the
air; and those among King Magnus's men who had been in Nidaros
thought that it was the ringing of the bell called Glod, which
King Olaf had presented to the church of Saint Clement in the
town of Nidaros.



29. BATTLE OF HLYRSKOG HEATH.

Then King Magnus stood up, and ordered the war trumpets to sound,
and at that moment the Vindland army advanced from the south
across the river against him; on which the whole of the king's
army stood up, and advanced against the heathens.  King Magnus
threw off from him his coat of ring-mail, and had a red silk
shirt outside over his clothes, and had in his hands the battle-
axe called Hel (1), which had belonged to King Olaf.  King Magnus
ran on before all his men to the enemy's army, and instantly
hewed down with both hands every man who came against him.  So
says Arnor, the earls' skald: --

     "His armour on the ground he flung
     His broad axe round his head he swung;
     And Norway's king strode on in might,
     Through ringing swords, to the wild fight.
     His broad axe Hel with both hands wielding,
     Shields, helms, and skulls before it yielding,
     He seemed with Fate the world to share,
     And life or death to deal out there."

This battle was not very long; for the king's men were very
fiery, and where they came the Vindland men fell as thick as
tangles heaped up by the waves on the strand.  They who stood
behind betook themselves to flight, and were hewed down like
cattle at a slaughter.  The king himself drove the fugitives
eastward over the heath, and people fell all over the moor.  So
says Thiodolf: --

     "And foremost he pursued,
     And the flying foe down hewed;
     An eagle's feast each stroke,
     As the Vindland helms he broke.
     He drove them o'er the hearth,
     And they fly from bloody death;
     But the moor, a mile or more,
     With the dead was studded o'er."

It is a common saying, that there never was so great a slaughter
of men in the northern lands, since the time of Christianity, as
took place among the Vindland people on Hlyrskog's Heath.  On the
other side, not many of King Magnus's people were killed,
although many were wounded.  After the battle the king ordered
the wounds of his men to be bound; but there were not so many
doctors in the army as were necessary, so the king himself went
round, and felt the hands of those he thought best suited for the
business; and when he had thus stroked their palms, he named
twelve men, who, he thought, had the softest hands, and told them
to bind the wounds of the people; and although none of them had
ever tried it before, they all became afterwards the best of
doctors.  There were two Iceland men among them; the one was
Thorkil, a son of Geire, from Lyngar; the other was Atle, father
of Bard Svarte of Selardal, from whom many good doctors are
descended.  After this battle, the report of the miracle which
King Olaf the Saint had worked was spread widely through the
country; and it was the common saying of the people, that no man
could venture to fight against King Magnus Olafson, for his
father Saint Olaf stood so near to him that his enemies, on that
account. never could do him harm.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hel -- Death: the goddess of Death. -- L.



30. BATTLE AT RE.

King Magnus immediately turned round with his army against Svein,
whom he called his earl, although the Danes called him their
king; and he collected ships, and a great force, and on both
sides a great strength was assembled.  In Svein's army were many
chiefs from Scania, Halland, Seeland, and Fyen; while King
Magnus, on the other hand, had mostly Norway and Jutland men, and
with that war-force he hastened to meet Svein.  They met at Re,
near Vestland; and there was a great battle, which ended in King
Magnus gaining the victory, and Svein taking flight.  After
losing many people, Svein fled back to Scania, and from thence to
Gautland, which was a safe refuge if he needed it, and stood open
to him.  King Magnus returned to Jutland, where he remained all
winter (A.D. 1044) with many people, and had a guard to watch his
ships.  Arnor, the earls' skald, speaks of this: --

     "At Re our battle-loving lord
     In bloody meeting stained his sword, --
     At Re upon the western shore,
     In Vestland warrior's blood once more."



31. BATTLE AT AROS.

Svein Ulfson went directly to his ships as soon as he heard that
King Magnus had left his fleet.  He drew to him all the men he
could, and went round in winter among the islands, Seeland, Fyen,
and others.  Towards Yule he sailed to Jutland, and went into
Limfjord, where many people submitted to him.  He imposed scat
upon some, but some joined King Magnus.  Now when King Magnus
heard what Svein was doing, he betook himself to his ships with
all the Northmen then in Denmark, and a part of the Danish
troops, and steered south along the land.  Svein was then in Aros
with a great force; and when he heard of King Magnus he laid his
vessels without the town, and prepared for battle.  When King
Magnus heard for certain where Svein was, and that the distance
between them was but short, he held a House-thing, and addressed
his people thus: "It is reported to me that the earl and his
fleet are lying not far from us, and that he has many people. 
Now I would let you know that I intend to go out against the earl
and fight for it, although, we have fewer people.  We will, as
formerly, put our trust in God, and Saint Olaf, my father, who
has given us victory sometimes when we fought, even though we had
fewer men than the enemy.  Now I would have you get ready to seek
out the enemy, and give battle the moment we find him by rowing
all to attack, and being all ready for battle."  Thereupon the
men put on their weapons, each man making himself and his place
ready; and then they stretched themselves to their oars.  When
they saw the earl's ships they rowed towards them, and made ready
to attack.  When Svein's men saw the forces they armed
themselves, bound their ships together, and then began one of the
sharpest of battles.  So says Thiodolf, the skald: --

     "Shield against shield, the earl and king
     Made shields and swords together ring.
     The gold-decked heroes made a play
     Which Hild's iron-shirt men say
     They never saw before or since
     On battle-deck; the brave might wince,
     As spear and arrow whistling flew,
     Point blank, death-bringing, quick and true."

They fought at the bows, so that the men only on the bows could
strike; the men on the forecastle thrust with spears: and all who
were farther off shot with light spears or javelins, or war-
arrows.  Some fought with stones or short stakes; and those who
were aft of the mast shot with the bow.  So Says Thiodolf: --

     "Steel-pointed spear, and sharpened stake,
     Made the broad shield on arm shake:
     The eagle, hovering in the air,
     Screamed o'er the prey preparing there.
     And stones and arrows quickly flew,
     And many a warrior bold they slew.
     The bowman never twanged his bow
     And drew his shaft so oft as now;
     And Throndhjem's bowmen on that day
     Were not the first tired of this play:
     Arrows and darts so quickly fly,
     You could not follow with the eye."

Here it appears how hot the battle was with casting weapons. 
King Magnus stood in the beginning of the battle within a shield-
rampart; but as it appeared to him that matters were going on too
slowly, he leaped over the shields, and rushed forward in the
ship, encouraging his men with a loud cheer, and springing to the
bows, where the battle was going on hand to hand.  When his men
saw this they urged each other on with mutual cheering, and there
was one great hurrah through all the ships.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "`On with our ships!  on to the foe!'
     Cry Magnus' men -- on, on they go.
     Spears against shields in fury rattle, --
     Was never seen so fierce a battle."

And now the battle was exceedingly sharp; and in the assault
Svein's ship was cleared of all her forecastle men, upon and on
both sides of the forecastle.  Then Magnus boarded Svein's ship,
followed by his men; and one after the other came up, and made so
stout an assault that Svein's men gave way, and King Magnus first
cleared that ship, and then the rest, one after the other.  Svein
fled, with a great part of his people; but many fell, and many
got life and peace.  Thiodolf tells of this: --

     "Brave Magnus, from the stern springing
     On to the stem, where swords were ringing
     From his sea-raven's beak of gold
     Deals death around -- the brave!  the bold!
     The earl's housemen now begin
     To shrink and fall: their ranks grow thin --
     The king's luck thrives -- their decks are cleared,
     Of fighting men no more appeared.
     The earl's ships are driven to flight,
     Before the king would stop the fight:
     The gold-distributor first then
     Gave quarters to the vanquished men."

This battle was fought on the last Sunday before Yule.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "'Twas on a Sunday morning bright,
     Fell out this great and bloody fight,
     When men were arming, fighting, dying,
     Or on the red decks wounded lying.
     And many a mabn, foredoomed to die,
     To save his life o'erboard did fly,
     But sank; for swimming could not save,
     And dead men rolled in every wave."

Magnus took seven ships from Svein's people.  So says Thiodolf:
--

     "Thick Olaf's son seven vessels cleared,
     And with his fleet the prizes steered.
     The Norway girls will not be sad
     To hear such news -- each from her lad."

He also sings: --

     "The captured men will grieve the most
     Svein and their comrades to have lost;
     For it went ill with those who fled,
     Their wounded had no easy bed.
     A heavy storm that very night
     O'ertook them flying from the fight;
     And skulls and bones are tumbling round,
     Under the sea, on sandy ground."

Svein fled immediately by night to Seeland, with the men who had
escaped and were inclined to follow him; but King Magnus brought
his ships to the shore, and sent his men up the country in the
night-time, and early in the morning they came flown to the
strand with a great booty in cattle.  Thiodolf tells about it: --

     "But yesterday with heavy stones
     We crushed their skulls, and broke their bones,
     And thinned their ranks; and now to-day
     Up through their land we've ta'en our way,
     And driven their cattle to the shore,
     And filled out ships with food in store.
     To save his land from our quick swords,
     Svein will need something more than words."



32. SVEIN'S FLIGHT.

King Magnus sailed with his fleet from the south after Svein to
Seeland; but as soon as the king came there Svein fled up the
country with his men, and Magnus followed them, and pursued the
fugitives, killing all that were laid hold of.  So says Thiodolf:
--

     "The Seeland girl asks with fear,
     `Whose blood-bespattered shield and spear --
     The earl's or king's -- up from the shore
     Moved on with many a warrior more?'
     We scoured through all their muddy lanes,
     Woodlands, and fields, and miry plains.
     Their hasty footmarks in the clay
     Showed that to Ringsted led their way.

     "Spattered with mud from heel to head,
     Our gallant lord his true men led.
     Will Lund's earl halt his hasty flight,
     And try on land another fight?
     His banner yesterday was seen,
     The sand-bills and green trees between,
     Through moss and mire to the strand,
     In arrow flight, leaving the land."

Then Svein fled over to Fyen Island, and King Magnus carried fire
and sword through Seeland, and burnt all round, because their men
had joined Svein's troop in harvest.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "As Svein in winter had destroyed
     The royal house, the king employed
     No little force to guard the land,
     And the earl's forays to withstand.
     An armed band one morn he found,
     And so beset them round and round,
     That Canute's nephew quickly fled, 
     Or he would have been captive led.

     "Our Throndhjem king in his just ire
     Laid waste the land with sword and fire,
     Burst every house, and over all
     Struck terror into great and small.
     To the earl's friends he well repaid
     Their deadly hate -- such wild work made
     On them and theirs, that from his fury,
     Flying for life, away they hurry."



33. BURNING IN FYEN.

As soon as King Magnus heard that Svein with his troops had gone
across to Fyen, he sailed after them; and when Svein heard this
news he went on board ship and sailed to Scania, and from thence
to Gautland, and at last to the Swedish King.  King Magnus landed
in Fyen, and plundered and burned over all; and all of Svein's
men who came there fled far enough.  Thiodolf speaks of it thus:
--

     "Fiona isle, once green and fair,
     Lies black and reeking through the air:
     The red fog rises, thick and hot,
     From burning farm and smouldering cot.
     The gaping thralls in terror gaze
     On the broad upward-spiring blaze,
     From thatched roofs and oak-built walls,
     Their murdered masters' stately halls.

     "Svein's men, my girl, will not forget
     That thrice they have the Norsemen met,
     By sea, by land, with steel, with fire,
     Thrice have they felt the Norse king's ire.
     Fiona's maids are slim and fair,
     The lovely prizes, lads, we'll share:
     Some stand to arms in rank and row,
     Some seize, bring off, and fend with blow."

After this the people of Denmark submitted to King Magnus, and
during the rest of the winter, there was peace.  King Magnus then
appointed some of his men to govern Denmark; and when spring was
advanced he sailed northwards with his fleet to Norway, where he
remained a great part of the summer.



34. BATTLE AT HELGANES

Now, when Svein heard that King Magnus had gone to Norway he rode
straight down, and had many people out of Svithjod with him.  The
people of Scania received him well, and he again collected an
army, with which he first crossed over into Seeland and seized
upon it and Fyen, and all the other isles.  When King Magnus
heard of this he gathered together men and ships, and sailed to
Denmark; and as soon as he knew where Svein was lying with his
ships King Magnus sailed to meet him.  They met at a place called
Helganes, and the battle began about the fall of day.  King
Magnus had fewer men, but larger and better equipt vessels.  So
says Arnor, the earls' skald: --

     "At Helganes -- so goes the tale --
     The brave wolf-feeder, under sail,
     Made many an ocean-elk (1) his prey,
     Seized many a ship ere break of day.
     When twilight fell he urged the fight,
     Close combat -- man to man all night;
     Through a long harvest night's dark hours,
     Down poured the battle's iron showers."

The battle was very hot, and as night advanced the fall of men
was great.  King Magnus, during the whole night, threw hand-
spears.  Thiodolf speaks of this: --

     "And there at Helganes sunk down,
     Sore wounded, men of great renown;
     And Svein's retainers lost all heart,
     Ducking before the flying dart.
     The Norsemen's king let fly his spears,
     His death-wounds adding to their fears;
     For each spear-blade was wet all o'er,
     Up to the shaft in their life-gore."

To make a short tale, King Magnus won the victory in this battle,
and Svein fled.  His ship was cleared of men from stem to stern;
and it went so on board many others of his ships.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "Earl Svein fled from the empty deck,
     His lonely ship an unmann'd wreck;
     Magnus the Good, the people's friend,
     Pressed to the death on the false Svein.
     Hneiter (2), the sword his father bore,
     Was edge and point, stained red with gore;
     Swords sprinkle blood o'er armour bright,

     When kings for land and power fight."

And Arnor says :-

     "The cutters of Bjorn's own brother
     Soon changed their owner for another;
     The king took them and all their gear;
     The crews, however, got off clear."

A great number of Svein's men fell, and King Magnus and his men
had a vast booty to divide. So says Thiodolf: --

     "Where the Norsemen the Danish slew,
     A Gautland shield and breast-plate true
     Fell to my share of spoil by lot;
     And something more i' the south I got:
     (There all the summer swords were ringing)
     A helm, gay arms, and gear worth bringing,
     Home to my quiet lovely one
     I sent -- with news how we had won."

Svein fled up to Scania with all the men who escaped with him;
and King Magnus and his people drove the fugitives up through the
country without meeting any opposition either from Svein's men or
the bondes.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Olaf's brave son then gave command,
     All his ships' crews should quickly land:
     King Magnus, marching at their head,
     A noble band of warriors led.
     A foray through the land he makes;
     Denmark in every quarter shakes.
     Up hill and down the horses scour,
     Carrying the Danes from Norsemen's power."

King Magnus drove with fire and sword through the land.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "And now the Norsemen storm along,
     Following their banner in a throng:
     King Magnus' banner flames on high,
     A star to guide our roaming by.
     To Lund, o'er Scania's peaceful field,
     My shoulder bore my useless shield;
     A fairer land, a better road,
     As friend or foe, I never trod."

They began to burn the habitations all around, and the people
fled on every side.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Our ice-cold iron in great store,
     Our arms, beside the king we bore:
     The Scanian rogues fly at the view
     Of men and steel all sharp and true.
     Their timbered houses flame on high,
     Red flashing over half the sky;
     The blazing town flings forth its light,
     Lighting the cowards on their flight."

And he also sang: --

     "The king o'er all the Danish land
     Roams, with his fire-bringing band:
     The house, the hut, the farm, the town,
     All where men dwelt is burned down.
     O'er Denmark's plains and corn-fields,
     Meadows and moors, are seen our shields:
     Victorious over all, we chase 
     Svein's wounded men from place to place.

     "Across Fiona's moor again,
     The paths late trodden by our men
     We tread once more, until quite near,
     Through morning mist, the foes appear.
     Then up our numerous banners flare
     In the cold early morning air;
     And they from Magnus' power who fly
     Cannot this quick war-work deny."

Then Svein fled eastwards along Scania, and King Magnus returned
to his ships, and steered eastwards also along the Scanian coast,
having got ready with the greatest haste to sail.  Thiodolf sings
thus about it: --

     "No drink but the salt sea
     On board our ships had we,
     When, following our king,
     On board our ships we spring.
     Hard work on the salt sea,
     Off Scania's coast, had we;
     But we laboured for the king,
     To his foemen death to bring."

Svein fled to Gautland, and then sought refuge with the Swedish
king, with whom he remained all winter (A.D. 1046), and was
treated with great respect.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Ship. -- L.
(2)  This was the name of Saint Olaf's sword, which Magnus had
     recovered. -- L.



35. OF KING MAGNUS'S CAMPAIGN.

When King Magnus had subdued Scania he turned about, and first
went to Falster, where he landed, plundered, and killed many
people who had before submitted to Svein.  Arnor speaks of this:
--

     "A bloody vengeance for their guile
     King Magnus takes on Falster Isle;
     The treacherous Danes his fury feel,
     And fall before his purpled steel.
     The battle-field is covered o'er,
     With eagle's prey from shore to shore;
     And the king's courtmen were the first
     To quench with blood the raven's thirst."

Thereafter Magnus with his fleet proceeded to the isle of Fyen,
went on land, plundered, and made great devastation.  So says
Arnor, the earls' skald: --

     "To fair Fiona's grassy shore
     His banner now again he bore:
     He who the mail-shirt's linked chains
     Severs, and all its lustre stains, --
     He will be long remembered there,
     The warrior in his twentieth year,
     Whom their black ravens from afar
     Saluted as he went to war."



36.---OF KING MAGNUS~S BATTLES.

King Magnus remained in Denmark all that winter (A.D. 1046), and
sat in peace.  He had held many battles, and had gained the
victory in all.  So says Od Kikinaskald: --

     "'Fore Michaelmas was struck the blow,
     That laid the Vindland vikings low;
     And people learned with joy to hear
     The clang of arms, and leaders' cheer.
     Short before Yule fell out the day,
     Southward of Aros, where the fray,
     Though not enough the foe to quell,
     Was of the bloodiest men can tell."

And Arnor says: --

     "Olaf's avenger who can sing?
     The skald cannot o'ertake the king,
     Who makes the war-bird daily drain
     The corpse-blood of his foemen slain.
     Four battles won within a year, --
     Breaker of shields!  with swords and spear,
     And hand to hand, exalt thy fame
     Above the kings of greatest name."

King Magnus had three battles with Svein Ulfson.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "To our brave Throndhjem sovereign's praise
     The skald may all his skaldcraft raise;
     For fortune, and for daring deed,
     His song will not the truth exceed.
     After three battles to regain
     What was his own, unjustly ta'en,
     Unjustly kept, and dues denied,
     He levied dues in red-blood dyed."



37. OF KING MAGNUS, AND THORFIN AND RAGNVALD, EARLS OF ORKNEY.

While King Magnus the Good, a son of King Olaf the Saint, ruled
over Norway, as before related, the Earl Ragnvald Brusason lived
with him.  Earl Thorfin Sigurdson, the uncle of Ragnvald, ruled
then over Orkney.  King Magnus sent Ragnvald west to Orkney, and
ordered that Thorfin should let him have his father's heritage.
Thorfin let Ragnvald have a third part of the land along with
him; for so had Erase, the father of Ragnvald, had it at his
dying day.  Earl Thorfin was married to Ingebjorg, the earl-
mother, who was a daughter of Fin Arnason.  Earl Ragnvald thought
he should have two-thirds of the land, as Olaf the Saint had
promised to his father Bruse, and as Bruse had enjoyed as long as
Olaf lived.  This was the origin of a great strife between these
relations, concerning which we have a long saga.  They had a
great battle in Pentland Firth, in which Kalf Arnason was with
Earl Thorfin.  So says Bjarne Gullbrarskald: --

     "Thy cutters, dashing through the tide,
     Brought aid to Earl Thorfin's side,
     Fin's son-in-law, and people say
     Thy aid made Bruse's son give way.
     Kalf, thou art fond of warlike toil,
     Gay in the strife and bloody broil;
     But here 'twas hate made thee contend
     Against Earl Ragnvald, the king's friend."



38. OF KING MAGNUS'S LETTER TO ENGLAND.

King Magnus ruled then both over Denmark and Norway; and when he
had got possession of the Danish dominions he sent ambassadors
over to England to King Edward, who brought to him King Magnus's
letter and seal.  And in this letter there stood, along with a
salutation from King Magnus, these words: -- "Ye must have heard
of the agreement which I and Hardaknut made, -- that he of us two
who survived the other should have all the land and people which
the deceased had possessed.  Now it has so turned out, as ye have
no doubt heard, that I have taken the Danish dominions as my
heritage after Hardaknut.  But before he departed this life he
had England as well as Denmark; therefore I consider myself now,
in consequence of my rights by this agreement, to own England
also.  Now I will therefore that thou deliver to me the kingdom;
otherwise I will seek to take it by arms, both from Denmark and
Norway; and let him rule the land to whom fate gives the
victory."



39. KING EDWARD'S ANSWER TO KING MAGNUS'S LETTER.

Now when King Edward had read this letter, he replied thus: "It
is known to all men in this country that King Ethelred, my
father, was udal-born to this kingdom, both after the old and
new law of inheritance.  We were four sons after him; and when he
by death left the throne my brother Edmund took the government
and kingdom; for he was the oldest of us brothers, and I was well
satisfied that it was so.  And after him my stepfather, Canute
the Great, took the kingdom, and as long as he lived there was no
access to it.  After him my brother Harald was king as long as he
lived; and after him my brother Hardaknut took the kingdoms both
of Denmark and England; for he thought that a just brotherly
division that he should have both England and Denmark, and that I
should have no kingdom at all.  Now he died, and then it was the
resolution of all the people of the country to take me for king
here in England.  So long as I had no kingly title I served only
superiors in all respects, like those who had no claims by birth
to land or kingdom.  Now, however, I have received the kingly
title, and am consecrated king.  I have established my royal
dignity and authority, as my father before me; and while I live I
will not renounce my title.  If King Magnus come here with an
army, I will gather no army against him; but he shall only get
the opportunity of taking England when he has taken my life. 
Tell him these words of mine."  The ambassadors went back to King
Magnus, and told him the answer to their message.  King Magnus
reflected a while, and answered thus: "I think it wisest, and
will succeed best, to let King Edward have his kingdom in peace
for me, and that I keep the kingdoms God has put into my hands." 



SAGA OF HARALD HARDRADE.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Harald, son of Sigurd Syr, was born in the year A.D. 1015, and
left Norway A.D. 1030.  He was called Hardrade, that is, the
severe counsellor, the tyrant, though the Icelanders never
applied this epithet to him.  Harald helped the Icelanders in the
famine of A.D. 1056, and sent them timber for a church at
Thingvol.  It was the Norwegians who gave him the name tyrant in
contrast to the "debonairete" of Magnus.  He came to Norway in
A.D. 1046, and became sole king in A.D. 1047.  He died in A.D.
1066, and his son and successor Magnus died in A.D. 1069.

His saga is to be compared with "Agrip", "Fagrskinna", and
"Morkinskinna".

The skalds quoted are: Thiodolf, Bolverk, Illuge Bryndalaskald,
Stuf the skald, Thorarin Skeggjason, Valgard o' Val, Od
Kikinaskald, Grane Skald, Thorleik the Fair, Stein Herdison, Ulf
the Marshal, Arnor the earls' skald, Thorkel Skallason, and King
Harald Hardrade himself.



1. HARALD ESCAPES FROM THE BATTLE OF STIKLESTAD.

Harald, son of Sigurd Syr, brother of Olaf the Saint, by the same
mother, was at the battle of Stiklestad, and was fifteen years
old when King Olaf the Saint fell, as was before related.  Harald
was wounded, and escaped with other fugitives.  So says Thiodolf:
--

     "At Haug the fire-sparks from his shield
     Flew round the king's head on the field,
     As blow for blow, for Olaf's sake,
     His sword and shield would give and take. 
     Bulgaria's conqueror, I ween,
     Had scarcely fifteen winters seen,
     When from his murdered brother's side
     His unhelmed head he had to hide."

Ragnvald Brusason led Harald from the battle, and the night after
the fray took him to a bonde who dwelt in a forest far from other
people.  The peasant received Harald, and kept him concealed; and
Harald was waited upon until he was quite cured of his wounds.
Then the bonde's son attended him on the way east over the ridge
of the land, and they went by all the forest paths they could,
avoiding the common road.  The bonde's son did not know who it
was he was attending; and as they were riding together between
two uninhabited forests, Harald made these verses:

     "My wounds were bleeding as I rode;
     And down below the bondes strode,
     Killing the wounded with the sword,
     The followers of their rightful lord.
     From wood to wood I crept along,
     Unnoticed by the bonde-throng;
     `Who knows,' I thought, `a day may come
     My name will yet be great at home.'"

He went eastward over the ridge through Jamtaland and
Helsingjaland, and came to Svithjod, where he found Ragnvald
Brusason, and many others of King Olaf's men who had fled from
the battle at Stiklestad, and they remained there till winter was
over.



2. HARALD'S JOURNEY TO CONSTANTINOPLE.

The spring after (A.D. 1031) Harald and Ragnvald got ships, and
went east in summer to Russia to King Jarisleif, and were with
him all the following winter.  So says the skald Bolverk: --

     "The king's sharp sword lies clean and bright,
     Prepared in foreign lands to fight:
     Our ravens croak to have their fill,
     The wolf howls from the distant hill.
     Our brave king is to Russia gone, --
     Braver than he on earth there's none;
     His sharp sword will carve many feast
     To wolf and raven in the East."

King Jarisleif gave Harald and Ragnvald a kind reception, and
made Harald and Ellif, the son of Earl Ragnvald, chiefs over the
land-defence men of the king.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Where Ellif was, one heart and hand
     The two chiefs had in their command;
     In wedge or line their battle order
     Was ranged by both without disorder.
     The eastern Vindland men they drove
     Into a corner; and they move
     The Lesians, although ill at ease,
     To take the laws their conquerors please."

Harald remained several years in Russia, and travelled far and
wide in the Eastern land.  Then he began his expedition out to
Greece, and had a great suite of men with him; and on he went to
Constantinople.  So says Bolverk: --

     "Before the cold sea-curling blast
     The cutter from the land flew past,
     Her black yards swinging to and fro,
     Her shield-hung gunwale dipping low.
     The king saw glancing o'er the bow
     Constantinople's metal glow
     From tower and roof, and painted sails
     Gliding past towns and wooded vales."



3. OF HARALD.

At that time the Greek empire was ruled by the Empress Zoe the
Great, and with her Michael Catalactus.  Now when Harald came to
Constantinople he presented himself to the empress, and went into
her pay; and immediately, in autumn, went on board the galleys
manned with troops which went out to the Greek sea.  Harald had
his own men along with him.  Now Harald had been but a short time
in the army before all the Varings flocked to him, and they all
joined together when there was a battle.  It thus came to pass
that Harald was made chief of the Varings.  There was a chief
over all the troops who was called Gyrger, and who was a relation
of the empress.  Gyrger and Harald went round among all the Greek
islands, and fought much against the corsairs.



4. OF HARALD AND GYRGER CASTING LOTS.

It happened once that Gyrger and the Varings were going through
the country, and they resolved to take their night quarters in a
wood; and as the Varings came first to the ground, they chose the
place which was best for pitching their tents upon, which was the
highest ground; for it is the nature of the land there to be soft
when rain falls, and therefore it is bad to choose a low
situation for your tents.  Now when Gyrger, the chief of the
army, came up, and saw where the Varings had set up their tents,
he told them to remove, and pitch their tents elsewhere, saying
he would himself pitch his tents on their ground.  Harald
replies, "If ye come first to the night quarter, ye take up your
ground, and we must go pitch our tents at some other place where
we best can.  Now do ye so, in the same way, and find a place
where ye will.  It is, I think, the privilege of us Varings here
in the dominions of the Greek emperor to be free, and independent
of all but their own commanders, and bound only to serve the
emperor and empress."  They disputed long and hotly about this,
and both sides armed themselves, and were on the way to fight for
it; but men of understanding came between and separated them.
They said it would be better to come to an agreement about such
questions, so that in future no dispute could arise.  It came
thus to an arbitration between them, at which the best and most
sagacious men should give their judgment in the case.  At this
arbitration it was determined, with the consent of all parties,
that lots should be thrown into a box, and the Greeks and Varings
should draw which was first to ride, or to row, or to take place
in a harbour, or to choose tent ground; and each side should be
satisfied with what the drawing of the lots gave them. 
Accordingly the lots were made and marked.  Harald said to
Gyrger, "Let me see what mark thou hast put upon thy lot, that
we may not both mark our lots in the same way."  He did so.  Then
Harald marked his lot, and put it into the box along with the
other.  The man who was to draw out the lots then took up one of
the lots between his fingers, held it up in the air, and said,
"This lot shall be the first to ride, and to row, and to take
place in harbour and on the tent field."  Harald seized his band,
snatched the die, and threw it into the sea, and called out,
"That was our lot!"  Gyrger said, "Why did you not let other
people see it?"  Harald replies, "Look at the one remaining in
the box, -- there you see your own mark upon it."  Accordingly
the lot which was left behind was examined, and all men saw that
Gyrger's mark was upon it, and accordingly the judgment was given
that the Varings had gained the first choice in all they had been
quarrelling about.  There were many things they quarrelled about,
but the end always was that Harald got his own way.



5. HARALD'S EXPEDITION IN THE LAND OF THE SARACENS (SERKLAND).

They went out all on a campaign in summer.  When the whole army
was thus assembled Harald kept his men out of the battle, or
wherever he saw the least danger, under pretext of saving his
men; but where he was alone with his own men only, he fought so
desperately that they must either come off victorious or die.  It
thus happened often that when he commanded the army he gained
victories, while Gyrger could do nothing.  The troops observed
this, and insisted they would be more successful if Harald alone
was chief of the whole army, and upbraided the general with never
effecting anything, neither himself, nor his people.  Gyrger
again said that the Varings would give him no assistance, and
ordered Harald to go with his men somewhere else, and he, with
the rest of his army, would win what they could.  Harald
accordingly left the army with the Varings and the Latin men, and
Gyrger on his side went off with the Greek troops.  Then it was
seen what each could do.  Harald always gained victories and
booty; but the Greeks went home to Constantinople with their
army, all except a few brave men, who, to gain booty and money,
joined themselves to Harald, and took him for their leader.  He
then went with his troops westward to Africa, which the Varings
call Serkland, where he was strengthened with many men.  In
Serkland he took eighty castles, some of which surrendered, and
others were stormed.  He then went to Sicily.  So says Thiodolf:
--

     "The serpent's bed of glowing gold
     He hates -- the generous king, the bold!
     He who four score towers laid low,
     Ta'en from the Saracenic foe.
     Before upon Sicilian plains,
     Shield joined to shield, the fight he gains,
     The victory at Hild's war game;
     And now the heathens dread his name."

So says also Illuge Bryndala-skald: --

     "For Michael's empire Harald fought,
     And southern lands to Michael brought;
     So Budle's son his friendship showed
     When he brought friends to his abode."

Here it is said that Michael was king of the Greeks at that time.
Harald remained many years in Africa, where he gathered great
wealth in gold, jewels, and all sorts of precious things; and all
the wealth he gathered there which he did not need for his
expenses, he sent with trusty men of his own north to Novgorod to
King Jarisleif's care and keeping.  He gathered together there
extraordinary treasure, as is reasonable to suppose; for he had
the plundering of the part of the world richest in gold and
valuable things, and he had done such great deeds as with truth
are related, such as taking eighty strongholds by his valour.



6. BATTLE IN SICILY.

Now when Harald came to Sicily he plundered there also, and sat
down with his army before a strong and populous castle.  He
surrounded the castle; but the walls were so thick there was no
possibility of breaking into it, and the people of the castle had
enough of provisions, and all that was necessary for defence.
Then Harald hit upon an expedient.  He made his bird-catchers
catch the small birds which had their nests within the castle,
but flew into the woods by day to get food for their young.  He
had small splinters of tarred wood bound upon the backs of the
birds, smeared these over with wax and sulphur, and set fire to
them. As soon as the birds were let loose they all flew at once
to the castle to their young, and to their nests, which they had
under the house roofs that were covered with reeds or straw.  The
fire from the birds seized upon the house roofs; and although
each bird could only carry a small burden of fire, yet all at
once there was a mighty flame, caused by so many birds carrying
fire with them and spreading it widely among the house roofs.
Thus one house after the other was set on fire, until the castle
itself was in flames.  Then the people came out of the castle and
begged for mercy; the same men who for many days had set at
defiance the Greek army and its leader.  Harald granted life and
safety to all who asked quarter, and made himself master of the
place.



7. BATTLE AT ANOTHER CASTLE.

There was another castle before which Harald had come with his
army.  This castle was both full of people and so strong, that
there was no hope of breaking into it.  The castle stood upon a
flat hard plain.  Then Harald undertook to dig a passage from a
place where a stream ran in a bed so deep that it could not be
seen from the castle.  They threw out all the earth into the
stream, to be carried away by the water.  At this work they
laboured day and night, and relieved each other in gangs; while
the rest of the army went the whole day against the castle, where
the castle people shot through their loop-holes.  They shot at
each other all day in this way, and at night they slept on both
sides.  Now when Harald perceived that his underground passage
was so long that it must be within the castle walls, he ordered
his people to arm themselves.  It was towards daybreak that they
went into the passage.  When they got to the end of it they dug
over their heads until they came upon stones laid in lime which
was the floor of a stone hall.  They broke open the floor and
rose into the hall.  There sat many of the castle-men eating and
drinking, and not in the least expecting such uninvited wolves;
for the Varings instantly attacked them sword in hand, and killed
some, and those who could get away fled.  The Varings pursued
them; and some seized the castle gate, and opened it, so that the
whole body of the army got in.  The people of the castle fled;
but many asked quarter from the troops, which was granted to all
who surrendered.  In this way Harald got possession of the place,
and found an immense booty in it.



8. BATTLE AT A THIRD CASTLE.

They came to a third castle, the greatest and strongest of them
all, and also the richest in property and the fullest of people.
Around this castle there were great ditches, so that it evidently
could not be taken by the same device as the former; and they lay
a long time before it without doing anything.  When the castle-
men saw this they became bolder, drew up their array on the
castle walls, threw open the castle gates, and shouted to the
Varings, urging them, and jeering at them, and telling them to
come into the castle, and that they were no more fit for battle
than so many poultry.  Harald told his men to make as if they did
not know what to do, or did not understand what was said.  "For,"
says he, "if we do make an assault we can effect nothing, as they
can throw their weapons under their feet among us; and if we get
in the castle with a party of our people, they have it in their
power to shut them in. and shut out the others; for they have all
the castle gates beset with men.  We shall therefore show them
the same scorn they show us, and let them see we do not fear
them.  Our men shall go out upon the plain nearest to the castle;
taking care, however, to keep out of bow-shot.  All our men shall
go unarmed, and be playing with each other, so that the castle-
men may see we do not regard them or their array."  Thus it went
on for some days, without anything being done.



9. OF ULF AND HALDOR.

Two Iceland men were then with Harald; the one was Haldor (1), a
son of the gode Snorre, who brought this account to Iceland; the
other was Ulf Uspakson, a grandson of Usvifer Spake.  Both were
very strong men, bold under arms, and Harald's best friends; and
both were in this play.  Now when some days were passed the
castle people showed more courage, and would go without weapons
upon the castle wall, while the castle gates were standing open.
The Varings observing this, went one day to their sports with the
sword under their cloaks, and the helmet under their hats.  After
playing awhile they observed that the castle people were off
their guard; and instantly seizing their weapons, they made at
the castle gate.  When the men of the castle saw this they went
against them armed completely, and a battle began in the castle
gate.  The Varings had no shields, but wrapped their cloaks round
their left arms.  Some of them were wounded, some killed, and all
stood in great danger.  Now came Harald with the men who had
remained in the camp, to the assistance of his people; and the
castle-men had now got out upon the walls, from which they shot
and threw stones down upon them; so that there was a severe
battle, and those who were in the castle gates thought that help
was brought them slower than they could have wished.  When Harald
came to the castle gate his standard-bearer fell, and Harald said
to Haldor, "Do thou take up the banner now."  Haldor took up the
banner, and said foolishly, "Who will carry the banner before
thee, if thou followest it so timidly as thou hast done for a
while?"  But these were words more of anger than of truth; for
Harald was one of the boldest of men under arms.  Then they
pressed in, and had a hard battle in the castle; and the end was
that Harald gained the victory and took the castle.  Haldor was
much wounded in the face, and it gave him great pain as long as
he lived.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  One of the descendants of this Haldor was Snorre Sturlason,
     the author of "Heimskring1a".



10. BATTLE AT A FOURTH CASTLE.

The fourth castle which Harald came to was the greatest of all we
have been speaking about.  It was so strong that there was no
possibility of breaking into it.  They surrounded the castle, so
that no supplies could get into it.  When they had remained here
a short time Harald fell sick, and he betook himself to his bed.
He had his tent put up a little from the camp, for he found
quietness and rest out of the clamour and clang of armed men. 
His men went usually in companies to or from him to hear his
orders; and the castle people observing there was something new
among the Varings, sent out spies to discover what this might
mean.  When the spies came back to the castle they had to tell of
the illness of the commander of the Varings, and that no assault
on that account had been made on the castle.  A while after
Harald's strength began to fail, at which his men were very
melancholy and cast down; all which was news to the castle-men.
At last Harald's sickness increased so rapidly that his death was
expected through all the army.  Thereafter the Varings went to
the castle-men; told them, in a parley, of the death of their
commander; and begged of the priests to grant him burial in the
castle.  When the castle people heard this news, there were many
among them who ruled over cloisters or other great establishments
within the place, and who were very eager to get the corpse for
their church, knowing that upon that there would follow very rich
presents.  A great many priests, therefore, clothed themselves in
all their robes, and went out of the castle with cross and shrine
and relics and formed a beautiful procession.  The Varings also
made a great burial.  The coffin was borne high in the air, and
over it was a tent of costly linen and before it were carried
many banners.  Now when the corpse was brought within the castle
gate the Varings set down the coffin right across the entry,
fixed a bar to keep the gates open, and sounded to battle with
all their trumpets, and drew their swords.  The whole army of the
Varings, fully armed. rushed from the camp to the assault of the
castle with shout and cry; and the monks and other priests who
had gone to meet the corpse and had striven with each other who
should be the first to come out and take the offering at the
burial, were now striving much more who should first get away
from the Varings; for they killed before their feet every one who
was nearest, whether clerk or unconsecrated.  The Varings
rummaged so well this castle that they killed all the men,
pillaged everything and made an enormous booty.



11. OF HARALD.

Harald was many years in these campaigns, both in Serkland and
in Sicily.  Then he came back to Constantinople with his troops
and stayed there but a little time before he began his expedition
to Jerusalem.  There he left the pay he had received from the
Greek emperor and all the Varings who accompanied him did the
same.  It is said that on all these expeditions Harald had fought
eighteen regular battles.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Harald the Stern ne'er allowed
     Peace to his foemen, false and proud;
     In eighteen battles, fought and won,
     The valour of the Norseman shone.
     The king, before his home return,
     Oft dyed the bald head of the erne
     With bloody specks, and o'er the waste
     The sharp-claw'd wolf his footsteps traced."



10. HARALD'S EXPEDITION TO PALESTINE.

Harald went with his men to the land of Jerusalem and then up to
the city of Jerusalem, and wheresoever he came in the land all
the towns and strongholds were given up to him.  So says the
skald Stuf, who had heard the king himself relate these tidings:
--

     "He went, the warrior bold and brave,
     Jerusalem, the holy grave,
     And the interior of the land,
     To bring under the Greeks' command;
     And by the terror of his name
     Under his power the country came,
     Nor needed wasting fire and sword
     To yield obediance to his word."

Here it is told that this land came without fire and sword under
Harald's command.  He then went out to Jordan and bathed therein,
according to the custom of other pilgrims.  Harald gave great
gifts to our Lord's grave, to the Holy Cross, and other holy
relics in the land of Jerusalem.  He also cleared the whole road
all the way out to Jordan, by killing the robbers and other
disturbers of the peace.  So says the skald Stuf: --

     "The Agder king cleared far and wide
     Jordan's fair banks on either side;
     The robber-bands before him fled,
     And his great name was widely spread.
     The wicked people of the land
     Were punished here by his dread hand,
     And they hereafter will not miss
     Much worse from Jesus Christ than this."



13. HARALD PUT IN PRISON.

Thereafter he went back to Constantinople.  When Harald returned
to Constantinople from Jerusalem he longed to return to the North
to his native land; and when he heard that Magnus Olafson, his
brother's son, had become king both of Norway and Denmark, he
gave up his command in the Greek service.  And when the empress
Zoe heard of this she became angry and raised an accusation
against Harald that he had misapplied the property of the Greek
emperor which he had received in the campaigns in which he was
commander of the army.  There was a young and beautiful girl
called Maria, a brother's daughter of the empress Zoe, and Harald
had paid his addresses to her; but the empress had given him a
refusal.  The Varings, who were then in pay in Constantinople,
have told here in the North that there went a report among
well-informed people that the empress Zoe herself wanted Harald
for her husband, and that she chiefly blamed Harald for his
determination to leave Constantinople, although another reason
was given out to the public.  Constantinus Monomachus was at
that time emperor of the Greeks and ruled along with Zoe.  On
this account the Greek emperor had Harald made prisoner and
carried to prison.



14. KING OLAF'S MIRACLE AND BLINDING THE GREEK EMPEROR.

When Harald drew near to the prison King Olaf the Saint stood
before him and said he would assist him.  On that spot of the
street a chapel has since been built and consecrated to Saint
Olaf and which chapel has stood there ever since.  The prison was
so constructed that there was a high tower open above, but a door
below to go into it from the street.  Through it Harald was
thrust in, along with Haldor and Ulf.  Next night a lady of
distinction with two servants came, by the help of ladders, to
the top of the tower, let down a rope into the prison and hauled
them up.  Saint Olaf had formerly cured this lady of a sickness
and he had appeared to her in a vision and told her to deliver
his brother.  Harald went immediately to the Varings, who all
rose from their seats when he came in and received him with joy.
The men armed themselves forthwith and went to where the emperor
slept.  They took the emperor prisoner and put out both the eyes
of him.  So says Thorarin Skeggjason in his poem: --

     "Of glowing gold that decks the hand
     The king got plenty in this land;
     But it's great emperor in the strife
     Was made stone-blind for all his life."

So says Thiodolf, the skald, also: --

     "He who the hungry wolf's wild yell
     Quiets with prey, the stern, the fell,
     Midst the uproar of shriek and shout
     Stung tho Greek emperor's eyes both out:
     The Norse king's mark will not adorn,
     The Norse king's mark gives cause to mourn;
     His mark the Eastern king must bear,
     Groping his sightless way in fear."

In these two songs, and many others, it is told that Harald
himself blinded the Greek emperor; and they would surely have
named some duke, count, or other great man, if they had not known
this to be the true account; and King Harald himself and other
men who were with him spread the account.



15. HARALD'S JOURNEY FROM CONSTANTINOPLE.

The same night King Harald and his men went to the house where
Maria slept and carried her away by force.  Then they went down
to where the galleys of the Varings lay, took two of them and
rowed out into Sjavid sound.  When they came to the place where
the iron chain is drawn across the sound, Harald told his men to
stretch out at their oars in both galleys; but the men who were
not rowing to run all to the stern of the galley, each with his
luggage in his hand.  The galleys thus ran up and lay on the iron
chain.  As soon as they stood fast on it, and would advance no
farther, Harald ordered all the men to run forward into the bow.
Then the galley, in which Harald was, balanced forwards and swung
down over the chain; but the other, which remained fast athwart
the chain, split in two, by which many men were lost; but some
were taken up out of the sound.  Thus Harald escaped out of
Constantinople and sailed thence into the Black Sea; but before
he left the land he put the lady ashore and sent her back with a
good escort to Constantinople and bade her tell her relation, the
Empress Zoe, how little power she had over Harald, and how little
the empress could have hindered him from taking the lady.  Harald
then sailed northwards in the Ellipalta and then all round the
Eastern empire.  On this voyage Harald composed sixteen songs for
amusement and all ending with the same words.  This is one of
them: --

     "Past Sicily's wide plains we flew,
     A dauntless, never-wearied crew;
     Our viking steed rushed through the sea,
     As viking-like fast, fast sailed we.
     Never, I think, along this shore
     Did Norsemen ever sail before;
     Yet to the Russian queen, I fear,
     My gold-adorned, I am not dear."

With this he meant Ellisif, daughter of King Jarisleif in
Novgorod.



16. OF KING HARALD.

When Harald came to Novgorod King Jarisleif received him in the
most friendly way and he remained there all winter (A.D. 1045).
Then he took into his own keeping all the gold and the many kinds
of precious things which he had sent there from Constantinople
and which together made up so vast a treasure that no man in the
Northern lands ever saw the like of it in one man's possession.
Harald had been three times in the poluta-svarf while he was in
Constantinople.  It is the custom, namely, there, that every time
one of the Greek emperors dies, the Varings are allowed
poluta-svarf; that is, they may go through all the emperor's
palaces where his treasures are and each may take and keep what
he can lay hold of while he is going through them.



17. KING HARALD'S MARRIAGE.

This winter King Jarisleif gave Harald his daughter Elisabeth in
marriage.  She is called by the Northmen Ellisif.  This is
related by Stuf the Blind, thus: --

     "Agder's chief now got the queen
     Who long his secret love had been.
     Of gold, no doubt, a mighty store
     The princess to her husband bore."

In spring he began his journey from Novgorod and came to
Aldeigjuborg, where he took shipping and sailed from the East in
summer.  He turned first to Svithjod and came to Sigtuna.  So
says Valgard o' Val: --

     "The fairest cargo ship e'er bore,
     From Russia's distant eastern shore
     The gallant Harald homeward brings --
     Gold, and a fame that skald still sings.
     The ship through dashing foam he steers,
     Through the sea-rain to Svithjod veers,
     And at Sigtuna's grassy shores
     His gallant vessel safely moors."



18. THE LEAGUE BETWEEN KING HARALD AND SVEIN ULFSON.

Harald found there before him Svein Ulfson, who the autumn before
(A.D. 1045) had fled from King Magnus at Helganes; and when they
met they were very friendly on both sides.  The Swedish king,
Olaf the Swede, was brother of the mother of Ellisif, Harald's
wife; and Astrid, the mother of Svein, was King Olaf's sister.
Harald and Svein entered into friendship with each other and
confirmed it by oath.  All the Swedes were friendly to Svein,
because he belonged to the greatest family in the country; and
thus all the Swedes were Harald's friends and helpers also, for
many great men were connected with him by relationship.  So says
Thiodolf:

     "Cross the East sea the vessel flew, --
     Her oak-keel a white furrow drew
     From Russia's coast to Swedish land.
     Where Harald can great help command.
     The heavy vessel's leeward side
     Was hid beneath the rushing tide;
     While the broad sail and gold-tipped mast
     Swung to and fro in the hard blast."



19. KING HARALD'S FORAY.

Then Harald and Svein fitted out ships and gathered together a
great force; and when the troops were ready they sailed from the
East towards Denmark.  So says Valgard: --

     "Brave Yngve!  to the land decreed
     To thee by fate, with tempest speed
     The winds fly with thee o'er the sea --
     To thy own udal land with thee.
     As past the Scanlan plains they fly,
     The gay ships glances 'twixt sea and sky,
     And Scanian brides look out, and fear
     Some ill to those they hold most dear."

They landed first in Seeland with their men and herried and
burned in the land far and wide.  Then they went to Fyen, where
they also landed and wasted.  So says Valgard: --

     "Harald! thou hast the isle laid waste,
     The Seeland men away hast chased,
     And the wild wolf by daylight roams
     Through their deserted silent homes.
     Fiona too could not withstand
     The fury of thy wasting hand.
     Helms burst, shields broke, -- Fiona's bounds.
     Were filled with death's terrific sounds.

     "Red flashing in the southern sky,
     The clear flame sweeping broad and high,
     From fair Roeskilde's lofty towers,
     On lowly huts its fire-rain pours;
     And shows the housemates' silent train
     In terror scouring o'er the plain,
     Seeking the forest's deepest glen,
     To house with wolves, and 'scape from men.

     "Few were they of escape to tell,
     For, sorrow-worn, the people fell:
     The only captives form the fray
     Were lovely maidens led away.
     And in wild terror to the strand,
     Down to the ships, the linked band
     Of fair-haired girls is roughly driven,
     Their soft skins by the irons riven."



20. KING MAGNUS'S LEVY.

King Magnus Olafson sailed north to Norway in the autumn after
the battle at Helganes (A.D. 1045).  There he hears the news that
Harald Sigurdson, his relation, was come to Svithjod; and
moreover that Svein Ulfson and Harald had entered into a friendly
bond with each other and gathered together a great force,
intending first to subdue Denmark and then Norway.  King Magnus
then ordered a general levy over all Norway and he soon collected
a great army.  He hears then that Harald and Svein were come to
Denmark and were burning and laying waste the land and that the
country people were everywhere submitting to them.  It was also
told that King Harald was stronger and stouter than other men,
and so wise withal that nothing was impossible to him, and he had
always the victory when he fought a battle; and he was also so
rich in gold that no man could compare with him in wealth. 
Thiodolf speaks thus of it:

     "Norsemen, who stand the sword of foe
     Like forest-stems unmoved by blow!
     My hopes are fled, no peace is near, --
     People fly here and there in fear.
     On either side of Seeland's coast
     A fleet appears -- a white winged host;
     Magnus form Norway takes his course,
     Harald from Sweden leads his force.



21. TREATY BETWEEN HARALD AND MAGNUS.

Those of Harald's men who were in his counsel said that it would
be a great misfortune if relations like Harald and Magnus should
fight and throw a death-spear against each other; and therefore
many offered to attempt bringing about some agreement between
them, and the kings, by their persuasion, agreed to it. 
Thereupon some men were sent off in a light boat, in which they
sailed south in all haste to Denmark, and got some Danish men,
who were proven friends of King Magnus, to propose this matter to
Harald.  This affair was conducted very secretly.  Now when
Harald heard that his relation, King Magnus, would offer him a
league and partition, so that Harald should have half of Norway
with King Magnus, and that they should divide all their movable
property into two equal parts, he accepted the proposal, and the
people went back to King Magnus with this answer.



22. TREATY BETWEEN HARALD AND SVEIN BROKEN.

A little after this it happened that Harald and Svein one evening
were sitting at table drinking and talking together, and Svein
asked Harald what valuable piece of all his property he esteemed
the most.

He answered, it was his banner Land-waster.

Svein asked what was there remarkable about it, that he valued it
so highly.

Harald replied, it was a common saying that he must gain the
victory before whom that banner is borne, and it had turned out
so ever since he had owned it.

Svein replies, "I will begin to believe there is such virtue in
the banner when thou hast held three battles with thy relation
Magnus, and hast gained them all."

Then answered Harald with an angry voice, "I know my relationship
to King Magnus, without thy reminding me of it; and although we
are now going in arms against him, our meeting may be of a better
sort."

Svein changed colour, and said, "There are people, Harald, who
say that thou hast done as much before as only to hold that part
of an agreement which appears to suit thy own interest best."

Harald answers, "It becomes thee ill to say that I have not stood
by an agreement, when I know what King Magnus could tell of thy
proceedings with him."

Thereupon each went his own way.  At night, when Harald went to
sleep within the bulwarks of his vessel, he said to his footboy,
"I will not sleep in my bed to-night, for I suspect there may be
treachery abroad.  I observed this evening that my friend Svein
was very angry at my free discourse.  Thou shalt keep watch,
therefore, in case anything happen in the night."  Harald then
went away to sleep somewhere else, and laid a billet of wood in
his place.  At midnight a boat rowed alongside to the ship's
bulwark; a man went on board, lifted up the cloth of the tent of
the bulwarks, went up, and struck in Harald's bed with a great
ax, so that it stood fast in the lump of wood.  The man instantly
ran back to his boat again, and rowed away in the dark night, for
the moon was set; but the axe remained sticking in the piece of
wood as an evidence.  Thereupon Harald waked his men and let them
know the treachery intended.  "We can now see sufficiently," said
he, "that we could never match Svein if he practises such
deliberate treachery against us; so it will be best for us to get
away from this place while we can.  Let us cast loose our vessel
and row away as quietly as possible."  They did so, and rowed
during the night northwards along the land; and then proceeded
night and day until they came to King Magnus, where he lay with
his army.  Harald went to his relation Magnus, and there was a
joyful meeting betwixt them.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "The far-known king the order gave,
     In silence o'er the swelling wave,
     With noiseless oars, his vessels gay
     From Denmark west to row away;
     And Olaf's son, with justice rare,
     Offers with him the realm to share.
     People, no doubt, rejoiced to find
     The kings had met in peaceful mind."

Afterwards the two relatives conversed with each other and all
was settled by peaceful agreement.



23. KING MAGNUS GIVES HARALD HALF OF NORWAY.

King Magnus lay at the shore and had set up tents upon the land.
There he invited his relation, King Harald, to be his guest at
table; and Harald went to the entertainment with sixty of his men
and was feasted excellently.  Towards the end of the day King
Magnus went into the tent where Harald sat and with him went men
carrying parcels consisting of clothes and arms.  Then the king
went to the man who sat lowest and gave him a good sword, to the
next a shield, to the next a kirtle, and so on, -- clothes, or
weapons, or gold; to all he gave one or the other valuable gift,
and the more costly to the more distinguished men among them.
Then he placed himself before his relation Harald, holding two
sticks in his hand, and said, "Which of these two sticks wilt
thou have, my friend?"

Harald replies, "The one nearest me."

"Then," said King Magnus, "with this stick I give thee half of
the Norwegian power, with all the scat and duties, and all the
domains thereunto belonging, with the condition that everywhere
thou shalt be as lawful king in Norway as I am myself; but when
we are both together in one place, I shall be the first man in
seat, service and salutation; and if there be three of us
together of equal dignity, that I shall sit in the middle, and
shall have the royal tent-ground and the royal landing-place. 
Thou shalt strengthen and advance our kingdom, in return for
making thee that man in Norway whom we never expected any man
should be so long as our head was above ground."  Then Harald
stood up, and thanked him for the high title and dignity.
Thereupon they both sat down, and were very merry together.  The
same evening Harald and his men returned to their ships.



24. HARALD GIVES MAGNUS THE HALF OF HIS TREASURES.

The following morning King Magnus ordered the trumpets to sound
to a General Thing of the people; and when it was seated, he made
known to the whole army the gift he had given to his relation
Harald.  Thorer of Steig gave Harald the title of King there at
the Thing; and the same day King Harald invited King Magnus to
table with him, and he went with sixty men to King Harald's
land-tent, where he had prepared a feast.  The two kings sat
together on a high-seat, and the feast was splendid; everything
went on with magnificence, and the kings' were merry and glad.
Towards the close of the day King Harald ordered many caskets to
be brought into the tent, and in like manner people bore in
weapons, clothes and other sorts of valuables; and all these King
Harald divided among King Magnus's men who were at the feast.
Then he had the caskets opened and said to King Magnus,
"Yesterday you gave us a large kingdom, which your hand won from
your and our enemies, and took us in partnership with you, which
was well done; and this has cost you much.  Now we on our side
have been in foreign parts, and oft in peril of life, to gather
together the gold which you here see.  Now, King Magnus, I will
divide this with you.  We shall both own this movable property,
and each have his equal share of it, as each has his equal half
share of Norway.  I know that our dispositions are different, as
thou art more liberal than I am; therefore let us divide this
property equally between us, so that each may have his share free
to do with as he will."  Then Harald had a large ox-hide spread
out, and turned the gold out of the caskets upon it.  Then scales
and weights were taken and the gold separated and divided by
weight into equal parts; and all people wondered exceedingly that
so much gold should have come together in one place in the
northern countries.  But it was understood that it was the Greek
emperor's property and wealth; for, as all people say, there are
whole houses there full of red gold.  The kings were now very
merry.  Then there appeared an ingot among the rest as big as a
man's hand.  Harald took it in his hands and said, "Where is the
gold, friend Magnus, that thou canst show against this piece?"

King Magnus replied, "So many disturbances and levies have been
in the country that almost all the gold and silver I could lay up
is gone.  I have no more gold in my possession than this ring." 
And he took the ring off his hand and gave it to Harald.

Harald looked at it, and said, "That is but little gold, friend.
for the king who owns two kingdoms; and yet some may doubt
whether thou art rightful owner of even this ring."

Then King Magnus replied, after a little reflection, "If I be not
rightful owner of this ring, then I know not what I have got
right to; for my father, King Olaf the Saint, gave me this ring
at our last parting."

Then said King Harald, laughing, "It is true, King Magnus, what
thou sayest.  Thy father gave thee this ring, but he took the
ring from my father for some trifling cause; and in truth it was
not a good time for small kings in Norway when thy father was in
full power."

King Harald gave Thorer of Steig at that feast a bowl of mountain
birch, that was encircled with a silver ring and had a silver
handle, both which parts were gilt; and the bowl was filled with
money of pure silver.  With that came also two gold rings, which
together stood for a mark.  He gave him also his cloak of dark
purple lined with white skins within, and promised him besides
his friendship and great dignity.  Thorgils Snorrason, an
intelligent man, says he has seen an altar-cloth that was made of
this cloak; and Gudrid, a daughter of Guthorm, the son of Thorer
of Steig, said, according to Thorgil's account, that she had seen
this bowl in her father Guthorm's possession.  Bolverk also tells
of these matters: --

     "Thou, generous king, I have been told,
     For the green land hast given gold;
     And Magnus got a mighty treasure,
     That thou one half might'st rule at pleasure.
     The people gained a blessed peace,
     Which 'twixt the kings did never cease;
     While Svein, disturbed with war's alarms,
     Had his folk always under arms."



25. OF KING MAGNUS.

The kings Magnus and Harald both ruled in Norway the winter after
their agreement (A.D. 1047), and each had his court.  In winter
they went around the Upland country in guest-quarters; and
sometimes they were both together, sometimes each was for
himself.  They went all the way north to Throndhjem, to the town
of Nidaros.  King Magnus had taken special care of the holy
remains of King Olaf after he came to the country; had the hair
and nails clipped every twelve month, and kept himself the keys
that opened the shrine.  Many miracles were worked by King Olaf's
holy remains.  It was not long before there was a breach in the
good understanding between the two kings, as many were so
mischievous as to promote discord between them.



26. OF SVEIN ULFSON.

Svein Ulfson remained behind in the harbour after Harald had gone
away, and inquired about his proceedings.  When he heard at last
of Magnus and Harald having agreed and joined their forces, he
steered with his forces eastward along Scania, and remained there
until towards winter, when he heard that King Magnus and King
Harald had gone northwards to Norway.  Then Svein, with his
troops, came south to Denmark and took all the royal income that
winter (A.D. 1047).



27. OF THE LEVY OF THE TWO KINGS.

Towards spring (A.D. 1047) King Magnus and his relation, King
Harald, ordered a levy in Norway.  It happened once that the
kings lay all night in the same harbour and next day, King
Harald, being first ready, made sail.  Towards evening he brought
up in the harbour in which Magnus and his retinue had intended to
pass the night.  Harald laid his vessel in the royal ground, and
there set up his tents.  King Magnus got under sail later in the
day and came into the harbour just as King Harald had done
pitching his tents.  They saw then that King Harald had taken up
the king's ground and intended to lie there.  After King Magnus
had ordered the sails to be taken in, he said, "The men will now
get ready along both sides of the vessel to lay out their oars,
and some will open the hatches and bring up the arms and arm
themselves; for, if they will not make way for us, we will fight
them."  Now when King Harald sees that King Magnus will give him
battle, he says to his men, "Cut our land-fastenings and back the
ship out of the ground, for friend Magnus is in a passion."  They
did so and laid the vessel out of the ground and King Magnus laid
his vessel in it.  When they were now ready on both sides with
their business, King Harald went with a few men on board of King
Magnus's ship.  King Magnus received him in a friendly way, and
bade him welcome.  King Harald answered, "I thought we were come
among friends; but just now I was in doubt if ye would have it
so.  But it is a truth that childhood is hasty, and I will only
consider it as a childish freak."  Then said King Magnus, "It is
no childish whim, but a trait of my family, that I never forget
what I have given, or what I have not given.  If this trifle had
been settled against my will, there would soon have followed'
some other discord like it.  In all particulars I will hold the
agreement between us; but in the same way we will have all that
belongs to us by that right."  King Harald coolly replied, that
it is an old custom for the wisest to give way; and returned to
his ship.  From such circumstances it was found difficult to
preserve good understanding between the kings.  King Magnus's men
said he was in the right; but others, less wise, thought there
was some slight put upon Harald in the business.  King Harald's
men, besides, insisted that the agreement was only that King
Magnus should have the preference of the harbour-ground when they
arrived together, but that King Harald was not bound to draw out
of his place when he came first.  They observed, also, that King
Harald had conducted himself well and wisely in the matter. 
Those who viewed the business in the worst light insisted that
King Magnus wanted to break the agreement, and that he had done
King Harald injustice, and put an affront on him.  Such disputes
were talked over so long among foolish people, that the spirit of
disagreeing affected the kings themselves.  Many other things
also occurred, in which the kings appeared determined to have
each his own way; but of these little will be set down here.



25. KING MAGNUS THE GOOD'S DEATH.

The kings, Magnus and Harald, sailed with their fleet south to
Denmark; and when Svein heard of their approach, he fled away
east to Scania.  Magnus and Harald remained in Denmark late in
summer, and subdued the whole country.  In autumn they were in
Jutland.  One night, as King Magnus lay in his bed, it appeared
to him in a dream that he was in the same place as his father,
Saint Olaf, and that he spoke to him thus: "Wilt thou choose, my
son, to follow me, or to become a mighty king, and have long
life; but to commit a crime which thou wilt never be able to
expiate?"  He thought he made the answer, "Do thou, father,
choose for me."  Then the king thought the answer was, "Thou
shalt follow me."  King Magnus told his men this dream.  Soon
after he fell sick and lay at a place called Sudathorp.  When he
was near his death he sent his brother, Thorer, with tokens to
Svein Ulfson, with the request to give Thorer the aid he might
require.  In this message King Magnus also gave the Danish
dominions to Svein after his death; and said it was just that
Harald should rule over Norway and Svein over Denmark.  Then King
Magnus the Good died (A.D. 1047), and great was the sorrow of all
the people at his death.  So says Od Kikinaskald: --

     "The tears o'er good King Magnus' bier,
     The people's tears, were all sincere:
     Even they to whom he riches gave
     Carried him heavily to the grave.
     All hearts were struck at the king's end;
     His house-thralls wept as for a friend;
     His court-men oft alone would muse,
     As pondering o'er unthought of news."



29. KING MAGNUS'S FUNERAL.

After this event King Harald held a Thing of his men-at-arms, and
told them his intention to go with the army to Viborg Thing, and
make himself be proclaimed king over the whole Danish dominions,
to which, he said, he had hereditary right after his relation
Magnus, as well as to Norway.  He therefore asked his men for
their aid, and said he thought the Norway man should show himself
always superior to the Dane.  Then Einar Tambaskelfer replies
that he considered it a greater duty to bring his foster-son King
Magnus's corpse to the grave, and lay it beside his father, King
Olaf's, north in Throndhjem town, than to be fighting abroad and
taking another king's dominions and property.  He ended his
speech with saying that he would rather follow King Magnus dead
than any other king alive.  Thereupon he had the body adorned in
the most careful way, so that most magnificent preparations were
made in the king's ship.  Then all the Throndhjem people and all
the Northmen made themselves ready to return home with the king's
body, and so the army was broken up.  King Harald saw then that
it was better for him to return to Norway to secure that kingdom
first, and to assemble men anew; and so King Harald returned to
Norway with all his army.  As soon as he came to Norway he held a
Thing with the people of the country, and had himself proclaimed
king everywhere.  He proceeded thus from the East through Viken,
and in every district in Norway he was named king.  Einar
Tambaskelfer, and with him all the Throndhjem troops, went with
King Magnus's body and transported it to the town of Nidaros,
where it was buried in St. Clement's church, where also was the
shrine of King Olaf the Saint.  King Magnus was of middle size,
of long and clear-complexioned countenance, and light hair, spoke
well and hastily, was brisk in his actions, and extremely
generous.  He was a great warrior, and remarkably bold in arms. 
He was the most popular of kings, prized even by enemies as well
as friends.



30. OF SVEIN ULFSON.

Svein Ulfson remained that autumn in Scania (A.D. 1047), and was
making ready to travel eastward to Sweden, with the intention of
renouncing the title of king he had assumed in Denmark; but just
as he was mounting his horse some men came riding to him with the
first news that King Magnus was dead, and all the Northmen had
left Denmark.  Svein answered in haste, "I call God to witness
that I shall never again fly from the Danish dominions as long as
I live."  Then he got on his horse and rode south into Scania,
where immediately many people crowded to him.  That winter he
brought under his power all the Danish dominions, and all the
Danes took him for their king.  Thorer, King Magnus's brother,
came to Svein in autumn with the message of King Magnus, as
before related, and was well received; and Thorer remained long
with Svein and was well taken care of.



31. OF KING HARALD SIGURDSON.

King Harald Sigurdson took the royal power over all Norway after
the death of King Magnus Olafson; and when he had reigned over
Norway one winter and spring was come (A.D. 1048), he ordered a
levy through all the land of one-half of all men and ships and
went south to Jutland.  He herried and burned all summer wide
around in the land and came into Godnarfjord, where King Harald
made these verses: --

     "While wives of husbands fondly dream,
     Here let us anchor in the stream,
     In Godnarfjord; we'll safely moor
     Our sea-homes, and sleep quite secure."

Then he spoke to Thiodolf, the skald, and asked him to add to it
what it wanted, and he sang: --

     "In the next summer, I foresee,
     Our anchorage in the South will be;
     To hold our sea-homes on the ground,
     More cold-tongued anchors will be found."

To this Bolverk alludes in his song also, that Harald went to
Denmark the summer after King Magnus's death.  Bolverk sings
thus: --

     "Next summer thou the levy raised,
     And seawards all the people gazed,
     Where thy sea-steeds in sunshine glancing
     Over the waves were gaily prancing;
     While the deep ships that plunder bore
     Seemed black specks from the distant shore.
     The Danes, from banks or hillocks green,
     Looked with dismay upon the scene."



32. OF THORKEL GEYSA'S DAUGHTERS.

Then they burned the house of Thorkel Geysa, who was a great
lord, and his daughters they carried off bound to their ships.
They had made a great mockery the winter before of King Harald's
coming with war-ships against Denmark; and they cut their cheese
into the shape of anchors, and said such anchors might hold all
the ships of the Norway king.  Then this was composed: --

     "The Island-girls, we were told,
     Made anchors all our fleet to hold:
     Their Danish jest cut out in cheese
     Did not our stern king's fancy please.
     Now many a maiden fair, may be,
     Sees iron anchors splash the sea,
     Who will not wake a maid next morn
     To laugh at Norway's ships in scorn."

It is said that a spy who had seen the fleet of King Harald said
to Thorkel Geysa's daughters, "Ye said, Geysa's daughters, that
King Harald dared not come to Denmark."  Dotta, Thorkel's
daughter, replied, "That was yesterday."  Thorkel had to ransom
his daughters with a great sum.  So says Grane: --

     "The gold-adorned girl's eye
     Through Hornskeg wood was never dry,
     As down towards the sandy shore
     The men their lovely prizes bore.
     The Norway leader kept at bay
     The foe who would contest the way,
     And Dotta's father had to bring
     Treasure to satisfy the king."

King Harald plundered in Denmark all that summer, and made
immense booty; but he had not any footing in the land that summer
in Denmark.  He went to Norway again in autumn and remained there
all winter (A.D. 1049).



33. MARRIAGES AND CHILDREN OF HARALD HARDRADE.

The winter after King Magnus the Good died, King Harald took
Thora, daughter of Thorberg Arnason, and they had two sons; the
oldest called Magnus, and the other Olaf.  King Harald and Queen
Ellisif had two daughters; the one Maria, the other Ingegerd. 
The spring after the foray which has just been related King
Harald ordered the people out and went with them to Denmark (A.D.
1049), and herried there, and did so summer after summer
thereafter.  So says Stuf, the skald: --

     "Falster lay waste, as people tell, --
     The raven in other isles fared well.
     The Danes were everywhere in fear,
     For the dread foray every year."



34. OF THE ARMAMENTS OF SVEIN ULFSON AND HARALD.

King Svein ruled over all the Danish dominions after King
Magnus's death.  He sat quiet all the winter; but in summer he
lay out in his ships with all his people and it was said he would
go north to Norway with the Danish army and make not less havoc
there than King Harald had made in Denmark.  King Svein proposed
to King Harald in winter (A.D. 1049) to meet him the following
summer at the Gaut river and fight until in the battle-field
their differences were ended, or they were settled peacefully.
They made ready on both sides all winter with their ships, and
called out in summer one-half of all the fighting men.  The same
summer came Thorleik the Fair out of Iceland, and composed a poem
about King Svein Ulfson.  He heard, when he arrived in Norway,
that King Harald had sailed south to the Gaut river against King
Svein.  Then Thorleik sang this: --

     "The wily Svein, I think, will meet
     These inland Norsemen fleet to fleet;
     The arrow-storm, and heaving sea,
     His vantage-fight and field will be.
     God only knows the end of strife,
     Or which shall have his land and life;
     This strife must come to such an end,
     For terms will never bind King Svein."

He also sang these verses: --

     "Harald, whose red shield oft has shone
     O'er herried coasts, and fields hard won,
     Rides in hot wrath, and eager speeds
     O'er the blue waves his ocean-steeds.
     Svein, who in blood his arrows stains,
     Brings o'er the ocean's heaving plains
     His gold-beaked ships, which come in view
     Out from the Sound with many a hue."

King Harald came with his forces to the appointed meeting-place;
but there he heard that King Svein was lying with his fleet at
the south side of Seeland.  Then King Harald divided his forces;
let the greater part of the bonde-troops return home; and took
with him his court-men, his lendermen, the best men-at-arms, and
all the bonde-troops who lived nearest to the Danish land.  They
sailed over to Jutland to the south of Vendilskage, and so south
to Thioda; and over all they carried fire and sword.  So says
Stuf, the skald: --

     "In haste the men of Thyland fly
     From the great monarch's threat'ning eye;
     At the stern Harald's angry look
     The boldest hearts in Denmark shook."

They went forward all the way south to Heidaby, took the merchant
town and burnt it.  Then one of Harald's men made the following
verses: --

     "All Heidaby is burned down!
     Strangers will ask where stood the town.
     In our wild humour up it blazed,
     And Svein looks round him all amazed.
     All Heidaby is burned down!
     From a far corner of the town
     I saw, before the peep of morning,
     Roofs, walls, and all in flame high burning."

To this also Thorleik alludes in his verses, when he heard there
had been no battle at the Gaut river: --

     "The stranger-warrior may inquire
     Of Harald's men, why in his ire
     On Heidaby his wrath he turns,
     And the fair town to ashes burns?
     Would that the day had never come
     When Harald's ships returned home
     From the East Sea, since now the town,
     Without his gain, is burned down!"



35. HARALD'S ESCAPE INTO THE JUTLAND SEA.

Then King Harald sailed north and had sixty ships and the most of
them large and heavily laden with the booty taken in summer; and
as they sailed north past Thioda King Svein came down from the
land with a great force and he challenged King Harald to land and
fight.  King Harald had little more than half the force of King
Svein and therefore he challenged Svein to fight at sea.  So says
Thorleik the Fair: --

     "Svein, who of all men under heaven
     Has had the luckiest birth-hour given,
     Invites his foemen to the field,
     There to contest with blood-stained shield.
     The king, impatient of delay,
     Harald, will with his sea-hawks stay;
     On board will fight, and fate decide
     If Svein shall by his land abide."

After that King Harald sailed north along Vendilskage; and the
wind then came against them, and they brought up under Hlesey,
where they lay all night.  A thick fog lay upon the sea; and when
the morning came and the sun rose they saw upon the other side of
the sea as if many lights were burning.  This was told to King
Harald; and he looked at it, and said immediately, "Strike the
tilts down on the ships and take to the oars.  The Danish forces
are coming upon us, and the fog there where they are must have
cleared off, and the sun shines upon the dragon-heads of their
ships, which are gilded, and that is what we see."  It was so as
he had said.  Svein had come there with a prodigious armed force.
They rowed now on both sides all they could.  The Danish ships
flew lighter before the oars; for the Northmen's ships were both
soaked with water and heavily laden, so that the Danes approached
nearer and nearer.  Then Harald, whose own dragon-ship was the
last of the fleet, saw that he could not get away; so he ordered
his men to throw overboard some wood, and lay upon it clothes and
other good and valuable articles; and it was so perfectly calm
that these drove about with the tide.  Now when the Danes saw
their own goods driving about on the sea, they who were in
advance turned about to save them; for they thought it was easier
to take what was floating freely about, than to go on board the
Northmen to take it.  They dropped rowing and lost ground.  Now
when King Svein came up to them with his ship, he urged them on,
saying it would be a great shame if they, with so great a force,
could not overtake and master so small a number.  The Danes then
began again to stretch out lustily at their oars.  When King
Harald saw that the Danish ships went faster he ordered his men
to lighten their ships, and cast overboard malt, wheat, bacon,
and to let their liquor run out, which helped a little.  Then
Harald ordered the bulwarkscreens, the empty casks and puncheons
and the prisoners to be thrown overboard; and when all these were
driving about on the sea, Svein ordered help to be given to save
the men.  This was done; but so much time was lost that they
separated from each other.  The Danes turned back and the
Northmen proceeded on their way.  So says Thorleik the Fair: --

     "Svein drove his foes from Jutland's coast, --
     The Norsemen's ships would have been lost,
     But Harald all his vessels saves,
     Throwing his booty on the waves.
     The Jutlanders saw, as he threw,
     Their own goods floating in their view;
     His lighten'd ships fly o'er the main
     While they pick up their own again."

King Svein returned southwards with his ships to Hlesey, where he
found seven ships of the Northmen, with bondes and men of the
levy.  When King Svein came to them they begged for mercy, and
offered ransom for themselves.  So says Thorleik the Fair: --

     "The stern king's men good offers make,
     If Svein will ransom for them take;
     Too few to fight, they boldly say
     Unequal force makes them give way.
     The hasty bondes for a word
     Would have betaken them to the sword,
     And have prolonged a bloody strife --
     Such men can give no price for life."



36. OF HARALD.

King Harald was a great man, who ruled his kingdom well in home-
concerns.  Very prudent was he, of good understanding; and it is
the universal opinion that no chief ever was in northern lands of
such deep judgment and ready counsel as Harald.  He was a great
warrior; bold in arms; strong and expert in the use of his
weapons beyond any others, as has been before related, although
many of the feats of his manhood are not here written down.  This
is owing partly to our uncertainty about them, partly to our wish
not to put stories into this book for which there is no
testimony.  Although we have heard, many things talked about, and
even circumstantially related, yet we think it better that
something may be added to, than that it should be necessary to
take something away from our narrative.  A great part of his
history is put in verse by Iceland men, which poems they
presented to him or his sons, and for which reason he was their
great friend.  He was, indeed. a great friend to all the people
of that country; and once, when a very dear time set in, he
allowed four ships to transport meal to Iceland, and fixed that
the shippund should not be dearer than 100 ells of wadmal.  He
permitted also all poor people, who could find provisions to keep
them on the voyage across the sea, to emigrate from Iceland to
Norway; and from that time there was better subsistence in the
country, and the seasons also turned out better.  King Harold
also sent from Norway a bell for the church of which Olaf the
Saint had sent the timbers to Iceland, and which was erected on
the Thing-plain.  Such remembrances of King Harald are found here
in the country, besides many great gifts which he presented to
those who visited him.



37. OF HALDOR SNORRASON.

Haldor Snorrason and Ulf Uspakson, as before related, came to
Norway with King Harald.  They were, in many respects, of
different dispositions.  Haldor was very stout and strong, and
remarkably handsome in appearance.  King Harald gave him this
testimony, that he, among all his men, cared least about doubtful
circumstances, whether they betokened danger or pleasure; for,
whatever turned up, he was never in higher nor in lower spirits,
never slept less nor more on account of them, nor ate or drank
but according to his custom.  Haldor was not a man of many words,
but short in conversation, told his opinion bluntly and was
obstinate and hard; and this could not please the king, who had
many clever people about him zealous in his service.  Haldor
remained a short time with the king; and then came to Iceland,
where he took up his abode in Hjardarholt, and dwelt in that farm
to a very advanced age.



38. OF ULF USPAKSON.

Ulf Uspakson stood in great esteem with King Harald; for he was a
man of great understanding, clever in conversation, active and
brave, and withal true and sincere.  King Harald made Ulf his
marshal, and married him to Jorun, Thorberg's daughter, a sister
of Harald's wife, Thora.  Ulf and Jorun's children were Joan the
Strong of Rasvol, and Brigida, mother of Sauda-Ulf, who was
father of Peter Byrdar-Svein, father of Ulf Fly and Sigrid.  Joan
the Strong's son was Erlend Himalde, father of Archbishop Eystein
and his brothers.  King Harald gave Ulf the marshal the rights of
a lenderman and a fief of twelve marks income, besides a half-
district in the Throndhjem land.  Of this Stein Herdison speaks
in his song about Ulf.



39. OF THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND HOUSES.

King Magnus Olafson built Olaf's church in the town (Nidaros), on
the spot where Olaf's body was set down for the night, and which,
at that time, was above the town.  He also had the king's house
built there.  The church was not quite finished when the king
died; but King Harald had what was wanting completed.  There,
beside the house, he began to construct a stone hall, but it was
not finished when he died.  King Harald had the church called
Mary Church built from the foundations up, at the sandhill close
to the spot where the king's holy remains were concealed in the
earth the first winter after his fall.  It was a large temple,
and so strongly built with lime that it was difficult to break it
when the Archbishop Eystein had it pulled down.  Olaf's holy
remains were kept in Olaf's church while Mary Church was
building.  King Harald had the king's house erected below Mary
Kirk, at the side of the river, where it now is; and he had the
house in which he had made the great hall consecrated and called
Gregorius Church.



40. BEGINNING OF HAKON IVARSON'S STORY.

There was a man called Ivar the White, who was a brave lenderman
dwelling in the Uplands, and was a daughter's son of Earl Hakon
the Great.  Ivar was the handsomest man that could be seen.
Ivar's son was called Hakon; and of him it was said that he was
distinguished above all men then in Norway for beauty, strength
and perfection of figure.  In his very youth he had been sent out
on war expeditions, where he acquired great honour and
consideration, and became afterwards one of the most celebrated
men.



41. OF EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

Einar Tambaskelfer was the most powerful lenderman in the
Throndhjem land.  There was but little friendship between him and
King Harald, although Einar retained all the fiefs he had held
while Magnus the Good lived.  Einar had many large estates, and
was married to Bergliot, a daughter of Earl Hakon, as related
above.  Their son Eindride was grown up, and married to Sigrid, a
daughter of Ketil Kalf and Gunhild, King Harald's sister's
daughter.  Eindride had inherited the beauty of his mother's
father, Earl Hakon, and his sons; and in size and strength he
took after his father, Einar, and also in all bodily perfections
by which Einar had been distinguished above other men.  He was,
also, as well as his father, the most popular of men, which the
sagas, indeed, show sufficiently.



42. OF EARL ORM.

Orm was at that time earl in the Uplands.  His mother was
Ragnhild, a daughter of Earl Hakon the Great, and Orm was a
remarkably clever man.  Aslak Erlingson was then in Jadar at
Sole, and was married to Sigrid, a daughter of Earl Svein
Hakonson.  Gunhild, Earl Svein's other daughter, was married to
the Danish king, Svein Ulfson.  These were the descendants of
Earl Hakon at that time in Norway, besides many other
distinguished people; and the whole race was remarkable for their
very beautiful appearance, and the most of them were gifted with
great bodily perfection, and were all distinguished and important
men.



43. HARALD'S PRIDE.

King Harald was very proud, and his pride increased after he was
established in the country; and it came so far that at last it
was not good to speak against him, or to propose anything
different from what he desired.  So says Thiodolf, the skald: --

     "In arms 'tis right the common man
     Should follow orders, one by one, --
     Should stoop or rise, or run or stand,
     As his war-leader may command;
     But now to the king who feeds the ravens
     The people bend like heartless cravens --
     Nothing is left them, but consent
     To what the king calls his intent."



44. OF THE QUARREL OF KING HARALD AND EINAR TAMBASKELFER.

Einar Tambaskelfer was the principal man among the bondes all
about Throndhjem, and answered for them at the Things even
against the king's men.  Einar knew well the law, and did not
want boldness to bring forward his opinion at Things, even if the
king was present; and all the bondes stood by him.  The king was
very angry at this, and it came so far that they disputed eagerly
against each other.  Einar said that the bondes would not put up
with any unlawful proceedings from him if he broke through the
law of the land; and this occurred several times between them.
Einar then began to keep people about him at home, and he had
many more when he came into the town if the king was there.  It
once happened that Einar came to the town with a great many men
and ships; he had with him eight or nine great war-ships and
nearly 500 men.  When he came to the town he went up from the
strand with his attendants.  King Harald was then in his house,
standing out in the gallery of the loft; and when he saw Einar's
people going on shore, it is said Harald composed these verses:
--

     "I see great Tambaskelfer go,
     With mighty pomp, and pride, and show,
     Across the ebb-shore up the land, --
     Before, behind, an armed band.
     This bonde-leader thinks to rule,
     And fill himself the royal stool.
     A goodly earl I have known
     With fewer followers of his own.
     He who strikes fire from the shield,
     Einar, may some day make us yield,
     Unless our axe-edge quickly ends,
     With sudden kiss, what he intends."

Einar remained several days in the town.



45. THE FALL OF EINAR AND EINDRIDE.

One day there was a meeting held in the town, at which the king
himself was present.  A thief had been taken in the town, and he
was brought before the Thing.  The man had before been in the
service of Einar, who had been very well satisfied with him. 
This was told to Einar, and he well knew the king would not let
the man off, and more because he took an interest in the matter.
Einar, therefore, let his men get under arms, went to the Thing,
and took the man by force.  The friends on both sides then came
between and endeavoured to effect a reconciliation; and they
succeeded so far that a meeting-place was appointed, to which
both should come.  There was a Thing-room in the king's house at
the river Nid, and the king went into it with a few men, while
the most of his people were out in the yard.  The king ordered
the shutters of the loft-opening to be turned, so that there was
but a little space left clear.  When Einar came into the yard
with his people, he told his son Eindride to remain outside with
the men, "for there is no danger here for me."  Eindride remained
standing outside at the room-door.  When Einar came into the
Thing-room, he said, "It is dark in the king's Thing-room."  At
that moment some men ran against him and assaulted him, some with
spears, some with swords.  When Eindride heard this he drew his
sword and rushed into the room; but he was instantly killed along
with his father.  The king's men then ran up and placed
themselves before the door, and the bondes lost courage, having
no leader.  They urged each other on, indeed, and said it was a
shame they should not avenge their chief; but it came to nothing
with their attack.  The king went out to his men, arrayed them in
battle order, and set up his standard: but the bondes did not
venture to assault.  Then the king went with all his men on board
of his ships, rowed down the river, and then took his way out of
the fjord.  When Einar's wife Bergliot, who was in the house
which Einar had possessed in the town, heard of Einar's fall, she
went immediately to the king's house where the bondes army was
and urged them to the attack; but at the same moment the king was
rowing out of the river.  Then said Bergliot, "Now we want here
my relation, Hakon Ivarson: Einar's murderer would not be rowing
out of the river if Ivar stood here on the riverbank."  Then
Bergliot adorned Einar's and Eindride's corpses and buried them
in Olaf's church, beside King Magnus Olafson's burial-place.
After Einar's murder the king was so much disliked for that deed
that there was nothing that prevented the lendermen and bondes
from attacking the king, and giving him battle, but the want of
some leader to raise the banner in the bonde army.



46. OF KING HARALD AND FIN ARNASON.

Fin Arnason dwelt at Austrat in Yrjar, and was King Harald's
lenderman there.  Fin was married to Bergliot, a daughter of
Halfdan, who was a son of Sigurd Syr, and brother of Olaf the
Saint and of King Harald.  Thora, King Harald's wife, was Fin
Arnason's brother's daughter: and Fin and all his brothers were
the king's dearest friends.  Fin Arnason had been for some
summers on a viking cruise in the West sea; and Fin, Guthorm
Gunhildson and Hakon Ivarson had all been together on that
cruise.  King Harald now proceeded out of Throndhjem fjord to
Austrat, where he was well received.  Afterwards the king and Fin
conversed with each other about this new event of Einar's and his
son's death, and of the murmuring and threatening which the
bondes made against the king.

Fin took up the conversation briskly, and said, "Thou art
managing ill in two ways: first, in doing all manner of mischief;
and next, in being so afraid that thou knowest not what to do."

The king replied, laughing, "I will send thee, friend, into the
town to bring about a reconciliation with the bondes; and if that
will not do, thou must go to the Uplands and bring matters to
such an understanding with Hakon Ivarson that he shall not be my
opponent."

Fin replies, "And how wilt thou reward me if I undertake this
dangerous errand; for both the people of Throndhjem and the
people of Upland are so great enemies to thee that it would not
be safe for any of thy messengers to come among them, unless he
were one who would be spared for his own sake?"

The king replies, "Go thou on this embassy, for I know thou wilt
succeed in it if any man can, and bring about a reconciliation;
and then choose whatever favour from us thou wilt."

Fin says, "Hold thou thy word, king, and I will choose my
petition.  I will desire to have peace and safe residence in the
country for my brother Kalf, and all his estates restored; and
also that he receive all the dignity and power he had when he
left the country."

The king assented to all that Fin laid down, and it was confirmed
by witnesses and shake of hand.

Then said Fin, "What shall I offer Hakon, who rules most among
his relations in the land, to induce him to agree to a treaty and
reconciliation with thee?"

The king replies, "Thou shalt first hear what Hakon on his part
requires for making an agreement; then promote my interest as
thou art best able; and deny him nothing in the end short of the
kingdom."

Then King Harald proceeded southwards to More, and drew together
men in considerable numbers.



47. OF FIN ARNASON'S JOURNEY.

Fin Arnason proceeded to the town and had with him his house-
servants, nearly eighty men.  When he came into the town he held
a Thing with the town's people.  Fin spoke long and ably at the
Thing; and told the town's people, and bondes, above all things
not to have a hatred against their king, or to drive him away. 
He reminded them of how much evil they had suffered by acting
thus against King Olaf the Saint; and added, that the king was
willing to pay penalty for this murder, according to the judgment
of understanding and good men.  The effect of Fin's speech was
that the bondes promised to wait quietly until the messengers
came back whom Bergliot had sent to the Uplands to her relative,
Hakon Ivarson.  Fin then went out to Orkadal with the men who had
accompanied him to the town.  From thence he went up to
Dovrefield, and eastwards over the mountains.  He went first to
his son-in-law, Earl Orm, who was married to Sigrid, Fin's
daughter, and told him his business.



48. OF FIN AND HAKON IVARSON.

Then Fin and Earl Orm appointed a meeting with Hakon Ivarson; and
when they met Fin explained his errand to Hakon, and the offer
which King Harald made him.  It was soon seen, from Hakon's
speech, that he considered it to be his great duty to avenge the
death of his relative, Eindride; and added, that word was come to
him from Throndhjem, from which he might expect help in making
head against the king.  Then Fin represented to Hakon how much
better it would be for him to accept of as high a dignity from
the king as he himself could desire, rather than to attempt
raising a strife against the king to whom he was owing service
and duty.  He said if he came out of the conflict without
victory, he forfeited life and property: "And even if thou hast
the victory, thou wilt still be called a traitor to thy
sovereign."  Earl Orm also supported Fin's speech.  After Hakon
had reflected upon this he disclosed what lay on his mind, and
said, "I will be reconciled with King Harald if he will give me
in marriage his relation Ragnhild, King Magnus Olafson's
daughter, with such dower as is suitable to her and she will be
content with."  Fin said he would agree to this on the king's
part; and thus it was settled among them.  Fin then returned to
Throndhjem, and the disturbance and enmity was quashed, so that
the king could retain his kingdom in peace at home; and the
league was broken which Eindride's relations had made among
themselves for opposing King Harald.



49. OF THE COURTSHIP OF HAKON IVARSON.

When the day arrived for the meeting at which this agreement with
Harald should be finally concluded, Hakon went to King Harald;
and in their conference the king said that he, for his part,
would adhere to all that was settled in their agreement.  "Thou
Hakon," says he, "must thyself settle that which concerns
Ragnhild, as to her accepting thee in marriage; for it would not
be advisable for thee, or for any one, to marry Ragnhild without
her consent."  Then Hakon went to Ragnhild, and paid his
addresses to her.  She answered him thus: "I have often to feel
that my father, King Magnus, is dead and gone from me, since I
must marry a bonde; although I acknowledge thou art a handsome
man, expert in all exercises.  But if King Magnus had lived he
would not have married me to any man less than a king; so it is
not to be expected that I will take a man who has no dignity or
title."  Then Hakon went to King Harald and told him his
conversation with Ragnhild, and also repeated the agreement which
was made between him and Fin, who was with him, together with
many others of the persons who had been present at the
conversation between him and Fin.  Hakon takes them all to
witness that such was the agreement that the king should give
Ragnhild the dower she might desire.  "And now since she will
have no man who has not a high dignity, thou must give me such a
title of honour; and, according to the opinion of the people, I
am of birth, family and other qualifications to be called earl."

The king replies, "When my brother, King Olaf, and his son, King
Magnus, ruled the kingdom, they allowed only one earl at a time
to be in the country, and I have done the same since I came to
the kingly title; and I will not take away from Orm the title of
honour I had before given him."

Hakon saw now that his business had not advanced, and was very
ill pleased; and Fin was outrageously angry.  They said the king
had broken his word; and thus they all separated.



50. HAKON'S JOURNEY TO DENMARK.

Hakon then went out of the country with a well-manned ship.  When
he came to Denmark he went immediately to his relative, King
Svein, who received him honourably and gave him great fiefs.
Hakon became King Svein's commander of the coast defence against
the vikings, -- the Vindland people, Kurland people, and others
from the East countries, -- who infested the Danish dominions;
and he lay out with his ships of war both winter and summer.



51. MURDER OF ASMUND.

There was a man called Asmund, who is said to have been King
Svein's sister's son, and his foster-son.  This Asmund was
distinguished among all by his boldness and was much disliked by
the king.  When Asmund came to years, and to age of discretion,
he became an ungovernable person given to murder and
manslaughter.  The king was ill pleased at this, and sent him
away, giving him a good fief, which might keep him and his
followers well.  As soon as Asmund had got this property from the
king he drew together a large troop of people; and as the estate
he had got from the king was not sufficient for his expenses he
took as his own much more which belonged to the king.  When the
king heard this he summoned Asmund to him, and when they met the
king said that Asmund should remain with the court without
keeping any retinue of his own; and this took place as the king
desired.  But when Asmund had been a little time in the king's
court he grew weary of being there, and escaped in the night,
returned to his former companions and did more mischief than
ever.  Now when the king was riding through the country he came
to the neighbourhood where Asmund was, and he sent out men-at-
arms to seize him.  The king then had him laid in irons, and kept
him so for some time in hope he would reform; but no sooner did
Asmund get rid of his chains than he absconded again, gathered
together people and men-at-arms and betook himself to plunder,
both abroad and at home.  Thus he made great forays, killing and
plundering all around.  When the people who suffered under these
disturbances came to the king and complained to him of their
losses, he replied, "Why do ye tell me of this?  Why don't you go
to Hakon Ivarson, who is my officer for the land-defence, placed
on purpose to keep the peace for you peasants, and to hold the
vikings in check?  I was told that Hakon was a gallant and brave
man, but I think he is rather shy when any danger of life is in
the way."  These words of the king were brought to Hakon, with
many additions.  Then Hakon went with his men in search of
Asmund, and when their ships met Hakon gave battle immediately --
and the conflict was sharp, and many men were killed.  Hakon
boarded Asmund's ship and cut down the men before his feet.  At
last he and Asmund met and exchanged blows until Asmund fell.
Hakon cut off his head, went in all haste to King Svein and found
him just sitting down to the dinner-table.  Hakon presented
himself before the table, laid Asmund's head upon the table
before the king, and asked if he knew it.  The king made no
reply, but became as red as blood in the face.  Soon after the
king sent him a message, ordering him to leave his service
immediately. "Tell him I will do him no harm; but I cannot keep
watch over all our relations (1).


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This incident shows how strong, in those ages, was the tie
     of relationship, and the point of honour of avenging its
     injuries -- the clanship spirit. -- L.



52. HAKON IVARSON'S MARRIAGE.

Hakon then left Denmark, and came north to his estates in Norway.
His relation Earl Orm was dead.  Hakon's relations and friends
were glad to see Hakon, and many gallant men gave themselves much
trouble to bring about a reconciliation between King Harald and
Hakon.  It was at last settled in this way, that Hakon got
Ragnhild, the king's daughter, and that King Harald gave Hakon
the earldom, with the same power Earl Orm had possessed.  Hakon
swore to King Harald an oath of fidelity to all the services he
was liable to fulfill.



53. RECONCILIATION OF KING HARALD AND KALF.

Kalf Arnason had been on a viking cruise to the Western countries
ever since he had left Norway; but in winter he was often in the
Orkney Islands with his relative, Earl Thorfin.  Fin Arnason sent
a message to his brother Kalf, and told him the agreement which
he had made with King Harald, that Kalf should enjoy safety in
Norway, and his estates, and all the fiefs he had held from King
Magnus.  When this message came to Kalf he immediately got ready
for his voyage, and went east to Norway to his brother Fin.  Then
Fin obtained the king's peace for Kalf, and when Kalf and the
king met they went into the agreement which Fin and the king had
settled upon before.  Kalf bound himself to the king in the same
way as he had bound himself to serve King Magnus, according to
which Kalf should do all that the king desired and considered of
advantage to his realm.  Thereupon Kalf received all the estates
and fiefs he had before.



54. FALL OF KALF ARNASON.

The summer following (A.D. 1050) King Harald ordered out a levy,
and went to Denmark, where he plundered during the summer; but
when he came south to Fyen he found a great force assembled
against him.  Then the king prepared to land his men from the
ships and to engage in a land-fight.  He drew up his men on board
in order of battle; set Kalf Arnason at the head of one division;
ordered him to make the first attack, and told him where they
should direct their assault, promising that he would soon make a
landing with the others, and come to their assistance.  When Kalf
came to the land with his men a force came down immediately to
oppose them, and Kalf without delay engaged in battle, which,
however, did not last long; for Kalf was immediately overpowered
by numbers, and betook himself to flight with his men.  The Danes
pursued them vigorously, and many of the Northmen fell, and among
them Kalf Arnason.  Now King Harald landed with his array; and
they soon came on their way to the field of battle, where they
found Kalf's body, and bore it down to the ships.  But the king
penetrated into the country, killing many people and destroying
much.  So says Arnor: --

     "His shining sword with blood he stains,
     Upon Fyona's grassy plains;
     And in the midst of fire and smoke,
     The king Fyona's forces broke."



55. FIN ARNASON'S EXPEDITION OUT OF THE COUNTRY.

After this Fin Arnason thought he had cause to be an enemy of the
king upon account of his brother Kalf's death; and said the king
had betrayed Kalf to his fall, and had also deceived him by
making him entice his brother Kalf to come over from the West and
trust to King Harald's faith.  When these speeches came out among
people, many said that it was very foolish in Fin to have ever
supposed that Kalf could obtain the king's sincere friendship and
favour; for they thought the king was the man to seek revenge for
smaller offences than Kalf had committed against the king.  The
king let every one say what he chose, and he himself neither said
yes or no about the affair; but people perceived that the king
was very well pleased with what had happened.  King Harald once
made these verses: --

     "I have, in all, the death-stroke given
     To foes of mine at least eleven;
     Two more, perhaps, if I remember,
     May yet be added to this number,
     I prize myself upon these deeds,
     My people such examples needs.
     Bright gold itself they would despise,
     Or healing leek-herb underprize,
     If not still brought before their eyes."

Fin Arnason took the business so much to heart that he left the
country and went to Denmark to King Svein, where he met a
friendly reception.  They spoke together in private for a long
time; and the end of the business was that Fin went into King
Svein's service, and became his man.  King Svein then gave Fin an
earldom, and placed him in Halland, where he was long earl and
defended the country against the Northmen.



56. OF GUTHORM GUNHILDSON.

Ketil Kalf and Gunhild of Ringanes had a son called Guthorm, and
he was a sister's son to King Olaf and Harald Sigurdson.  Guthorm
was a gallant man, early advanced to manhood.  He was often with
King Harald, who loved him much, and asked his advice; for he was
of good understanding, and very popular.  Guthorm had also been
engaged early in forays, and had marauded much in the Western
countries with a large force.  Ireland was for him a land of
peace; and he had his winter quarters often in Dublin, and was in
great friendship with King Margad.



57. GUTHORM'S JUNCTION WITH THE IRISH KING MARGAD.

The summer after King Margad, and Guthorm with him, went out on
an expedition against Bretland, where they made immense booty.
But when the king saw the quantity of silver which was gathered
he wanted to have the whole booty, and regarded little his
friendship for Guthorm.  Guthorm was ill pleased that he and his
men should be robbed of their share; but the king said, "Thou
must choose one of two things, -- either to be content with what
we determine, or to fight; and they shall have the booty who gain
the victory; and likewise thou must give up thy ships, for them I
will have."  Guthorm thought there were great difficulties on
both sides; for it was disgraceful to give up ships and goods
without a stroke, and yet it was highly dangerous to fight the
king and his force, the king having sixteen ships and Guthorm
only five.  Then Guthorm desired three days' time to consider the
matter with his people, thinking in that time to pacify the king,
and come to a better understanding with him through the mediation
of others; but he could not obtain from the king what he desired. 
This was the day before St. Olaf's day.  Guthorm chose the
condition that they would rather die or conquer like men, than
suffer disgrace, contempt and scorn, by submitting to so great a
loss.  He called upon God, and his uncle Saint Olaf, and
entreated their help and aid; promising to give to the holy man's
house the tenth of all the booty that fell to their share, if
they gained the victory.  Then he arranged his men, placed them
in battle order against the great force, prepared for battle, and
gave the assault.  By the help of God, and the holy Saint Olaf,
Guthorm won the battle.  King Margad fell, and every man, old and
young, who followed him; and after that great victor, Guthorm and
all his people returned home joyfully with all the booty they had
gained by the battle.  Every tenth penny of the booty they had
made was taken, according to the vow, to King Olaf the Saint's
shrine; and there was so much silver that Guthorm had an image
made of it, with rays round the head, which was the size of his
own, or of his forecastle-man's head; and the image was seven
feet high.  The image thus produced was given by Guthorm to King
Olaf of the Saint's temple, where it has since remained as a
memorial of Guthorm's victory and King Olaf the Saint's miracle.



58. MIRACLE OF KING OLAF IN DENMARK.

There was a wicked, evil-minded count in Denmark who had a
Norwegian servant-girl whose family belonged to Throndhjem
district.  She worshipped King Olaf the Saint, and believed
firmly in his sanctity.  But the above mentioned count doubted
all that was told of the holy man's miracles, insisted that it
was nothing but nonsense and idle talk, and made a joke and scorn
of the esteem and honour which all the country people showed the
good king.  Now when his holyday came, on which the mild monarch
ended his life, and which all Northmen kept sacred, this
unreasonable count would not observe it, but ordered his servant-
girl to bake and put fire in the oven that day.  She knew well
the count's mad passion, and that he would revenge himself
severely on her if she refused doing as he ordered.  She went,
therefore, of necessity, and baked in the oven, but wept much at
her work; and she threatened King Olaf that she never would
believe in him, if he did not avenge this misdeed by some
mischance or other.  And now shall ye come to hear a well-
deserved vengeance, and a true miracle.  It happened, namely, in
the same hour that the count became blind of both eyes, and the
bread which she had shoved into the oven was turned into stone!
Of these stones some are now in St. Olaf's temple, and in other
places; and since that time O1afsmas has been always held holy in
Denmark.



59. KING OLAF'S MIRACLE ON A CRIPPLE.

West in Valland, a man had such bad health that he became a
cripple, and went on his knees and elbows.  One day he was upon
the road, and had fallen asleep.  He dreamt that a gallant man
came up to him and asked him where he was going.  When he named
the neighbouring town, the man said to him, "Go to Saint Olaf's
church that stands in London, and there thou shalt be cured."
There-upon he awoke, and went straightway to inquire the road to
Olaf's church in London.  At last he came to London Bridge, and
asked the men of the castle if they could tell him where Olaf's
church was; but they replied, there were so many churches that
they could not tell to whom each of them was consecrated.  Soon
after a man came up and asked him where he wanted to go, and he
answered to Olaf's church.  Then said the man, "We shall both go
together to Olaf's church, for I know the way to it."  Thereupon
they went over the bridge to the shrine where Olaf's church was;
and when they came to the gates of the churchyard the man mounted
over the half-door that was in the gate, but the cripple rolled
himself in, and rose up immediately sound and strong: when he
looked about him his conductor had vanished.



60. KING HARALD'S FORAY IN DENMARK.

King Harald had built a merchant town in the East at Oslo, where
he often resided; for there was good supply from the extensive
cultivated district wide around.  There also he had a convenient
station to defend the country against the Danes, or to make an
attack upon Denmark, which he was in the custom of doing often,
although he kept no great force on foot.  One summer King Harald
went from thence with a few light ships and a few men.  He
steered southwards out from Viken, and, when the wind served,
stood over to Jutland, and marauded; but the country people
collected and defended the country.  Then King Harald steered to
Limfjord, and went into the fjord.  Limfjord is so formed that
its entrance is like a narrow river; but when one gets farther
into the fjord it spreads out into a wide sea.  King Harald
marauded on both sides of the land; and when the Danes gathered
together on every side to oppose him, he lay at a small island
which was uncultivated.  They wanted drink on board his ships,
and went up into the island to seek water; but finding none, they
reported it to the king.  He ordered them to look for some long
earthworms on the island, and when they found one they brought it
to the king.  He ordered the people to bring the worm to a fire,
and bake it before it, so that it should be thirsty.  Then he
ordered a thread to be tied round the tail of the worm, and to
let it loose.  The worm crept away immediately, while thread
wound off from the clew as the worm took it away; and the people
followed the worm until it sought downwards in the earth.  There
the king ordered them to dig for water, which they did, and found
so much water that they had no want of it.  King Harald now heard
from his spies that King Svein was come with a large armament to
the mouth of the fjord; but that it was too late for him to come
into it, as only one ship at a time can come in.  King Harald
then steered with his fleet in through the fjord to where it was
broadest to a place called Lusbreid.  In the inmost bight, there
is but a narrow neck of land dividing the fjord from the West
sea.  Thither King Harald rowed with his men towards evening; and
at night when it was dark he unloaded his ships, drew them over
the neck of land into the West sea, loaded them again, and was
ready with all this before day.  He then steered northwards along
the Jutland coast.  People then said that Harald had escaped from
the hands of the Danes.  Harald said that he would come to
Denmark next time with more people and larger vessels.  King
Harald then proceeded north to Throndhjem.



61. KING HARALD HAD A SHIP BUILT.

King Harald remained all winter at Nidaros (A.D. 1062) and had a
vessel built out upon the strand, and it was a buss.  The ship
was built of the same size as the Long Serpent, and every part of
her was finished with the greatest care.  On the stem was a
dragon-head, and on the stern a dragon-tail, and the sides of the
bows of the ship were gilt.  The vessel was of thirty-five rowers
benches, and was large for that size, and was remarkably
handsome; for the king had everything belonging to the ship's
equipment of the best, both sails and rigging, anchors and
cables.  King Harald sent a message in winter south to Denmark to
King Svein, that he should come northwards in spring; that they
should meet at the Gaut river and fight, and so settle the
division of the countries that the one who gained the victory
should have both kingdoms.



62. KING HARALD'S CHALLENGE.

King Harald during this winter called out a general levy of all
the people of Norway, and assembled a great force towards spring.
Then Harald had his great ship drawn down and put into the river
Nid, and set up the dragon's head on her.  Thiodolf, the skald,
sang about it thus: --

     "My lovely girl!  the sight was grand
     When the great war-ships down the strand
     Into the river gently slid,
     And all below her sides was hid.
     Come, lovely girl, and see the show! --
     Her sides that on the water glow,
     Her serpent-head with golden mane,
     All shining back from the Nid again."

Then King Harald rigged out his ship, got ready for sea, and when
he had all in order went out of the river.  His men rowed very
skilfully and beautifully.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "It was upon a Saturday,
     Ship-tilts were struck and stowed away,
     And past the town our dragon glides,
     That girls might see our glancing sides.
     Out from the Nid brave Harald steers;
     Westward at first the dragon veers;
     Our lads together down with oars,
     The splash is echoed round the shores.

     "Their oars our king's men handle well,
     One stroke is all the eye can tell:
     All level o'er the water rise;
     The girls look on in sweet surprise.
     Such things, they think, can ne'er give way;
     The little know the battle day.
     The Danish girls, who dread our shout,
     Might wish our ship-gear not so stout.

     "'Tis in the fight, not on the wave,
     That oars may break and fail the brave.
     At sea, beneath the ice-cold sky,
     Safely our oars o'er ocean ply;
     And when at Throndhjem's holy stream
     Our seventy cars in distance gleam,
     We seem, while rowing from the sea,
     An erne with iron wings to be."

King Harald sailed south along the land, and called out the levy
everywhere of men and ships.  When they came east to Viken they
got a strong wind against them and the forces lay dispersed about
in the harbour; some in the isles outside, and some in the
fjords.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "The cutters' sea-bleached bows scarce find
     A shelter from the furious wind
     Under the inland forests' side,
     Where the fjord runs its farthest tide.
     In all the isles and creeks around
     The bondes' ships lie on the ground,
     And ships with gunwales hung with shields
     Seek the lee-side of the green fields."

In the heavy storm that raged for some time the great ship had
need of good ground tackle.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "With lofty bow above the seas,
     Which curl and fly before the breeze,
     The gallant vessel rides and reels,
     And every plunge her cable feels.
     The storm that tries the spar and mast
     Tries the main-anchor at the last:
     The storm above, below the rock,
     Chafe the thick cable with each shock."

When the weather became favourable King Harald sailed eastwards
to the Gaut river with his fleet and arrived there in the
evening.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "The gallant Harald now has come
     To Gaut, full half way from his home,
     And on the river frontier stands,
     To fight with Svein for life and lands.
     The night passed o'er, the gallant king
     Next day at Thumia calls a Thing,
     Where Svein is challenged to appear --
     A day which ravens wish were near."



63. OF KING HARALD'S FLEET.

When the Danes heard that the Northmen's army was come to the
Gaut river they all fled who had opportunity to get away.  The
Northmen heard that the Danish king had also called out his
forces and lay in the south, partly at Fyen and partly about
Seeland.  When King Harald found that King Svein would not hold a
meeting with him, or a fight, according to what had been agreed
upon between them, he took the same course as before -- letting
the bonde troops return home, but manning 150 ships, with which
he sailed southwards along Halland, where he herried all round,
and then brought up with his fleet in Lofufjord, and laid waste
the country.  A little afterwards King Svein came upon them with
all the Danish fleet, consisting of 300 ships.  When the Northmen
saw them King Harald ordered a general meeting of the fleet to be
called by sound of trumpet; and many there said it was better to
fly, as it was not now advisable to fight.  The king replied,
"Sooner shall all lie dead one upon another than fly."  So says
Stein Herdison: --

     "With falcon eye, and courage bright,
     Our king saw glory in the fight;
     To fly, he saw, would ruin bring
     On them and him -- the folk and king.
     `Hands up the arms to one and all!'
     Cries out the king; `we'll win or fall!
     Sooner than fly, heaped on each other
     Each man shall fall across his brother!'"

Then King Harald drew up his ships to attack, and brought forward
his great dragon in the middle of his fleet.  So says Thiodolf:
--

     "The brave king through his vessels' throng
     His dragon war-ship moves along;
     He runs her gaily to the front,
     To meet the coming battle's brunt."

The ship was remarkably well equipt, and fully manned.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "The king had got a chosen crew --
     He told his brave lads to stand true.
     The ring of shields seemed to enclose
     The ship's deck from the boarding foes.
     The dragon, on the Nis-river flood,
     Beset with men, who thickly stood,
     Shield touching shield, was something rare,
     That seemed all force of man to dare."

Ulf, the marshal, laid his ship by the side of the king's and
ordered his men to bring her well forward.  Stein Herdison, who
was himself in Ulf's ship, sings of it thus: --

     "Our oars were stowed, our lances high,
     As the ship moved swung in the sky.
     The marshal Ulf went through our ranks,
     Drawn up beside the rowers' banks:
     The brave friend of our gallant king
     Told us our ship well on to bring,
     And fight like Norsemen in the cause --
     Our Norsemen answered with huzzas."

Hakon Ivarson lay outside on the other wing, and had many ships
with him, all well equipt.  At the extremity of the other side
lay the Throndhjem chiefs, who had also a great and strong force.



64. OF KING SVEIN'S ARMAMENT.

Svein, the Danish king, also drew up his fleet, and laid his ship
forward in the center against King Harald's ship, and Fin Arnason
laid his ship next; and then the Danes laid their ships,
according as they were bold or well-equipt.  Then, on both sides,
they bound the ships together all through the middle of the
fleets; but as the fleets were so large, very many ships remained
loose, and each laid his ship forward according to his courage,
and that was very unequal.  Although the difference among the men
was great, altogether there was a very great force on both sides.
King Svein had six earls among the people following him.  So says
Stein Herdison: --

     "Danger our chief would never shun,
     With eight score ships he would not run:
     The Danish fleet he would abide,
     And give close battle side by side.
     From Leire's coast the Danish king
     Three hundred ocean steeds could bring,
     And o'er the sea-weed plain in haste
     Thought Harald's vessels would be chased."



65. BEGINNING OF THE BATTLE OF NIS-RIVER.

As soon as King Harald was ready with his fleet, he orders the
war-blast to sound, and the men to row forward to the attack.  So
says Stein Herdison: --

     "Harald and Svein first met as foes,
     Where the Nis in the ocean flows;
     For Svein would not for peace entreat,
     But, strong in ships, would Harald meet.
     The Norsemen prove, with sword in hand,
     That numbers cannot skill withstand.
     Off Halland's coast the blood of Danes
     The blue sea's calm smooth surface stains."

Soon the battle began, and became very sharp; both kings urging
on their men.  So says Stein Herdison: --

     "Our king, his broad shield disregarding,
     More keen for striking than for warding,
     Now tells his lads their spears to throw, --
     Now shows them where to strike a blow.
     From fleet to fleet so short the way,
     That stones and arrows have full play;
     And from the keen sword dropped the blood
     Of short-lived seamen in the flood."

It was late in the day when the battle began, and it continued
the whole night.  King Harald shot for a long time with his bow.
So says Thiodolf: --

     "The Upland king was all the night
     Speeding the arrows' deadly flight.
     All in the dark his bow-string's twang
     Was answered; for some white shield rang,
     Or yelling shriek gave certain note
     The shaft had pierced some ring-mail coat,
     The foemen's shields and bulwarks bore
     A Lapland arrow-scat(1) or more."

Earl Hakon, and the people who followed him, did not make fast
their ships in the fleet, but rowed against the Danish ships that
were loose, and slew the men of all the ships they came up with.
When the Danes observed this each drew his ship out of the way of
the earl; but he set upon those who were trying to escape, and
they were nearly driven to flight.  Then a boat came rowing to
the earl's ship and hailed him and said that the other wing of
King Harald's fleet was giving way and many of their people had
fallen.  Then the earl rowed thither and gave so severe an
assault that the Danes had to retreat before him.  The earl went
on in this way all the night, coming forward where he was most
wanted, and wheresoever he came none could stand against him.
Hakon rowed outside around the battle.  Towards the end of the
night the greatest part of the Danish fleet broke into flight,
for then King Harald with his men boarded the vessel of King
Svein; and it was so completely cleared that all the crew fell in
the ship, except those who sprang overboard.  So says Arnor, the
earls' skald: --

     "Brave Svein did not his vessel leave
     Without good cause, as I believe:
     Oft on his casque the sword-blade rang,
     Before into the sea he sprang.
     Upon the wave his vessel drives;
     All his brave crew had lost their lives.
     O'er dead courtmen into the sea
     The Jutland king had now to flee."

And when King Svein's banner was cut down, and his ship cleared
of its crew, all his forces took to flight, and some were killed.
The ships which were bound together could not be cast loose, so
the people who were in them sprang overboard, and some got to the
other ships that were loose; and all King Svein's men who could
get off rowed away, but a great many of them were slain.  Where
the king himself fought the ships were mostly bound together, and
there were more than seventy left behind of King Svein's vessels.
So says Thiodolf: --

     "Svein's ships rode proudly o'er the deep,
     When, by a single sudden sweep,
     Full seventy sail, as we are told,
     Were seized by Norway's monarch bold."

King Harald rowed after the Danes and pursued them; but that was
not easy, for the ships lay so thick together that they scarcely
could move.  Earl Fin Arnason would not flee; and being also
shortsighted, was taken prisoner.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "To the six Danish earls who came
     To aid his force, and raise his name,
     No mighty thanks King Svein is owing
     For mighty actions of their doing.
     Fin Arnason, in battle known,
     With a stout Norse heart of his own,
     Would not take flight his life to gain,
     And in the foremost ranks was ta'en."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The Laplanders paid their seat, or yearly tax, in bows and
     arrows; and the meaning of the skald appears to be, that as
     many as were paid in a year were shot at the foe. -- L.



66. KING SVEIN'S FLIGHT.

Earl Hakon lay behind with his ships, while the king and the rest
of the forces were pursuing the fugitives; for the earls' ships
could not get forward on account of the ships which lay in the
way before him.  Then a man came rowing in a boat to the earl's
ship and lay at the bulwarks.  The man was stout and had on a
white hat.  He hailed the ship, "Where is the earl?" said he.

The earl was in the fore-hold, stopping a man's blood.  The earl
cast a look at the man in the hat and asked what his name was. 
He answered, "Here is Vandrad: speak to me, earl."

The earl leant over the ship's side to him.  Then the man in the
boat said, "Earl, I will accept of my life from thee, if thou
wilt give it."

Then the earl raised himself up, called two men who were friends
dear to him, and said to them, "Go into the boat; bring Vandrad
to the land; attend him to my friend's Karl the bonde; and tell
Karl, as a token that these words come from me, that he let
Vandrad have the horse which I gave to him yesterday, and also
his saddle, and his son to attend him."

Thereupon they went into the boat and took the oars in hand,
while Vandrad steered.  This took place just about daybreak,
while the vessels were in movement, some rowing towards the land,
some towards the sea, both small and great.  Vandrad steered
where he thought there was most room between the vessels; and
when they came near to Norway's ships the earl's men gave their
names and then they all allowed them to go where they pleased.
Vandrad steered along the shore, and only set in towards the land
when they had come past the crowd of ships.  They then went up to
Karl the bonde's farm, and it was then beginning to be light.
They went into the room where Karl had just put on his clothes.
The earl's men told him their message and Karl said they must
first take some food; and he set a table before them and gave
them water to wash with.

Then came the housewife into the room and said, "I wonder why we
could get no peace or rest all night with the shouting and
screaming."

Karl replies, "Dost thou not know that the kings were fighting
all night?"

She asked which had the better of it.

Karl answered, "The Northmen gained."

"Then," said she, "our king will have taken flight."

"Nobody knows," says Karl, "whether he has fled or is fallen."

She says, "What a useless sort of king we have!  He is both slow
and frightened."

Then said Vandrad, "Frightened he is not; but he is not lucky."

Then Vandrad washed his hands; but he took the towel and dried
them right in the middle of the cloth.  The housewife snatched
the towel from him, and said, "Thou hast been taught little good;
it is wasteful to wet the whole cloth at one time.

Vandrad replies, "I may yet come so far forward in the world as
to be able to dry myself with the middle of the towel."

Thereupon Karl set a table before them and Vandrad sat down
between them.  They ate for a while and then went out.  The horse
was saddled and Karl's son ready to follow him with another
horse.  They rode away to the forest; and the earl's men returned
to the boat, rowed to the earl's ship and told the success of
their expedition.



67. OF KING HARALD.

King Harald and his men followed the fugitives only a short way,
and rowed back to the place where the deserted ships lay.  Then
the battle-place was ransacked, and in King Svein's ship was
found a heap of dead men; but the king's body was not found,
although people believed for certain that he had fallen.  Then
King Harald had the greatest attention paid to the dead of his
men, and had the wounds of the living bound up.  The dead bodies
of Svein's men were brought to the land, and he sent a message to
the peasants to come and bury them.  Then he let the booty be
divided, and this took up some time.  The news came now that King
Svein had come to Seeland, and that all who had escaped from the
battle had joined him, along with many more, and that he had a
great force.



68. FIN ARNASON GETS QUARTER.

Earl Fin Arnason was taken prisoner in the battle, as before
related; and when he was led before King Harald the king was very
merry, and said, "Fin, we meet here now, and we met last in
Norway.  The Danish court has not stood very firmly by thee; and
it will be a troublesome business for Northmen to drag thee, a
blind old man, with them, and preserve thy life."

The earl replies, "The Northmen find it very difficult now to
conquer, and it is all the worse that thou hast the command of
them."

Then said King Harald, "Wilt thou accept of life and safety,
although thou hast not deserved it?"

The earl replies, "Not from thee, thou dog."

The king: "Wilt thou, then, if thy relation Magnus gives thee
quarter?"

Magnus, King Harald's son, was then steering the ship.

The earl replies, "Can the whelp rule over life and quarter?"

The king laughed, as if he found amusement in vexing him. --
"Wilt thou accept thy life, then, from thy she-relation Thorer?"

The earl: "Is she here?"

"She is here," said the king.

Then Earl Fin broke out with the ugly expressions which since
have been preserved, as a proof that he was so mad with rage that
he could not govern his tongue: --

"No wonder thou hast bit so strongly, if the mare was with thee."

Earl Fin got life and quarter and the king kept him a while about
him.  But Fin was rather melancholy and obstinate in
conversation; and King Harald said, "I see, Fin, that thou dost
not live willingly in company with me and thy relations; now I
will give thee leave to go to thy friend King Svein."

The earl said, "I accept of the offer willingly, and the more
gratefully the sooner I get away from hence."

The king afterwards let Earl Fin be landed and the traders going
to Halland received him well.  King Harald sailed from thence to
Norway with his fleet; and went first to Oslo, where he gave all
his people leave to go home who wished to do so.



69. OF KING SVEIN.

King Svein, it is told, sat in Denmark all that winter, and had
his kingdom as formerly.  In winter he sent men north to Halland
for Karl the bonde and his wife.  When Karl came the king called
him to him and asked him if he knew him, or thought he had ever
seen him before.

Karl replies, "I know thee, sire, and knew thee before, the
moment I saw thee; and God be praised if the small help I could
give was of any use to thee."

The king replies, "I have to reward thee for all the days I have
to live.  And now, in the first place, I will give thee any farm
in Seeland thou wouldst desire to have; and, in the next place,
will make thee a great man, if thou knowest how to conduct
thyself."

Karl thanked the king for his promise, and said he had now but
one thing to ask.

The king asked what that was.

Karl said that he would ask to take his wife with him.

The king said, "I will not let thee do that; but I will provide
thee a far better and more sensible wife.  But thy wife can keep
the bonde-farm ye had before and she will have her living from
it."

The king gave Karl a great and valuable farm, and provided him a
good marriage; and he became a considerable man.  This was
reported far and wide and much praised; and thus it came to be
told in Norway.



70. OF THE TALK OF THE COURT-MEN.

King Harald stayed in Oslo the winter after the battle at Nis-
river (A.D. 1063).  In autumn, when the men came from the south,
there was much talk and many stories about the battle which they
had fought at Nis-river, and every one who had been there thought
he could tell something about it.  Once some of them sat in a
cellar and drank, and were very merry and talkative.  They talked
about the Nis-river battle, and who had earne'd the greatest
praise and renown.  They all agreed that no man there had been at
all equal to Earl Hakon.  He was the boldest in arms, the
quickest, and the most lucky; what he did was of the greatest
help, and he won the battle.  King Harald, in the meantime, was
out in the yard, and spoke with some people.  He went then to the
room-door, and said, "Every one here would willingly be called
Hakon;" and then went his way.



71. OF THE ATTEMPT TO TAKE EARL HAKON.

Earl Hakon went in winter to the Uplands, and was all winter in
his domains.  He was much beloved by all the Uplanders.  It
happened, towards spring, that some men were sitting drinking in
the town, and the conversation turned, as usual, on the Nis-river
battle; and some praised Earl Hakon, and some thought others as
deserving of praise as he.  When they had thus disputed a while,
one of them said, "It is possible that others fought as bravely
as the earl at Nis-river; but none, I think, has had such luck
with him as he."

The others replied, that his best luck was his driving so many
Danes to flight along with other men.

The same man replied, "It was greater luck that he gave King
Svein quarter."

One of the company said to him, "Thou dost not know what thou art
saying."

He replied, "I know it for certain, for the man told me himself
who brought the king to the land."

It went, according to the old proverb, that the king has many
ears.  This was told the king, and he immediately ordered horses
to be gathered, and rode away directly with 900 men.  He rode all
that night and the following day.  Then some men met them who
were riding to the town with mead and malt.  In the king's
retinue was a man called Gamal, who rode to one of these bondes
who was an acquaintance of his, and spoke to him privately.  "I
will pay thee," said he, "to ride with the greatest speed, by the
shortest private paths that thou knowest, to Earl Hakon, and tell
him the king will kill him; for the king has got to the knowledge
that Earl Hakon set King Svein on shore at Nis-river."  They
agreed on the payment.  The bonde rode, and came to the earl just
as he was sitting drinking, and had not yet gone to bed.  When
the bonde told his errand, the earl immediately stood up with all
his men, had all his loose property removed from the farm to the
forest, and all the people left the house in the night.  When the
king came he halted there all night; but Hakon rode away, and
came east to Svithjod to King Steinkel and stayed with him all
summer.  King Harald returned to the town, travelled northwards
to Throndhjem district, and remained there all summer; but in
autumn he returned eastwards to Viken.



72. OF EARL HAKON.

As soon as Earl Hakon heard the king had gone north he returned
immediately in summer to the Uplands (A.D. 1063), and remained
there until the king had returned from the north.  Then the earl
went east into Vermaland, where he remained during the winter,
and where the king, Steinkel, gave him fiefs.  For a short time
in winter he went west to Raumarike with a great troop of men
from Gautland and Vermaland, and received the scat and duties
from the Upland people which belonged to him, and then returned
to Glutland, and remained there till spring.  King Harald had his
seat in Oslo all winter (A.D. 1064), and sent his men to the
Uplands to demand the scat, together with the king's land dues,
and the mulcts of court; but the Uplanders said they would pay
all the scat and dues which they had to pay, to Earl Hakon as
long as he was in life, and had forfeited his life or his fief;
and the king got no dues that winter.



73. AGREEMENT BETWEEN KING HARALD AND KING SVEIN.

This winter messengers and ambassadors went between Norway and
Denmark, whose errand was that both Northmen and Danes should
make peace, and a league with each other. and to ask the kings to
agree to it.  These messages gave favourable hopes of a peace;
and the matter proceeded so far that a meeting for peace was
appointed at the Gaut river between King Harald and King Svein.
When spring approached, both kings assembled many ships and
people for this meeting.  So says a skald in a poem on this
expedition of the kings, which begins thus: --

     "The king, who from the northern sound
     His land with war-ships girds around,
     The raven-feeder, filled the coast
     With his proud ships, a gallant host!
     The gold-tipped stems dash through the foam
     That shakes the seamen's planked home;
     The high wave breaks up to the mast,
     As west of Halland on they passed,

     "Harald whose word is fixed and sure,
     Whose ships his land from foes secure,
     And Svein, whose isles maintain is fleet,
     Hasten as friends again to meet;
     And every creek with vessels teems, --
     All Denmark men and shipping seems;
     And all rejoice that strife will cease,
     And men meet now but to make peace."

Here it is told that the two kings held the meeting that was
agreed upon between them, and both came to the frontiers of their
kingdoms.  So says the skald: --

     "To meet (since peace the Dane now craves)
     On to the south upon the waves
     Sailed forth our gallant northern king,
     Peace to the Danes with him to bring.
     Svein northward to his frontier hies
     To get the peace his people prize,
     And meet King Harald, whom he finds
     On land hard used by stormy winds."

When the kings found each other, people began at once to talk of
their being reconciled.  But as soon as peace was proposed, many
began to complain of the damage they had sustained by harrying,
robbing and killing men; and for a long time it did not look very
like peace.  It is here related: --

     "Before this meeting of the kings
     Each bende his own losses brings,
     And loudly claims some recompense
     From his king's foes, at their expense.
     It is not easy to make peace,
     Where noise and talking never cease:
     The bondes' warmth may quickly spread,
     And kings be by the people led.

     "When kings are moved, no peace is sure;
     For that peace only is secure
     Which they who make it fairly make, --
     To each side give, from each side take.
     The kings will often rule but ill
     Who listen to the people's will:
     The people often have no view
     But their own interests to pursue."

At last the best men, and those who were the wisest, came between
the kings, and settled the peace thus: -- that Harald should have
Norway, and Svein Denmark, according to the boundaries of old
established between Denmark and Norway; neither of them should
pay to the other for any damage sustained; the war should cease
as it now stood, each retaining what he had got; and this peace
should endure as long as they were kings.  This peace was
confirmed by oath.  Then the kings parted, having given each
other hostages, as is here related: --

     "And I have heard that to set fast
     The peace God brought about at last,
     Svein and stern Harald pledges sent,
     Who witnessed to their sworn intent;
     And much I wish that they and all
     In no such perjury may fall
     That this peace ever should be broken,
     And oaths should fail before God spoken."

King Harald with his people sailed northwards to Norway, and King
Svein southwards to Denmark.



74. KING HARALD'S BATTLE WITH EARL HAKON.

King Harald was in Viken in the summer (A.D. 1064), and he sent
his men to the Uplands after the scat and duty which belonged to
him; but the bondes paid no attention to the demand, but said
they would hold all for Earl Hakon until he came for it.  Earl
Hakon was then up in Gautland with a large armed force.  When
summer was past King Harald went south to Konungahella.  Then he
took all the light-sailing vessels he could get hold of and
steered up the river.  He had the vessels drawn past all the
waterfalls and brought them thus into the Wener lake.  Then he
rowed eastward across the lake to where he heard Earl Hakon was;
but when the earl got news of the king's expedition he retreated
down the country, and would not let the king plunder the land.
Earl Hakon had a large armed force which the Gautland people had
raised for him.  King Harald lay with his ships up in a river,
and made a foray on land, but left some of his men behind to
protect the ships.  The king himself rode up with a part of the
men, but the greater part were on foot.  They had to cross a
forest, where they found a mire or lake, and close to it a wood;
and when they reached the wood they saw the earl's men, but the
mire was between them.  They drew up their people now on both
sides.  Then King Harald ordered his men to sit down on the
hillside.  "We will first see if they will attack us.  Earl Hakon
does not usually wait to talk."  It was frosty weather, with some
snow-drift, and Harald's men sat down under their shields; but it
was cold for the Gautlanders, who had but little clothing with
them.  The earl told them to wait until King Harald came nearer,
so that all would stand equally high on the ground.  Earl Hakon
had the same banner which had belonged to King Magnus Olafson. 

The lagman of the Gautland people, Thorvid, sat upon a horse, and
the bridle was fastened to a stake that stood in the mire.  He
broke out with these words: "God knows we have many brave and
handsome fellows here, and we shall let King Steinkel hear that
we stood by the good earl bravely.  I am sure of one thing: we
shall behave gallantly against these Northmen, if they attack us;
but if our young people give way, and should not stand to it, let
us not run farther than to that stream; but if they should give
way farther, which I am sure they will not do, let it not be
farther than to that hill."  At that instant the Northmen sprang
up, raised the war-cry, and struck on their shields; and the
Gautland army began also to shout.  The lagman's horse got shy
with the war-cry, and backed so hard that the stake flew up and
struck the lagman on the head.  He said, "Ill luck to thee,
Northman, for that arrow!" and away fled the lagman.  King Harald
had told his people, "If we do make a clash with the weapons, we
shall not however, go down from the hill until they come nearer
to us;" and they did so.  When the war-cry was raised the earl
let his banner advance; but when they came under the hill the
king's army rushed down upon them, and killed some of the earl's
people, and the rest fled.  The Northmen did not pursue the
fugitives long, for it was the fall of day; but they took Earl
Hakon's banner and all the arms and clothes they could get hold
of.  King Harald had both the banners carried before him as they
marched away.  They spoke among themselves that the earl had
probably fallen.  As they were riding through the forest they
could only ride singly, one following the other.  Suddenly a man
came full gallop across the path, struck his spear through him
who was carrying the earl's banner, seized the banner-staff, and
rode into the forest on the other side with the banner.  When
this was told the king he said, "Bring me my armour, for the earl
is alive."  Then the king rode to his ships in the night; and
many said that the earl had now taken his revenge.  But Thiodolf
sang thus: --

     "Steinkel's troops, who were so bold,
     Who the Earl Hakon would uphold,
     Were driven by our horsemen's power
     To Hel, death goddess, in an hour;
     And the great earl, so men say
     Who won't admit he ran away,
     Because his men fled from the ground,
     Retired, and cannot now be found."



75. DEATH OF HAL, THE MURDERER OF KODRAN.

The rest of the night Harald passed in his ships; but in the
morning, when it was daylight, it was found that so thick ice had
gathered about the vessels that one could walk around them.  The
king ordered his men to cut the ice from the ships all the way
out to the clear water; on which they all went to break the ice.
King Harald's son, Magnus, steered the vessel that lay lowest
down the river and nearest the water.  When the people had
cleared the ice away almost entirely, a man ran out to the ice,
and began hewing away at it like a madman.  Then said one of the
men, "It is going now as usual, that none can do so much as Hal
who killed Kodran, when once he lays himself to the work.  See
how he is hewing away at the ice."  There was a man in the crew
of Magnus, the king's son, who was called Thormod Eindridason; 
and when he heard the name of Kodran's murderer he ran up to Hal,
and gave him a death-wound.  Kodran was a son of Gudmund
Eyjolfson; and Valgerd, who was a sister of Gudmund, was the
mother of Jorun, and the grandmother by the mother's side of this
Thormod.  Thormod was a year old when Kodran was killed, and had
never seen Hal Utrygson until now.  When the ice was broken all
the way out to the water, Magnus drew his ship out, set sail
directly, and sailed westward across the lake; but the king's
ship, which lay farthest up the river, came out the last.  Hal
had been in the king's retinue, and was very dear to him; so that
the king was enraged at his death.  The king came the last into
the harbour, and Magnus had let the murderer escape into the
forest, and offered to pay the mulct for him; and the king had
very nearly attacked Magnus and his crew, but their friends came
up and reconciled them.



76. OF KING HARALD.

That winter (A.D. 1065) King Harald went up to Raumarike, and had
many people with him; and he accused the bondes there of having
kept from him his scat and duties, and of having aided his
enemies to raise disturbance against him.  He seized on the
bondes and maimed some, killed others, and robbed many of all
their property.  They who could do it fled from him.  He burned
everything in the districts and laid them altogether waste.  So
says Thiodolf: --

     "He who the island-people drove,
     When they against his power strove,
     Now bridle's Raumarike's men,
     Marching his forces through their glen.
     To punish them the fire he lights
     That shines afar off in dark nights
     From house and yard, and, as he says,
     Will warn the man who disobeys."

Thereafter the king went up to Hedemark, burnt the dwellings, and
made no less waste and havoc there than in Raumarike.  From
thence he went to Hadeland and Ringerike, burning and ravaging
all the land.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "The bonde's household goods are seen
     Before his door upon the green,
     Smoking and singed: and sparks red hot
     Glow in the thatched roof of his cot.
     In Hedemark the bondes pray
     The king his crushing hand to stay;
     In Ringerike and Hadeland,
     None 'gainst his fiery wrath can stand."

Then the bondes left all to the king's mercy.  After the death of
King Magnus fifteen years had passed when the battle at Nis-river
took place, and afterwards two years elapsed before Harald and
Svein made peace.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "The Hordland king under the land
     At anchor lay close to the strand,
     At last, prepared with shield and spear
     The peace was settled the third year."

After this peace the disturbances with the people of the Upland
districts lasted a year and a half.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "No easy task it is to say
     How the king brought beneath his sway
     The Upland bondes, and would give
     Nought but their ploughs from which to live.
     The king in eighteen months brought down
     Their bonde power, and raised his own,
     And the great honour he has gained
     Will still in memory be retained."



77. OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND.

Edward, Ethelred's son, was king of England after his brother
Hardacanute.  He was called Edward the Good; and so he was.  King
Edward's mother was Queen Emma, daughter of Richard, earl of
Rouen.  Her brother was Earl Robert, whose son was William the
Bastard, who at that time was earl at Rouen in Normandy.  King
Edward's queen was Gyda, a daughter of Earl Godwin, the son of
Ulfnad.  Gyda's brothers were, Earl Toste, the eldest; Earl
Morukare the next; Earl Walter the third; Earl Svein the fourth;
and the fifth was Harald, who was the youngest, and he was
brought up at King Edward's court, and was his foster-son.  The
king loved him very much, and kept him as his own son; for he had
no children.



78. OF HARALD GODWINSON.

One summer it happened that Harald, the son of Godwin, made an
expedition to Bretland with his ships, but when they got to sea
they met a contrary wind, and were driven off into the ocean.
They landed west in Normandy, after suffering from a dangerous
storm.  They brought up at Rouen, where they met Earl William,
who received Harald and his company gladly.  Harald remained
there late in harvest, and was hospitably entertained; for the
stormy weather continued, and there was no getting to sea, and
this continued until winter set in; so the earl and Harald agreed
that he should remain there all winter.  Harald sat on the high-
seat on one side of the earl; and on the other side sat the
earl's wife, one of the most beautiful women that could be seen.
They often talked together for amusement at the drinking-table;
and the earl went generally to bed, but Harald and the earl's
wife sat long in the evenings talking together, and so it went on
for a great part of the winter.  In one of their conversations
she said to Harald, "The earl has asked me what it is we have to
talk about so much, for he is angry at it."  Harald replies, "We
shall then at once let him know all our conversation."  The
following day, Harald asked the earl to a conference, and they
went together into the conference-chamber; where also the queen
was, and some of the councillors.  Then Harald began thus: -- "I
have to inform you, earl, that there lies more in my visit here
than I have let you know.  I would ask your daughter in marriage,
and have often spoke over this matter with her mother, and she
has promised to support my suit with you."  As soon as Harald had
made known this proposal of his, it was well received by all who
were present.  They explained the case to the earl; and at last
it came so far that the earl was contracted to Harald, but as she
was very young, it was resolved that the wedding should be
deferred for some years.



79. KING EDWARD'S DEATH.

When spring came Harald rigged his ships and set off; and he and
the earl parted with great friendship.  Harald sailed over to
England to King Edward, but did not return to Valland to fulfill
the marriage agreement.  Edward was king over England for twenty-
three years and died on a bed of sickness in London on the 5th of
January, and was buried in Paul's church.  Englishmen call him a
saint.



80. HARALD GODWINSON MADE KING OF ENGLAND.

The sons of Earl Godwin were the most powerful men in England.
Toste was made chief of the English king's army, and was his
land-defence man when the king began to grow old; and he was also
placed above all the other earls.  His brother Harald was always
with the court itself, and nearest to the king in all service,
and had the charge of the king's treasure-chamber.  It is said
that when the king was approaching his last hour, Harald and a
few others were with him.  Harald first leans down over the king,
and then said, "I take you all to witness that the king has now
given me the kingdom, and all the realm of England:" and then the
king was taken dead out of the bed.  The same day there was a
meeting of the chiefs, at which there was some talk of choosing a
king; and then Harald brought forward his witnesses that King
Edward had given him the kingdom on his dying day.  The meeting
ended by choosing Harald as king, and he was consecrated and
crowned the 13th day of Yule, in Paul's church.  Then all the
chiefs and all the people submitted to him.  Now when his
brother, Earl Toste, heard of this he took it very ill, as he
thought himself quite as well entitled to be king.  "I want,"
said he, "that the principal men of the country choose him whom
they think best fitted for it."  And sharp words passed between
the brothers.  King Harald says he will not give up his kingly
dignity, for he is seated on the throne which kings sat upon, and
is anointed and consecrated a king.  On his side also was the
strength of the people, for he had the king's whole treasure.



81. EARL TOSTE'S EXPEDITION TO DENMARK.

Now when King Harald perceived that his brother Toste wanted to
have him deprived of the kingdom he did not trust him; for Toste
was a clever man, and a great warrior, and was in friendship with
the principal men of the country.  He therefore took the command
of the army from Toste, and also all the power he had beyond that
of the other earls of the country.  Earl Toste, again, would not
submit to be his own brother's serving man; therefore he went
with his people over the sea to Flanders, and stayed there
awhile, then went to Friesland, and from thence to Denmark to his
relation King Svein.  Earl Ulf, King Svein's father, and Gyda,
Earl Toste's mother, were brother's and sister's children.  The
earl now asked King Svein for support and help of men; and King
Svein invited him to stay with him, with the promise that he
should get so large an earldom in Denmark that he would be an
important chief.

The earl replies, "My inclination is to go back to my estate in
England; but if I cannot get help from you for that purpose, I
will agree to help you with all the power I can command in
England, if you will go there with the Danish army, and win the
country, as Canute, your mother's brother, did."

The king replied, "So much smaller a man am I than Canute the
Great, that I can with difficulty defend my own Danish dominions
against the Northmen.  King Canute, on the other hand, got the
Danish kingdom in heritage, took England by slash and blow, and
sometimes was near losing his life in the contest; and Norway he
took without slash or blow.  Now it suits me much better to be
guided by my own slender ability than to imitate my relation,
King Canute's, lucky hits."

Then Earl Toste said, "The result of my errand here is less
fortunate than I expected of thee who art so gallant a man,
seeing that thy relative is in so great need. It may be that I
will seek friendly help where it could less be expected; and that
I may find a chief who is less afraid, king, than thou art of a
great enterprise."

Then the king and the earl parted, not just the best friends.



82. EARL TOSTE'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

Earl Toste turned away then and went to Norway, where he
presented himself to King Harald, who was at that time in Viken.
When they met the earl explained his errand to the king.  He told
him all his proceedings since he left England, and asked his aid
to recover his dominions in England.

The king replied that the Northmen had no great desire for a
campaign in England, and to have English chiefs over them there. 
"People say," added he, "that the English are not to be trusted." 

The earl replied, "Is it true what I have heard people tell in
England, that thy relative, King Magnus, sent men to King Edward
with the message that King Magnus had right to England as well as
to Denmark, and had got that heritage after Hardacanute, in
consequence of a regular agreement?"

The king replied, "How came it that he did not get it, if he had
a right to it?"

"Why," replied the earl, "hast thou not Denmark, as King Magnus,
thy predecessor, had it?"

The king replies, "The Danes have nothing to brag of over us
Northmen; for many a place have we laid in ashes to thy
relations."

Then said the earl, "If thou wilt not tell me, I will tell thee.
Magnus subdued Denmark, because all the chiefs of the country
helped him; and thou hast not done it, because all the people of
the country were against thee.  Therefore, also, King Magnus did
not strive for England, because all the nation would have Edward
for king.  Wilt thou take England now?  I will bring the matter
so far that most of the principal men in England shall be thy
friends, and assist thee; for nothing is wanting to place me at
the side of my brother Harald but the king's name.  All men allow
that there never was such a warrior in the northern lands as thou
art; and it appears to me extraordinary that thou hast been
fighting for fifteen years for Denmark, and wilt not take England
that lies open to thee."

King Harald weighed carefully the earl's words, and perceived at
once that there was truth in much of what he said; and he himself
had also a great desire to acquire dominions.  Then King Harald
and the earl talked long and frequently together; and at last he
took the resolution to proceed in summer to England, and conquer
the country.  King Harald sent a message-token through all Norway
and ordered out a levy of one-half of all the men in Norway able
to carry arms.  When this became generally known, there were many
guesses about what might be the end of this expedition.  Some
reckoned up King Harald's great achievements, and thought he was
also the man who could accomplish this.  Others, again, said that
England was difficult to attack; that it was very full of people;
and the men-at-arms, who were called Thingmen, were so brave,
that one of them was better than two of Harald's best men.  Then
said Ulf the marshal: --

     "I am still ready gold to gain;
     But truly it would be in vain,
     And the king's marshal in the hall
     Might leave his good post once for all,
     If two of us in any strife
     Must for one Thingman fly for life,
     My lovely Norse maid, in my youth
     We thought the opposite the truth."

Ulf the marshal died that spring (A.D. 1066).  King Harald stood
over his grave, and said, as he was leaving it, "There lies now
the truest of men, and the most devoted to his king."

Earl Toste sailed in spring west to Flanders, to meet the people
who had left England with him, and others besides who had
gathered to him both out of England and Flanders.



83. GYRD'S DREAMS.

King Harald's fleet assembled at the Solunds.  When King Harald
was ready to leave Nidaros he went to King Olaf's shrine,
unlocked it, clipped his hair and nails, and locked the shrine
again, and threw the keys into the Nid.  Some say he threw them
overboard outside of Agdanes; and since then the shrine of Saint
Olaf, the king, has never been opened.  Thirty-five years had
passed since he was slain; and he lived thirty-five years here on
earth (A.D. 1080-1066).  King Harald sailed with his ships he had
about him to the south to meet his people, and a great fleet was
collected; so that. according to the people's reckoning, King
Harald had nearly 200 ships beside provision-ships and small
craft.

While they lay at the Solunds a man called Gyrd, on board the
king's ship, had a dream.  He thought he was standing in the
king's ship and saw a great witch-wife standing on the island,
with a fork in one hand and a trough in the other.  He thought
also that he saw over all the fleet, and that a fowl was sitting
upon every ship's stern, and that these fowls were all ravens or
ernes; and the witch-wife sang this song: --

     "From the east I'll 'tice the king,
     To the west the king I'll bring;
     Many a noble bone will be
     Ravens o'er Giuke's ship are fitting,
     Eyeing the prey they think most fitting.
     Upon the stem I'll sail with them!
     Upon the stem I'll sail with them!"



84. THORD'S DREAM.

There was also a man called Thord, in a ship which lay not far
from the king's.  He dreamt one night that he saw King Harald's
fleet coming to land, and he knew the land to be England.  He saw
a great battle-array on the land; and he thought both sides began
to fight, and had many banners flapping in the air.  And before
the army of the people of the country was riding a huge witch-
wife upon a wolf; and the wolf had a man's carcass in his mouth,
and the blood was dropping from his jaws; and when he had eaten
up one body she threw another into his mouth, and so one after
another, and he swallowed them all.  And she sang thus: --

     "Skade's eagle eyes
     The king's ill luck espies:
     Though glancing shields
     Hide the green fields,
     The king's ill luck she spies.
     To bode the doom of this great king,
     The flesh of bleeding men I fling
     To hairy jaw and hungry maw!
     To hairy jaw and hungry maw!"



85. KING HARALD'S DREAM.

King Harald also dreamt one night that he was in Nidaros, and met
his brother, King Olaf, who sang to him these verses: --

     "In many a fight
     My name was bright;
     Men weep, and tell
     How Olaf fell.
     Thy death is near;
     Thy corpse, I fear,
     The crow will feed,
     The witch-wife's steed."

Many other dreams and forebodings were then told of, and most of
them gloomy.  Before King Harald left Throndhjem, he let his son
Magnus be proclaimed king and set him as king over Norway while
he was absent.  Thora, the daughter of Thorberg, also remained
behind; but he took with him Queen Ellisif and her two daughters,
Maria and Ingegerd.  Olaf, King Harald's son, also accompanied
his father abroad.



86. BATTLE AT SCARBOROUGH.

When King Harald was clear for sea, and the wind became
favourable, he sailed out into the ocean; and he himself landed
in Shetland, but a part of his fleet in the Orkney Islands.  King
Harald stopped but a short time in Shetland before sailing to
Orkney, from whence he took with him a great armed force, and the
earls Paul and Erlend, the sons of Earl Thorfin; but he left
behind him here the Queen Ellisif, and her daughters Maria and
Ingegerd.  Then he sailed, leaving Scotland and England westward
of him, and landed at a place called Klifland.  There he went on
shore and plundered, and brought the country in subjection to him
without opposition.  Then he brought up at Skardaburg, and fought
with the people of the place.  He went up a hill which is there,
and made a great pile upon it, which he set on fire; and when the
pile was in clear flame, his men took large forks and pitched the
burning wood down into the town, so that one house caught fire
after the other, and the town surrendered.  The Northmen killed
many people there and took all the booty they could lay hold of.
There was nothing left for the Englishmen now, if they would
preserve their lives, but to submit to King Harald; and thus he
subdued the country wherever he came.  Then the king proceeded
south along the land, and brought up at Hellornes, where there
came a force that had been assembled to oppose him, with which he
had a battle, and gained the victory.



87. OF HARALD'S ORDER OF BATTLE.

Thereafter the king sailed to the Humber, and up along the river,
and then he landed.  Up in Jorvik were two earls, Earl Morukare,
and his brother, Earl Valthiof, and they had an immense army. 
While the army of the earls was coming down from the upper part
of the country, King Harald lay in the Usa.  King Harald now went
on the land, and drew up his men.  The one arm of this line stood
at the outer edge of the river, the other turned up towards the
land along a ditch; and there was also a morass, deep, broad, and
full of water.  The earls let their army proceed slowly down
along the river, with all their troops in line.  The king's
banner was next the river, where the line was thickest.  It was
thinnest at the ditch, where also the weakest of the men were.
When the earls advanced downwards along the ditch, the arm of the
Northmen's line which was at the ditch gave way; and the
Englishmen followed, thinking the Northmen would fly.  The banner
of Earl Morukare advanced then bravely.



88. THE BATTLE AT THE HUMBER.

When King Harald saw that the English array had come to the ditch
against him, he ordered the charge to be sounded, and urged on
his men.  He ordered the banner which was called the Land-ravager
to be carried before him, and made so severe an assault that all
had to give way before it; and there was a great loss among the
men of the earls, and they soon broke into flight, some running
up the river, some down, and the most leaping into the ditch,
which was so filled with dead that the Norsemen could go dry-foot
over the fen.  There Earl Morukare fell.  So says Stein Herdison:
--

     "The gallant Harald drove along,
     Flying but fighting, the whole throng.
     At last, confused, they could not fight,
     And the whole body took to flight.
     Up from the river's silent stream
     At once rose desperate splash and scream;
     But they who stood like men this fray
     Round Morukare's body lay."

This song was composed by Stein Herdison about Olaf, son of King
Harald; and he speaks of Olaf being in this battle with King
Harald, his father.  These things are also spoken of in the song
called "Harald's Stave": --

     "Earl Valthiof's men
     Lay in the fen,
     By sword down hewed,
     So thickly strewed,
     That Norsemen say
     They paved a way
     Across the fen
     For the brave Norsemen."

Earl Valthiof, and the people who escaped, fled up to the castle
of York; and there the greatest loss of men had been.  This
battle took place upon the Wednesday next Mathias' day (A.D.
1066).



89. OF EARL TOSTE.

Earl Toste had come from Flanders to King Harald as soon as he
arrived in England, and the earl was present at all these
battles.  It happened, as he had foretold the king at their first
meeting, that in England many people would flock to them, as
being friends and relations of Earl Toste, and thus the king's
forces were much strengthened.  After the battle now told of, all
people in the nearest districts submitted to Harald, but some
fled.  Then the king advanced to take the castle, and laid his
army at Stanforda-bryggiur (Stamford Bridge); and as King Harald
had gained so great a victory against so great chiefs and so
great an army, the people were dismayed, and doubted if they
could make any opposition.  The men of the castle therefore
determined, in a council, to send a message to King Harald, and
deliver up the castle into his power.  All this was soon settled;
so that on Sunday the king proceeded with the whole army to the
castle, and appointed a Thing of the people without the castle,
at which the people of the castle were to be present.  At this
Thing all the people accepted the condition of submitting to
Harald, and gave him, as hostages, the children of the most
considerable persons; for Earl Toste was well acquainted with all
the people of that town.  In the evening the king returned down
to his ships, after this victory achieved with his own force, and
was very merry.  A Thing was appointed within the castle early on
Monday morning, and then King Harald was to name officers to rule
over the town, to give out laws, and bestow fiefs.  The same
evening, after sunset, King Harald Godwinson came from the south
to the castle with a numerous army, and rode into the city with
the good-will and consent of the people of the castle.  All the
gates and walls were beset so that the Northmen could receive no
intelligence, and the army remained all night in the town.



90. OF KING HARALD'S LANDING.

On Monday, when King Harald Sigurdson had taken breakfast, he
ordered the trumpets to sound for going on shore.  The army
accordingly got ready, and he divided the men into the parties
who should go, and who should stay behind.  In every division he
allowed two men to land, and one to remain behind.  Earl Toste
and his retinue prepared to land with King Harald; and, for
watching the ships, remained behind the king's son Olaf; the
earls of Orkney, Paul and Erlend; and also Eystein Orre, a son of
Thorberg Arnason, who was the most able and best beloved by the
king of all the lendermen, and to whom the king had promised his
daughter Maria.  The weather was uncommonly fine, and it was hot
sunshine.  The men therefore laid aside their armour, and went on
the land only with their shields, helmets and spears, and girt
with swords; and many had also arrows and bows, and all were very
merry.  Now as they came near the castle a great army seemed
coming against them, and they saw a cloud of dust as from horses'
feet, and under it shining shields and bright armour.  The king
halted his people, and called to him Earl Toste, and asked him
what army this could be.  The earl replied that he thought it
most likely to be a hostle army, but possibly it might be some of
his relations who were seeking for mercy and friendship, in order
to obtain certain peace and safety from the king.  Then the king
said, "We must all halt, to discover what kind of a force this
is."  They did so; and the nearer this force came the greater it
appeared, and their shining arms were to the sight like glancing
ice.



91. OF EARL TOSTE'S COUNSEL.

Then said King Harald, "Let us now fall upon some good sensible
counsel; for it is not to be concealed that this is an hostile
army and the king himself without doubt is here."

Then said the earl, "The first counsel is to turn about as fast
as we can to our ships to get our men and our weapons, and then
we will make a defence according to our ability; or otherwise let
our ships defend us, for there these horsemen have no power over
us."

Then King Harald said, "I have another counsel.  Put three of our
best horses under three of our briskest lads and let them ride
with all speed to tell our people to come  quickly to our relief.
The Englishmen shall have a hard fray of it before we give
ourselves up for lost."

The earl said the king must order in this, as in all things, as
he thought best; adding, at the same time, it was by no means his
wish to fly.  Then King Harald ordered his banner Land-ravager to
be set up; and Frirek was the name of him who bore the banner.



92. OF KING HARALD'S ARMY.

Then King Harald arranged his army, and made the line of battle
long, but not deep.  He bent both wings of it back, so that they
met together; and formed a wide ring equally thick all round,
shield to shield, both in the front and rear ranks.  The king
himself and his retinue were within the circle; and there was the
banner, and a body of chosen men.  Earl Toste, with his retinue,
was at another place, and had a different banner.  The army was
arranged in this way, because the king knew that horsemen were
accustomed to ride forwards with great vigour, but to turn back
immediately.  Now the king ordered that his own and the earl's
attendants should ride forwards where it was most required.  "And
our bowmen," said he, "shall be near to us; and they who stand in
the first rank shall set the spear-shaft on the ground, and the
spear-point against the horseman's breast, if he rides at them;
and those who stand in the second rank shall set the spear-point
against the horse's breast."



93. OF KING HARALD GODWINSON.

King Harald Godwinson had come with an immense army, both of
cavalry and infantry.  Now King Harald Sigurdson rode around his
array, to see how every part was drawn up.  He was upon a black
horse, and the horse stumbled under him, so that the king fell
off.  He got up in haste and said, "A fall is lucky for a
traveller."

The English king Harald said to the Northmen who were with him,
"Do ye know the stout man who fell from his horse, with the blue
kirtle and the beautiful helmet?"

"That is the king himself." said they.

The English king said, "A great man, and of stately appearance is
he; but I think his luck has left him."



94. OF THE TROOP OF THE NOBILITY.

Twenty horsemen rode forward from the Thing-men's troops against
the Northmen's array; and all of them, and likewise their horses,
were clothed in armour.

One of the horsemen said, "Is Earl Toste in this army?"

The earl answered, "It is not to be denied that ye will find him
here."

The horseman says, "Thy brother, King Harald, sends thee
salutation, with the message that thou shalt have the whole of
Northumberland; and rather than thou shouldst not submit to him,
he will give thee the third part of his kingdom to rule over
along with himself."

The earl replies, "This is something different from the enmity
and scorn he offered last winter; and if this had been offered
then it would have saved many a man's life who now is dead, and
it would have been better for the kingdom of England.  But if I
accept of this offer, what will he give King Harald Sigurdson
for his trouble?"

The horseman replied, "He has also spoken of this; and will give
him seven feet of English ground, or as much more as he may be
taller than other men."

"Then," said the earl, "go now and tell King Harald to get ready
for battle; for never shall the Northmen say with truth that Earl
Toste left King Harald Sigurdson to join his enemy's troops, when
he came to fight west here in England.  We shall rather all take
the resolution to die with honour, or to gain England by a
victory."

Then the horseman rode back.

King Harald Sigurdson said to the earl, "Who was the man who
spoke so well?"

The earl replied, "That was King Harald Godwinson."

Then, said King Harald Sigurdson, "That was by far too long
concealed from me; for they had come so near to our army, that
this Harald should never have carried back the tidings of our
men's slaughter."

Then said the earl, "It was certainly imprudent for such chiefs,
and it may be as you say; but I saw he was going to offer me
peace and a great dominion, and that, on the other hand, I would
be his murderer if I betrayed him; and I would rather he should
be my murderer than I his, if one of two be to die."

King Harald Sigurdson observed to his men, "That was but a little
man, yet he sat firmly in his stirrups."

It is said that Harald made these verses at this time: --

     "Advance!  advance!
     No helmets glance,
     But blue swords play
     In our array.
     Advance!  advance!
     No mail-coats glance,
     But hearts are here
     That ne'er knew fear."

His coat of mail was called Emma; and it was so long that it
reached almost to the middle of his leg, and so strong that no
weapon ever pierced it.  Then said King Harald Sigurdson, "These
verses are but ill composed; I must try to make better;" and he
composed the following: --

     "In battle storm we seek no lee,
     With skulking head, and bending knee,
     Behind the hollow shield.
     With eye and hand we fend the head;
     Courage and skill stand in the stead
     Of panzer, helm, and shield,
     In hild's bloody field."

Thereupon Thiodolf sang: --

     "And should our king in battle fall, --
     A fate that God may give to all, --
     His sons will vengeance take;
     And never shone the sun upon
     Two nobler eaglet; in his run,
     And them we'll never forsake."



95. OF THE BEGINNING OF THE BATTLE.

Now the battle began.  The Englishmen made a hot assault upon the
Northmen, who sustained it bravely.  It was no easy matter for
the English to ride against the Northmen on account of their
spears; therefore they rode in a circle around them.  And the
fight at first was but loose and light, as long as the Northmen
kept their order of battle; for although the English rode hard
against the Northmen, they gave way again immediately, as they
could do nothing against them.  Now when the Northmen thought
they perceived that the enemy were making but weak assaults, they
set after them, and would drive them into flight; but when they
had broken their shield-rampart the Englishmen rode up from all
sides, and threw arrows and spears on them.  Now when King Harald
Sigurdson saw this, he went into the fray where the greatest
crash of weapons was, and there was a sharp conflict, in which
many people fell on both sides.  King Harald then was in a rage,
and ran out in front of the array, and hewed down with both
hands; so that neither helmet nor armour could withstand him, and
all who were nearest gave way before him.  It was then very near
with the English that they had taken to flight.  So says Arnor,
the earls' skald: --

     "Where battle-storm was ringing,
     Where arrow-cloud was singing,
          Harald stood there,
          Of armour bare,
     His deadly sword still swinging.
     The foeman feel its bite;
     His Norsemen rush to fight,
          Danger to share,
          With Harald there,
     Where steel on steel was ringing."



96. FALL OF KING HARALD.

King Harald Sigurdson was hit by an arrow in the windpipe, and
that was his death-wound.  He fell, and all who had advanced with
him, except those who retired with the banner.  There was
afterwards the warmest conflict, and Earl Toste had taken charge
of the king's banner.  They began on both sides to form their
array again, and for a long time there was a pause in fighting.
Then Thiodolf sang these verses: --

     "The army stands in hushed dismay;
     Stilled is the clamour of the fray.
     Harald is dead, and with him goes
     The spirit to withstand our foes.
     A bloody scat the folk must pay
     For their king's folly on this day.
     He fell; and now, without disguise,
     We say this business was not wise."

But before the battle began again Harald Godwinson offered his
brother, Earl Toste, peace, and also quarter to the Northmen who
were still alive; but the Northmen called out, all of them
together, that they would rather fall, one across the other, than
accept of quarter from the Englishmen.  Then each side set up a
war-shout, and the battle began again.  So says Arnor, the earls'
skald: --

     "The king, whose name would ill-doers scare,
     The gold-tipped arrow would not spare.
     Unhelmed, unpanzered, without shield,
     He fell among us in the field.
     The gallant men who saw him fall
     Would take no quarter; one and all
     Resolved to die with their loved king,
     Around his corpse in a corpse-ring."



97. SKIRMISH OF ORRE.

Eystein Orre came up at this moment from the ships with the men
who followed him, and all were clad in armour.  Then Eystein got
King Harald's banner Land-ravager; and now was, for the third
time, one of the sharpest of conflicts, in which many Englishmen
fell, and they were near to taking flight.  This conflict is
called Orre's storm.  Eystein and his men had hastened so fast
from the ships that they were quite exhausted, and scarcely fit
to fight before they came into the battle; but afterwards they
became so furious, that they did not guard themselves with their
shields as long as they could stand upright.  At last they threw
off their coats of ringmail, and then the Englishmen could easily
lay their blows at them; and many fell from weariness, and died
without a wound.  Thus almost all the chief men fell among the
Norway people.  This happened towards evening; and then it went,
as one might expect, that all had not the same fate, for many
fled, and were lucky enough to escape in various ways; and
darkness fell before the slaughter was altogether ended.



98. OF STYRKAR THE MARSHAL.

Styrkar, King Harald Sigurdson's marshal, a gallant man, escaped
upon a horse, on which he rode away in the evening.  It was
blowing a cold wind, and Styrkar had not much other clothing upon
him but his shirt, and had a helmet on his head, and a drawn
sword in his hand.  As soon as his weariness was over, he began
to feel cold.  A waggoner met him in a lined skin-coat.  Styrkar
asks him, "Wilt thou sell thy coat, friend?"

"Not to thee," says the peasant: "thou art a Northman; that I
can hear by thy tongue."

Styrkar replies, "If I were a Northman, what wouldst thou do?"

"I would kill thee," replied the peasant; "but as ill luck would
have it, I have no weapon just now by me that would do it."

Then Styrkar says, "As you can't kill me, friend, I shall try if
I can't kill you."  And with that he swung his sword, and struck
him on the neck, so that his head came off.  He then took the
skin-coat, sprang on his horse, and rode down to the strand.  

Olaf Haraldson had not gone on land with the others, and when he
heard of his father's fall he made ready to sail away with the
men who remained.



99. OF WILLIAM THE BASTARD.

When the Earl of Rouen, William the Bastard, heard of his
relation, King Edward's, death, and also that Harald Godwinson
was chosen, crowned, and consecrated king of England, it appeared
to him that he had a better right to the kingdom of England than
Harald, by reason of the relationship between him and King
Edward.  He thought, also, that he had grounds for avenging the
affront that Harald had put upon him with respect to his
daughter.  From all these grounds William gathered together a
great army in Normandy, and had many men, and sufficient
transport-shipping.  The day that he rode out of the castle to
his ships, and had mounted his horse, his wife came to him, and
wanted to speak with him; but when he saw her he struck at her
with his heel, and set his spurs so deep into her breast that she
fell down dead; and the earl rode on to his ships, and went with
his ships over to England.  His brother, Archbishop Otto, was
with him; and when the earl came to England he began to plunder,
and take possession of the land as he came along.  Earl William
was stouter and stronger than other men; a great horseman and
warrior, but somewhat stern; and a very sensible man, but not
considered a man to be relied on.



100. FALL OF KING HARALD GODWINSON.

King Harald Godwinson gave King Harald Sigurdson's son Olaf leave
to go away, with the men who had followed him and had not fallen
in battle; but he himself turned round with his army to go south,
for he had heard that William the Bastard was overwhelming the
south of England with a vast army, and was subduing the country
for himself.  With King Harald went his brothers Svein and Gyrd,
and Earl Valthiof.  King Harald and Earl William met each other
south in England at Helsingja-port (Hastings).  There was a great
battle in which King Harald and his brother Earl Gyrd and a great
part of his men fell.  This was the nineteenth day after the fall
of King Harald Sigurdson.  Harald's brother, Earl Valthiof,
escaped by flight, and towards evening fell in with a division of
William's people, consisting of 100 men; and when they saw Earl
Valthiof's troop they fled to a wood.  Earl Valthiof set fire to
the wood, and they were all burnt.  So says Thorkel Skallason in
Valthiof's ballad: --

     "Earl Valthiof the brave
     His foes a warming gave:
     Within the blazing grove
     A hundred men he drove.
     The wolf will soon return,
     And the witch's horse will burn
     Her sharp claws in the ash,
     To taste the Frenchman's flesh."



101. EARL VALTHIOF'S DEATH.

William was proclaimed king of England.  He sent a message to
Earl Valthiof that they should be reconciled, and gave him
assurance of safety to come to the place of meeting.  The earl
set out with a few men; but when he came to a heath north of
Kastala-bryggia, there met him two officers of King William, with
many followers, who took him prisoner, put him in fetters, and
afterwards he was beheaded; and the English call him a saint.
Thorkel tells of this: --

     "William came o'er the sea,
     With bloody sword came he:
     Cold heart and bloody hand
     Now rule the English land.
     Earl Valthiof he slew, --
     Valthiof the brave and true.
     Cold heart and bloody hand
     Now rule the English land."

William was after this king of England for twenty-one years, and
his descendants have been so ever since.



102. OF OLAF HARALDSON'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

Olaf, the son of King Harald Sigurdson, sailed with his fleet
from England from Hrafnseyr, and came in autumn to the Orkney
Isles, where the event had happened that Maria, a daughter of
Harald Sigurdson, died a sudden death the very day and hour her
father, King Harald, fell.  Olaf remained there all winter; but
the summer after he proceeded east to Norway, where he was
proclaimed king along with his brother Magnus.  Queen Ellisif
came from the West, along with her stepson Olaf and her daughter
Ingegerd.  There came also with Olaf over the West sea Skule, a
son of Earl Toste, and who since has been called the king's
foster-son, and his brother Ketil Krok.  Both were gallant men,
of high family in England, and both were very intelligent; and
the brothers were much beloved by King Olaf.  Ketil Krok went
north to Halogaland, where King Olaf procured him a good
marriage, and from him are descended many great people.  Skule,
the king's foster-son, was a very clever man, and the handsomest
man that could be seen.  He was the commander of King Olaf's
court-men, spoke at the Things (1) and took part in all the
country affairs with the king.  The king offered to give Skule
whatever district in Norway he liked, with all the income and
duties that belonged to the king in it.  Skule thanked him very
much for the offer, but said he would rather have something else
from him.  "For if there came a shift of kings," said he, "the
gift might come to nothing.  I would rather take some properties
lying near to the merchant towns, where you, sire, usually take
up your abode, and then I would enjoy your Yule-feasts."  The
king agreed to this, and conferred on him lands eastward at
Konungahella, Oslo, Tunsberg, Sarpsborg, Bergen, and north at
Nidaros.  These were nearly the best properties at each place,
and have since descended to the family branches which came from
Skule.  King Olaf gave Skule his female relative, Gudrun, the
daughter of Nefstein, in marriage.  Her mother was Ingerid, a
daughter of Sigurd Syr and Asta, King Olaf the Saint's mother.
Ingerid was a sister of King Olaf the Saint and of King Harald.
Skule and Gudrun's son was Asolf of Reine, who married Thora, a
daughter of Skopte Ogmundson; Asolf's and Thora's son was Guthorm
of Reine, father of Bard, and grandfather of King Inge and of
Duke Skule.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Another instance of the old Norse or Icelandic tongue having
     been generally known in a part of England.



103. OF KING HARALD SIGURDSON.

One year after King Harald's fall his body was transported from
England north to Nidaros, and was buried in Mary church, which he
had built.  It was a common observation that King Harald
distinguished himself above all other men by wisdom and resources
of mind; whether he had to take a resolution suddenly for himself
and others, or after long deliberation.  He was, also, above all
other men, bold, brave, and lucky, until his dying day, as above
related; and bravery is half victory.  So says Thiodolf: -- 

     "Harald, who till his dying day
     Came off the best in many a fray,
     Had one good rule in battle-plain,
     In Seeland and elsewhere, to gain --
     That, be his foes' strength more or less,
     Courage is always half success."

King Herald was a handsome man, of noble appearance; his hair and
beard yellow.  He had a short beard, and long mustaches.  The one
eyebrow was somewhat higher than the other.  He had large hands
(1) and feet; but these were well made.  His height was five
ells.  He was stern and severe to his enemies, and avenged
cruelly all opposition or misdeed.  So says Thiodolf: --

     "Severe alike to friends or foes,
     Who dared his royal will oppose;
     Severe in discipline to hold
     His men-at-arms wild and bold;
     Severe the bondes to repress;
     Severe to punish all excess;
     Severe was Harald -- but we call
     That just which was alike to all."

King Harald was most greedy of power, and of all distinction and
honour.  He was bountiful to the friends who suited him.  So says
Thiodolf: --

     "I got from him, in sea-fight strong,
     A mark of gold for my ship-song.
     Merit in any way
     He generously would pay."

King Harald was fifty years old when he fell.  We have no
particular account of his youth before he was fifteen years old,
when he was with his brother, King Olaf, at the battle of
Stiklestad.  He lived thirty-five years after that, and in all
that time was never free from care and war.  King Harald never
fled from battle, but often tried cunning ways to escape when he
had to do with great superiority of forces.  All the men who
followed King Harald in battle or skirmish said that when he
stood in great danger, or anything came suddenly upon him, he
always took that course which all afterwards saw gave the best
hope of a fortunate issue.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  It is a singular physical circumstance, that in almost all
     the swords of those ages to be found in the collection of
     weapons in the Antiquarian Museum at Copenhagen, the handles
     indicate a size of hand very much smaller than the hands of
     modern people of any class or rank.  No modern dandy, with
     the most delicate hands, would find room for his hand to
     grasp or wield with case some of the swords of these
     Northmen. -- L.



104. KING HARALD AND KING OLAF COMPARED.

When Haldor, a son of Brynjolf Ulfalde the Old, who was a
sensible man and a great chief, heard people talk of how unlike
the brothers Saint Olaf and King Harald were in disposition, he
used to say, "I was in great friendship with both the brothers,
and I knew intimately the dispositions of both, and never did I
know two men more like in disposition.  Both were of the highest
understanding, and bold in arms, and greedy of power and
property; of great courage, but not acquainted with the way of
winning the favour of the people; zealous in governing, and
severe in their revenge.  King Olaf forced the people into
Christianity and good customs, and punished cruelly those who
disobeyed.  This just and rightful severity the chiefs of the
country could not bear, but raised an army against him, and
killed him in his own kingdom; and therefore he is held to be a
saint.  King Harald, again, marauded to obtain glory and power,
forced all the people he could under his power, and died in
another king's dominions.  Both brothers, in daily life, were of
a worthy and considerate manner of living; they were of great
experience, and very laborious, and were known and celebrated far
and wide for these qualities."



105. KING MAGNUS'S DEATH.

King Magnus Haraldson ruled over Norway the first winter after
King Harald's death (A.D. 1067), and afterwards two years (A.D.
1068-1069) along with his brother, King Olaf.  Thus there were
two kings of Norway at that time; and Magnus had the northern and
Olaf the eastern part of the country.  King Magnus had a son
called Hakon, who was fostered by Thorer of Steig in
Gudbrandsdal, who was a brother of King Magnus by the mother's
side; and Hakon was a most agreeable man.

After King Harald Sigurdson's death the Danish king Svein let it
be known that the peace between the Northmen and the Danes was at
an end, and insisted that the league between Harald and Svein was
not for longer time than their lives.  There was a levy in both
kingdoms.  Harald's sons called out the whole people in Norway
for procuring men and ships, and Svein set out from the south
with the Danish army.  Messengers then went between with
proposals for a peace; and the Northmen said they would either
have the same league as was concluded between King Harald and
Svein, or otherwise give battle instantly on the spot.  Verses
were made on this occasion, viz.: --

     "Ready for war or peace,
     King Olaf will not cease
     From foeman's hand
     To guard his land."

So says also Stein Herdison in his song of Olaf: --

     "From Throndhjem town, where in repose
     The holy king defies his foes,
     Another Olaf will defend
     His kingdom from the greedy Svein.
     King Olaf had both power and right,
     And the Saint's favour in the fight.
     The Saint will ne'er his kin forsake,
     And let Svein Ulfson Norway take."

In this manner friendship was concluded between the kings and
peace between the countries.  King Magnus fell ill and died of
the ringworm disease, after being ill for some time.  He died and
was buried at Nidaros.  He was an amiable king and bewailed by
the people.



SAGA OF OLAF KYRRE.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Snorri's account of Olaf Kyrre corresponds with the statements
found in "Agrip", "Fagrskinna", and "Morkinskinna".

There are but few events in Olaf's long reign, and hence he is
very appropriately called the Quiet (Kyrre).  As Hildebrand says,
this saga seems to be written simply to fill out the empty space
between Harald Hardrade and Magnus Barefoot.

Skalds quoted in this saga are: Stein Herdison and Stuf.



1. OLAF'S PERSONAL APPEARANCE.

Olaf remained sole king of Norway after the death (A.D. 1069) of
his brother King Magnus.  Olaf was a stout man, well grown in
limbs; and every one said a handsomer man could not be seen, nor
of a nobler appearance.  His hair was yellow as silk, and became
him well; his skin was white and fine over all his body; his eyes
beautiful, and his limbs well proportioned.  He was rather silent
in general, and did not speak much even at Things; but he was
merry in drinking parties.  He loved drinking much, and was
talkative enough then; but quite peaceful.  He was cheerful in
conversation, peacefully inclined during all his reign, and
loving gentleness and moderation in all things.  Stein Herdison
speaks thus of him: --

     "Our Throndhjem king is brave and wise,
     His love of peace our bondes prize;
     By friendly word and ready hand
     He holds good peace through every land.
     He is for all a lucky star;
     England he frightens from a war;
     The stiff-necked Danes he drives to peace;
     Troubles by his good influence cease."



2. OF KING OLAF'S MANNER OF LIVING.

It was the fashion in Norway in old times for the king's high-
seat to be on the middle of a long bench, and the ale was handed
across the fire (1); but King Olaf had his high-seat made on a
high bench across the room; he also first had chimney-places in
the rooms, and the floors strewed both summer and winter.  In
King Olaf's time many merchant towns arose in Norway, and many
new ones were founded.  Thus King Olaf founded a merchant town at
Bergen, where very soon many wealthy people settled themselves,
and it was regularly frequented by merchants from foreign lands.
He had the foundations laid for the large Christ church, which
was to be a stone church; but in his time there was little done
to it.  Besides, he completed the old Christ church, which was of
wood.  King Olaf also had a great feasting-house built in
Nidaros, and in many other merchant towns, where before there
were only private feasts; and in his time no one could drink in
Norway but in these houses, adorned for the purpose with branches
and leaves, and which stood under the king's protection.  The
great guild-bell in Throndhjem, which was called the pride of the
town, tolled to call together to these guilds.  The guild-
brethren built Margaret's church in Nidaros of stone.  In King
Olaf's time there were general entertainments and hand-in-hand
feasts.  At this time also much unusual splendour and foreign
customs and fashions in the cut of clothes were introduced; as,
for instance, costly hose plaited about the legs.  Some had gold
rings about the legs, and also used coats which had lists down
the sides, and arms five ells long, and so narrow that they must
be drawn up with ties, and lay in folds all the way up to the
shoulders.  The shoes were high, and all edged with silk, or even
with gold.  Many other kinds of wonderful ornaments were used at
that time.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  We may understand the arrangement by supposing the fire in
     the middle of the room, the smoke escaping by a hole in the
     roof, and a long bench on each side of the fire; one bench
     occupied by the high-seat of the king and great guests, the
     other by the rest of the guests; and the cup handed across
     the fire, which appears to have had a religious meaning
     previous to the introduction of Christianity. -- L.



3. FASHION OF KING OLAF'S COURT.

King Olaf used the fashion, which was introduced from the courts
of foreign kings, of letting his grand-butler stand at the end of
the table, and fill the table-cups for himself and the other
distinguished guests who sat at the table.  He had also torch-
bearers, who held as many candles at the table as there were
guests of distinction present.  There was also a marshal's bench
outside of the table-circle, where the marshal and other persons
of distinction sat with their faces towards the high-seat.  King
Harald, and the kings before him, used to drink out of deer-horn;
and the ale was handed from the high-seat to the otherside over
the fire, and he drank to the memory of any one he thought of. 
So says Stuf the skald: --

     "He who in battle is the first,
     And now in peace is best to trust,
     A welcome, hearty and sincere,
     Gave to me on my coming here.
     He whom the ravens watch with care,
     He who the gold rings does not spare,
     A golden horn full to the brink
     Gave me himself at Haug to drink."



4. ARRANGEMENT OF KING OLAF'S COURT.

King Olaf had 120 courtmen-at-arms, and 60 pursuivants, besides
60 house-servants, who provided what was wanted for the king's
house wherever it might be, or did other work required for the
king.  When the bondes asked why he kept a greater retinue than
the law allowed, or former kings kept when they went in guest-
quarters or feasts which the bondes had to provide for them, the
king answered, "It does not happen that I rule the kingdom
better, or produce greater respect for me than ye had for my
father, although I have one-half more people than he had.  I do
not by any means do it merely to plague you, or to make your
condition harder than formerly."



5. KING SVEIN ULFSON'S DEATH.

King Svein Ulfson died ten years after the fall of both the
Haralds (A.D. 1076).  After him his son, Harald Hein, was king
for three years (A.D. 1077-1080); then Canute the Holy for seven
years (A.D. 1081-1087); afterwards Olaf, King Svein's third son,
for eight years (A.D. 1088-1095).  Then Eirik the Good, Svein's
fourth son, for eight winters (A.D. 1096-1103).  Olaf, the king
of Norway, was married to Ingerid, a daughter of Svein, the
Danish king; and Olaf, the Danish King Svein's son, married
Ingegerd, a daughter of King Harald, and sister of King Olaf of
Norway.  King Olaf Haraldson, who was called by some Olaf Kyrre,
but by many Olaf the Bonde, had a son by Thora, Joan's daughter,
who was called Magnus, and was one of the handsomest lads that
could be seen, and was promising in every respect.  He was
brought up in the king's court.



6. MIRACLES OF KING OLAF THE SAINT.

King Olaf had a church of stone built in Nidaros, on the spot
where King Olaf's body had first been buried, and the altar was
placed directly over the spot where the king's grave had been.
This church was consecrated and called Christ Church; and King
Olaf's shrine was removed to it, and was placed before the altar,
and many miracles took place there.  The following summer, on the 
same day of the year as the church was consecrated, which was the
day before Olafsmas, there was a great assemblage of people, and
then a blind man was restored to sight.  And on the mass-day
itself, when the shrine and the holy relics were taken out and
carried, and the shrine itself, according to custom, was taken
and set down in the churchyard, a man who had long been dumb
recovered his speech again, and sang with flowing tongue praise-
hymns to God, and to the honour of King Olaf the Saint.  The
third miracle was of a woman who had come from Svithjod, and had
suffered much distress on this pilgrimage from her blindness; but
trusting in God's mercy, had come travelling to this solemnity.
She was led blind into the church to hear mass this day; but
before the service was ended she saw with both eyes, and got her
sight fully and clearly, although she had been blind fourteen
years.  She returned with great joy, praising God and King Olaf 
the Saint.



7. OF THE SHRINE OF KING OLAF THE SAINT.

There happened a circumstance in Nidaros, when King Olaf's coffin
was being carried about through the streets, that it became so
heavy that people could not lift it from the spot.  Now when the
coffin was set down, the street was broken up to see what was
under it at that spot, and the body of a child was found which
had been murdered and concealed there.  The body was carried
away, the street put in order again as it had been before, and
the shrine carried on according to custom.



8. KING OLAF WAS BLESSED WITH PEACE.

In the days of King O1af there were bountiful harvests in Norway
and many good things.  In no man's life had times been so good in
Norway since the days of Harald Harfager.  King O1af modified for
the better many a matter that his father had inaugurated and
maintained with severity.  He was generous, but a strict ruler,
for he was a wise man, and well understood what was of advantage
to the kingdom.  There are many stories of his good works.  How
much he loved and how kind he was to the people may be seen from
the following words, which he once spoke at a large banquet.  He
was happy and in the best of spirits, when one of his men said,
"It pleases us, sire, to see you so happy."  He answered: "I have
reason to be glad when I see my subjects sitting happy and free
in a guild consecrated to my uncle, the sainted King Olaf.  In
the days of my father these people were subjected to much terror
and fear; the most of them concealed their gold and their
precious things, but now I see glittering on his person what each
one owns, and your freedom is my gladness.  In his reign there
was no strife, and he protected himself and his realm against
enemies abroad; and his nearest neighbours stood in great awe of
him, although he was a most gentle man, as is confirmed by the
skald.



9. MEETING OF OLAF KYRRE AND CANUTE THE SAINT.

King Olaf Kyrre was a great friend of his brother-in-law, the
Danish king, Canute the holy.  They appointed a meeting and met
at the Gaut river at Konungahella, where the kings used to have
their meetings.  There King Canute made the proposal that they
should send an army westward to England on account of the revenge
they had to take there; first and foremost King Olaf himself, and
also the Danish king.  "Do one of two things," said King Canute,
-- "either take sixty ships, which I will furnish thee with, and
be thou the leader; or give me sixty ships, and I shall be the
leader."  Then said King Olaf, "This speech of thine, King
Canute, is altogether according to my mind; but there is this
great difference between us; your family has had more luck in
conquering England with great glory, and, among others, King
Canute the Great; and it is likely that this good fortune follows
your race.  On the other hand, when King Harald, my father, went
westward to England, he got his death there; and at that time the
best men in Norway followed him.  But Norway was so emptied then
of chosen men, that such men have not since been to find in the
country; for that expedition there was the most excellent outfit,
and you know what was the end of it.  Now I know my own capacity,
and how little I am suited to be the leader; so I would rather
you should go, with my help and assistance."

So King Olaf gave Canute sixty large ships, with excellent
equipment and faithful men, and set his lendermen as chiefs over
them; and all must allow that this armament was admirably equipt.
It is also told in the saga about Canute, that the Northmen alone
did not break the levy when the army was assembled, but the Danes
would not obey their king's orders.  This king Canute
acknowledged, and gave them leave to trade in merchandise where
they pleased through his country, and at the same time sent the
king of Norway costly presents for his assistance.  On the other
hand he was enraged against the Danes, and laid heavy fines upon
them.



10. A BONDE WHO UNDERSTOOD THE LANGUAGE OF BIRDS.

One summer, when King Olaf's men had gone round the country
collecting his income and land dues, it happened that the king,
on their return home asked them where on their expedition they
had been best entertained.  They said it was in the house of a
bonde in one of the king's districts.  "There is an old bonde
there who knows many things before they happen.  We asked him
about many things, which he explained to us; nay, we even believe
that he understands perfectly the language of birds."  The king
replies, "How can ye believe such nonsense?" and insisted that it
was wrong to put confidence in such things.  It happened soon
after that the king was sailing along the coast; and as they
sailed through a Sound the king said, "What is that township up
in the country?"

They replied, "That is the district, sire, where we told you we
were best entertained."

Then said the king, "What house is that which stands up there,
not far from the Sound?"

They replied, "That house belongs to the wise old bonde we told
you of, sire."

They saw now a horse standing close to the house.  Then said the
king, "Go there, and take that horse, and kill him."

They replied, "We would not like to do him such harm."

The king: "I will command.  Cut off the horse's head; but take
care of yourselves that ye let no blood come to the ground, and
bear the horse out to my ship.  Go then and bring to me the old
man; but tell him nothing of what has happened, as ye shall
answer for it with your lives."

They did as they were ordered, and then came to the old man, and
told him the king's message.  When he came before the king, the
king asked him, "Who owns the house thou art dwelling in?"

He replies, "Sire, you own it, and take rent for it."

The king: "Show us the way round the ness, for here thou must be
a good pilot."

The old man went into his boat and rowed before the king's ship;
and when he had rowed a little way a crow came flying over the
ship, and croaking hideously.  The peasant listens to the crow.
The king said, "Do you think, bonde, that betokens anything?"

"Sire, that is certain," said he.

Then another crow flies over the ship, and screeches dreadfully.
The bonde was so ill hearing this that he could not row, and the
oars hung loose in his hands.

Then said the king, "Thy mind is turned much to these crows,
bonde, and to what they say."

The bonde replies, "Now I suspect it is true what they say."

The third time the crow came flying screeching at its very worst,
and almost settling on the ship.  Now the bonde threw down his
oars, regarded them no more, and stood up before the king.

Then the king said, "Thou art taking this much to heart, bonde;
what is it they say?"

The peasant -- "It is likely that either they or I have
misunderstood -- "

"Say on," replied the king.

The bonde replied in a song: --

     "The `one-year old'
     Mere nonsense told;
     The `two-years' chatter
     Seemed senseless matter;
     The three-years' croak
     Of wonders spoke.
     The foul bird said
     My old mare's head
     I row along;
     And, in her song,
     She said the thief
     Was the land's chief."

The king said, "What is this, bonde!  Wilt thou call me a thief?"

Then the king gave him good presents, and remitted all the land-
rent of the place he lived on.  So says Stein: --

     "The pillar of our royal race
     Stands forth adorned with every grace.
     What king before e'er took such pride
     To scatter bounty far and wide?
     Hung round with shields that gleam afar;
     The merchant ship on one bestows,
     With painted streaks in glowing rows.

     "The man-at-arms a golden ring
     Boasts as the present of his king;
     At the king's table sits the guest,
     By the king's bounty richly drest.
     King Olaf, Norway's royal son,
     Who from the English glory won,
     Pours out with ready-giving hand
     His wealth on children of the land.

     "Brave clothes to servants he awards,
     Helms and ring-mail coats grace his guards;
     Or axe and sword Har's warriors gain,
     And heavy armour for the plain.
     Gold, too, for service duly paid,
     Red gold all pure, and duly weighed,
     King Olaf gives -- be loves to pay
     All service in a royal way."



11. OF KING OLAF KYRRE'S DEATH.

King Olaf lived principally in his domains on his large farms.
Once when he was east in Ranrike, on his estate of Haukby, he
took the disease which ended in his death.  He had then been king
of Norway for twenty-six years (A.D. 1068-1093); for he was made
king of Norway the year after King Harald's death.  King Olaf's
body was taken north to Nidaros, and buried in Christ church,
which he himself had built there.  He was the most amiable king
of his time, and Norway was much improved in riches and
cultivation during his reign.



MAGNUS BAREFOOT'S SAGA.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

The greater part of the contents of this saga is also found in
"Agrip", "Fagrskinna", and "Morkinskinna".

Magnus and his cousin Hakon became kings in 1093, but Hakon ruled
only two years and died in 1095.  King Magnus fell in the year
1103.

Skalds quoted are: Bjorn Krephende, Thorkel Hamarskald, and
Eldjarn.



1. BEGINNING OF THE REIGN OF KING MAGNUS AND HIS COUSIN HAKON.

Magnus, King Olaf's son, was, immediately after King Olaf's
death, proclaimed at Viken king of all Norway; but the Upland
people, on hearing of King Olaf's death, chose Hakon, Thorer's
foster-son, a cousin of King Magnus, as king.  Thereupon Hakon
and Thorer went north to the Throndhjem country, and when they
came to Nidaros they summoned the Eyrathing; and at that Thing
Hakon desired the bondes to give him the kingly title, which was
agreed to, and the Throndhjem people proclaimed him king of half
of Norway, as his father, King Magnus, had been before.  Hakon
relieved the Throndhjem people of all harbour duties, and gave
them many other privileges.  He did away with Yule-gifts, and
gained by this the good-will of all the Throndhjem people.
Thereafter Hakon formed a court, and then proceeded to the
Uplands, where he gave the Upland people the same privileges as
the Throndhjem people; so that they also were perfectly well
affected to him, and were his friends.  The people in Throndhjem
sang this ballad about him: --

     "Young Hakon was the Norseman's pride,
     And Steig-Thorer was on his side.
     Young Hakon from the Upland came,
     With royal birth, and blood, and name.
     Young Hakon from the king demands
     His royal birthright, half the lands;
     Magnus will not the kingdom break, --
     The whole or nothing he will take."



2. HAKON'S DEATH.

King Magnus proceeded north to the merchant town (Nidaros), and
on his arrival went straight to the king's house, and there took
up his abode.  He remained here the first part of the winter
(A.D. 1094), and kept seven longships in the open water of the
river Nid, abreast of the king's house.  Now when King Hakon
heard that King Magnus was come to Throndhjem, he came from the
East over the Dovrefield, and thence down from Throndhjem to the
merchant town, where he took up his abode in the house of Skule,
opposite to Clement's church, which had formerly been the king's
house.  King Magnus was ill pleased with the great gifts which
Hakon had given to the bondes to gain their favour, and thought
it was so much given out of his own property.  This irritated his
mind; and he thought he had suffered injustice from his relative
in this respect, that he must now put up with less income than
his father and his predecessors before him had enjoyed; and he
gave Thorer the blame.  When King Hakon and Thorer observed this,
they were alarmed for what Magnus might do; and they thought it
suspicious that Magnus kept long-ships afloat rigged out, and
with tents.  The following spring, after Candlemas, King Magnus
left the town in the night with his ships; the tents up, and
lights burning in the tents.  They brought up at Hefring,
remained there all night, and kindled a fire on the land.  Then
Hakon and the men in the town thought some treachery was on foot,
and he let the trumpets call all the men together out on the
Eyrar, where the whole people of the town came to him, and the
people were gathering together the whole night.  When it was
light in the morning, King Magnus saw the people from all
districts gathered together on the Eyrar; and he sailed out of
the fjord, and proceeded south to where the Gulathing is held.
Hakon thanked the people for their support which they had given
him, and got ready to travel east to Viken.  But he first held a
meeting in the town, where, in a speech, he asked the people for
their friendship, promising them his; and added, that he had some
suspicions of his relation, King Magnus's intentions.  Then King
Hakon mounted his horse, and was ready to travel.  All men
promised him their good-will and support whenever he required
them, and the people followed him out to the foot of Steinbjorg.
From thence King Hakon proceeded up the Dovrefield; but as he was
going over the mountains he rode all day after a ptarmigan, which
flew up beside him, and in this chase a sickness overfell him,
which ended in his death; and he died on the mountains.  His body
was carried north, and came to the merchant town just half a
month after he left it.  The whole townspeople went to meet the
body, sorrowing, and the most of them weeping; for all people
loved him with sincere affection.  King Hakon's body was interred
in Christ church, and Hakon and Magnus had ruled the country for
two years.  Hakon was a man full twenty-five years old, and was
one of the chiefs the most beloved by all the people.  He had
made a journey to Bjarmaland, where he had given battle and
gained a victory.



3. OF A FORAY IN HALLAND.

King Magnus sailed in winter (A.D. 1095) eastward to Viken; but
when spring approached he went southwards to Halland, and
plundered far and wide.  He laid waste Viskardal and many other
districts, and returned with a great booty back to his own
kingdom.  So says Bjorn Krephende in his song on Magnus: --

     "Through Halland wide around
     The clang and shriek resound;
          The houses burn,
          The people mourn,
     Through Halland wide around.
     The Norse king strides in flame,
     Through Viskardal he came;
          The fire sweeps,
          The widow weeps,
     The Norse king strides in flame."

Here it is told that King Magnus made the greatest devastation
through Halland.



4. OF THORER OF STEIG.

"There was a man called Svein, a son of Harald Fietter.  He was a
Danish man by family, a great viking and champion, and a very
clever man, and of high birth in his own country.  He had been
some time with King Hakon Magnuson, and was very dear to him; but
after King Hakon's decease Thorer of Steig, his foster-father,
had no great confidence in any treaty or friendship with King
Magnus, if the whole country came into his power, on account of
the position in which Thorer had stood to King Magnus, and the
opposition he had made to him.  Thereupon Thorer and Svein took
counsel with each other, which they afterwards carried into
effect, -- to raise, with Thorer's assistance, and his men, a
troop against Magnus.  But as Thorer was old and heavy, Svein
took the command, and name of leader of the troop.  In this
design several chiefs took part, among whom the principal was
Egil Aslakson of Aurland.  Egil was a lenderman, and married to
Ingebjorg, a daughter of Ogmund Thorbergson, a sister of Skopte
of Giske.  The rich and powerful man, Skjalg Erlingson, also
joined their party.  Thorkel Hamarskald speaks of this in his
ballad of Magnus:

     "Thorer and Egil were not wise,
     They aimed too high to win a prize:
     There was no reason in their plan,
     And it hurt many a udalman.
     The stone, too great for them to throw,
     Fell back, and hurt them with the blow,
     And now the udalmen must rue
     That to their friends they were so true."

Thorer and Svein collected a troop in the Uplands, and went down
through Raumsdal into Sunmore, and there collected vessels, with
which they afterwards sailed north to Throndhjem.



5. OF THORER'S ADVENTURES.

The lenderman Sigurd Ulstreng, a son of Lodin Viggiarskalle,
collected men by sending round the war-token, as soon as he heard
of Thorer and the troop which followed him, and had a rendezvous
with all the men he could raise at Viggia.  Svein and Thorer also
met there with their people, fought with Sigurd, and gained the
victory after giving him a great defeat; and Sigurd fled, and
joined King Magnus.  Thorer and his followers proceeded to the
town (Nidaros), and remained there some time in the fjord, where
many people joined them.  King Magnus hearing this news
immediately collected an army, and proceeded north to Throndhjem.
And when he came into the fjord Thorer and his party heard of it
while they lay at Herring, and they were ready to leave the
fjord; and they rowed their ships to the strand at Vagnvik, and
left them, and came into Theksdal in Seliuhverfe, and Thorer was
carried in a litter over the mountains.  Then they got hold of
ships and sailed north to Halogaland.  As soon as King Magnus was
ready for sea, he sailed from Throndhjem in pursuit of them.
Thorer and his party went north all the way to Bjarkey; and Jon,
with his son Vidkun, fled from thence.  Thorer and his men robbed
all the movable goods, and burnt the house, and a good long-ship
that belonged to Vidkun.  While the hull was burning the vessel
keeled to one side, and Thorer called out, "Hard to starboard,
Vidkun!"  Some verses were made about this burning in Bjarkey: --

     "The sweetest farm that I have seen
     Stood on Bjarkey's island green;
     And now, where once this farmhouse stood,
     Fire crackles through a pile of wood;
     And the clear red flame, burning high,
     Flashes across the dark-night sky.
     Jon and Vidkun, this dark night,
     Will not be wandering without light."



6. DEATH OF THORER AND EGIL.

Jon and Vidkun travelled day and night till they met King Magnus.
Svein and Thorer proceeded northwards with their men, and
plundered far and wide in Halogaland.  But while they lay in a
fjord called Harm, Thorer and his party saw King Magnus coming
under sail towards them; and thinking they had not men enough to
fight him, they rowed away and fled.  Thorer and Egil brought up
at Hesjutun; but Svein rowed out to sea, and some of their people
rowed into the fjords.  King Magnus pursued Thorer, and the
vessels struck together while they were landing.  Thorer stood in
the forecastle of his ship, and Sigurd Ulstreng called out to
him, and asked, "Art thou well, Thorer?"  Thorer replied, "I am
well in hands, but ill on my feet."

Then all Thorer's men fled up the country, and Thorer was taken
prisoner.  Egil was also taken prisoner, for he would not leave
his wife.  King Magnus then ordered both of them to be taken out
to Vambarholm; and when they were leading Thorer from the ship he
tottered on his legs.  Then Vidkun called out, "More to the
larboard, Thorer!"  When he was being led to the gallows he sang:
--

     "We were four comrades gay, --
     Let one by the helm stay."

When he came to the gallows he said, "Bad counsel comes to a bad
end."  Then Thorer was hanged; but when he was hoisted up the
gallows tree he was so heavy that his neck gave way, and the body
fell down to the ground; for Thorer was a man exceedingly stout,
both high of stature and thick.  Egil was also led to the
gallows, and when the king's thralls were about hanging him he
said, "Ye should not hang me, for in truth each of you deserves
much more to be hanged."  People sang these verses about it: --

     "I hear, my girl, that Egil said,
     When to the gallows he was led,
     That the king's thralls far more than he
     Deserved to hang on gallows-tree.
     It might be so; but, death in view,
     A man should to himself be true, --
     End a stout life by death as stout,
     Showing no fear; or care, or doubt."

King Magnus sat near while they were being hanged, and was in
such a rage that none of his men was so bold as to ask mercy for
them.  The king said, when Egil was spinning at the gallows, "Thy
great friends help thee but poorly in time of need."  From this
people supposed that the king only wanted to have been entreated
to have spared Egil's life.  Bjorn Krephende speaks of these
things: --

     "King Magnus in the robbers' gore
     Dyed red his sword; and round the shore
     The wolves howled out their wild delight,
     At corpses swinging in their sight.
     Have ye not heard how the king's sword
     Punished the traitors to their lord?
     How the king's thralls hung on the gallows
     Old Thorer and his traitor-fellows?"



7. OF THE PUNISHMENT OF THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE.

After this King Magnus sailed south to Throndhjem, and brought up
in the fjord, and punished severely all who had been guilty of
treason towards him; killing some, and burning the houses of
others.  So says Bjorn Krephende: --

     "He who despises fence of shields
     Drove terror through the Throndhjem fields,
     When all the land through which he came
     Was swimming in a flood of flame.
     The raven-feeder, will I know,
     Cut off two chieftans at a blow;
     The wolf could scarcely ravenous be,
     The ernes flew round the gallows-tree."

Svein Harald Fletter's son, fled out to sea first, and sailed
then to Denmark, and remained there; and at last came into great
favour with King Eystein, the son of King Magnus, who took so
great a liking to Svein that he made him his dish-bearer, and
held him in great respect.  King Magnus had now alone the whole
kingdom, and he kept good peace in the land, and rooted out all
vikings and lawless men.  He was a man quick, warlike, and able,
and more like in all things to his grandfather, King Harald, in
disposition and talents than to his father.



8. OF THE BONDE SVEINKE, AND SIGURD ULSTRENG.

There was a man called Sveinke Steinarson, who was very wealthy,
and dwelt in Viken at the Gaut river.  He had brought up Hakon
Magnuson before Thorer of Steig took him.  Sveinke had not yet
submitted to King Magnus.  King Magnus ordered Sigurd Ulstreng to
be called, and told him he would send him to Sveinke with the
command that he should quit the king's land and domain.  "He has
not yet submitted to us, or shown us due honour."  He added, that
there were some lendermen east in Viken, namely Svein Bryggjufot,
Dag Eilifson, and Kolbjorn Klakke, who could bring this matter
into right bearing.  Then Sigurd said, "I did not know there was
the man in Norway against whom three lendermen besides myself
were needful."  The king replied, "Thou needst not take this
help, unless it be necessary."  Now Sigurd made himself ready for
the journey with a ship, sailed east to Viken, and there summoned
the lendermen to him.  Then a Thing was appointed to Viken, to
which the people were called who dwelt on the Gaut river, besides
others; so that it was a numerous assembly.  When the Thing was
formed they had to wait for Sveinke.  They soon after saw a troop
of men coming along, so well furnished with weapons that they
looked like pieces of shining ice; and now came Sveinke and his
people to the Thing, and set themselves down in a circle.  All
were clad in iron, with glowing arms, and 500 in number.  Then
Sigurd stood up, and spoke.  "My master, King Magnus, sends God's
salutation and his own to all friends, lendermen and others, his
subjects in the kingdom; also to the powerful bondes, and the
people in general, with kind words and offers of friendship; and
to all who will obey him he offers his friendship and good will.
Now the king will, with all cheerfulness and peace, show himself
a gracious master to all who will submit to him, and to all in
his dominions.  He will be the leader and defender of all the men
of Norway; and it will be good for you to accept his gracious
speech, and this offer."

Then stood up a man in the troop of the Elfgrims, who was of
great stature and grim countenance, clad in a leather cloak, with
a halberd on his shoulder, and a great steel hat upon his head.
He looked sternly, and said, "Here is no need of wheels, says the
fox, when he draws the trap over the ice."  He said nothing more,
but sat down again.

Soon after Sigurd Ulstreng stood up again, and spoke thus: "But
little concern or help have we for the king's affairs from you,
Elfgrims, and but little friendship; yet by such means every man
shows how much he respects himself.  But now I shall produce more
clearly the king's errand."  Thereupon he demanded land-dues and
levy-dues, together with all other rights of the king, from the
great bondes.  He bade each of them to consider with himself how
they had conducted themselves in these matters; and that they
should now promote their own honour, and do the king justice, if
they had come short hitherto in doing so.  And then he sat down.

Then the same man got up in the troop of Elfgrims who had spoken
before, lifted his hat a little up, and said, "The lads run well,
say the Laplanders, who have skates for nothing."  Then he sat
himself down again.

Soon after Sigurd arose, after speaking with the lendermen, and
said that so weighty a message as the king's ought not to be
treated lightly as a jest.  He was now somewhat angry; and added,
that they ought not to receive the king's message and errand so
scornfully, for it was not decent.  He was dressed in a red or
scarlet coat, and had a blue coat over it.  He cast off his upper
coat and said, "Now it is come so far that every one must look to
himself, and not loiter and jest with others; for by so doing
every man will show what he is.  We do not require now to be
taught by others; for now we can see ourselves how much we are
regarded.  But this may be borne with; but not that ye treat so
scornfully the king's message.  Thereby every one shows how
highly he considers himself.  There is one man called Sveinke
Steinarson, who lives east at the Gaut river; and from him the
king will have his just land-dues, together with his own land, or
will banish him from the country.  It is of no use here to seek
excuses, or to answer with sharp words; for people are to be
found who are his equals in power, although he now receives our
speech so unworthily; and it is better now than afterwards to
return to the right way, and do himself honour, rather than await
disgrace for his obstinancy."  He then sat down.

Sveinke then got up, threw back his steel-hat, and gave Sigurd
many scornful words, and said, "Tut!  tut!  'tis a shame for the
dogs, says the proverb, when the fox is allowed to cast their
excrements in the peasant's well.  Here will be a miracle!  Thou
useless fellow!  with a coat without arms, and a kirtle with
skirts, wilt thou drive me out of the country?  Thy relation,
Sigurd Woolsack, was sent before on this errand, and one called
Gille the Backthief, and one who had still a worse name.  They
were a night in every house, and stole wherever they came.  Wilt
thou drive me out of the country?  Formerly thou wast not so
mighty, and thy pride was less when King Hakon, my foster-son,
was in life.  Then thou wert as frightened for him when he met
thee on the road as a mouse in a mouse-trap, and hid thyself
under a heap of clothes, like a dog on board a ship.  Thou wast
thrust into a leather-bag like corn in a sack, and driven from
house and farm like a year-old colt from the mares; and dost thou
dare to drive me from the land?  Thou shouldst rather think
thyself lucky to escape from hence with life.  Let us stand up
and attack him."

Then all his men stood up, and made a great clash with their
weapons.  Then Svein Bryggjufot and the other lendermen saw there
was no other chance for Sigurd but to get him on horseback, which
was done, and he rode off into the forest.  The end was that
Sveinke returned home to his farm, and Sigurd Ulstreng came, with
great difficulty, by land north to Throndhjem to King Magnus, and
told the result of his errand.  "Did I not say," said the king,
"that the help of my lendermen would be needed?"  Sigurd was ill
pleased with his journey; insisted that he would be revenged,
cost what it will; and urged the king much.  The king ordered
five ships to be fitted out; and as soon as they were ready for
sea he sailed south along the land, and then east to Viken, where
he was entertained in excellent guest-quarters by his lendermen.
The king told them he would seek out Sveinke.  "For I will not
conceal my suspicion that he thinks to make himself king of
Norway."  They said that Sveinke was both a powerful and an
ungovernable man.  Now the king went from Viken until he came to
Sveinke's farm.  Then the lendermen desired that they might be
put on shore to see how matters stood; and when they came to the
land they saw that Sveinke had already come down from the farm,
and was on the road with a number of well-armed men.  The
lendermen held up a white shield in the air, as a peace-token;
and when Sveinke saw it he halted his men, and they approached
each other.  Then said Kolbjorn Klakke, "King Magnus sends thee
God's salutation and his own, and bids thee consider what becomes
thee, and do him obedience, and not prepare thyself to give him
battle."  Kolbjorn offered to mediate peace between them, if he
could, and told him to halt his troops.

Sveinke said he would wait for them where he was. "We came out to
meet you," he said, "that ye might not tread down our corn-
fields."

The lendermen returned to the king, and told him all was now at
his pleasure.

The king said, "My doom is soon delivered.  He shall fly the
country, and never come back to Norway as long as the kingdom is
mine; and he shall leave all his goods behind."

"But will it not be more for thy honour," said Kolbjorn, "and
give thee a higher reputation among other kings, if, in banishing
him from the country, thou shouldst allow him to keep his
property, and show himself among other people?  And we shall take
care that he never comes back while we live.  Consider of this,
sire, by yourself, and have respect for our assurance."

The king replied, "Let him then go forth immediately."

They went back, therefore, to Sveinke, and told him the king's
words; and also that the king had ordered him out of the country,
and he should show his obedience, since he had forgotten himself
towards the king.  "It is for the honour of both that thou
shouldst show obedience to the king."

Then Sveinke said, "There must be some great change if the king
speaks agreeably to me; but why should I fly the country and my
properties?  Listen now to what I say.  It appears to me better
to die upon my property than to fly from my udal estates.  Tell
the king that I will not stir from them even an arrow-flight." 

Kolbjorn replied, "This is scarcely prudent, or right; for it is
better for one's own honour to give way to the best chief, than
to make opposition to one's own loss.  A gallant man succeeds
wheresoever he goes; and thou wilt be the more respected
wheresoever thou art, with men of power, just because thou hast
made head so boldly against so powerful a chief.  Hear our
promises, and pay some attention to our errand.  We offer thee to
manage thy estates, and take them faithfully under our
protection; and also never, against thy will, to pay scat for thy
land until thou comest back.  We will pledge our lives and
properties upon this.  Do not throw away good counsel from thee,
and avoid thus the ill fortune of other good men."

Then Sveinke was silent for a short time, and said at last, "Your
endeavours are wise; but I have my suspicions that ye are
changing a little the king's message.  In consideration, however,
of the great good-will that ye show me, I will hold your advice
in such respect that I will go out of the country for the whole
winter, if, according to your promises, I can then retain my
estates in peace.  Tell the king, also, these my words, that I do
this on your account, not on his."

Thereupon they returned to the king, and said, that Sveinke left
all in the king's hands.  "But entreats you to have respect to
his honour.  He will be away for three years, and then come back,
if it be the king's pleasure.  Do this; let all things be done
according to what is suitable for the royal dignity and according
to our entreaty, now that the matter is entirely in thy power,
and we shall do all we can to prevent his returning against thy
will."

The king replied, "Ye treat this matter like men, and, for your
sakes, shall all things be as ye desire.  Tell him so."

They thanked the king, and then went to Sveinke, and told him the
king's gracious intentions.  "We will be glad," said they, "if ye
can be reconciled.  The king requires, indeed that thy absence
shall be for three years; but, if we know the truth rightly, we
expect that before  that time he will find he cannot do without
thee in this part of the country.  It will be to thy own future
honour, therefore, to agree to this."

Sveinke replies, "What condition is better than this?  Tell the
king that I shall not vex him longer with my presence here, and
accept of my goods and estates on this condition."

Thereupon he went home with his men, and set off directly; for he
had prepared everything beforehand.  Kolbjorn remains behind, and
makes ready a feast for King Magnus, which also was thought of
and prepared.  Sveinke, on the other hand, rides up to Gautland
with all the men he thought proper to take with him.  The king
let himself be entertained in guest-quarters at his house,
returned to Viken, and Sveinke's estates were nominally the
king's, but Kolbjorn had them under his charge.  The king
received guest-quarters in Viken, proceeded from thence
northwards, and there was peace for a while; but now that the
Elfgrims were without a chief, marauding gangs infested them, and
the king saw this eastern part of the kingdom would be laid
waste.  It appeared to him, therefore, most suitable and
advisable to make Sveinke himself oppose the stream, and twice he
sent messages to him.  But he did not stir until King Magnus
himself was south in Denmark, when Sveinke and the king met, and
made a full reconciliation; on which Sveinke returned home to his
house and estates, and was afterwards King Magnus's best and
trustiest friend, who strengthened his kingdom on the eastern
border; and their friendship continued as long as they lived.



9. KING MAGNUS MAKES WAR ON THE SOUTHERN HEBUDES.

King Magnus undertook an expedition out of the country, with many
fine men and a good assortment of shipping.  With this armament
he sailed out into the West sea, and first came to the Orkney
Islands.  There he took the two earls, Paul and Erlend,
prisoners, and sent them east to Norway, and placed his son
Sigurd as chief over the islands, leaving some counsellors to
assist him.  From thence King Magnus, with his followers,
proceeded to the Southern Hebudes, and when he came there began
to burn and lay waste the inhabited places, killing the people
and plundering wherever he came with his men; and the country
people fled in all directions, some into Scotland-fjord, others
south to Cantire, or out to Ireland; some obtained life and
safety by entering into his service.  So says Bjorn Krephende: -- 
     "In Lewis Isle with fearful blaze
     The house-destroying fire plays;
     To hills and rocks the people fly,
     Fearing all shelter but the sky.
     In Uist the king deep crimson made
     The lightning of his glancing blade;
     The peasant lost his land and life
     Who dared to bide the Norseman's strife.
     The hunger battle-birds were filled
     In Skye with blood of foemen killed,
     And wolves on Tyree's lonely shore
     Dyed red their hairy jaws in gore.
     The men of Mull were tired of flight;
     The Scottish foemen would not fight,
     And many an island-girl's wail
     Was heard as through the isles we strife sail."



10. OF LAGMAN, KING GUDROD'S SON.

King Magnus came with his forces to the Holy Island (Iona), and
gave peace and safety to all men there.  It is told that the king
opened the door of the little Columb's Kirk there, but did not go
in, but instantly locked the door again, and said that no man
should be so bold as to go into that church hereafter; which has
been the case ever since.  From thence King Magnus sailed to
Islay, where he plundered and burnt; and when he had taken that
country he proceeded south around Cantire, marauding on both
sides in Scotland and Ireland, and advanced with his foray to
Man, where he plundered.  So says Bjorn Krephende: --

     "On Sandey's plain our shield they spy:
     From Isla smoke rose heaven-high,
     Whirling up from the flashing blaze
     The king's men o'er the island raise.
     South of Cantire the people fled,
     Scared by our swords in blood dyed red,
     And our brave champion onward goes
     To meet in Man the Norseman's foes."

Lagman (Lawman) was the name of the son of Gudrod, king of the
Hebudes.  Lawman was sent to defend the most northerly islands;
but when King Magnus and his army came to the Hebudes, Lawman
fled here and there about the isles, and at last King Magnus's
men took him and his ship's crew as he was flying over to
Ireland.  The king put him in irons to secure him.  So says Bjorn
Krephende: --

     "To Gudrod's son no rock or cave,
     Shore-side or hill, a refuge gave;
     Hunted around from isle to isle,
     This Lawman found no safe asyle.
     From isle to isle, o'er firth and sound,
     Close on his track his foe he found.
     At Ness the Agder chief at length
     Seized him, and iron-chained his strength."



11. OF THE FALL OF EARL HUGE THE BRAVE.

Afterwards King Magnus sailed to Wales; and when he came to the
sound of Anglesey there came against him an army from Wales,
which was led by two earls -- Hugo the brave, and Hugo the Stout.
They began immediately to give battle, and there was a severe
conflict.  King Magnus shot with the bow; but Huge the Brave was
all over in armour, so that nothing was bare about him excepting
one eye.  King Magnus let fly an arrow at him, as also did a
Halogaland man who was beside the king.  They both shot at once.
The one shaft hit the nose-screen of the helmet, which was bent
by it to one side, and the other arrow hit the earl's eye, and
went through his head; and that was found to be the king's.  Earl
Huge fell, and the Britons fled with the loss of many people.  So
says Bjorn Krephende: --

     "The swinger of the sword
     Stood by Anglesey's ford;
     His quick shaft flew,
     And Huge slew.
     His sword gleamed a while
     O'er Anglesey Isle,
     And his Norsemen's band
     Scoured the Anglesey land."

There was also sung the following verse about it: --

     "On the panzers arrows rattle,
     Where our Norse king stands in battle;
     From the helmets blood-streams flow,
     Where our Norse king draws his bow:
     His bowstring twangs, -- its biting hail
     Rattles against the ring-linked mail.
     Up in the land in deadly strife
     Our Norse king took Earl Huge's life."

King Magnus gained the victory in this battle, and then took
Anglesey Isle, which was the farthest south the Norway kings of
former days had ever extended their rule.  Anglesey is a third
part of Wales.  After this battle King Magnus turned back with
his fleet, and came first to Scotland.  Then men went between the
Scottish king, Melkolm and King Magnus, and a peace was made
between them; so that all the islands lying west of Scotland,
between which and the mainland he could pass in a vessel with her
rudder shipped, should be held to belong to the king of Norway.
Now when King Magnus came north to Cantire, he had a skiff drawn
over the strand at Cantire, and shipped the rudder of it.  The
king himself sat in the stern-sheets, and held the tiller; and
thus he appropriated to himself the land that lay on the farboard
side.  Cantire is a great district, better than the best of the
southern isles of the Hebudes, excepting Man; and there is a
small neck of land between it and the mainland of Scotland, over
which longships are often drawn.



12. DEATH OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.

King Magnus was all the winter in the southern isles, and his men
went over all the fjords of Scotland, rowing within all the
inhabited and uninhabited isles, and took possession for the king
of Norway of all the islands west of Scotland.  King Magnus
contracted in marriage his son Sigurd to Biadmynia, King
Myrkjartan's daughter.  Myrkjartan was a son of the Irish king
Thialfe, and ruled over Connaught.  The summer after, King
Magnus, with his fleet, returned east to Norway.  Earl Erland
died of sickness at Nidaros, and is buried there; and Earl Paul
died in Bergen.

Skopte Ogmundson, a grandson of Thorberg, was a gallant
lenderman, who dwelt at Giske in Sunmore, and was married to
Gudrun, a daughter of Thord Folason.  Their children were Ogmund,
Fin, Thord, and Thora, who was married to Asolf Skulason. 
Skopte's and Gudrun's sons were the most promising and popular
men in their youth.



13. QUARRELS OF KING MAGNUS AND KING INGE.

Steinkel, the Swedish king, died about the same time (A.D. 1066)
as the two Haralds fell, and the king who came after him in
Svithjod was called Hakon.  Afterwards Inge, a son of Steinkel,
was king, and was a good and powerful king, strong and stout
beyond most men; and he was king of Svithjod when King Magnus was
king of Norway.  King Magnus insisted that the boundaries of the
countries in old times had been so, that the Gaut river divided
the kingdoms of the Swedish and Norwegian kings, but afterwards
the Vener lake up to Vermaland.  Thus King Magnus insisted that
he was owner of all the places lying west of the Vener lake up to
Vermaland, which are the districts of Sundal, Nordal, Vear, and
Vardyniar, with all the woods belonging thereto.  But these had
for a long time been under the Swedish dominion, and with respect
to scat were joined to West Gautland; and, besides, the forest-
settlers preferred being under the Swedish king.  King Magnus
rode from Viken up to Gautland with a great and fine army, and
when he came to the forest-settlements he plundered and burnt all
round; on which the people submitted, and took the oath of
fidelity to him.  When he came to the Vener lake, autumn was
advanced and he went out to the island Kvaldinsey, and made a
stronghold of turf and wood, and dug a ditch around it.  When the
work was finished, provisions and other necessaries that might be
required were brought to it.  The king left in it 300 men, who
were the chosen of his forces, and Fin Skoptason and Sigurd
Ulstreng as their commanders.  The king himself returned to
Viken.



14. OF THE NORTHMEN.

When the Swedish king heard this he drew together people, and the
report came that he would ride against these Northmen; but there
was delay about his riding, and the Northmen made these lines: --
     "The fat-hipped king, with heavy sides,
     Finds he must mount before he rides."

But when the ice set in upon the Vener lake King Inge rode down,
and had near 300 men with him.  He sent a message to the Northmen
who sat in the burgh that they might retire with all the booty
they had taken, and go to Norway.  When the messengers brought
this message, Sigurd Ulstreng replied to it; saying that King
Inge must take the trouble to come, if he wished to drive them
away like cattle out of a grass field, and said he must come
nearer if he wished them to remove.  The messengers returned with
this answer to the king, who then rode out with all his army to
the island, and again sent a message to the Northmen that they
might go away, taking with them their weapons, clothes, and
horses; but must leave behind all their booty.  This they
refused.  The king made an assault upon them, and they shot at
each other.  Then the king ordered timber and stones to be
collected, and he filled up the ditch; and then he fastened
anchors to long spars which were brought up to the timber-walls,
and, by the strength of many hands, the walls were broken down.
Thereafter a large pile of wood was set on fire, and the lighted
brands were flung in among them.  Then the Northmen asked for
quarter.  The king ordered them to go out without weapons or
cloaks.  As they went out each of them received a stroke with a
whip, and then they set off for Norway, and all the forest-men
submitted again to King Inge.  Sigurd and his people went to King
Magnus, and told him their misfortune.



15. KING MAGNUS AND GIPARDE.

When King Magnus was east in Viken, there came to him a foreigner
called Giparde.  He gave himself out for a good knight, and
offered his services to King Magnus; for he understood that in
the king's dominions there was something to be done.  The king
received him well.  At that time the king was preparing to go to
Gautland, on which country the king had pretensions; and besides
he would repay the Gautland people the disgrace they had
occasioned him in spring, when he was obliged to fly from them.
He had then a great force in arms, and the West Gautlanders in
the northern districts submitted to him.  He set up his camp on
the borders, intending to make a foray from thence.  When King
Inge heard of this he collected troops, and hastened to oppose
King Magnus; and when King Magnus heard of this expedition, many
of the chiefs of the people urged him to turn back; but this the
king would not listen to, but in the night time went
unsuspectedly against the Swedish king.  They met at Foxerne; and
when he was drawing up his men in battle order he asked, "Where
is Giparde?" but he was not to be found.  Then the king made
these verses: --

     "Cannot the foreign knight abide
     Our rough array? -- where does he hide?"

Then a skald who followed the king replied: --

     "The king asks where the foreign knight
     In our array rides to the fight:
     Giparde the knight rode quite away
     When our men joined in bloody fray.
     When swords were wet the knight was slow
     With his bay horse in front to go;
     The foreign knight could not abide
     Our rough array, and went to hide."

There was a great slaughter, and after the battle the field was
covered with the Swedes slain, and King Inge escaped by flight.
King Magnus gained a great victory.  Then came Giparde riding
down from the country, and people did not speak well of him for
not being in the fight.  He went away, and proceeded westward to
England; and the voyage was stormy, and Giparde lay in bed. 
There was an Iceland man called Eldjarn, who went to bale out the
water in the ship's hold, and when he saw where Giparde was lying
he made this verse: --

     "Does it beseem a courtman bold
     Here to be dozing in the hold?
     The bearded knight should danger face:
     The leak gains on our ship apace.
     Here, ply this bucket!  bale who can;
     We need the work of every man.
     Our sea-horse stands full to the breast, --
     Sluggards and cowards must not rest."

When they came west to England, Giparde said the Northmen had
slandered him.  A meeting was appointed, and a count came to it,
and the case was brought before him for trial.  He said he was
not much acquainted with law cases, as he was but young, and had
only been a short time in office; and also, of all things, he
said what he least understood to judge about was poetry.  "But
let us hear what it was."  Then Eldjarn sang: --

     "I heard that in the bloody fight
     Giparde drove all our foes to flight:
     Brave Giparde would the foe abide,
     While all our men ran off to hide.
     At Foxerne the fight was won
     By Giparde's valour all alone;
     Where Giparde fought, alone was he;
     Not one survived to fight or flee."

Then said the count, "Although I know but little about skald-
craft, I can hear that this is no slander, but rather the highest
praise and honour."  Giparde could say nothing against it, yet he
felt it was a mockery.



16. BATTLE OF FOXERNE.

The spring after, as soon as the ice broke up, King Magnus, with
a great army, sailed eastwards to the Gaut river, and went up the
eastern arm of it, laying waste all that belonged to the Swedish
dominions.  When they came to Foxerne they landed from their
vessels; but as they came over a river on their way an army of
Gautland people came against them, and there was immediately a
great battle, in which the Northmen were overwhelmed by numbers,
driven to flight, and many of them killed near to a waterfall.
King Magnus fled, and the Gautlanders pursued, and killed those
they could get near.  King Magnus was easily known.  He was a
very stout man, and had a red short cloak over him, and bright
yellow hair like silk that fell over his shoulders.  Ogmund
Skoptason, who was a tall and handsome man, rode on one side of
the king.  He said, "Sire, give me that cloak."

The king said, "What would you do with it?"

"I would like to have it," said Ogmund; "and you have given me
greater gifts, sire."

The road was such that there were great and wide plains, so that
the Gautlanders and Northmen were always in sight of each other,
unless where clumps of wood and bushes concealed them from each
other now and then.  The king gave Ogmund the cloak and he put it
on.  When they came out again upon the plain ground, Ogmund and
his people rode off right across the road.  The Gautlanders,
supposing this must be the king, rode all after him, and the king
proceeded to the ships.  Ogmund escaped with great difficulty;
however, he reached the ships at last in safety.  King Magnus
then sailed down the river, and proceeded north to Viken.



17. MEETING OF THE KINGS AT THE GAUT RIVER.

The following summer a meeting of the kings was agreed upon at
Konghelle on the Gaut river; and King Magnus, the Swedish king,
Inge, and the Danish king, Eirik Sveinson, all met there, after
giving each other safe conduct to the meeting.  Now when the
Thing had sat down the kings went forward upon the plain, apart
from the rest of the people, and they talked with each other a
little while.  Then they returned to their people, and a treaty
was brought about, by which each should possess the dominions his
forefathers had held before him; but each should make good to his
own men the waste and manslaughter suffered by them, and then
they should agree between themselves about settling this with
each other.  King Magnus should marry King Inge's daughter
Margaret, who afterwards was called Peace-offering.  This was
proclaimed to the people; and thus, within a little hour, the
greatest enemies were made the best of friends.

It was observed by the people that none had ever seen men with
more of the air of chiefs than these had.  King Inge was the
largest and stoutest, and, from his age, of the most dignified
appearance.  King Magnus appeared the most gallant and brisk, and
King Eirik the most handsome.  But they were all handsome men;
stout, gallant, and ready in speech.  After this was settled they
parted.



18. KING MAGNUS'S MARRIAGE.

King Magnus got Margaret, King Inge's daughter, as above related;
and she was sent from Svithjod to Norway with an honourable
retinue.  King Magnus had some children before, whose names shall
here be given.  The one of his sons who was of a mean mother was
called Eystein; the other, who was a year younger, was called
Sigurd, and his mother's name was Thora.  Olaf was the name of a
third son, who was much younger than the two first mentioned, and
whose mother was Sigrid, a daughter of Saxe of Vik, who was a
respectable man in the Throndhjem country; she was the king's
concubine.  People say that when King Magnus came home from his
viking cruise to the Western countries, he and many of his people
brought with them a great deal of the habits and fashion of
clothing of those western parts.  They went about on the streets
with bare legs, and had short kirtles and over-cloaks; and
therefore his men called him Magnus Barefoot or Bareleg.  Some
called him Magnus the Tall, others Magnus the Strife-lover.  He
was distinguished among other men by his tall stature.  The mark
of his height is put down in Mary church, in the merchant town of
Nidaros, which King Harald built.  In the northern door there
were cut into the wall three crosses, one for Harald's stature,
one for Olaf's, and one for Magnus's; and which crosses each of
them could with the greatest ease kiss.  The upper was Harald's
cross; the lowest was Magnus's; and Olaf's was in the middle,
about equally distant from both.

It is said that Magnus composed the following verses about the
emperor's daughter: --

     "The ring of arms where blue swords gleam,
     The battle-shout, the eagle's scream,
     The Joy of war, no more can please:
     Matilda is far o'er the seas.
     My sword may break, my shield be cleft,
     Of land or life I may be reft;
     Yet I could sleep, but for one care, --
     One, o'er the seas, with light-brown hair."

He also composed the following: --

     "The time that breeds delay feels long,
     The skald feels weary of his song;
     What sweetens, brightens, eases life?
     'Tis a sweet-smiling lovely wife.
     My time feels long in Thing affairs,
     In Things my loved one ne'er appears.
     The folk full-dressed, while I am sad,
     Talk and oppose -- can I be glad?"

When King Magnus heard the friendly words the emperor's daughter
had spoken about him -- that she had said such a man as King
Magnus was appeared to her an excellent man, he composed the
following: --

     "The lover hears, -- across the sea,
     A favouring word was breathed to me.
     The lovely one with light-brown hair
     May trust her thoughts to senseless air;
     Her thoughts will find like thoughts in me;
     And though my love I cannot see,
     Affection's thoughts fly in the wind,
     And meet each other, true and kind."



19. OF THE QUARREL OF KING MAGNUS AND SKOPTE.

Skopte Ogmundson came into variance with King Magnus, and they
quarrelled about the inheritance of a deceased person which
Skopte retained; but the king demanded it with so much
earnestness, that it had a dangerous appearance.  Many meetings
were held about the affair, and Skopte took the resolution that
he and his son should never put themselves into the king's power
at the same time; and besides there was no necessity to do so.
When Skopte was with the king he represented to him that there
was relationship between the king and him; and also that he,
Skopte, had always been the king's friend, and his father's
likewise, and that their friendship had never been shaken.  He
added, "People might know that I have sense enough not to hold a
strife, sire, with you, if I was wrong in what I asked; but it is
inherited from my ancestors to defend my rights against any man,
without distinction of persons."  The king was just the same on
this point, and his resolution was by no means softened by such a
speech.  Then Skopte went home.



20. FIN SKOPTASON'S PROCEEDINGS.

Then Fin Skoptason went to the king, spoke with him, and
entreated him to render justice to the father and son in this
business.  The king answers angrily and sharply.  Then said Fin,
"I expected something else, sire, from you, than that you would
use the law's vexations against me when I took my seat in
Kvaldinsey Island, which few of your other friends would do; as
they said, what was true, that those who were left there were
deserted and doomed to death, if King Inge had not shown greater
generosity to us than you did; although many consider that we
brought shame and disgrace only from thence."  The king was not
to be moved by this speech, and Fin returned home.



21. OGMUND SKOPTASON'S PROCEEDINGS.

Then came Ogmund Skoptason to the king; and when he came before
him he produced his errand, and begged the king to do what was
right and proper towards him and his father.  The king insisted
that the right was on his side, and said they were "particularly
impudent."

Then said Ogmund, "It is a very easy thing for thee, having the
power, to do me and my father injustice; and I must say the old
proverb is true, that one whose life you save gives none, or a
very bad return.  This I shall add, that never again shall I come
into thy service; nor my father, if I can help it."  Then Ogmund
went home, and they never saw each other again.



22. SKOPTE OGMUNDSON'S VOYAGE ABROAD.

The spring after, Skopte Ogmundson made ready to travel out of
the country.  They had five long-ships all well equipped.  His
sons, Ogmund, Fin, and Thord, accompanied him on this journey. 
It was very late before they were ready, and in autumn they went
over to Flanders, and wintered there.  Early in spring they
sailed westward to Valland, and stayed there all summer.  Then
they sailed further, and through Norvasund; and came in autumn to
Rome, where Skopte died.  All, both father and sons, died on this
journey.  Thord, who died in Sicily, lived the longest.  It is a
common saying among the people that Skopte was the first Northman
who sailed through Norvasund; and this voyage was much
celebrated.



23. MIRACLE OF KING OLAF THE SAINT AT A FIRE.

It happened once in the merchant town (Nidaros) where King Olaf
reposes, that there broke out a fire in the town which spread
around.  Then Olaf's shrine was taken out of the church, and set
up opposite the fire.  Thereupon came a crazy foolish man, struck
the shrine, threatened the holy saint, and said all must be
consumed by the flames, both churches and other houses, if he did
not save them by his prayers.  Now the burning of the church did
cease, by the help of Almighty God; but the insane man got sore
eyes on the following night, and he lay there until King Olaf
entreated God A1mighty to be merciful to him; after which he
recovered in the same church.



24. MIRACLE OF KING OLAF ON A LAME WOMAN.

It happened once in the merchant town that a woman was brought to
the place where the holy King Olaf reposes.  She was so miserably
shaped, that she was altogether crumpled up; so that both her
feet lay in a circle against her loins.  But as she was diligent
in her prayers, often weeping and making vows to King Olaf, he
cured her great infirmities; so that feet, legs, and other limbs
straightened, and every limb and part came to the right use for
which they were made.  Before she could not creep there, and now
she went away active and brisk to her family and home.



25. WAR IN IRELAND.

When King Magnus had been nine years king of Norway (A.D. 1094-
1102), he equipped himself to go out of the country with a great
force.  He sailed out into the West sea with the finest men who
could be got in Norway.  All the powerful men of the country
followed him; such as Sigurd Hranason, Vidkun Jonson, Dag
Eilifson, Serk of Sogn, Eyvind Olboge, the king's marshal Ulf
Hranason, brother of Sigurd, and many other great men.  With all
this armament the king sailed west to the Orkney Islands, from
whence he took with him Earl Erlend's sons, Magnus and Erling,
and then sailed to the southern Hebudes.  But as he lay under the
Scotch land, Magnus Erlendson ran away in the night from the
king's ship, swam to the shore, escaped into the woods, and came
at last to the Scotch king's court.  King Magnus sailed to
Ireland with his fleet, and plundered there.  King Myrkjartan
came to his assistance, and they conquered a great part of the
country, both Dublin and Dyflinnarskire (Dublin shire).  King
Magnus was in winter (A.D. 1102) up in Connaught with King
Myrkjartan, but set men to defend the country he had taken.
Towards spring both kings went westward with their army all the
way to Ulster, where they had many battles, subdued the country,
and had conquered the greatest part of Ulster when Myrkjartan
returned home to Connaught.



26. KING MAGNUS'S FORAY ON THE LAND.

King Magnus rigged his ships, and intended returning to Norway,
but set his men to defend the country of Dublin.  He lay at
Ulster ready for sea with his whole fleet.  As they thought they
needed cattle for ship-provision, King Magnus sent a message to
King Myrkjartan, telling him to send some cattle for slaughter;
and appointed the day before Bartholomew's day as the day they
should arrive, if the messengers reached him in safety; but the
cattle had not made their appearance the evening before
Bartholomew's mass.  On the mass-day itself, when the sun rose in
the sky, King Magnus went on shore himself with the greater part
of his men, to look after his people, and to carry off cattle
from the coast.  The weather was calm, the sun shone, and the
road lay through mires and mosses, and there were paths cut
through; but there was brushwood on each side of the road.  When
they came somewhat farther, they reached a height from which they
had a wide view.  They saw from it a great dust rising up the
country, as of horsemen, and they said to each other, "That must
be the Irish army;" but others said, "It was their own men
returning with the cattle."  They halted there; and Eyvind Olboge
said, "How, sire, do you intend to direct the march?  The men
think we are advancing imprudently.  You know the Irish are
treacherous; think, therefore, of a good counsel for your men."
Then the king said, "Let us draw up our men, and be ready, if
there be treachery."  This was done, and the king and Eyvind went
before the line.  King Magnus had a helmet on his head; a red
shield, in which was inlaid a gilded lion; and was girt with the
sword of Legbit, of which the hilt was of tooth (ivory), and
handgrip wound about with gold thread; and the sword was
extremely sharp.  In his hand he had a short spear, and a red
silk short cloak, over his coat, on which, both before and
behind, was embroidered a lion in yellow silk; and all men
acknowledged that they never had seen a brisker, statelier man.
Eyvind had also a red silk cloak like the king's; and he also was
a stout, handsome, warlike man.



27. FALL OF KING MAGNUS.

When the dust-cloud approached nearer they knew their own men,
who were driving the cattle.  The Irish king had been faithful to
the promises he had given the king, and had sent them.  Thereupon
they all turned towards the ships, and it was mid-day.  When they
came to the mires they went but slowly over the boggy places; and
then the Irish started up on every side against them from every
bushy point of land, and the battle began instantly.  The
Northmen were going divided in various heaps, so that many of
them fell.

Then said Eyvind to the king, "Unfortunate is this march to our
people, and we must instantly hit upon some good plan."

The king answered, "Call all the men together with the war-horns
under the banner, and the men who are here shall make a rampart
with their shields, and thus we will retreat backwards out of the
mires; and we will clear ourselves fast enough when we get upon
firm ground."

The Irish shot boldly; and although they fell in crowds, there
came always two in the place of one.  Now when the king had come
to the nearest ditch there was a very difficult crossing, and few
places were passable; so that many Northmen fell there.  Then the
king called to his lenderman Thorgrim Skinhufa, who was an Upland
man, and ordered him to go over the ditch with his division.  "We
shall defend you," said he, "in the meantime, so that no harm
shall come to you.  Go out then to those holms, and shoot at them
from thence; for ye are good bowmen."

When Thorgrim and his men came over the ditch they cast their
shields behind their backs, and set off to the ships.

When the king saw this, he said, "Thou art deserting thy king in
an unmanly way.  I was foolish in making thee a lenderman, and
driving Sigurd Hund out of the country; for never would he have
behaved so."

King Magnus received a wound, being pierced by a spear through
both thighs above the knees.  The king laid hold of the shaft
between his legs, broke the spear in two, and said, "Thus we
break spear-shafts, my lads; let us go briskly on.  Nothing hurts
me."  A little after King Magnus was struck in the neck with an
Irish axe, and this was his death-wound.  Then those who were
behind fled.  Vidkun Jonson instantly killed the man who had
given the king his death-wound, and fled, after having received
three wounds; but brought the king's banner and the sword Legbit
to the ships.  Vidkun was the last man who fled; the other next
to him was Sigurd Hranason, and the third before him, Dag
Eilifson.  There fell with King Magnus, Eyvind Olboge, Ulf
Hranason, and many other great people.  Many of the Northmen
fell, but many more of the Irish.  The Northmen who escaped
sailed away immediately in autumn.  Erling, Earl Erlend's'son,
fell with King Magnus in Ireland; but the men who fled from
Ireland came to the Orkney Islands.  Now when King Sigurd heard
that his father had fallen, he set off immediately, leaving the
Irish king's daughter behind, and proceeded in autumn with the
whole fleet directly to Norway.



28. OF KING MAGNUS AND VIDKUN JONSON.

King Magnus was ten years king of Norway (A.D. 1094-1105), and in
his days there was good peace kept within the country; but the
people were sorely oppressed with levies.  King Magnus was
beloved by his men, but the bondes thought him harsh.  The words
have been transmitted from him that he said when his friends
observed that he proceeded incautiously when he was on his
expeditions abroad, -- "The kings are made for honour, not for
long life."  King Magnus was nearly thirty years of age when he
fell.  Vidkun did not fly until he had killed the man who gave
the king his mortal wound, and for this cause King Magnus's sons
had him in the most affectionate regard.



SAGA OF SIGURD THE CRUSADER AND HIS BROTHERS EYSTEIN AND OLAF.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

"Agrip", "Fagrskinna", and "Morkinskinna" more or less complete
the story of the sons of Magnus. They contain some things omitted
by Snorre, while, on the other hand, some facts related by Snorre
are not found in the above sources.

Thjodrek the Monk tells of Sigurd that he made a Journey to
Jerusalem, conquered many heathen cities, and among them Sidon;
that he captured a cave defended by robbers, received presents
from Baldwin, returned to Norway in Eystein's lifetime, and
became insane, as a result, as some say, of a poisonous drink.

The three brothers became kings in the year A.D. 1103.  Olaf died
1115, Eystein 1122 or 1123, Sigurd 1130.

Skalds quoted in this saga are: Thorarin Stutfeld, Einar
Skulason, Haldor Skvaldre, and Arne Fjoruskeif.



1. BEGINNING OF THE REIGN OF KING MAGNUS'S SONS.

After King Magnus Barefoot's fall, his sons, Eystein, Sigurd, and
Olaf, took the kingdom of Norway.  Eystein got the northern, and
Sigurd the southern part of the country.  King Olaf was then four
or five years old, and the third part of the country which he had
was under the management of his two brothers.  King Sigurd was
chosen king when he was thirteen or fourteen years old, and
Eystein was a year older.  King Sigurd left west of the sea the
Irish king's daughter.  When King Magnus's sons were chosen
kings, the men who had followed Skopte Ogmundson returned home.
Some had been to Jerusalem, some to Constantinople; and there
they had made themselves renowned, and they had many kinds of
novelties to talk about.  By these extraordinary tidings many men
in Norway were incited to the same expedition; and it was also
told that the Northmen who liked to go into the military service
at Constantinople found many opportunities of getting property.
Then these Northmen desired much that one of the two kings,
either Eystein or Sigurd, should go as commander of the troop
which was preparing for this expedition.  The kings agreed to
this, and carried on the equipment at their common expense.  Many
great men, both of the lendermen and bondes, took part in this
enterprise; and when all was ready for the journey it was
determined that Sigurd should go, and Eystein in the meantime,
should rule the kingdom upon their joint account.



2. OF THE EARLS OF ORKNEY.

A year or two after King Magnus Barefoot's fall, Hakon, a son of
Earl Paul, came from Orkney.  The kings gave him the earldom and
government of the Orkney Islands, as the earls before him, his
father Paul or his Uncle Erland, had possessed it; and Earl Hakon
then sailed back immediately to Orkney.



3. KING SIGURD'S JOURNEY OUT OF THE COUNTRY.

Four years after the fall of King Magnus (A.D. 1107), King Sigurd
sailed with his people from Norway.  He had then sixty ships.  So
says Thorarin Stutfeld: --

     "A young king just and kind,
     People of loyal mind:
     Such brave men soon agree, --
     To distant lands they sail with glee.
     To the distant Holy Land
     A brave and pious band,
     Magnificent and gay,
     In sixty long-ships glide away."

King Sigurd sailed in autumn to England, where Henry, son of
William the Bastard, was then king, and Sigurd remained with him
all winter.  So says Einar Skulason: --

     "The king is on the waves!
     The storm he boldly braves.
          His ocean-steed,
          With winged speed,
     O'er the white-flashing surges,
     To England's coast he urges;
     And there he stays the winter o'er:
     More gallant king ne'er trod that shore."



4. OF KING SIGURD'S JOURNEY.

In spring King Sigurd and his fleet sailed westward to Valland
(A.D. 1108), and in autumn came to Galicia, where he stayed the
second winter (A.D. 1109).  So says Einar Skulason: --

     "Our king, whose land so wide
     No kingdom stands beside,
     In Jacob's land next winter spent,
     On holy things intent;
     And I have heard the royal youth
     Cut off an earl who swerved from truth.
     Our brave king will endure no ill, --
     The hawks with him will get their fill."

It went thus: -- The earl who ruled over the land made an
agreement with King Sigurd, that he should provide King Sigurd
and his men a market at which they could purchase victuals all
the winter; but this he did not fulfil longer than to about Yule.
It began then to be difficult to get food and necessaries, for it
is a poor barren land.  Then King Sigurd with a great body of men
went against a castle which belonged to the earl; and the earl
fled from it, having but few people.  King Sigurd took there a
great deal of victuals and of other booty, which he put on board
of his ships, and then made ready and proceeded westward to
Spain.  It so fell out, as the king was sailing past Spain, that
some vikings who were cruising for plunder met him with a fleet
of galleys, and King Sigurd attacked them.  This was his first
battle with heathen men; and he won it, and took eight galleys
from them.  So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "Bold vikings, not slow
     To the death-fray to go,
     Meet our Norse king by chance,
     And their galleys advance.
     The bold vikings lost
     Many a man of their host,
     And eight galleys too,
     With cargo and crew."

Thereafter King Sigurd sailed against a castle called Sintre and
fought another battle.  This castle is in Spain, and was occupied
by many heathens, who from thence plundered Christian people.
King Sigurd took the castle, and killed every man in it, because
they refused to be baptized; and he got there an immense booty.
So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "From Spain I have much news to tell
     Of what our generous king befell.
     And first he routs the viking crew,
     At Cintra next the heathens slew;
     The men he treated as God's foes,
     Who dared the true faith to oppose.
     No man he spared who would not take
     The Christian faith for Jesus' sake."



5. LISBON TAKEN.

After this King Sigurd sailed with his fleet to Lisbon, which is
a great city in Spain, half Christian and half heathen; for there
lies the division between Christian Spain and heathen Spain, and
all the districts which lie west of the city are occupied by
heathens.  There King Sigurd had his third battle with the
heathens, and gained the victory, and with it a great booty.  So
says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "The son of kings on Lisbon's plains
     A third and bloody battle gains.
     He and his Norsemen boldly land,
     Running their stout ships on the strand."

Then King Sigurd sailed westwards along heathen Spain, and
brought up at a town called Alkasse; and here he had his fourth
battle with the heathens, and took the town, and killed so many
people that the town was left empty.  They got there also immense
booty.  So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "A fourth great battle, I am told,
     Our Norse king and his people hold
     At Alkasse; and here again
     The victory fell to our Norsemen."

And also this verse: --

     "I heard that through the town he went,
     And heathen widows' wild lament
     Resounded in the empty halls;
     For every townsman flies or falls."



3. BATTLE IN THE ISLAND FORMINTERRA.

King Sigurd then proceeded on his voyage, and came to Norfasund;
and in the sound he was met by a large viking force, and the king
gave them battle; and this was his fifth engagement with heathens
since the time he left Norway.  He gained the victory here also.
So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "Ye moistened your dry swords with blood,
     As through Norfasund ye stood;
     The screaming raven got a feast,
     As ye sailed onward to the East."

King Sigurd then sailed eastward along the coast of Serkland, and
came to an island there called Forminterra.  There a great many
heathen Moors had taken up their dwelling in a cave, and had
built a strong stone wall before its mouth.  They harried the
country all round, and carried all their booty to their cave.
King Sigurd landed on this island, and went to the cave; but it
lay in a precipice, and there was a high winding path to the
stone wall, and the precipice above projected over it.  The
heathens defended the stone wall, and were not afraid of the
Northmen's arms; for they could throw stones, or shoot down upon
the Northmen under their feet; neither did the Northmen, under
such circumstances, dare to mount up.  The heathens took their
clothes and other valuable things, carried them out upon the
wall, spread them out before the Northmen, shouted, and defied
them, and upbraided them as cowards.  Then Sigurd fell upon this
plan.  He had two ship's boats, such as we call barks, drawn up
the precipice right above the mouth of the cave; and had thick
ropes fastened around the stem, stern, and hull of each.  In
these boats as many men went as could find room, and then the
boats were lowered by the ropes down in front of the mouth of the
cave; and the men in the boats shot with stones and missiles into
the cave, and the heathens were thus driven from the stone wall.
Then Sigurd with his troops climbed up the precipice to the foot
of the stone wall, which they succeeded in breaking down, so that
they came into the cave.  Now the heathens fled within the stone
wall that was built across the cave; on which the king ordered
large trees to be brought to the cave, made a great pile in the
mouth of it, and set fire to the wood.  When the fire and smoke
got the upper hand, some of the heathens lost their lives in it;
some fled; some fell by the hands of the Northmen; and part were
killed, part burned; and the Northmen made the greatest booty
they had got on all their expeditions.  So says Halder Skvaldre:
--

     "Forminterra lay
     In the victor's way;
     His ships' stems fly
     To victory.
     The bluemen there
     Must fire bear,
     And Norsemen's steel
     At their hearts feel."

And also thus:--

     "'Twas a feat of renown, --
     The boat lowered down,
     With a boat's crew brave,
     In front of the cave;
     While up the rock scaling,
     And comrades up trailing,
     The Norsemen gain,
     And the bluemen are slain."

And also Thorarin Stutfeld says:--

     "The king's men up the mountain's side
     Drag two boats from the ocean's tide;
          The two boats lay,
          Like hill-wolves grey.
     Now o'er the rock in ropes they're swinging
     Well manned, and death to bluemen bringing;
          They hang before
          The robber's door."



7. OF THE BATTLES OF IVIZA AND MINORCA.

Thereafter King Sigurd proceeded on his expedition, and came to
an island called Iviza (Ivica), and had there his seventh battle,
and gained a victory.  So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "His ships at Ivica now ride,
     The king's, whose fame spreads far and wide;
     And hear the bearers of the shield
     Their arms again in battle wield."

Thereafter King Sigurd came to an island called Manork (Minorca),
and held there his eighth battle with heathen men, and gained the
victory.  So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "On green Minorca's plains
     The eighth battle now he gains:
     Again the heathen foe
     Falls at the Norse king's blow."



8. DUKE ROGER MADE A KING.

In spring King Sigurd came to Sicily (A.D. 1109), and remained a
long time there.  There was then a Duke Roger in Sicily, who
received the king kindly, and invited him to a feast.  King
Sigurd came to it with a great retinue, and was splendidly
entertained.  Every day Duke Roger stood at the company's table,
doing service to the king; but the seventh day of the feast, when
the people had come to table, and had wiped their hands, King
Sigurd took the duke by the hand, led him up to the high-seat,
and saluted him with the title of king; and gave the right that
there should be always a king over the dominion of Sicily,
although before there had only been earls or dukes over that
country.



9. OF KING ROGER.

King Roger of Sicily was a very great king.  He won and subdued
all Apulia, and many large islands besides in the Greek sea; and
therefore he was called Roger the Great.  His son was William,
king of Sicily, who for a long time had great hostility with the
emperor of Constantinople.  King William had three daughters, but
no son.  One of his daughters he married to the Emperor Henry, a
son of the Emperor Frederik; and their son was Frederik, who for
a short time after was emperor of Rome.  His second daughter was
married to the Duke of Kipr.  The third daughter, Margaret, was
married to the chief of the corsairs; but the Emperor Henry
killed both these brothers-in-law.  The daughter of Roger the
Great, king of Sicily, was married to the Emperor Manuel of
Constantinople; and their son was the Emperor Kirjalax.



10. KING SIGURD'S EXPEDITION TO PALESTINE.

In the summer (A.D. 1110) King Sigurd sailed across the Greek sea
to Palestine, and thereupon went up to Jerusalem, where he met
Baldwin, king of Palestine.  King Baldwin received him
particularly well, and rode with him all the way to the river
Jordan, and then back to the city of Jerusalem.  Einar Skulason
speaks thus of it: --

     "Good reason has the skald to sing
     The generous temper of the king,
     Whose sea-cold keel from northern waves
     Ploughs the blue sea that green isles laves.
     At Acre scarce were we made fast,
     In holy ground our anchors cast,
     When the king made a joyful morn
     To all who toil with him had borne."

And again he made these lines: --

     "To Jerusalem he came,
     He who loves war's noble game,
     (The skald no greater monarch finds
     Beneath the heaven's wide hall of winds)
     All sin and evil from him flings
     In Jordan's wave: for all his sins
     (Which all must praise) he pardon wins."

King Sigurd stayed a long time in the land of Jerusalem
(Jorsalaland) in autumn, and in the beginning of winter.



11. SIDON TAKEN.

King Baldwin made a magnificent feast for King Sigurd and many of
his people, and gave him many holy relics.  By the orders of King
Baldwin and the patriarch, there was taken a splinter off the
holy cross; and on this holy relic both made oath, that this wood
was of the holy cross upon which God Himself had been tortured.
Then this holy relic was given to King Sigurd; with the condition
that he, and twelve other men with him, should swear to promote
Christianity with all his power, and erect an archbishop's seat
in Norway if he could; and also that the cross should be kept
where the holy King Olaf reposed, and that he should introduce
tithes, and also pay them himself.  After this King Sigurd
returned to his ships at Acre; and then King Baldwin prepared to
go to Syria, to a heathen town called Saet.  On this expedition
King Sigurd accompanied him, and after the kings had besieged the
town some time it surrendered, and they took possession of it,
and of a great treasure of money; and their men found other
booty.  King Sigurd made a present of his share to King Baldwin.
So say Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "He who for wolves provides the feast
     Seized on the city in the East,
     The heathen nest; and honour drew,
     And gold to give, from those he slew."

Einar Skulason also tells of it: --

     "The Norsemen's king, the skalds relate,
     Has ta'en the heathen town of Saet:
     The slinging engine with dread noise
     Gables and roofs with stones destroys.
     The town wall totters too, -- it falls;
     The Norsemen mount the blackened walls.
     He who stains red the raven's bill
     Has won, -- the town lies at his will."

Thereafter King Sigurd went to his ships and made ready to leave
Palestine.  They sailed north to the island Cyprus; and King
Sigurd stayed there a while, and then went to the Greek country,
and came to the land with all his fleet at Engilsnes.  Here he
lay still for a fortnight, although every day it blew a breeze
for going before the wind to the north; but Sigurd would wait a
side wind, so that the sails might stretch fore and aft in the
ship; for in all his sails there was silk joined in, before and
behind in the sail, and neither those before nor those behind the
ships could see the slightest appearance of this, if the vessel
was before the wind; so they would rather wait a side wind.



12. SIGURD'S EXPEDITION TO CONSTANTINOPLE.

When King Sigurd sailed into Constantinople, he steered near the
land.  Over all the land there are burghs, castles, country
towns, the one upon the other without interval.  There from the
land one could see into the bights of the sails; and the sails
stood so close beside each other, that they seemed to form one
enclosure.  All the people turned out to see King Sigurd sailing
past.  The Emperor Kirjalax had also heard of King Sigurd's
expedition, and ordered the city port of Constantinople to be
opened, which is called the Gold Tower, through which the emperor
rides when he has been long absent from Constantinople, or has
made a campaign in which he has been victorious.  The emperor had
precious cloths spread out from the Gold Tower to Laktjarna,
which is the name of the emperor's most splendid hall.  King
Sigurd ordered his men to ride in great state into the city, and
not to regard all the new things they might see; and this they
did.  King Sigurd and his followers rode with this great
splendour into Constantinople, and then came to the magnificent
hall, where everything was in the grandest style.

King Sigurd remained here some time.  The Emperor Kirjalax sent
his men to him to ask if he would rather accept from the emperor
six lispund of gold, or would have the emperor give the games in
his honour which the emperor was used to have played at the
Padreim.  King Sigurd preferred the games, and the messengers
said the spectacle would not cost the emperor less than the money
offered.  Then the emperor prepared for the games, which were
held in the usual way; but this day everything went on better for
the king than for the queen; for the queen has always the half
part in the games, and their men, therefore, always strive
against each other in all games.  The Greeks accordingly think
that when the king's men win more games at the Padreim than the
queen's, the king will gain the victory when he goes into battle.
People who have been in Constantinople tell that the Padreim is
thus constructed: -- A high wall surrounds a flat plain, which
may be compared to a round bare Thing-place, with earthen banks
all around at the stone wall, on which banks the spectators sit;
but the games themselves are in the flat plain.  There are many
sorts of old events represented concerning the Asas, Volsungs,
and Giukungs, in these games; and all the figures are cast in
copper, or metal, with so great art that they appear to be living
things; and to the people it appears as if they were really
present in the games.  The games themselves are so artfully and
cleverly managed, that people appear to be riding in the air; and
at them also are used shot-fire (1), and all kinds of harp-
playing, singing, and music instruments.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Fireworks, or the Greek fire, probably were used. -- L.



12. SIGURD AND THE EMPEROR OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

It is related that King Sigurd one day was to give the emperor a
feast, and he ordered his men to provide sumptuously all that was
necessary for the entertainment; and when all things were
provided which are suitable for an entertainment given by a great
personage to persons of high dignity, King Sigurd ordered his
men to go to the street in the city where firewood was sold, as
they would require a great quantity to prepare the feast.  They
said the king need not be afraid of wanting firewood, for every
day many loads were brought into the town.  When it was
necessary, however, to have firewood, it was found that it was
all sold, which they told the king.  He replied, "Go and try if
you can get walnuts.  They will answer as well as wood for fuel."
They went and got as many as they needed.  Now came the emperor,
and his grandees and court, and sat down to table.  All was very
splendid; and King Sigurd received the emperor with great state,
and entertained him magnificently.  When the queen and the
emperor found that nothing was wanting, she sent some persons to
inquire what they had used for firewood; and they came to a house
filled with walnuts, and they came back and told the queen.
"Truly," said she, "this is a magnificent king, who spares no
expense where his honour is concerned."  She had contrived this
to try what they would do when they could get no firewood to
dress their feast with.



14. KING SIGURD THE CRUSADER'S RETURN HOME.

King Sigurd soon after prepared for his return home.  He gave the
emperor all his ships; and the valuable figureheads which were on
the king's ships were set up in Peter's church, where they have
since been to be seen.  The emperor gave the king many horses and
guides to conduct him through all his dominions.  Then King
Sigurd left Constantinople; but a great many Northmen remained,
and went into the emperor's pay.  Then King Sigurd traveled from
Bulgaria, and through Hungary, Pannonia. Suabia, and Bavaria,
where he met the Roman emperor, Lotharius, who received him in
the most friendly way, gave him guides through his dominions, and
had markets established for him at which he could purchase all he
required.  When King Sigurd came to Slesvik in Denmark, Earl
Eilif made a sumptuous feast for him; and it was then midsummer.
In Heidaby he met the Danish king, Nikolas, who received him in
the most friendly way, made a great entertainment for him,
accompanied him north to Jutland, and gave him a ship provided
with everything needful.  From thence the king returned to
Norway, and was joyfully welcomed on his return to his kingdom
(A.D. 1110).  It was the common talk among the people, that none
had ever made so honourable a journey from Norway as this of King
Sigurd.  He was twenty years of age, and had been three years on
these travels.  His brother Olaf was then twelve years old.



15. EYSTEIN'S DOINGS IN THE MEANTIME.

King Eystein had also effected much in the country that was
useful while King Sigurd was on his journey.  He established a
monastery at Nordnes in Bergen, and endowed it with much
property.  He also built Michael's church, which is a very
splendid stone temple.  In the king's house there he also built
the Church of the Apostles, and the great hall, which is the most
magnificent wooden structure that was ever built in Norway.  He
also built a church at Agdanes with a parapet; and a harbour,
where formerly there had been a barren spot only.  In Nidaros he
built in the king's street the church of Saint Nikolas, which was
particularly ornamented with carved work, and all in wood.  He
also built a church north in Vagar in Halogaland, and endowed it
with property and revenues.



16. OF KING EYSTEIN.

King Eystein sent a verbal message to the most intelligent and
powerful of the men of Jamtaland, and invited them to him;
received them all as they came with great kindness; accompanied
them part of the way home, and gave them presents, and thus
enticed them into a friendship with him.  Now as many of them
became accustomed to visit him and receive gifts from him, and he
also sent gifts to some who did not come themselves, he soon
gained the favour of all the people who had most influence in the
country.  Then he spoke to the Jamtaland people, and told them
they had done ill in turning away from the kings of Norway, and
withdrawing from them their taxes and allegiance.  He began by
saying how the Jamtaland people had submitted to the reign of
Hakon, the foster-son of Athelstane, and had long afterwards been
subjected to the kings of Norway, and he represented to them how
many useful things they could get from Norway, and how
inconvenient it was for them to apply to the Swedish king for
what they needed.  By these speeches he brought matters so far
that the Jamtaland people of their own accord offered to be
subject to him, which they said was useful and necessary for
them; and thus, on both sides, it was agreed that the
Jamtalanders should put their whole country under King Eystein.
The first beginning was with the men of consequence, who
persuaded the people to take an oath of fidelity to King Eystein;
and then they went to King Eystein and confirmed the country to
him by oath; and this arrangement has since continued for a long
time.  King Eystein thus conquered Jamtaland by his wisdom, and
not by hostile inroads, as some of his forefathers had done.



17. OF KING EYSTEIN'S PERFECTIONS.

King Eystein was the handsomest man that could be seen.  He had
blue open eyes; his hair yellow and curling; his stature not
tall, but of the middle size.  He was wise, intelligent, and
acquainted with the laws and history.  He had much knowledge of
mankind, was quick in counsel, prudent in words, and very
eloquent and very generous.  He was very merry, yet modest; and
was liked and beloved, indeed, by all the people.  He was married
to Ingebjorg, a daughter of Guthorm, son of Thorer of Steig; and
their daughter was Maria, who afterwards married Gudbrand
Skafhogson.



18. OF IVAR INGIMUNDSON.

King Eystein had in many ways improved the laws and priveleges of
the country people, and kept strictly to the laws; and he made
himself acquainted with all the laws of Norway, and showed in
everything great prudence and understanding.  What a valuable man
King Eystein was, how full of friendship, and how much he turned
his mind to examining and avoiding everything that could be of
disadvantage to his friends, may be seen from his friendship to
an Iceland man called Ivar Ingimundson.  The man was witty, of
great family, and also a poet.  The king saw that Ivar was out of
spirits, and asked him why he was so melancholy.  "Before, when
thou wast with us, we had much amusement with thy conversation. 
I know thou art a man of too good an understanding to believe
that I would do anything against thee.  Tell me then what it is."

He replied, "I cannot tell thee what it is."

Then said the king, "I will try to guess what it is.  Are there
any men who displease thee?"

To this he replied, "No."

"Dost thou think thou art held in less esteem by me than thou
wouldst like to be?"

To this he also replied, "No."

"Hast thou observed anything whatever that has made an impression
on thee at which thou art ill pleased?"

He replied, it was not this either.

The king: "Would you like to go to other chiefs or to other men?"

To this he answered, "No."

The king: "It is difficult now to guess.  Is there any girl here,
or in any other country, to whom thy affections are engaged?"

He said it was so.

The king said, "Do not be melancholy on that account.  Go to
Iceland when spring sets in, and I shall give thee money, and
presents, and with these my letters and seal to the men who have
the principal sway there; and I know no man there who will not
obey my persuasions or threats."

Ivar replied, "My fate is heavier, sire; for my own brother has
the girl."

Then said the king, "Throw it out of thy mind; and I know a
counsel against this.  After Yule I will travel in
guest-quarters.  Thou shalt come along with me, and thou will
have an opportunity of seeing many beautiful girls; and, provided
they are not of the royal stock, I will get thee one of them in
marriage."

Ivar replies, "Sire, my fate is still the heavier; for as oft as
I see beautiful and excellent girls I only remember the more that
girl, and they increase my misery."

The king: "Then I will give thee property to manage, and estates
for thy amusement."

He replied, "For that I have no desire."

The king: "Then I will give thee money, that thou mayest travel
in other countries."

He said he did not wish this.

Then said the king, "It is difficult for me to seek farther, for
I have proposed everything that occurs to me.  There is but one
thing else; and that is but little compared to what I have
offered thee.  Come to me every day after the tables are removed,
and, if I am not sitting upon important business, I shall talk
with thee about the girl in every way that I can think of; and I
shall do so at leisure.  It sometimes happens that sorrow is
lightened by being brought out openly; and thou shalt never go
away without some gift."

He replied, "This I will do, sire, and return thanks for this
inquiry."

And now they did so constantly; and when the king was not
occupied with weightier affairs he talked with him, and his
sorrow by degrees wore away, and he was again in good spirits.



19. OF KING SIGURD.

King Sigurd was a stout and strong man, with brown hair; of a
manly appearance, but not handsome; well grown; of little speech,
and often not friendly, but good to his friends, and faithful;
not very eloquent, but moral and polite.  King Sigurd was self-
willed, and severe in his revenge; strict in observing the law;
was generous; and withal an able, powerful king.  His brother
Olaf was a tall, thin man; handsome in countenance; lively,
modest, and popular.  When all these brothers, Eystein, Sigurd
and Olaf were kings of Norway, they did away with many burthens
which the Danes had laid upon the people in the time that Svein
Alfifason ruled Norway; and on this account they were much
beloved, both by the people and the great men of the country.



20. OF KING SIGURD'S DREAM.

Once King Sigurd fell into low spirits, so that few could get him
to converse, and he sat but a short time at the drinking table.
This was heavy on his counsellors, friends, and court; and they
begged King Eystein to consider how they could discover the cause
why the people who came to the king could get no reply to what
they laid before him.  King Eystein answered them, that it was
difficult to speak with the king about this; but at last, on the
entreaty of many, he promised to do it.  Once, when they were
both together, King Eystein brought the matter before his
brother, and asked the cause of his melancholy.  "It is a great
grief, sire, to many to see thee so melancholy; and we would like
to know what has occasioned it, or if perchance thou hast heard
any news of great weight?"

King Sigurd replies, that it was not so.

"Is it then, brother," says King Eystein, "that you would like to
travel out of the country, and augment your dominions as our
father did?"

He answered, that it was not that either.

"Is it, then, that any man here in the country has offended?"

To this also the king said "No."

"Then I would like to know if you have dreamt anything that has
occasioned this depression of mind?"

The king answered that it was so.

"Tell me, then, brother, thy dream."

King Sigurd said, "I will not tell it, unless thou interpret it
as it may turn out; and I shall be quick at perceiving if thy
interpretation be right or not."

King Eystein replies, "This is a very difficult matter, sire, on
both sides; as I am exposed to thy anger if I cannot interpret
it, and to the blame of the public if I can do nothing in the
matter; but I will rather fall under your displeasure, even if my
interpretation should not be agreeable."

King Sigurd replies, "It appeared to me, in a dream, as if we
brothers were all sitting on a bench in front of Christ church in
Throndhjem; and it appeared to me as if our relative, King Olaf
the Saint, came out of the church adorned with the royal raiment
glancing and splendid, and with the most delightful and joyful
countenance.  He went to our brother King Olaf, took him by the
hand, and said cheerfully, to him, `Come with me, friend.'  On
which he appeared to stand up and go into the church.  Soon after
King Olaf the Saint came out of the church, but not so gay and
brilliant as before.  Now he went to thee, brother, and said to
thee that thou shouldst go with him; on which he led thee with
him, and ye went into the church.  Then I thought, and waited for
it, that he would come to me, and meet me; but it was not so.
Then I was seized with great sorrow, and great dread and anxiety
fell upon me, so that I was altogether without strength; and then
I awoke."

King Eystein replies, "Thus I interpret your dream, sire, -- That
the bench betokens the kingdom we brothers have; and as you
thought King Olaf came with so glad a countenance to our brother,
King Olaf, he will likely live the shortest time of us brothers,
and have all good to expect hereafter; for he is amiable, young
in years, and has gone but little into excess, and King Olaf the
Saint must help him.  But as you thought he came towards me, but
not with so much joy, I may possibly live a few years longer, but
not become old, and I trust his providence will stand over me;
but that he did not come to me with the same splendour and glory
as to our brother Olaf, that will be because, in many ways, I
have sinned and transgressed his command.  If he delayed coming
to thee, I think that in no way betokens thy death, but rather a
long life; but it may be that some heavy accident may occur to
thee, as there was an unaccountable dread overpowering thee; but
I foretell that thou will be the oldest of us, and wilt rule the
kingdom longest."

Then said Sigurd, "This is well and intelligently interpreted,
and it is likely it will be so."  And now the king began to be
cheerful again.



21. OF KING SIGURD'S MARRIAGE.

King Sigurd married Malmfrid, a daughter of King Harald
Valdemarson, eastward in Novgorod.  King Harald Valdemarson's
mother was Queen Gyda the Old, a daughter of the Swedish king,
Inge Steinkelson.  Harald Valdemarson's other daughter, sister to
Malmfrid, was Ingebjorg, who was married to Canute Lavard, a son
of the Danish king, Eirik the Good, and grandson of King Svein
Ulfson.  Canute's and Ingebjorg's children were, the Danish king,
Valdemar, who came to the Danish kingdom after Svein Eirikson;
and daughters Margaret, Christina, and Catherine.  Margaret was
married to Stig Hvitaled; and their daughter was Christina,
married to the Swedish king, Karl Sorkvison, and their son was
King Sorkver.



22. OF THE CASES BEFORE THE THING.

The king's relative, Sigurd Hranason, came into strife with King
Sigurd.  He had had the Lapland collectorship on the king's
account, because of their relationship and long friendship, and
also of the many services Sigurd Hranason had done to the kings;
for he was a very distinguished, popular man.  But it happened to
him, as it often does to others, that persons more wicked and
jealous than upright slandered him to King Sigurd, and whispered
in the king's ear that he took more of the Laplander's tribute to
himself than was proper.  They spoke so long about this, that
King Sigurd conceived a dislike and anger to him, and sent a
message to him.  When he appeared before the king, the king
carried these feelings with him, and said, "I did not expect that
thou shouldst have repaid me for thy great fiefs and other
dignities by taking the king's property, and abstracting a
greater portion of it than is allowable."

Sigurd Hranason replies, "It is not true that has been told you;
for I have only taken such portion as I had your permission to
take."

King Sigurd replies, "Thou shalt not slip away with this; but the
matter shall be seriously treated before it comes to an end." 
With that they parted.

Soon after, by the advice of his friends, the king laid an action
against Sigurd Hranason at the Thing-meeting in Bergen, and would
have him made an outlaw.  Now when the business took this turn,
and appeared so dangerous, Sigurd Hranason went to King Eystein,
and told him what mischief King Sigurd intended to do him, and
entreated his assistance.  King Eystein replied, "This is a
difficult matter that you propose to me, to speak against my
brother; and there is a great difference between defending a
cause and pursuing it in law;" and added, that this was a matter
which concerned him and Sigurd equally.  "But for thy distress,
and our relationship, I shall bring in a word for thee."

Soon after Eystein visited King Sigurd, and entreated him to
spare the man, reminding him of the relationship between them and
Sigurd Hranason, who was married to their aunt, Skialdvor; and
said he would pay the penalty for the crime committed against the
king, although he could not with truth impute any blame to him in
the matter.  Besides, he reminded the king of the long friendship
with Sigurd Hranason.  King Sigurd replied, that it was better
government to punish such acts.  Then King Eystein replied, "If
thou, brother, wilt follow the law, and punish such acts
according to the country's privileges, then it would be most
correct that Sigurd Hranason produce his witnesses, and that the
case be judged at the Thing, but not at a meeting; for the case
comes under the law of the land, not under Bjarkey law."  Then
said Sigurd, "It may possibly be so that the case belongs to it,
as thou sayest, King Eystein; and if it be against law what has
hitherto been done in this case, then we shall bring it before
the Thing."  Then the kings parted, and each seemed determined to
take his own way.  King Sigurd summoned the parties in the case
before the Arnarnes Thing, and intended to pursue it there.  King
Eystein came also to the Thing-place; and when the case was
brought forward for judgment, King Eystein went to the Thing
before judgment was given upon Sigurd Hranason.  Now King Sigurd
told the lagmen to pronounce the judgment; but King Eystein
replied thus: "I trust there are here men acquainted sufficiently
with the laws of Norway, to know that they cannot condemn a
lendermen to be outlawed at this Thing."  And he then explained
how the law was, so that every man clearly understood it.  Then
said King Sigurd, "Thou art taking up this matter very warmly,
King Eystein, and it is likely the case will cost more trouble
before it comes to an end than we intended; but nevertheless we
shall follow it out.  I will have him condemned to be outlawed in
his native place."  Then said King Eystein, "There are certainly
not many things which do not succeed with thee, and especially
when there are but few and small folks to oppose one who has
carried through such great things."  And thus they parted,
without anything being concluded in the case.  Thereafter King
Sigurd called together a Gula Thing, went himself there, and
summoned to him many high chiefs.  King Eystein came there also
with his suite; and many meetings and conferences were held among
people of understanding concerning this case, and it was tried
and examined before the lagmen.  Now King Eystein objected that
all the parties summoned in any cases tried here belonged to the
Thing-district; but in this case the deed and the parties
belonged to Halogaland.  The Thing accordingly ended in doing
nothing, as King Eystein had thus made it incompetent.  The kings
parted in great wrath; and King Eystein went north to Throndhjem.
King Sigurd, on the other hand, summoned to him all lendermen,
and also the house-servants of the lendermen, and named out of
every district a number of the bondes from the south parts of the
country, so that he had collected a large army about him; and
proceeded with all this crowd northwards along the coast to
Halogaland, and intended to use all his power to make Sigurd
Hranason an outlaw among his own relations.  For this purpose he
summoned to him the Halogaland and Naumudal people, and appointed
a Thing at Hrafnista.  King Eystein prepared himself also, and
proceeded with many people from the town of Nidaros to the Thing,
where he made Sigurd Hranason, by hand-shake before witnesses,
deliver over to him the following and defending this case.  At
this Thing both the kings spoke, each for his own side.  Then
King Eystein asks the lagmen where that law was made in Norway
which gave the bondes the right to judge between the kings of the
country, when they had pleas with each other.  "I shall bring
witnesses to prove that Sigurd has given the case into my hands;
and it is with me, not with Sigurd Hranason, that King Sigurd has
to do in this case."  The lagmen said that disputes between kings
must be judged only at the Eyra Thing in Nidaros.

King Eystein said, "So I thought that it should be there, and the
cases must be removed there."

Then King Sigurd said, "The more difficulties and inconvenience
thou bringest upon me in this matter, the more I will persevere
in it."  And with that they parted.

Both kings then went south to Nidaros town, where they summoned a
Thing from eight districts.  King Eystein was in the town with a
great many people, but Sigurd was on board his ships.  When the
Thing was opened, peace and safe conduct was given to all; and
when the people were all collected, and the case should be gone
into, Bergthor, a son of Svein Bryggjufot, stood up, and gave his
evidence that Sigurd Hranason had concealed a part of the
Laplanders' taxes.

Then King Eystein stood up and said, "If thy accusation were
true, although we do not know what truth there may be in thy
testimony, yet this case has already been dismissed from three
Things, and a fourth time from a town meeting; and therefore I
require that the lagmen acquit Sigurd in this case according to
law."  And they did so.

Then said King Sigurd, "I see sufficiently, King Eystein, that
thou hast carried this case by law-quirks (1), which I do not
understand.  But now there remains, King Eystein, a way of
determining the case which I am more used to, and which I shall
now apply."

He then retired to his ships, had the tents taken down, laid his
whole fleet out at the holm, and held a Thing of his people; and
told them that early in the morning they should land at
Iluvellir, and give battle to King Eystein.  But in the evening,
as King Sigurd sat at his table in his ship taking his repast,
before he was aware of it a man cast himself on the floor of the
forehold, and at the king's feet.  This was Sigurd Hranason, who
begged the king to take what course with regard to him the king
himself thought proper.  Then came Bishop Magne and Queen
Malmfrid, and many other great personages, and entreated
forgiveness for Sigurd Hranason; and at their entreaty the king
raised him up, took him by the hand, and placed him among his
men, and took him along with himself to the south part of the
country.  In autumn the king gave Sigurd Hranason leave to go
north to his farm, gave him an employment, and was always
afterward his friend.  After this day, however, the brothers were
never much together, and there was no cordiality or cheerfulness
among them.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  These law-quirks show a singularly advanced state of law.
     and deference to the Law Things, amidst such social disorder
     and misdeeds. -- L.



23. OF KING OLAF'S DEATH.

King Olaf Magnuson fell into a sickness which ended in his death.
He was buried in Christ church in Nidaros, and many were in great
grief at his death.  After Olaf's death, Eystein and Sigurd ruled
the country, the three brothers together having been kings of
Norway for twelve years (A.D. 1104-1115); namely, five years
after King Sigurd returned home, and seven years before.  King
Olaf was seventeen years old when he died, and it happened on the
24th of December.



24. MAGNUS THE BLIND; HIS BIRTH.

King Eystein had been about a year in the east part of the
country at that time, and King Sigurd was then in the north. 
King Eystein remained a long time that winter in Sarpsborg. 
There was once a powerful and rich bonde called O1af of Dal, who
dwelt in Great Dal in Aumord, and had two children, -- a son
called Hakon Fauk, and a daughter called Borghild, who was a very
beautiful girl, and prudent, and well skilled in many things.
Olaf and his children were a long time in winter in Sarpsborg,
and Borghild conversed very often with King Eystein; so that many
reports were spread about their friendship.  The following summer
King Eystein went north, and King Sigurd came eastward, where he
remained all winter, and was long in Konungahella, which town he
greatly enlarged and improved.  He built there a great castle of
turf and stone, dug a great ditch around it, and built a church
and several houses within the castle.  The holy cross he allowed
to remain at Konungahella, and therein did not fulfill the oath
he had taken in Palestine; but, on the other hand, he established
tithe, and most of the other things to which he had bound himself
by oath.  The reason of his keeping the cross east at the
frontier of the country was, that he thought it would be a
protection to all the land; but it proved the greatest misfortune
to place this relic within the power of the heathens, as it
afterwards turned out.

When Borghild, Olaf's daughter, heard it whispered that people
talked ill of her conversations and intimacy with King Eystein,
she went to Sarpsborg; and after suitable fasts she carried the
iron as proof of her innocence, and cleared herself thereby fully
from all offence.  When King Sigurd heard this, he rode one day
as far as usually was two days' travelling, and came to Dal to
Olaf, where he remained all night, made Borghild his concubine,
and took her away with him.  They had a son, who was called
Magnus, and he was sent immediately to Halogaland, to be fostered
at Bjarkey by Vidkun Jonson; and he was brought up there.  Magnus
grew up to be the handsomest man that could be seen, and was very
soon stout and strong.



25. COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TWO KINGS.

King Eystein and King Sigurd went both in spring to
guest-quarters in the Uplands; and each was entertained in a
separate house, and the houses were not very distant from each
other.  The bondes, however, thought it more convenient that both
should be entertained together by turns in each house; and thus
they were both at first in the house of King Eystein.  But in the
evening, when the people began to drink, the ale was not good; so
that the guests were very quiet and still.  Then said King
Eystein, "Why are the people so silent?  It is more usual in
drinking parties that people are merry, so let us fall upon some
jest over our ale that will amuse people; for surely, brother
Sigurd, all people are well pleased when we talk cheerfully." 

Sigurd replies, bluntly, "Do you talk as much as you please, but
give me leave to be silent."

Eystein says, "It is a common custom over the ale-table to
compare one person with another, and now let us do so."  Then
Sigurd was silent.

"I see," says King Eystein, "that I must begin this amusement.
Now I will take thee, brother, to compare myself with, and will
make it appear so as if we had both equal reputation and
property, and that there is no difference in our birth and
education."

Then King Sigurd replies, "Do you remember that I was always able
to throw you when we wrestled, although you are a year older?" 

Then King Eystein replied, "But I remember that you was not so
good at the games which require agility."

Sigurd: "Do you remember that I could drag you under water, when
we swam together, as often as I pleased?"

Eystein: "But I could swim as far as you, and could dive as well
as you; and I could run upon snow-skates so well that nobody
could beat me, and you could no more do it than an ox."

Sigurd: "Methinks it is a more useful and suitable accomplishment
for a chief to be expert at his bow; and I think you could
scarcely draw my bow, even if you took your foot to help."

Eystein: "I am not strong at the bow as you are, but there is
less difference between our shooting near; and I can use the
skees much better than you, and in former times that was held a
great accomplishment."

Sigurd: "It appears to me much better for a chief who is to be
the superior of other men, that he is conspicuous in a crowd, and
strong and powerful in weapons above other men; easily seen, and
easily known, where there are many together."

Eystein: "It is not less a distinction and an ornament that a man
is of a handsome appearance, so as to be easily known from others
on that account; and this appears to me to suit a chief best,
because the best ornament is allied to beauty.  I am moreover
more knowing in the law than you, and on every subject my words
flow more easily than yours."

Sigurd: "It may be that you know more law-quirks, for I have had
something else to do; neither will any deny you a smooth tongue.
But there are many who say that your words are not to be trusted;
that what you promise is little to be regarded; and that you talk
just according to what those who are about you say, which is not
kingly."

Eystein: "This is because, when people bring their cases before
me, I wish first to give every man that satisfaction in his
affairs which he desires; but afterwards comes the opposite
party, and then there is something to be given or taken away very
often, in order to mediate between them, so that both may be
satisfied.  It often happens, too, that I promise whatever is
desired of me, that all may be joyful about me.  It would be an
easy matter for me to do as you do, -- to promise evil to all;
and I never hear any complain of your not keeping this promise to
them."

Sigurd: "It is the conversation of all that the expedition that I
made out of the country was a princely expedition, while you in
the meantime sat at home like your father's daughter."

Eystein: "Now you touched the tender spot.  I would not have
brought up this conversation if I had not known what to reply on
this point.  I can truly say that I equipt you from home like a
sister, before you went upon this expedition."

Sigurd: "You must have heard that on this expedition I was in
many a battle in the Saracen's land, and gained the victory in
all; and you must have heard of the many valuable articles I
acquired, the like of which were never seen before in this
country, and I was the most respected wherever the most gallant
men were; and, on the other hand, you cannot conceal that you
have only a home-bred reputation."

Eystein: "I have heard that you had several battles abroad, but
it was more useful for the country what I was doing in the
meantime here at home.  I built five churches from the
foundations, and a harbour out at Agdanes, where it before was
impossible to land, and where vessels ply north and south along
the coast.  I set a warping post and iron ring in the sound of
Sinholm, and in Bergen I built a royal hall, while you were
killing bluemen for the devil in Serkland.  This, I think, was of
but little advantage to our kingdom."

King Sigurd said: "On this expedition I went all the way to
Jordan and swam across the river.  On the edge of the river there
is a bush of willows, and there I twisted a knot of willows, and
said this knot thou shouldst untie, brother, or take the curse
thereto attached."

King Eystein said: "I shall not go and untie the knot which you
tied for me; but if I had been inclined to tie a knot for thee,
thou wouldst not have been king of Norway at thy return to this
country, when with a single ship you came sailing into my fleet."

Thereupon both were silent, and there was anger on both sides.
More things passed between the brothers, from which it appeared
that each of them would be greater than the other; however, peace
was preserved between them as long as they lived.



26. OF KING SIGURD'S SICKNESS.

King Sigurd was at a feast in the Upland, and a bath was made
ready for him.  When the king came to the bath and the tent was
raised over the bathing-tub, the king thought there was a fish in
the tub beside him; and a great laughter came upon him, so that
he was beside himself, and was out of his mind, and often
afterwards these fits returned.

Magnus Barefoot's daughter, Ragnhild, was married by her brothers
to Harald Kesia, a son of the Danish king, Eirik the Good; and
their sons were Magnus, Olaf, Knut and Harald.



27. OF KING EYSTEIN'S DEATH.

King Eystein built a large ship at Nidaros, which, in size and
shape, was like the Long Serpent which King Olaf Trygvason had
built.  At the stem there was a dragon's head, and at the stern a
crooked tail, and both were gilded over.  The ship was high-
sided; but the fore and aft parts appeared less than they should
be.  He also made in Nidaros many and large dry-docks of the best
material, and well timbered.

Six years after King Olaf's death, it happened that King Eystein,
at a feast at Hustadir in Stim, was seized with an illness which
soon carried him off.  He died the 29th of August, 1123, and his
body was carried north to Nidaros, and buried in Christ church;
and it is generally said that so many mourners never stood over
any man's grave in Norway as over King Eystein's, at least since
the time Magnus the Good, Saint Olaf's son, died.  Eystein had
been twenty years (A.D. 1104-1123) king of Norway; and after his
decease his brother, King Sigurd, was the sole king of Norway as
long as he lived.



28. BAPTIZING THE PEOPLE OF SMALAND.

The Danish king, Nikolas, a son of Svein Ulfson, married
afterwards the Queen Margaret, a daughter of King Inge, who had
before been married to King Magnus Barefoot; and their sons were
Nikolas and Magnus the Strong.  King Nikolas sent a message to
King Sigurd the Crusader, and asked him if he would go with him
with all his might and help him to the east of the Swedish
dominion, Smaland, to baptize the inhabitants; for the people who
dwelt there had no regard for Christianity, although some of them
had allowed themselves to be baptized.  At that time there were
many people all around in the Swedish dominions who were
heathens, and many were bad Christians; for there were some of
the kings who renounced Christianity, and continued heathen
sacrifices, as Blotsvein, and afterwards Eirik Arsale, had done.
King Sigurd promised to undertake this journey, and the kings
appointed their meeting at Eyrarsund.  King Sigurd then summoned
all people in Norway to a levy, both of men and ships; and when
the fleet was assembled he had about 300 ships.  King Nikolas
came very early to the meeting-place, and stayed there a long
time; and the bondes murmured much, and said the Northmen did not
intend to come.  Thereupon the Danish army dispersed, and the
king went away with all his fleet.  King Sigurd came there soon
afterwards, and was ill pleased; but sailed east to Svimraros,
and held a House-thing, at which Sigurd spoke about King
Nikolas's breach of faith, and the Northmen, on this account,
determined to go marauding in his country.  They first plundered
a village called Tumathorp, which is not far from Lund; and then
sailed east to the merchant-town of Calmar, where they plundered,
as well as in Smaland, and imposed on the country a tribute of
1500 cattle for ship provision; and the people of Smaland
received Christianity.  After this King Sigurd turned about with
his fleet, and came back to his kingdom with many valuable
articles and great booty, which he had gathered on this
expedition; and this levy was called the Calmar levy.  This was
the summer before the eclipse.  This was the only levy King
Sigurd carried out as long as he was king.



29. OF THORARIN STUTFELD.

It happened once when King Sigurd was going from the drinking-
table to vespers, that his men were very drunk and merry; and
many of them sat outside the church singing the evening song, but
their singing was very irregular.  Then the king said, "Who is
that fellow I see standing at the church with a skin jacket on?"
They answered, that they did not know.  Then the king said: -- 

     "This skin-clad man, in sorry plight,
     Puts all our wisdom here to flight."

Then the fellow came forward and said: --

     "I thought that here I might be known,
     Although my dress is scanty grown.
     'Tis poor, but I must be content:
     Unless, great king, it's thy intent
     To give me better; for I have seen
     When I and rags had strangers been."

The king answered, "Come to me to-morrow when I am at the drink-
table."  The night passed away; and the morning after the
Icelander, who was afterwards called Thorarin Stutfetd, went into
the drinking-room.  A man stood outside of the door of the room
with a horn in his hand, and said, "Icelander!  the king says
that if thou wilt deserve any gift from him thou shalt compose a
song before going in, and make it about a man whose name is Hakon
Serkson, and who is called Morstrut (1); and speak about that
surname in thy song."  The man who spoke to him was called Arne
Fioruskeif.  Then they went into the room; and when Thorarin came
before the king's seat he recited these verses: --

     "Throndhjem's warrior-king has said
     The skald should be by gifts repaid,
     If he before this meeting gave
     The king's friend Serk a passing stave.
     The generous king has let me know
     My stave, to please, must be framed so
     That my poor verse extol the fame
     Of one called Hakon Lump by name."

Then said the king, "I never said so, and somebody has been
making a mock of thee.  Hakon himself shall determine what
punishment thou shalt have.  Go into his suite."  Hakon said, "He
shall be welcome among us, for I can see where the joke came
from;" and he placed the Icelander at his side next to himself,
and they were very merry.  The day was drawing to a close, and
the liquor began to get into their heads, when Hakon said, "Dost
thou not think, Icelander, that thou owest me some penalty?  and
dost thou not see that some trick has been played upon thee?"

Thorarin replies, "It is true, indeed, that I owe thee some
compensation."

Hakon says, "Then we shall be quits, if thou wilt make me another
stave about Arne."

He said he was ready to do so; and they crossed over to the side
of the room where Arne was sitting, and Thorarin gave these
verses: --

     "Fioruskeif has often spread,
     With evil heart and idle head,
     The eagle's voidings round the land,
     Lampoons and lies, with ready hand.
     Yet this landlouper we all know,
     In Africa scarce fed a crow,
     Of all his arms used in the field,
     Those in most use were helm and shield."

Arne sprang up instantly, drew his sword, and was going to fall
upon him; but Hakon told him to let it alone and be quiet, and
bade him remember that if it came to a quarrel he would come off
the worst himself.  Thorarin afterwards went up to the king, and
said he had composed a poem which he wished the king to hear. 
The king consented, and the song is known by the name of the
Stutfeld poem.  The king asked Thorarin what he intended to do. 
He replied, it was his intention to go to Rome.  Then the king
gave him much money for his pilgrimage, and told him to visit him
on his return, and promised to provide for him.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Morstrut is a short, fat, punchy fellow. -- L.



30. OF SIGURD AND OTTAR BIRTING.

It is told that King Sigurd, one Whitsunday, sat at table with
many people, among whom were many of his friends; and when he
came to his high-seat, people saw that his countenance was very
wild, and as if he had been weeping, so that people were afraid
of what might follow.  The king rolled his eyes, and looked at
those who were seated on the benches.  Then he seized the holy
book which he had brought with him from abroad, and which was
written all over with gilded letters; so that never had such a
costly book come to Norway.  His queen sat by his side.  Then
said King Sigurd, "Many are the changes which may take place
during a man's lifetime.  I had two things which were dear to me
above all when I came from abroad, and these were this book and
the queen; and now I think the one is only worse and more
loathsome than the other, and nothing I have belonging to me that
I more detest.  The queen does not know herself how hideous she
is; for a goat's horn is standing out on her head, and the better
I liked her before the worse I like her now."  Thereupon he cast
the book on the fire which was burning on the hall-floor, and
gave the queen a blow with his fist between the eyes.  The queen
wept; but more at the king's' illness than at the blow, or the
affront she had suffered.

Then a man stood up before the king; his name was Ottar Birting;
and he was one of the torch-bearers, although a bonde's son, and
was on service that day.  He was of small stature, but of
agreeable appearance; lively, bold, and full of fun; black
haired, and of a dark skin.  He ran and snatched the book which
the king had cast into the fire, held it out, and said,
"Different were the days, sire, when you came with great state
and splendour to Norway, and with great fame and honour; for then
all your friends came to meet you with joy, and were glad at your
coming.  All as one man would have you for king, and have you in
the highest regard and honour.  But now days of sorrow are come
over us; for on this holy festival many of your friends have come
to you, and cannot be cheerful on account of your melancholy and
ill health.  It is much to be desired that you would be merry
with them; and do, good king, take this saving advice, make peace
first with the queen, and make her joyful whom you have so highly
affronted, with a friendly word; and then all your chiefs,
friends, and servants; that is my advice."

Then said King Sigurd, "Dost thou dare to give me advice, thou
great lump of a houseman's lad!"  And he sprang up, drew his
sword, and swung it with both hands as if going to cut him down.

But Ottar stood quiet and upright; did not stir from the spot,
nor show the slightest sign of fear; and the king turned round
the sword-blade which he had waved over Ottar's head, and gently
touched him on the shoulder with it.  Then he sat down in silence
on his high-seat.

All were silent who were in the hall, for nobody dared to say a
word.  Now the king looked around him, milder than before, and
said, "It is difficult to know what there is in people.  Here sat
my friends, and lendermen, marshals and shield-bearers, and all
the best men in the land; but none did so well against me as this
man, who appears to you of little worth compared to any of you,
although now he loves me most. I came here like a madman, and
would have destroyed my precious property; but he turned aside my
deed, and was not afraid of death for it.  Then he made an able
speech, ordering his words so that they were honourable to me,
and not saying a single word about things which could increase my
vexation; but even avoiding what might, with truth, have been
said.  So excellent was his speech, that no man here, however
great his understanding, could have spoken better.  Then I sprang
up in a pretended rage, and made as if I would have cut him down;
but he was courageous as if he had nothing to fear; and seeing
that, I let go my purpose; for he was altogether innocent.  Now
ye shall know, my friends, how I intend to reward him; he was
before my torchbearer, and shall now be my lenderman; and there
shall follow what is still more, that he shall be the most
distinguished of my lendermen.  Go thou and sit among the
lendermen, and be a servant no longer."

Ottar became one of the most celebrated men in Norway for various
good and praiseworthy deeds.



31. OF KING SIGURD'S DREAM.

In King Sigurd's latter days he was once at an entertainment at
one of his farms; and in the morning when he was dressed he was
silent and still, so that his friends were afraid he was not able
to govern himself.  Now the farm bailiff, who was a man of good
sense and courage, brought him into conversation, and asked if he
had heard any news of such importance that it disturbed his
mirth; or if the entertainment had not satisfied him; or if there
was anything else that people could remedy.

King Sigurd said, that none of the things he had mentioned was
the cause. "But it is that I think upon the dream I had in the
night."

"Sire," replied he, "may it prove a lucky dream!  I would gladly
hear it."

The king: "I thought that I was in Jadar, and looked out towards
the sea; and that I saw something very black moving itself; and
when it came near it appeared to be a large tree, of which the
branches stretched far above the water, and the roots were down
in the sea.  Now when the tree came to the shore it broke into
pieces, and drove all about the land, both the mainland and the
out-islands, rocks and strands; and it appeared to me as if I saw
over all Norway along the sea-coast, and saw pieces of that tree,
some small and some large, driven into every bight."

Then said the bailiff, "It is likely that you an best interpret
this dream yourself; and I would willingly hear your
interpretation of it."

Then said the king, "This dream appears to me to denote the
arrival in this country of some man who will fix his seat here,
and whose posterity will spread itself over the land; but with
unequal power, as the dream shows."



32. OF ASLAK HANE.

It so happened once, that King Sigurd sat in a gloomy mood among
many worthy men.  It was Friday evening, and the kitchen-master
asked what meat should be made ready.

The king replies, "What else but flesh-meat?"  And so harsh were
his words that nobody dared to contradict him, and all were ill
at ease.  Now when people prepared to go to table, dishes of warm
flesh-meat were carried in; but all were silent, and grieved at
the king's illness.  Before the blessing was pronounced over the
meat, a man called Aslak Hane spoke.  He had been a long time
with King Sigurd on his journey abroad, and was not a man of any
great family; and was small of stature, but fiery.  When he
perceived how it was, and that none dared to accost the king, he
asked, "What is it, sire, that is smoking on the dish before
you?"

The king replies, "What do you mean, Aslak? what do you think it
is?"

Aslak: "I think it is flesh-meat; and I would it were not so."

The king: "But if it be so, Aslak?"

He replied, "It would be vexatious to know that a gallant king,
who has gained so much honour in the world, should so forget
himself.  When you rose up out of Jordan, after bathing in the
same waters as God himself, with palm-leaves in your hands, and
the cross upon your breast, it was something else you promised,
sire, than to eat flesh-meat on a Friday.  If a meaner man were
to do so, he would merit a heavy punishment.  This royal hall is
not so beset as it should be, when it falls upon me, a mean man,
to challenge such an act."

The king sat silent, and did not partake of the meat; and when
the time for eating was drawing to an end, the king ordered the
flesh dishes to be removed and other food was brought in, such as
it is permitted to use.  When the meal-time was almost past, the
king began to be cheerful, and to drink.  People advised Aslak to
fly, but he said he would not do so.  "I do not see how it could
help me; and to tell the truth, it is as good to die now that I
have got my will, and have prevented the king from committing a
sin.  It is for him to kill me if he likes."

Towards evening the king called him, and said, "Who set thee on,
Aslak Hane, to speak such free words to me in the hearing of so
many people?"

"No one, sire, but myself."

The king: "Thou wouldst like, no doubt, to know what thou art to
have for such boldness; what thinkest thou it deserves."

He replies, "If it be well rewarded, sire, I shall be glad; but
should it be otherwise, then it is your concern."

Then the king said, "Smaller is thy reward than thou hast
deserved.  I give thee three farms.  It has turned out, what
could not have been expected, that thou hast prevented me from a
great crime, -- thou, and not the lendermen, who are indebted to
me for so much good."  And so it ended.



33. OF A WOMAN BROUGHT TO THE KING.

One Yule eve the king sat in the hall, and the tables were laid
out, and the king said, "Get me flesh-meat."

They answered, "Sire, it is not the custom to eat flesh-meat on
Yule eve."

The king said, "If it be not the custom I will make it the
custom."

They went out, and brought him a dolphin.  The king stuck his
knife into it, but did not eat of it.  Then the king said, "Bring
me a girl here into the hall."  They brought him a woman whose
head-dress went far down her brows.  The king took her hand in
his hands, looked at her, and said, "An ill looking girl!"

((LACUNA -- The rest of this story is missing))



34. HARALD GILLE COMES TO NORWAY.

Halkel Huk, a son of Jon Smiorbalte, who was lenderman in More,
made a voyage in the West sea, all the way to the South Hebudes.
A man came to him out of Ireland called Gillikrist, and gave
himself out for a son of King Magnus Barefoot.  His mother came
with him, and said his other name was Harald.  Halkel received
the man, brought him to Norway with him, and went immediately to
King Sigurd with Harald and his mother.  When they had told their
story to the king, he talked over the matter with his principal
men, and bade them give their opinions upon it.  They were of
different opinions, and all left it to the king himself, although
there were several who opposed this; and the king followed his
own counsel.  King Sigurd ordered Harald to be called before him,
and told him that he would not deny him the proof, by ordeal, of
who his father was; but on condition that if he should prove his
descent according to his claim, he should not desire the kingdom
in the lifetime of King Sigurd, or of King Magnus: and to this he
bound himself by oath.  King Sigurd said he must tread over hot
iron to prove his birth; but this ordeal was thought by many too
severe, as he was to undergo it merely to prove his father, and
without getting the kingdom; but Harald agreed to it, and fixed
on the trial by iron: and this ordeal was the greatest ever made
in Norway; for nine glowing plowshares were laid down, and Harald
went over them with bare feet, attended by two bishops.

Three days after the iron trial the ordeal was taken to proof,
and the feet were found unburnt.  Thereafter King Sigurd
acknowledged Harald's relationship; but his son Magnus conceived
a great hatred of him, and in this many chiefs followed Magnus.
King Sigurd trusted so much to his favour with the whole people
of the country, that he desired all men, under oath, to promise
to accept Magnus after him as their king; and all the people took
this oath.



35. RACE BETWEEN MAGNUS AND HARALD GILLE.

Harald Gille was a tall, slender-grown man, of a long neck and
face, black eyes, and dark hair, brisk and quick, and wore
generally the Irish dress of short light clothes.  The Norse
language was difficult for Harald, and he brought out words which
many laughed at.  Harald sat late drinking one evening.  He spoke
with another man about different things in the west in Ireland;
and among other things, said that there were men in Ireland so
swift of foot that no horse could overtake them in running.
Magnus, the king's son, heard this, and said, "Now he is lying,
as he usually does."

Harald replies, "It is true that there are men in Ireland whom no
horse in Norway could overtake."  They exchanged some words about
this, and both were drunk.  Then said Magnus, "Thou shalt make a
wager with me, and stake thy head if thou canst not run so fast
as I ride upon my horse, and I shall stake my gold ring."

Harald replies, "I did not say that I could run so swiftly; but I
said that men are to be found in Ireland who will run as fast;
and on that I would wager."

The king's son Magnus replies, "I will not go to Ireland about
it; we are wagering here, and not there."

Harald on this went to bed, and would not speak to him more about
it.  This was in Oslo.  The following morning, when the early
mass was over, Magnus rode up the street, and sent a message to
Harald to come to him.  When Harald came he was dressed thus.  He
had on a shirt and trousers which were bound with ribands under
his foot-soles, a short cloak, an Irish hat on his head, and a
spear-shaft in his hand.  Magnus set up a mark for the race.
Harald said, "Thou hast made the course too long;" but Magnus
made it at once even much longer, and said it was still too
short.  There were many spectators.  They began the race, and
Harald followed always the horse's pace; and when they came to
the end of the race course, Magnus said, "Thou hadst hold of the
saddle-girth, and the horse dragged thee along."  Magnus had his
swift runner, the Gautland horse.  They began the race again, and
Harald ran the whole race-course before the horse.  When came to
the end Harald asked, "Had I hold of the saddle-girths now?"

Magnus replied, "Thou hadst the start at first."

Then Magnus let his horse breathe a while, and when he was ready
he put the spurs to him, and set off in full gallop.  Harald
stood still, and Magnus looked back, and called, "Set off now."

Then Harald ran quickly past the horse, and came to the end of
the course so long before him that he lay down, and got up and
saluted Magnus as he came in."

Then they went home to the town.  In the meantime King Sigurd had
been at high mass, and knew nothing of this until after he had
dined that day.  Then he said to Magnus angrily, "Thou callest
Harald useless; but I think thou art a great fool, and knowest
nothing of the customs of foreign people.  Dost thou not know
that men in other countries exercise themselves in other feats
than in filling themselves with ale, and making themselves mad,
and so unfit for everything that they scarcely know each other?
Give Harald his ring, and do not try to make a fool of him again,
as long as I am above ground."



36. OF SIGURD'S SWIMMING.

It happened once that Sigurd was out in his ship, which lay in
the harbour; and there lay a merchant ship, which was an Iceland
trader, at the side of it.  Harald Gille was in the forecastle of
the king's ship, and Svein Rimhildson, a son of Knut Sveinson of
Jadar, had his berth the next before him.  There was also Sigurd
Sigurdson, a gallant lenderman, who himself commanded a ship.  It
was a day of beautiful weather and warm sunshine, and many went
out to swim, both from the long-ship and the merchant vessel.  An
Iceland man, who was among the swimmers, amused himself by
drawing those under water who could not swim so well as himself;
and at that the spectators laughed.  When King Sigurd saw and
heard this, he cast off his clothes, sprang into the water, and
swam to the Icelander, seized him, and pressed him under the
water, and held him there; and as soon as the Icelander came up
the king pressed him down again, and thus the one time after the
other.

Then said Sigurd Sigurdson, "Shall we let the king kill this
man?"

Somebody said, "No one has any wish to interfere."

Sigurd replies, that "If Dag Eilifson were here, we should not be
without one who dared."

Then Sigurd sprang overboard, swam to the king, took hold of him,
and said, "Sire, do not kill the man.  Everybody sees that you
are a much better swimmer."

The king replies, "Let me loose, Sigurd: I shall be his death,
for he will destroy our people under water."

Sigurd says, "Let us first amuse ourselves; and, Icelander, do
thou set off to the land," which he did.  The king now got loose
from Sigurd, and swam to his ship, and Sigurd went his way: but
the king ordered that Sigurd should not presume to come into his
presence; this was reported to Sigurd, and so he went up into the
country. 



37. OF HARALD AND SVEIN RIMHILDSON.

In the evening, when people were going to bed, some of the ship's
men were still at their games up in the country.  Harald was with
those who played on the land, and told his footboy to go out to
the ship, make his bed, and wait for him there.  The lad did as
he was ordered.  The king had gone to sleep; and as the boy
thought Harald late, he laid himself in Harald's berth.  Svein
Rimhildson said, "It is a shame for brave men to be brought from
their farms at home, and to have here serving boys to sleep
beside them."  The lad said that Harald had ordered him to come
there.  Svein Rimhildson said, "We do not so much care for Harald
himself lying here, if he do not bring here his slaves and
beggars;" and seized a riding-whip, and struck the boy on the
head until the blood flowed from him.  The boy ran immediately up
the country, and told Harald what had happened, who went
immediately out to the ship, to the aft part of the forecastle,
and with a pole-axe struck Svein so that he received a severe
wound on his hands; and then Harald went on shore.  Svein ran to
the land after him, and, gathering his friends, took Harald
prisoner, and they were about hanging him.  But while they were
busy about this, Sigurd Sigurdson went out to the king's ship and
awoke him.  When the king opened his eyes and recognised Sigurd,
he said. "For this reason thou shalt die, that thou hast intruded
into my presence; for thou knowest that I forbade thee:" and with
these words the king sprang up.

Sigurd replied, "That is in your power as soon as you please; but
other business is more urgent. Go to the land as quickly as
possible to help thy brother; for the Rogaland people are going
to hang him."

Then said the king, "God give us luck, Sigurd!  Call my
trumpeter, and let him call the people all to land, and to meet
me."

The king sprang on the land, and all who knew him followed him to
where the gallows was being erected.  The king instantly took
Harald to him; and all the people gathered to the king in full
armour, as they heard the trumpet.  Then the king ordered that
Svein and all his comrades should depart from the country as
outlaws; but by the intercession of good men the king was
prevailed on to let them remain and hold their properties, but no
mulct should be paid for Svein's wound.

Then Sigurd Sigurdson asked if the king wished that he should go
forth out of the country.

"That will I not," said the king; "for I can never be without
thee."



38. OF KING OLAF'S MIRACLE.

There was a young and poor man called Kolbein; and Thora, King
Sigurd the Crusader's mother, had ordered his tongue to be cut
out of his mouth, and for no other cause than that this young man
had taken a piece of meat out of the king-mother's tub which he
said the cook had given him, and which the cook had not ventured
to serve up to her.  The man had long gone about speechless.  So
says Einar Skulason in Olaf's ballad: --

     "The proud rich dame, for little cause,
     Had the lad's tongue cut from his jaws:
     The helpless man, of speech deprived,
     His dreadful sore wound scarce survived.
     A few weeks since at Hild was seen,
     As well as ever he had been,
     The same poor lad -- to speech restored
     By Olaf's power, whom he adored."

Afterwards the young man came to Nidaros, and watched in the
Christ church; but at the second mass for Olaf before matins he
fell asleep, and thought he saw King Olaf the Saint coming to
him; and that Olaf talked to him, and took hold with his hands of
the stump of his tongue and pulled it.  Now when he awoke he
found himself restored, and joyfully did he thank our Lord and
the holy Saint Olaf, who had pitied and helped him; for he had
come there speechless, and had gone to the holy shrine, and went
away cured, and with his speech clear and distinct.



39. KING OLAF'S MIRACLE WITH A PRISONER.

The heathens took prisoner a young man of Danish family and
carried him to Vindland, where he was in fetters along with other
prisoners.  In the day-time he was alone in irons, without a
guard; but at night a peasant's son was beside him in the chain,
that he might not escape from them.  This poor man never got
sleep or rest from vexation and sorrow, and considered in many
ways what could help him; for he had a great dread of slavery,
and was pining with hunger and torture.  He could not again
expect to be ransomed by his friends, as they had already
restored him twice from heathen lands with their own money; and
he well knew that it would be difficult and expensive for them to
submit a third time to this burden.  It is well with the man who
does not undergo so much in the world as this man knew he had
suffered.  He saw but one way; and that was to get off and escape
if he could.  He resolved upon this in the night-time, killed
the peasant, and cut his foot off after killing him, and set off
to the forest with the chain upon his leg.  Now when the people
knew this, soon after daylight in the morning, they pursued him
with two dogs accustomed to trace any one who escaped, and to
find him in the forest however carefully he might be concealed.
They got him into their hands and beat him, and did him all kinds
of mischief; and dragging him home, left barely alive, and showed
him no mercy.  They tortured him severely; put him in a dark
room, in which there lay already sixteen Christian men; and bound
him both with iron and other tyings, as fast as they could.  Then
he began to think that the misery and pain he had endured before
were but shadows to his present sufferings.  He saw no man before
his eyes in this prison who would beg for mercy for him; no one
had compassion on his wretchedness, except the Christian men who
lay bound with him, who sorrowed with him, and bemoaned his fate
together with their own misfortunes and helplessness.  One day
they advised him to make a vow to the holy King Olaf, to devote
himself to some office in his sacred house, if he, by God's
compassion and Saint Olaf's prayers could get away from this
prison.  He gladly agreed to this, and made a vow and prepared
himself for the situation they mentioned to him.  The night after
he thought in his sleep that he saw a man, not tall, standing at
his side, who spoke to him thus, "Here, thou wretched man, why
dost thou not get up?"

He replied, "Sir, who are you?"

"I am King Olaf, on whom thou hast called."

"Oh, my good lord!  gladly would I raise myself; but I lie bound
with iron and with chains on my legs, and also the other men who
lie here."

Thereupon the king accosts him with the words, "Stand up at once
and be not afraid; for thou art loose."

He awoke immediately, and told his comrades what, had appeared to
him in his dream.  They told him to stand up, and try if it was
true.  He stood up, and observed that he was loose.  Now said his
fellow-prisoners, this would help him but little, for the door
was locked both on the inside and on the outside.  Then an old
man who sat there in a deplorable condition put in his word, and
told him not to doubt the mercy of the man who had loosened his
chains; "For he has wrought this miracle on thee that thou
shouldst enjoy his mercy, and hereafter be free, without
suffering more misery and torture.  Make haste, then, and seek
the door; and if thou are able to slip out, thou art saved."

He did so, found the door open, slipped out, and away to the
forest.  As soon as the Vindland people were aware of this they
set loose the dogs, and pursued him in great haste; and the poor
man lay hid, and saw well where they were following him.  But now
the hounds lost the trace when they came nearer, and all the eyes
that sought him were struck with a blindness, so that nobody
could find him, although he lay before their feet; and they all
returned home, vexed that they could not find him.  King Olaf did
not permit this man's destruction after he had reached the
forest, and restored him also to his health and hearing; for they
had so long tortured and beaten him that he had become deaf.  At
last he came on board of a ship, with two other Christian men who
had been long afflicted in that country.  All of them worked
zealously in this vessel, and so had a successful flight.  Then
he repaired to the holy man's house, strong and fit to bear arms.
Now he was vexed at his vow, went from his promise to the holy
king, ran away one day, and came in the evening to a bonde who
gave him lodging for God's sake.  Then in the night he saw three
girls coming to him; and handsome and nobly dressed were they.
They spoke to him directly, and sharply reprimanded him for
having been so bold as to run from the good king who had shown so
much compassion to him, first in freeing him from his irons, and
then from the prison; and yet he had deserted the mild master
into whose service he had entered.  Then he awoke full of terror,
got up early, and told the house-father his dream.  The good man
had nothing so earnest in life as to send him-back to the holy
place.  This miracle was first written down by a man who himself
saw the man, and the marks of the chains upon his body.



40. KING SIGURD MARRIES CECILIA.

In the last period of King Sigurd's life, his new and
extraordinary resolution was whispered about, that he would be
divorced from his queen, and would take Cecilia, who was a great
man's daughter, to wife.  He ordered accordingly a great feast to
be prepared, and intended to hold his wedding with her in Bergen.
Now when Bishop Magne heard this, he was very sorry; and one day
the bishop goes to the king's hall, and with him a priest called
Sigurd, who was afterwards bishop of Bergen.  When they came to
the king's hall, the bishop sent the king a message that he would
like to meet him; and asked the king to come out to him.  He did
so, and came out with a drawn sword in his hand.  He received the
bishop kindly and asked him to go in and sit down to table with
him.

The bishop replies, "I have other business now.  Is it true,
sire, what is told me, that thou hast the intention of marrying,
and of driving away thy queen, and taking another wife?"

The king said it was true.

Then the bishop changed countenance, and angrily replied, "How
can it come into your mind, sire, to do such an act in our
bishopric as to betray God's word and law, and the holy church?
It surprises me that you treat with such contempt our episcopal
office, and your own royal office.  I will now do what is my
duty; and in the name of God, of the holy King Olaf, of Peter the
apostle, and of the other saints, forbid thee this wickedness."

While he thus spoke he stood straight up, as if stretching out
his neck to the blow, as if ready if the king chose to let the
sword fall; and the priest Sigurd. who afterwards was bishop, has
declared that the sky appeared to him no bigger than a calf's
skin, so frightful did the appearance of the king present itself
to him.  The king returned to the hall, however, without saying a
word; and the bishop went to his house and home so cheerful and
gay that he laughed, and saluted every child on his way, and was
playing with his fingers.  Then the priest Sigurd asked him the
reason, saying, "Why are you so cheerful, sir?  Do you not
consider that the king may be exasperated against you?  and would
it not be better to get out of the way?"

Then said the bishop, "It appears to me more likely that he will
not act so; and besides, what death could be better, or more
desirable, than to leave life for the honour of God?  or to die
for the holy cause of Christianity and our own office, by
preventing that which is not right?  I am so cheerful because I
have done what I ought to do."

There was much noise in the town about this.  The king got ready
for a journey, and took with him corn, malt and honey.  He went
south to Stavanger, and prepared a feast there for his marriage
with Cecilia.  When a bishop who ruled there heard of this he
went to the king, and asked if it were true that he intended to
marry in the lifetime of the queen.

The king said it was so.

The bishop answers, "If it be so, sire, you must know how much
such a thing is forbidden to inferior persons.  Now it appears as
if you thought it was allowable for you, because you have great
power, and that it is proper for you, although it is against
right and propriety; but I do not know how you will do it in our
bishopric, dishonouring thereby God's command, the holy Church,
and our episcopal authority.  But you must bestow a great amount
of gifts and estates on this foundation, and thereby pay the
mulct due to God and to us for such transgression."

Then said the king, "Take what thou wilt of our possessions. 
Thou art far more reasonable than Bishop Magne."

Then the king went away, as well pleased with this bishop as ill
pleased with him who had laid a prohibition on him.  Thereafter
the king married the girl, and loved her tenderly.



41. IMPROVEMENT OF KONUNGAHELLA.

King Sigurd improved the town of Konungahella so much, that there
was not a greater town in Norway at the time, and he remained
there long for the defence of the frontiers.  He built a king's
house in the castle, and imposed a duty on all the districts in
the neighbourhood of the town, as well as on the townspeople,
that every person of nine years of age and upwards should bring
to the castle five missile stones for weapons, or as many large
stakes sharp at one end and five ells long.  In the castle the
king built a cross-church of timber, and carefully put together,
as far as regards the wood and other materials.  The cross-church
was consecrated in the 24th year of King Sigurd's reign (A.D.
1127).  Here the king deposited the piece of the holy cross, and
many other holy relics.  It was called the castle church; and
before the high altar he placed the tables he had got made in the
Greek country, which were of copper and silver, all gilt, and
beautifully adorned with jewels.  Here was also the shrine which
the Danish king Eirik Eimune had sent to King Sigurd; and the
altar book, written with gold letters, which the patriarch had
presented to King Sigurd.



42. KING SIGURD'S DEATH.

Three years after the consecration of the cross-church, when King
Sigurd was stopping at Viken, he fell sick (A.D. 1130).  He died
the night before Mary's-mass (August 15), and was buried in
Halvard's church, where he was laid in the stone wall without the
choir on the south side.  His son Magnus was in the town at the
time and took possession of the whole of the king's treasury when
King Sigurd died.  Sigurd had been king of Norway twenty-seven
years (A.D. 1104-1130), and was forty years of age when he died.
The time of his reign was good for the country; for there was
peace, and crops were good.



SAGA OF MAGNUS THE BLIND AND OF HARALD GILLE.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS

An age of conflict now begins in Norway.  On his death, in 1130,
Sigurd left his son Magnus and his brother Harald.  They soon
divided the government, and then entered upon a five-years'
conflict, until Magnus, in 1135, with eyes picked out, went into
a convent.

The next year, 1136, a new pretender appeared in the person of
Sigurd Slembe, who took King Harald's life in 1137.  Magnus died
in 1139.

Other literature in regard to this epoch is "Fagrskinna" and
"Morkinskinna".  The corresponding part of "Agrip" is lost.

Skalds quoted are: Haldor Skvaldre, Einar Skulason, and Ivar
Ingemundson.



1. MAGNUS AND HARALD PROCLAIMED KINGS.

King Sigurd's son Magnus was proclaimed in Oslo king of all the
country immediately after his father's death, according to the
oath which the whole nation had sworn to King Sigurd; and many
went into his service, and many became his lendermen.  Magnus was
the handsomest man then in Norway; of a passionate temper, and
cruel, but distinguished in bodily exercises.  The favour of the
people he owed most to the respect for his father.  He was a
great drinker, greedy of money, hard, and obstinate.

Harald Gille, on the other hand, was very pleasing in
intercourse, gay, and full of mirth; and so generous that he
spared in nothing for the sake of his friends.  He willingly
listened to good advice, so that he allowed others to consult
with him and give counsel. With all this he obtained favour and a
good repute, and many men attached themselves as much to him as
to King Magnus.  Harald was in Tunsberg when he heard of his
brother King Sigurd's death.  He called together his friends to a
meeting, and it was resolved to hold the Hauga Thing (1) there in
the town.  At this Thing, Harald was chosen king of half the
country, and it was called a forced oath which had been taken
from him to renounce his paternal heritage.  Then Harald formed a
court, and appointed lendermen; and very soon he had as many
people about him as King Magnus.  Then men went between them, and
matters stood in this way for seven days; but King Magnus,
finding he had fewer people, was obliged to give way, and to
divide the kingdom with Harald into two parts.  The kingdom
accordingly was so divided (October 3, 1130) that each of them
should have the half part of the kingdom which King Sigurd had
possessed; but that King Magnus alone should inherit the fleet of
ships, the table service, the valuable articles and the movable
effects which had belonged to his father, King Sigurd.  He was
notwithstanding the least satisfied with his share.  Although
they were of such different dispositions, they ruled the country
for some time in peace.  King Harald had a son called Sigurd, by
Thora, a daughter of Guthorm Grabarde.  King Harald afterwards
married Ingerid, a daughter of Ragnvald, who was a son of the
Swedish King Inge Steinkelson.  King Magnus was married to a
daughter of Knut Lavard, and she was a sister of the Danish King
Valdernar; but King Magnus having no affection for her, sent her
back to Denmark; and from that day everything went ill with him,
and he brought upon himself the enmity of her family.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Hauga-thing means a Thing held at the tumuli or burial
     mounds. -- L.



2. OF THE FORCES OF HARALD AND MAGNUS.

When the two relations, Harald and Magnus, had been about three
years kings of Norway (A.D. 1131-1133), they both passed the
fourth winter (A.D. 1134) in the town of Nidaros, and invited
each other as guests; but their people were always ready for a
fight.  In spring King Magnus sailed southwards along the land
with his fleet, and drew all the men he could obtain out of each
district, and sounded his friends if they would strengthen him
with their power to take the kingly dignity from Harald, and give
him such a portion of the kingdom, as might be suitable;
representing to them that King Harald had already renounced the
kingdom by oath.  King Magnus obtained the consent of many
powerful men.  The same spring Harald went to the Uplands, and by
the upper roads eastwards to Viken; and when he heard what King
Magnus was doing, he also drew together men on his side. 
Wheresoever the two parties went they killed the cattle, or even
the people, upon the farms of the adverse party.  King Magnus had
by far the most people, for the main strength of the country lay
open to him for collecting men from it.  King Harald was in Viken
on the east side of the fjord, and collected men, while they were
doing each other damage in property and life.  King Harald had
with him Kristrod, his brother by his mother's side, and many
other lendermen; but King Magnus had many more.  King Harald was
with his forces at a place called Fors in Ranrike, and went from
thence towards the sea.  The evening before Saint Lawrence day
(August 10), they had their supper at a place called Fyrileif,
while the guard kept a watch on horseback all around the house.
The watchmen observed King Magnus's army hastening towards the
house, and consisting of full 6000 men, while King Harald had but
1500.  Now come the watchmen who had to bring the news to King
Harald of what was going on and say that King Magnus's army was
now very near the town.

The king says, "What will my relation King Magnus Sigurdson have? 
He wants not surely to fight us."

Thjostolf Alason replies, "You must certainly, sire, make
preparation for that, both for yourself and your, men.  King
Magnus has been drawing together an army all the summer for the
purpose of giving you battle when he meets you."

Then King Harald stood up, and ordered his men to take their
arms.  "We shall fight, if our relative King Magnus wants to
fight us."

Then the war-horns sounded, and all Harald's men went out from
the house to an enclosed field, and set up their banners.  King
Harald had on two shirts of ring-mail, but his brother Kristrod
had no armour on; and a gallant man he was.  When King Magnus and
his men saw King Harald's troop they drew up and made their
array, and made their line so long that they could surround the
whole of King Harald's troop.  So says Haldor Skvaldre: --

     "King Magnus on the battle-plain
     From his long troop-line had great gain;
     The plain was drenched with warm blood,
     Which lay a red and reeking flood."



3. BATTLE AT FYRILEIF.

King Magnus had the holy cross carried before him in this battle,
and the battle was great and severe.  The king's brother,
Kristrod, had penetrated with his troop into the middle of King
Magnus's array, and cut down on each side of him, so that people
gave way before him everywhere.  But a powerful bonde who was in
King Harald's array raised his spear with both hands, and drove
it through between Kristrod's shoulders, so that it came out at
his breast; and thus fell Kristrod.  Many who were near asked the
bonde why he had done so foul a deed.

The bonde replies, "He knows the consequences now of slaughtering
my cattle in summer, and taking all that was in my house, and
forcing me to follow him here.  I determined to give him some
return when the opportunity came."

After this King Harald's army took to flight, and he fled
himself, with all his men.  Many fell; and Ingemar Sveinson of
Ask, a great chief and lenderman, got there his death-wound, and
nearly sixty of King Harald's court-men also fell.  Harald
himself fled eastward to Viken to his ships, and went out of the
country to King Eirik Eimune in Denmark, and found him in Seeland
and sought aid from him.  King Eirik received him well, and
principally because they had sworn to each other to be as
brothers (1); and gave him Halland as a fief to rule over, and
gave him seven long-ships, but without equipment.  Thereafter
King Harald went northwards through Halland, and many Northmen
came to meet him.  After this battle King Magnus subdued the
whole country, giving life and safety to all who were wounded,
and had them taken care of equally with his own men.  He then
called the whole country his own, and had a choice of the best
men who were in the country.  When they held a council among
themselves afterwards, Sigurd Sigurdson, Thorer Ingeridson, and
all the men of most understanding, advised that they should keep
their forces together in Viken, and remain there, in case Harald
should return from the south; but King Magnus would take his own
way, and went north to Bergen.  There he sat all winter (A.D.
1135), and allowed his men to leave him; on which the lendermen
returned home to their own houses.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  These brotherhoods, by which one man was bound by oath to
     aid or avenge another, were common in the Middle Ages among
     all ranks.  "Sworn brothers" is still a common expression
     with us. -- L.



4. DEATH OF ASBJORN AND OF NEREID.

King Harald came to Konungahella with the men who had followed
him from Denmark.  The lendermen and town's burgesses collected a
force against him, which they drew up in a thick array above the
town.  King Harald landed from his ships, and sent a message to
the bondes, desiring that they would not deny him his land, as he
wanted no more than what of right belonged to him.  Then
mediators went between them; and it came to this, that the bondes
dismissed their troops, and submitted to him.  Thereupon he
bestowed fiefs and property on the lendermen, that they might
stand by him, and paid the bondes who joined him the lawful
mulcts for what they had lost.  A great body of men attached
themselves, therefore, to King Harald; and he proceeded westwards
to Viken, where he gave peace to all men, except to King Magnus's
people, whom he plundered and killed wherever he found them.  And
when he came west to Sarpsborg he took prisoners two of King
Magnus s lendermen, Asbjorn and his brother Nereid; and gave them
the choice that one should be hanged, and the other thrown into
the Sarpsborg waterfall, and they might choose as they pleased.
Asbjorn chose to be thrown into the cataract, for he was the
elder of the two, and this death appeared the most dreadful; and
so it was done.  Halder Skvaldre tells of this: --

     "Asbjorn, who opposed the king,
     O'er the wild cataract they fling:
     Nereid, who opposed the king,
     Must on Hagbard's high tree swing.
     The king given food in many a way
     To foul-mouthed beasts and birds of prey:
     The generous men who dare oppose
     Are treated as the worst of foes."

Thereafter King Harald proceeded north to Tunsberg, where he was
well received, and a large force gathered to him.



5. OF THE COUNSELS PROPOSED.

When King Magnus, who was in Bergen, heard these tidings, he
called together all the chiefs who were in the town, and asked
them their counsel, and what they should now do.  Then Sigurd
Sigurdson said, "Here I can give a good advice.  Let a ship be
manned with good men, and put me, or any other lenderman, to
command it; send it to thy relation, King Harald, and offer him
peace according to the conditions upright men may determine upon,
and offer him the half of the kingdom.  It appears to me probable
that King Harald, by the words and counsel of good men, may
accept this offer, and thus there may be a peace established
between you."

Then King Magnus replied, "This proposal I will not accept of;
for of what advantage would it be, after we have gained the whole
kingdom in summer to give away the half of it now?  Give us some
other counsel."

Then Sigurd Sigurdson answered, "It appears to me, sire, that
your lendermen who in autumn asked your leave to return home will
now sit at home and will not come to you.  At that time it was
much against my advice that you dispersed so entirely the people
we had collected; for I could well suppose that Harald would come
back to Viken as soon as he heard that it was without a chief.
Now there is still another counsel, and it is but a poor one; but
it may turn out useful to us.  Send out your pursuivants, and
send other people with them, and let them go against the
lendermen who will not join you in your necessity, and kill them;
and bestow their property on others who will give you help
although they may have been of small importance before.  Let them
drive together the people, the bad as well as the good; and go
with the men you can thus assemble against King Harald, and give
him battle."

The king replies, "It would be unpopular to put to death people
of distinction, and raise up inferior people who often break
faith and law, and the country would be still worse off.  I would
like to hear some other counsel still."

Sigurd replies, "It is difficult for me now to give advice, as
you will neither make peace nor give battle.  Let us go north to
Throndhjem, where the main strength of the country is most
inclined to our side; and on the way let us gather all the men we
can.  It may be that these Elfgrims will be tired of such a long
stride after us."

The king replies, "We must not fly from those whom we beat in
summer.  Give some better counsel still."

Then Sigurd stood up and said, while he was preparing to go out,
"I will now give you the counsel which I see you will take, and
which must have its course.  Sit here in Bergen until Harald
comes with his troops, and then you will either suffer death or
disgrace."

And Sigurd remained no longer at that meeting.



6. OF HARALD'S FORCE.

King Harald came from the East along the coast with a great army,
and this winter (A.D. 1135) is called on that account the
Crowd-winter.  King Harald came to Bergen on Christmas eve, and
landed with his fleet at Floruvagar; but would not fight on
account of the sacred time.  But King Magnus prepared for defence
in the town.  He erected a stone-slinging machine out on the
holm, and had iron chains and wooden booms laid across over the
passage from the king's house to Nordnes, and to the Monks
bridge.  He had foot-traps made, and thrown into Saint John's
field, and did not suspend these works except during the three
sacred days of Christmas.  The last holyday of Yule, King Harald
ordered his war-horns to sound the gathering of his men for going
to the town; and, during the Yule holydays, his army had been
increased by about 900 men.



7. KING MAGNUS TAKEN PRISONER.

King Harald made a promise to King Olaf the Saint for victory,
that he would build an Olaf's church in the town at his own
expense.  King Magnus drew up his men in the Christ church yard;
but King Harald laid his vessels first at Nordnes.  Now when King
Magnus and his people saw that, they turned round towards the
town, and to the end of the shore; but as they passed through the
streets many of the burgesses ran into their houses and homes,
and those who went across the fields fell into the foot-traps.
Then King Magnus and his men perceived that King Harald had rowed
with all his men across to Hegravik, and landed there, and had
gone from thence the upper road up the hill opposite the town.
Now Magnus returned back again through the streets, and then his
men fled from him in all directions; some up to the mountains,
some up to the neighbourhood of the convent of nuns, some to
churches, or hid themselves as they best could.  King Magnus fled
to his ship; but there was no possibility of getting away, for
the iron chains outside prevented the passage of vessels.  He had
also but few men with him, and therefore could do nothing.  Einar
Skulason tells of this in the song of Harald: --

     "For a whole week an iron chain
     Cut off all sailing to the main:
     Bergen's blue stable was locked fast, --
     Her floating wains could not get past."

Soon after Harald's people came out to the ships, and then King
Magnus was made prisoner.  He was sitting behind in the
forecastle upon the chests of the high-seat, and at his side
Hakon Fauk, his mother's brother, who was very popular but was
not considered very wise, and Ivar Assurson.  They, and many
others of King Magnus's friends, were taken, and some of them
killed on the spot.



8. KING MAGNUS MUTILATED.

Thereafter King Harald had a meeting of his counsellors, and
desired their counsel; and in this meeting the judgment was given
that Magnus should be deposed from his dominions, and should no
longer be called king.  Then he was delivered to the king's
slaves, who mutilated him, picked out both his eyes, cut off one
foot, and at last castrated him.  Ivar Assurson was blinded, and
Hakon Fauk killed.  The whole country then was reduced to
obedience under King Harald.  Afterwards it was diligently
examined who were King Magnus's best friends, or who knew most of
his concealments of treasure or valuables.  The holy cross King
Magnus had kept beside him since the battle of Fyrileif, but
would not tell where it was deposited for preservation.  Bishop
Reinald of Stavanger, who was an Englishman, was considered very
greedy of money.  He was a great friend of King Magnus, and it
was thought likely that great treasure and valuables had been
given into his keeping.  Men were sent for him accordingly, and
he came to Bergen, where it was insisted against him that he had
some knowledge of such treasure; but he denied it altogether,
would not admit it, and offered to clear himself by ordeal.  King
Harald would not have this, but laid on the bishop a money fine
of fifteen marks of gold, which he should pay to the king.  The
bishop declared he would not thus impoverish his bishop's see,
but would rather offer his life.  On this they hanged the bishop
out on the holm, beside the sling machine.  As he was going to
the gallows he threw the sock from his foot, and said with an
oath, "I know no more about King Magnus's treasure than what is
in this sock;" and in it there was a gold ring.  Bishop Reinald
was buried at Nordnes in Michael's church, and this deed was much
blamed.  After this Harald Gille was sole king of Norway as long
as he lived.



9. WONDERFUL OMENS IN KONUNGAHELLA.

Five years after King Sigurd's death remarkable occurrences took
place in Konungahella (A.D. 1135).  Guthorm, a son of Harald
Fletter, and Saemund Husfreyja, were at that time the king's
officers there.  Saemund was married to Ingebjorg, a daughter of
the priest Andres Brunson.  Their sons were Paul Flip and Gunne
Fis.  Saemund's natural son was called Asmund.  Andres Brunson
was a very remarkable man, who carried on divine service in the
Cross church.  His wife (1) was called Solveig.  Jon Loptson, who
was then eleven years old, was in their house to be fostered and
educated.  The priest Lopt Saemundson, Jon's father, was also in
the town at that time.  The priest Andres and Solveig had a
daughter by name Helga, who was Einar's wife.  It happened now in
Konungahella, the next Sunday night after Easter week, that there
was a great noise in the streets through the whole town as if the
king was going through with all his court-men.  The dogs were so
affected that nobody could hold them, but they slipped loose; and
when they came out they ran mad, biting all that came in their
way, people and cattle.  All who were bitten by them till the
blood came turned raging mad; and pregnant women were taken in
labour prematurely, and became mad.  From Easter to
Ascension-day, these portentous circumstances took place almost
every night.  People were dreadfully alarmed at these wonders;
and many made themselves ready to remove, sold their houses, and
went out to the country districts, or to other towns.  The most
intelligent men looked upon it as something extremely remarkable;
were in dread of it; and said, as it proved to be, that it was an
omen of important events which had not yet taken place.  And the
priest Andres, on Whit Sunday, made a long and excellent speech,
and turned the conclusion of it to the distressing situation of
the townspeople; telling them to muster courage, and not lay
waste their excellent town by deserting it, but rather to take
the utmost care in all things, and use the greatest foresight
against all dangers, as of fire or the enemy, and to pray to God
to have mercy on them.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The Catholic priests appear to have had wives at that time
     in Norway, and celibacy to have been confined to the monks.
     -- L.



10. THE RISE OF WAR IN KONUNGAHELLA.

Thirteen loaded merchant ships made ready to leave the town,
intending to proceed to Bergen; but eleven of them were lost, men
and goods, and all that was in them; the twelfth was lost also,
but the people were saved, although the cargo went to the bottom.
At that time the priest Lopt went north to Bergen, with all that
belonged to him, and arrived safely.  The merchant vessels were
lost on Saint Lawrence eve (August 10).  The Danish king Eirik
and the Archbishop Assur, both sent notice to Konungahella to
keep watch on their town; and said the Vindland people had a
great force on foot with which they made war far around on
Christian people, and usually gained the victory.  But the
townspeople attended very little to this warning, were
indifferent, and forgot more and more the dreadful omens the
longer it was since they happened.  On the holy Saint Lawrence
day, while the words of high mass were spoken, came to the
Vindland king Rettibur to Konungahella with 550 Vindland cutters,
and in each cutter were forty-four men and two horses.  The
king's sister's son Dunimiz, and Unibur, a chief who ruled over
many people, were with him.  These two chiefs rowed at once, with
a part of their troops, up the east arm of the Gaut river past
Hising Isle, and thus came down to the town; but a part of the
fleet lay in the western arm, and came so to the town.  They made
fast their ships at the piles, and landed their horses, and rode
over the height of Bratsas, and from thence up around the town.
Einar, a relation of priest Andres, brought these tidings up to
the Castle church; for there the whole inhabitants of the town
were gathered to hear high mass.  Einar came just as the priest
Andres was holding his discourse; and he told the people that an
army was sailing up against the town with a great number of ships
of war, and that some people were riding over Bratsas.  Many said
it must be the Danish king Eirik, and from him they might expect
peace.  The people ran down into the town to their properties,
armed themselves, and went down upon the piers, whence they
immediately saw there was an enemy and an immense army.  Nine
East-country trading vessels belonging to the merchants were
afloat in the river at the piers.  The Vindland people first
directed their course toward these and fought with the merchants,
who armed themselves, and defended themselves long, well, and
manfully.  There was a hard battle, and resistance, before the
merchant vessels were cleared of their men; and in this conflict
the Vindland people lost 150 of their ships, with all the men on
board.  When the battle was sharpest the townsmen stood upon the
piers, and shot at the heathens.  But when the fight slackened
the burgesses fled up to the town, and from thence into the
castle; and the men took with them all their valuable articles,
and such goods as they could carry.  Solveig and her daughters,
with two other women, went on shore when the Vindlanders took
possession of the merchant vessels.  Now the Vindlanders landed,
and mustered their men, and discovered their loss.  Some of them
went up into the town, some on board the merchant ships, and took
all the goods they pleased; and then they set fire to the town,
and burnt it and the ships.  They hastened then with all their
army to assault the castle.



11. THE SECOND BATTLE.

King Rettibur made an offer to those who were in the castle that
they should go out, and he would give them their lives, weapons,
clothes, silver, and gold; but all exclaimed against it, and went
out on the fortification; some shot, some threw stones, some
sharp stakes.  It was a great battle, in which many fell on both
sides, but by far the most of the Vindlanders.  Solveig came up
to a large farm called Solbjorg, and brought the news.  A message
war-token was there split, and sent out to Skurbagar, where there
happened to be a joint ale-drinking feast, and many men were
assembled.  A bonde called Olver Miklimun (Mickle Mouth) was
there, who immediately sprang up, took helmet and shield, and a
great axe in his hand, and said, "Stand up, brave lads, and take
your weapons.  Let us go help the townspeople; for it would
appear shameful to every man who heard of it, if we sit here
sipping our ale, while good men in the town are losing their
lives by our neglect."

Many made an objection, and said they would only be losing their
own lives, without being of any assistance to the townspeople.  

Then said Olver, "Although all of you should hold back, I will go
alone; and one or two heathens, at any rate, shall fall before I
fall."

He ran down to the town, and a few men after him to see what he
would do, and also whether they could assist him in any way. 
When he came near the castle, and the heathens saw him, they sent
out eight men fully armed against him; and when they met, the
heathen men ran and surrounded him on all sides.  Olver lifted
his axe, and struck behind him with the extreme point of it,
hitting the neck of the man who was coming up behind him, so that
his throat and jawbone were cut through, and he fell dead
backwards.  Then he heaved his axe forwards, and struck the next
man in the head, and clove him down to the shoulders.  He then
fought with the others, and killed two of them; but was much
wounded himself.  The four who remained took to flight, but Olver
ran after them.  There was a ditch before them, and two of the
heathens jumped into it, and Olver killed them both; but he stuck
fast himself in the ditch, so that two of the eight heathens
escaped.  The men who had followed Olver took him up, and brought
him back to Skurbagar, where his wounds were bound and healed;
and it was the talk of the people, that no single man had ever
made such a bloody onset.  Two lendermen, Sigurd Gyrdson, a
brother of Philip, and Sigard, came with 600 men to Skurbagar; on
which Sigurd turned back with 400 men.  He was but little
respected afterwards, and soon died.  Sigard, on the other hand,
proceeded with 200 men towards the town; and they gave battle to
the heathens, and were all slain.  While the Vindlanders were
storming the castle, their king and his chiefs were out of the
battle.  At one place there was a man among the Vindlanders
shooting with a bow, and killing a man for every arrow; and two
men stood before him, and covered him with their shields.  Then
Saemund Husfreyja said to his son Asmund, that they should both
shoot together at this bowman.  "But I will shoot at the man who
holds the shield before him."  He did so, and he knocked the
shield down a little before the man; and in the same instant
Asmund shot between the shields, and the arrow hit the bowman in
the forehead, so that it came out at his neck, and he fell down
dead.  When the Vindlanders saw it they howled like dogs, or like
wolves.  Then King Rettibur called to them that he would give
them safety and life, but they refused terms.  The heathens again
made a hard assault.  One of the heathens in particular fought so
bravely, and ventured so near, that he came quite up to the
castle-gate, and pierced the man who stood outside the gate with
his sword; and although they used both arrows and stones against
him, and he had neither shield nor helmet, nothing could touch
him, for he was so skilled in witchcraft that weapon could not
wound him.  Then priest Andres took consecrated fire; blew upon
it; cut tinder in pieces, and laid it on the fire; and then laid
the tinder on the arrow-point, and gave it to Asmund.  He shot
this arrow at the warlock; and the shaft hit so well that it did
its business, and the man of witchcraft fell dead.  Then the
heathens crowded together as before, howling and whining
dreadfully; and all gathered about their king, on which the
Christians believed that they were holding a council about
retreating.  The interpreters, who understood the Vindland
tongue, heard the chief Unibur make the following speech: "These
people are brave, and it is difficult to make anything of them;
and even if we took all the goods in their town, we might
willingly give as much more that we had never come here, so great
has been our loss of men and chiefs.  Early in the day, when we
began to assault the castle, they defended themselves first with
arrows and spears; then they fought against us with stones; and
now with sticks and staves, as against dogs.  I see from this
that they are in want of weapons and means of defense; so we
shall make one more hard assault, and try their strength."  It
was as he said, that they now fought with stakes; because, in the
first assault, they had imprudently used up all their missile
weapons and stones; and now when the Christians saw the number of
their stakes diminishing, they clave each stake in two.  The
heathens now made a very hot attack, and rested themselves
between whiles, and on both sides they were exhausted.  During a
rest the Vindland king Rettibur again offered terms, and that
they should retain the weapons, clothes, and silver they could
carry out of the castle.  Saemund Husfreyja had fallen, and the
men who remained gave the counsel to deliver up the castle and
themselves into the power of the heathens; but it was a foolish
counsel; for the heathens did not keep their promises, but took
all people, men, women, and children, and killed all of them who
were wounded or young, or could not easily be carried with them.
They took all the goods that were in the castle; went into the
Cross church, and plundered it of all its ornaments.  The priest
Andres gave King Rettibur a silver-mounted gilt sceptre, and to
his sister's son Dunimiz he gave a gold ring.  They supposed from
this that he was a man of great importance in the town, and held
him in higher respect than the others.  They took away with them
the holy cross, and also the tables which stood before the altar,
which Sigurd had got made in the Greek country, and had brought
home himself.  These they took, and laid flat down on the steps
before the altar.  Then the heathens went out of the church.
Rettibur said, "This house has been adorned with great zeal for
the God to whom it is dedicated; but, methinks, He has shown
little regard for the town or house: so I see their God has been
angry at those who defended them."  King Rettibur gave the priest
Andres the church, the shrine, the holy cross, the Bible, the
altar-book, and four clerks (prisoners); but the heathens burnt
the Castle church, and all the houses that were in the castle. 
As the fire they had set to the church went out twice, they hewed
the church down, and then it burnt like other houses.  Then the
heathens went to their ships with the booty; but when they
mustered their people and saw their loss, they made prisoners of
all the people, and divided them among the vessels.  Now priest
Andres went on board the king's ship with the holy cross, and
there came a great terror over the heathens on account of the
portentous circumstance which took place in the king's ship;
namely, it became so hot that all thought they were to be burnt
up.  The king ordered the interpreter to ask the priest why this
happened.  He replied, that the Almighty God on whom the
Christians believed, sent them a proof of His anger, that they
who would not believe in their Creator presumed to lay hands on
the emblem of His suffering; and that there lay so much power in
the cross, that such, and even clearer miracles, happened to
heathen men who had taken the cross in their hands.  The king had
the priest put into the ship's boat, and the priest Andres
carried the holy cross in his grasp.  They led the boat along
past the ship's bow, and then along the side of the next ship,
and then shoved it with a boat-hook in beside the pier.  Then
Andres went with the cross by night to Solbjorg, in rain and
dreadful weather; but brought it in good preservation.  King
Rettibur, and the men he had remaining, went home to Vindland,
and many of the people who were taken at Konungahella were long
afterwards in slavery in Vindland; and those who were ransomed
and came back to Norway to their udal lands and properties,
throve worse than before their capture.  The merchant town of
Konungahella has never since risen to the importance it was of
before this event.



12. OF MAGNUS THE BLIND.

King Magnus, after he was deprived of sight, went north to
Nidaros, where he went into the cloister on the holm, and assumed
the monk's dress.  The cloister received the farm of Great Hernes
in Frosta for his support.  King Harald alone ruled the country
the following winter, gave all men peace and pardon who desired
it, and took many of the men into his court-service who had been
with King Magnus.  Einar Skulason says that King Harald had two
battles in Denmark; the one at Hvedn Isle, and the other at
Hlesey Isle: --

     "Unwearied champion! who wast bred
     To stain thy blue-edged weapons red!
     Beneath high Hvedn's rocky shore,
     The faithless felt thy steel once more."

And again, thus: --

     "On Hlesey's plain the foe must quail
     'Fore him who dyes their shirts of mail.
     His storm-stretched banner o'er his head
     Flies straight, and fills the foe with dread."



13. OF KING HARALD GILLE AND BISHOP MAGNUS.

King Harald Gille was a very generous man.  It is told that in
his time Magnus Einarson came from Iceland to be consecrated a
bishop, and the king received him well, and showed him much
respect.  When the bishop was ready to sail for Iceland again,
and the ship was rigged out for sea, he went to the hall where
the king was drinking, saluted him politely and warmly, and the
king received him joyfully.  The queen was sitting beside the
king.

Then said the king, "Are you ready, bishop, for your voyage?"

He replied that he was.

The king said, "You come to us just now at a bad time; for the
tables are just removed, and there is nothing at hand suitable to
present to you.  What is there to give the bishop?"

The treasurer replies, "Sire, as far as I know, all articles of
any value are given away."

The king: "Here is a drinking goblet remaining; take this,
bishop; it is not without value."

The bishop expressed his thanks for the honour shown him.

Then said the queen, "Farewell, bishop!  and a happy voyage."

The king said to her, "When did you ever hear a noble lady say so
to a bishop without giving him something?"

She replies, "Sire, what have I to give him?"

The king: "Thou hast the cushion under thee."

Thereupon this, which was covered with costly cloth, and was a
valuable article, was given to the bishop.  When the bishop was
going away the king took the cushion from under himself and gave
it him, saying, "They have long been together."  When the bishop
arrived in Iceland to his bishop's see, it was talked over what
should be done with the goblet that would be serviceable for the
king; and when the bishop asked the opinion of other people, many
thought it should be sold, and the value-bestowed on the poor.
Then said the bishop, "I will take another plan.  I will have a
chalice made of it for this church, and consecrate it, so that
all the saints of whom there are relics in this church shall let
the king have some good for his gift every time a mass is sung
over it."  This chalice has since belonged to the bishopric of
Skalholt; and of the costly cloth with which the cushions given
him by the king were covered, were made the choristers' cloaks
which are now in Skalholt.  From this the generous spirit of King
Harald may be seen, as well as from many other things, of which
but a few are set down here.



14. BEGINNING OF SIGURD SLEMBIDJAKN.

There was a man, by name Sigurd, who was brought up in Norway,
and was called priest Adalbrikt's son.  Sigurd's mother was
Thora, a daughter of Saxe of Vik, a sister of Sigrid, who was
mother of King Olaf Magnuson, and of Kare, the king's brother who
married Borghild, a daughter of Dag Eilifson.  Their sons were
Sigurd of Austrat and Dag.  Sigurd of Austrat's sons were Jon of
Austrat, Thorstein, and Andres the Deaf.  Jon was married to
Sigrid, a sister of King Inge and of Duke Skule.  This Sigurd, in
his childhood, was kept at his book, became a clerk, and was
consecrated a deacon; but as he ripened in years and strength he
became a very clever man, stout, strong, distinguished for all
perfections and exercises beyond any of his years, -- indeed,
beyond any man in Norway.  Sigurd showed early traces of a
haughty ungovernable spirit, and was therefore called
Slembidjakn.  He was as handsome a man as could be seen, with
rather thin but beautiful hair.  When it came to Sigurd's ears
that his mother said King Magnus was his father, he laid aside
all clerkship; and as soon as he was old enough to be his own
master, he left the country.  He was a long time on his travels,
went to Palestine; was at the Jordan river; and visited many holy
places, as pilgrims usually do.  When he came back, he applied
himself to trading expeditions.  One winter he was in Orkney with
Earl Harald, and was with him when Thorkel Fostre Summarlidason
was killed.  Sigurd was also in Scotland with the Scottish king
David, and was held in great esteem by him.  Thereafter Sigurd
went to Denmark; and according to the account of himself and his
men, he there submitted to the iron ordeal to confirm his
paternal descent, and proved by it, in the presence of five
bishops, that he was a son of King Magnus Barefoot.  So says Ivar
Ingemundson, in Sigurd's song: --

     "The holiest five
     Of men alive, --
     Bishops were they, --
     Solemnly say,
     The iron glowing
     Red hot, yet showing
     No scaith on skin,
     Proves cause and kin."

King Harald Gille's friends, however, said this was only a lie,
and deceit of the Danes.



15. SIGURD IN ICELAND.

It is told before of Sigurd that he passed some years in merchant
voyages, and he came thus to Iceland one winter, and took up his
lodging with Thorgils Odson in Saurby; but very few knew where he
was.  In autumn, when the sheep were being driven into a fold to
be slaughtered, a sheep that was to be caught ran to Sigurd; and
as Sigurd thought the sheep ran to him for protection, he
stretched out his hands to it and lifted it over the fold dyke,
and let it run to the hills, saying, "There are not many who seek
help from me, so I may well help this one."  It happened the same
winter that a woman had committed a theft, and Thorgils, who was
angry at her for it, was going to punish her; but she ran to
Sigurd to ask his help, and he set her upon the bench by his
side.  Thorgils told him to give her up, and told him what she
had committed; but Sigurd begged forgiveness for her since she
had come to him for protection, and that Thorgils would dismiss
the complaint against her, but Thorgils insisted that she should
receive her punishment.  When Sigurd saw that Thorgils would not
listen to his entreaty, he started up, drew his sword, and bade
him take her if he dared; and Thorgils seeing that Sigurd would
defend the woman by force of arms, and observing his commanding
mien, guessed who he must be, desisted from pursuing the woman,
and pardoned her.  There were many foreign men there, and Sigurd
made the least appearance among them.  One day Sigurd came into
the sitting-room, and a Northman who was splendidly clothed was
playing chess with one of Thorads house-servants.  The Northman
called Sigurd, and asked him his advice how to play; but when
Sigurd looked at the board, he saw the game was lost.  The man
who was playing against the Northman had a sore foot, so that one
toe was bruised, and matter was coming out of it.  Sigurd, who
was sitting on the bench, takes a straw, and draws it along the
floor, so that some young kittens ran after it.  He drew the
straw always before them, until they came near the house-
servant's foot, who jumping up with a scream, threw the chessmen
in disorder on the board; and thus it was a dispute how the game
had stood.  This is given as a proof of Sigurd's cunning.  People
did not know that he was a learned clerk until the Saturday
before Easter, when he consecrated the holy water with chant; and
the longer he stayed there the more he was esteemed.  The summer
after, Sigurd told Thorgils before they parted, that he might
with all confidence address his friends to Sigurd Slembidjakn.
Thorgils asked how nearly he was related to him, on which he
replies, "I am Sigurd Slembidjakn, a son of King Magnus
Barefoot."  He then left Iceland.



16. OF SIGURD SLEMBE.

When Harald Gille had been six years (A.D. 1136), king of Norway,
Sigurd came to the country and went to his brother King Harald,
and found him in Bergen.  He placed himself entirely in the
king's hands, disclosed who his father was, and asked him to
acknowledge their relationship.  The king gave him no hasty or
distinct reply; but laid the matter before his friends in a
conference at a specially appointed meeting.  After this
conference it became known that the king laid an accusation
against Sigurd, because he had been at the killing of Thorkel
Fostre in the West.  Thorkel had accompanied Harald to Norway
when he first came to the country, and had been one of Harald's
best friends.  This case was followed up so severely, that a
capital accusation against Sigurd was made, and, by the advice of
the lendermen, was carried so far, that some of the king's
pursuivants went one evening late to Sigurd, and called him to
them.  They then took a boat and rowed away with Sigurd from the
town south to Nordnes.  Sigurd sat on a chest in the stern of the
boat, and had his suspicions that foul play was intended.  He was
clothed in blue trousers, and over his shirt he had a hood tied
with ribands, which served him for a cloak.  He sat looking down,
and holding his hood-strings; and sometimes moved them over his
head, sometimes let them fall again before him.  Now when they
had passed the ness, they were drunk, and merry, were rowing so
eagerly that they were not taking notice of anything.  Sigurd
stood up, and went on the boat's deck; but the two men who were
placed to guard him stood up also, and followed him to the side
of the vessel, holding by his cloak, as is the custom in guarding
people of distinction.  As he was afraid that they would catch
hold of more of his clothes, he seized them both, and leaped
overboard with them.  The boat, in the meantime, had gone on a
long way, and it was a long time before those on board could turn
the vessel, and long before they could get their own men taken on
board again; and Sigurd dived under water, and swam so far away
that he reached the land before they could get the boat turned to
pursue him.  Sigurd, who was very swift of foot, hied up to the
mountains, and the king's men travelled about the whole night
seeking him without finding him.  He lay down in a cleft of the
rocks; and as he was very cold he took off his trousers, cut a
hole in the seat of them, and stuck his head through it, and put
his arms in the legs of them.  He escaped with life this time;
and the king's men returned, and could not conceal their
unsuccessful adventure.



17. TREACHERY TOWARDS KING HARALD.

Sigurd thought now that it would be of no use to seek any help
from King Harald again; and he kept himself concealed all the
autumn and the beginning of the winter.  He lay hid in Bergen, in
the house of a priest.  King Harald was also in the town, and
many great people with him.  Now Sigurd considered how, with his
friends' help, he might take the king by surprise, and make an
end of him.  Many men took part in this design; and among them
some who were King Harald's court-men and chamberlains, but who
had formerly been King Magnus's court-men.  They stood in great
favour with the king, and some of them sat constantly at the
king's table.  On Saint Lucia's day (December 13), in the evening
when they proposed to execute this treason, two men sat at the
king's table talking together; and one of them said to the king,
"Sire, we two table-companions submit our dispute to your
judgment, having made a wager of a basket of honey to him who
guesses right.  I say that you will sleep this night with your
Queen Ingerid; and he says that you will sleep with Thora,
Guthorm's daughter."

The king answered laughing, and without suspecting in the least
that there lay treachery under the question, that he who had
asked had lost his bet.

They knew thus where he was to be found that night; but the main
guard was without the house in which most people thought the king
would sleep, viz., that which the queen was in.



18. MURDER OF KING HARALD.

Sigurd Slembe, and some men who were in his design, came in the
night to the lodging in which King Harald was sleeping; killed
the watchman first; then broke open the door, and went in with
drawn swords.  Ivar Kolbeinson made the first attack on King
Harald; and as the king had been drunk when he went to bed he
slept sound, and awoke only when the men were striking at him.
Then he said in his sleep, "Thou art treating me hardly, Thora."
She sprang up, saying, "They are treating thee hardly who love
thee less than I do."  Harald was deprived of life.  Then Sigurd
went out with his helpers, and ordered the men to be called to
him who had promised him their support if he should get King
Harald taken out of the way.  Sigurd and his men then went on,
and took a boat, set themselves to the oars, and rowed out in
front of the king's house; and then it was just beginning to be
daylight.  Then Sigurd stood up, spoke to those who were standing
on the king's pier, made known to them the murder of King Harald
by his hand, and desired that they would take him, and choose him
as chief according to his birth.  Now came many swarming down to
the pier from the king's house; and all with one voice replied,
that they would never give obedience or service to a man who had
murdered his own brother.  "And if thou are not his brother, thou
hast no claim from descent to be king."  They clashed their
weapons together, and adjudged all murderers to be banished and
outlawed men.  Now the king's horn sounded, and all lendermen and
courtmen were called together.  Sigurd and his companions saw it
was best for them to get way; and he went northward to North
Hordaland, where he held a Thing with the bondes, who submitted
to him, and gave him the title of king.  From thence he went to
Sogn, and held a Thing there with the bondes and was proclaimed
king.  Then he went north across the fjords, and most people
supported his cause.  So says Ivar Ingemundson: --

     "On Harald's fall
     The bondes all,
     In Hord and Sogn,
     Took Magnus' son.
     The Things swore too
     They would be true
     To this new head
     In Harald's stead."

King Harald was buried in the old Christ church.



SAGA OF SIGURD, INGE, AND EYSTEIN, THE SONS OF HARALD


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

Sigurd died A.D. 1155, Eystein 1157, and Inge 1161.

Other literature is "Morkinskinna" and "Fagrskinna."

Sigurd Slembe is the subject of a drama by Bjornstjerne Bjornson,
translated into English by William Morton Payne, and published by
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Boston, 1888.

Skalds quoted are: Kolle, Einar Skulason, and Thorbjorn
Skakkaskald.



1. HISTORY OF KINGS SIGURD AND INGE.

Queen Ingerid, and with her the lendermen and the court which had
been with King Harald, resolved to send a fast-sailing vessel to
Throndhjem to make known King Harald's death, and also to desire
the Throndhjem people to take King Harald's son Sigurd for king.
He was then in the north, and was fostered by Sadagyrd Bardson.
Queen Ingerid herself proceeded eastward immediately to Viken.
Inge was the name of her son by King Harald, and he was then
fostered by Amunde Gyrdson, a grandson of Logberse.  When they
came to Viken a Borgar-thing was immediately called together, at
which Inge, who was in the second year of his age, was chosen
king.  This resolution was supported by Amunde and Thjostolf
Alason, together with many other great chiefs.  Now when the
tidings came north to Throndhjem that King Harald was murdered,
the Throndhjem people took Sigurd, King Harald's son, to be the
king; and this resolution was supported by Ottar Birting, Peter
Saudaulfson, the brothers Guthorm of Reine, and Ottar Balle, sons
of Asolf and many other great chiefs.  Afterwards the whole
nation almost submitted to the brothers, and principally because
their father was considered holy; and the country took the oath
to them, that the kingly power should not go to any other man as
long as any of King Harald's sons were alive.



2. OF SIGURD SLEMBIDJAKN.

Sigurd Slembe sailed north around Stad; and when he came to North
More, he found that letters and full powers had arrived before
him from the leaders who had given in their allegiance to
Harald's sons; so that there he got no welcome or help.  As
Sigurd himself had but few people with him, he resolved to go
with them to Throndhjem, and seek out Magnus the Blind; for he
had already sent a message before him to Magnus's friends.  Now
when they came to the town, they rowed up the river Nid to meet
King Magnus, and fastened their land-ropes on the shore at the
king's house; but were obliged to set off immediately, for all
the people rose against them.  They then landed at Monkholm, and
took Magnus the Blind out of the cloister against the will of the
monks; for he had been consecrated a monk.  It is said by some
that Magnus willingly went with them; although it was differently
reported, in order to make his cause appear better.  Sigurd,
immediately after Yule (January, A.D. 1137), went forth with his
suite, expecting aid from his relations and Magnus's friends, and
which they also got.  Sigurd sailed with his men out of the
fjord, and was joined afterwards by Bjorn Egilson, Gunnar of
Gimsar, Haldor Sigurdson, Aslak Hakonson, the brothers Bendikt
and Eirik, and also the court which had before been with King
Magnus, and many others.  With this troop they went south to
More, and down to the mouth of Raumsdal fjord.  Here Sigurd and
Magnus divided their forces, and Sigurd went immediately
westwards across the sea.  King Magnus again proceeded to the
Uplands, where he expected much help and strength, and which he
obtained.  He remained there the winter and all the summer (A.D.
1137), and had many people with him; but King Inge proceeded
against him with all his forces, and they met at a place called
Mynne.  There was a great battle, at which King Magnus had the
most people.  It is related that Thjostolf Alason carried King
Inge in his belt as long as the battle lasted, and stood under
the banner; but Thjostolf was hard pressed by fatigue and
fighting; and it is commonly said that King Inge got his ill
health there, and which he retained as long as he lived, so that
his back was knotted into a hump, and the one foot was shorter
than the other; and he was besides so infirm that he could
scarcely walk as long as he lived.  The defeat began to turn upon
Magnus and his men; and in the front rank of his array fell
Haldor Sigurdson, Bjorn Egilson, Gunnar of Gimsar, and a great
number of his men, before he himself would take to his horse and
fly. So says Kolle: --

     "Thy arrow-storm on Mynne's banks
     Fast thinn'd the foemen's strongest ranks;
     Thy good sword hewed the raven's feast
     On Mynne's banks up in the East.
     Shield clashed on shield, and bucklers broke
     Under thy battle-axe's stroke;
     While thou, uncovered, urged the fray,
     Thy shield and mail-coat thrown away."

And also this: --

     "The king to heaven belonging fled,
     When thou, in war's quick death-game bred,
     Unpanzered, shieldless on the plain
     His heavy steel-clad guards hadst slain.
     The painted shield, and steel-plate mail,
     Before thy fierce attack soon fail,
     To Magnus who belongs to heaven,

     Was no such fame in battle given."

Magnus fled eastward to Gautland, and then to Denmark.  At that
time there was in Gautland an earl, Karl Sonason, who was a great
and ambitious man.  Magnus the Blind and his men said, wherever
they happened to meet with chiefs, that Norway lay quite open to
any great chieftain who would attack it; for it might well be
said there was no king in the country, and the kingdom was only
ruled by lendermen, and, among those who had most sway, there
was, from mutual jealousy, most discord.  Now Karl, being
ambitious of power, listens willingly to such speeches; collects
men, and rides west to Viken, where many people, out of fear,
submit to him.  When Thjostolf Alason and Amunde heard of this,
they went with the men they could get together, and took King
Inge with them.  They met Earl Karl and the Gautland army
eastward in Krokaskog, where there was a great battle and a great
defeat, King Inge gaining the victory.  Munan Ogmundson, Earl
Karl's mother's brother, fell there.  Ogmund, the father of
Munan, was a son of Earl Orm Eilifson, and Sigrid, a daughter of
Earl Fin Arnason.  Astrid, Ogrnund's daughter, was the mother of
Earl Karl.  Many others of the Gautland people fell at Krokaskog;
and the earl fled eastward through the forest.  King Inge pursued
them all the way out of the kingdom; and this expedition turned
out a great disgrace to them.  So says Kolle: --

     "I must proclaim how our great lord
     Coloured deep red his ice-cold sword;
     And ravens played with Gautland bones,
     And wolves heard Gautlanders' last groans.
     Their silly jests were well repaid, --
     In Krokaskog their laugh was laid:
     Thy battle power was then well tried,
     And they who won may now deride."



3. KING EIRIK'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

Magnus the Blind then went to Denmark to King Eirik Eimune, where
he was well received.  He offered the king to follow him if he
would invade Norway with a Danish army, and subdue the country;
saying, that if he came to Norway with his army, no man in Norway
would venture to throw a spear against him.  The king allowed
himself to be moved by Magnus's persuasions, ordered a levy, and
went north to Norway with 200 ships; and Magnus and his men were
with him on this expedition.  When they came to Viken, they
proceeded peacefully and gently on the east side of the fjord;
but when the fleet came westward to Tunsberg, a great number of
King Inge's lendermen came against them.  Their leader was
Vatnorm Dagson, a brother of Gregorius.  The Danes could not land
to get water without many of them being killed; and therefore
they went in through the fjord to Oslo, where Thjostolf Alason
opposed them.  It is told that some people wanted to carry the
holy Halvard's coffin out of the town in the evening when the
fleet was first observed, and as many as could took hold of it;
but the coffin became so heavy that they could not carry it over
the church floor.  The morning after, however, when they saw the
fleet sailing in past the Hofud Isle, four men carried the coffin
out of the town, and Thjostolf and all the townspeople followed
it.



4. THE TOWN OF OSLO BURNT.

King Eirik and his army advanced against the town; and some of
his men hastened after Thjostolf and his troop.  Thjostolf threw
a spear at a man named Askel, which hit him under the throat, so
that the spear point went through his neck; and Thjostolf thought
he had never made a better spear-cast, for, except the place he
hit, there was nothing bare to be seen.  The shrine of St.
Halvard, was taken up to Raumarike, where it remained for three
months.  Thjostolf went up to Raumarike, and collected men during
the night, with whom he returned towards the town in the morning.
In the meantime King Eirik set fire to Halvard's church, and to
the town, which was entirely burnt.  Thjostolf came soon after to
the town with the men he had assembled, and Eirik sailed off with
his fleet; but could not land anywhere on that side of the fjord,
on account of the troops of the lendermen who came down against
them; and wherever they attempted a landing, they left five or
six men or more upon the strand.  King Inge lay with a great
number of people into Hornborusund, but when he learned this, he
turned about southwards to Denmark again.  King Inge pursued him,
and took from him all the ships he could get hold of; and it was
a common observation among people, that never was so poor an
expedition made with so great an armament in another king's
dominions.  King Eirik was ill pleased at it, and thought King
Magnus and his men had been making a fool of him by encouraging
him to undertake this expedition, and he declared he would never
again besuch friends with them as before.



5. OF SIGURD SLEMBIDJAKN.

Sigurd Slembidjakn came that summer from the West sea to Norway,
where he heard of his relation King Magnus's unlucky expedition;
so he expected no welcome in Norway, but sailed south, outside
the rocks, past the land, and set over to Denmark, and went into
the Sound.  He fell in with some Vindland cutters south of the
islands, gave them battle, and gained the victory.  He cleared
eight ships, killing many of the men, and he hanged the others. 

He also had a battle off the Island Mon with the Vindland men,
and gained a victory.  He then sailed from the south and came to
the eastern arm of the Gaut river, and took three ships of the
fleet of Thorer Hvinantorde, and Olaf, the son of Harald Kesia,
who was Sigurd's own sister's son; for Ragnhild, the mother of
Olaf, was a daughter of King Magnus Barefoot.  He drove Olaf up
the country.

Thjostolf was at this time in Konungahella, and had collected
people to defend the country, and Sigurd steered thither with his
fleet.  They shot at each other, but he could not effect a
landing; and, on both sides, many were killed and many wounded.
Ulfhedin Saxolfson, Sigurd's forecastle man, fell there.  He was
an Icelander, from the north quarter.  Sigurd continued his
course northwards to Viken and plundered far and wide around. 
Now when Sigurd lay in a harbour called Portyrja on Limgard's
coast, and watched the ships going to or coming from Viken to
plunder them, the Tunsberg men collected an armed force against
him, and came unexpectedly upon them while Sigurd and his men
were on shore dividing their booty.  Some of the men came down
from the land, but some of the other party laid themselves with
their ships right across the harbour outside of them.  Sigurd ran
up into his ship, and rowed out against them.  Vatnorm's ship was
the nearest, and he let his ship fall behind the line, and Sigurd
rowed clear past, and thus escaped with one ship and the loss of
many men.  This verse was made upon Vatnorm (1): --

     "The water serpent, people say,
     From Portyrja slipped away."


ENDNOTES:
(1)  Vatnorm, the name of this man, means the water-serpent, and
     appears to have been a favourite name for war-ships also;
     hence the pun in the lines upon Vatnorm. -- L.



6. THE MURDER OF BEINTEIN.

Sigurd Slembidjakn sailed from thence to Denmark; and at that
time a man was lost in his ship, whose name was Kolbein
Thorliotson of Batald.  He was sitting in a boat which was made
fast to the vessel, and upset because she was sailing quickly.
When they came south to Denmark, Sigurd's ship itself was cast
away; but he got to Alaborg, and was there in winter.  The summer
after (A.D. 1138) Magnus and Sigurd sailed together from the
south with seven ships, and came unexpectedly in the night to
Lister, where they laid their ships on the land.  Beintein
Kolbeinson, a court-man of King Inge, and a very brave man, was
there.  Sigurd and his men jumped on shore at daylight, came
unexpectedly on the people, surrounded the house, and were
setting fire to the buildings; but Beintein came out of a store-
house with his weapons, well armed, and stood within the door
with drawn sword, his shield before him, helmet on, and ready to
defend himself.  The door was somewhat low.  Sigurd asked which
of his lads had most desire to go in against Beintein, which he
called brave man's work; but none was very hurried to make ready
for it.  While they were discussing this matter Sigurd rushed
into the house, past Beintein.  Beintein struck at him, but
missed him. Sigurd turned instantly on Beintein; and after
exchanging blows, Sigurd gave him his death-stroke, and came out
presently bearing his head in his hands.

They took all the goods that were in the farm-house, carried the
booty to their ships, and sailed away.  When King Inge and his
friends, and also Kolbein's sons, Sigurd and Gyrd, the brothers
of Beintein, heard of Beintein's murder, the king sent a great
force against Sigurd Slembe and his followers; and also travelled
himself, and took a ship from Hakon Paulson Pungelta, who was a
daughter's son of Aslak, a son of Erling Skjalgson of Sole, and
cousin of Hakon Mage.  King Inge drove Hakon and his followers up
the country, and took all their gear.  Sigurd Stork, a son of
Eindride of Gautdal, and his brother, Eirik Hael, and Andres
Kelduskit, son of Grim of Vist, all fled away into the fjords.
But Sigurd Slembe, Magnus the Blind and Thorieif Skiappa sailed
outside the isles with three ships north to Halogaland; and
Magnus was in winter (A.D. 1139) north in Bjarkey Isle with
Vidkun Jonson.  But Sigurd had the stem and stern-post of his
ship cut out, made a hole in her, and sank her in the inner part
of Egisfjord, and thereafter he passed the winter at Tialdasund
by Gljufrafjord in Hin.  Far up the fjord there is a cave in the
rock; in that place Sigurd sat with his followers, who were above
twenty men, secretly, and hung a grey cloth before the mouth of
the hole, so that no person could see them from the strand. 
Thorleif Skiappa, and Einar, son of Ogmund of Sand, and of
Gudrun, daughter of Einar Arason of Reikiaholar, procured food
for Sigurd during the winter.  It is said that Sigurd made the
Laplanders construct two boats for him during the winter up in
the fjord; and they were fastened together with deer sinews,
without nails, and with twigs of willow instead of knees, and
each boat could carry twelve men.  Sigurd was with the Laplanders
while they were making the boats; and the Laplanders had good
ale, with which they entertained Sigurd.  Sigurd made these lines
on it: --

          "In the Lapland tent
          Brave days we spent.
     Under the grey birch tree;
          In bed or on bank
          We knew no rank,
     And a merry crew were we.

          "Good ale went round
          As we sat on the ground,
     Under the grey birch tree;
          And up with the smoke
          Flew laugh and joke,
     And a merry crew were we."

These boats were so light that no ship could overtake them in the
water, according to what was sung at the time: --

     "Our skin-sewed Fin-boats lightly swim,
     Over the sea like wind they skim.
     Our ships are built without a nail;
     Few ships like ours can row or sail."

In spring Sigurd and Magnus went south along the coast with the
two boats which the Laplanders had made; and when they came to
Vagar they killed Svein the priest and his two sons.



7. OF SIGURD'S SLEMBE'S CAMPAIGN.

Thereafter Sigurd came south to Vikar, and seized King Sigurd's
lendermen, William Skinnare and Thorald Kept, and killed them
both.  Then Sigurd turned south-wards along the coast, and met
Styrkar Glaesirofa south of Byrda, as he was coming from the
south from the town of Nidaros, and killed him.  Now when Sigurd
came south to Valsnes, he met Svinagrim outside of the ness, and
cut off his right hand.  From thence he went south to More, past
the mouth of the Throndhjem fjord, where they took Hedin Hirdmage
and Kalf Kringluauge.  They let Hedin escape, but killed Kalf.
When King Sigurd, and his foster-father, Sadagyrd, heard of
Sigurd Slembidjakn's proceedings, and what he was doing, they
sent people to search for him; and their leader was Jon Kauda, a
son of Kalf Range.  Bishop Ivar's brother, and besides the priest
Jon Smyril.  They went on board the ship the Reindeer, which had
twenty-two rowing benches, and was one of the swiftest sailing
vessels, to seek Sigurd; but as they could not find him, they
returned north-wards with little glory; for people said that they
had got sight of Sigurd and his people, and durst not attack
them.  Afterwards Sigurd proceeded southwards to Hordaland, and
came to Herdla, where Einar, a son of Laxapaul, had a farm; and
went into Hamar's fjord, to the Gangdaga-thing.  They took all
the goods that were at the farm, and a long-ship of twenty-two
benches which belonged to Einar; and also his son, four years
old, who was living with one of his labouring people.  Some
wanted to kill the boy, but others took him and carried him with
them.  The labouring man said, "It will not be lucky for you to
kill the child; and it will be of no use to you to carry him
away, for it is my son, and not Einar's."  And on his word they
let the boy remain, and went away.  When Einar came home he gave
the labourer money to the value of two ore of gold, and thanked
him for his clever invention, and promised him his constant
friendship.  So says Eirik Odson, who first wrote down this
relation; and he heard himself Einar Paulson telling these
circumstances in Bergen.  Sigurd then went southward along the
coast all the way east to Viken, and met Fin Saudaulfson east at
Kvildar, as he was engaged in drawing in King Inge's rents and
duties, and hanged him.  Then they sailed south to Denmark.



8. OF KING INGE'S LETTER TO KING SIGURD.

The people of Viken and of Bergen complained that it was wrong
for King Sigurd and his friends to be sitting quietly north in
the town of Nidaros, while his father's murderer was cruising
about in the ordinary passage at the mouth of the Throndhjem
fjord; and King Inge and his people, on the other hand, were in
Viken in the midst of the danger, defending the country and
holding many battles.  Then King Inge sent a letter north to the
merchant-town Nidaros, in which were these words: "King Inge
Haraldson sends his brother King Sigurd, as also Sadagyrd, Ogmund
Svipte, Ottar Birting, and all lendermen, court-men, house-
people, and all the public, rich and poor, young and old, his own
and God's salutation.  The misfortune is known to all men that on
account of our childhoods -- thou being five, and I but three
years of age -- we can undertake nothing without the counsel of
our friends and other good men.  Now I and my men think that we
stand nearer to the danger and necessity common to us both, than
thou and thy friends; therefore make it so that thou, as soon as
possible, come to me, and as strong in troops as possible, that
we may be assembled to meet whatever may come.  He will be our
best friend who does all he can that we may be united, and may
take an equal part in all things.  But if thou refuse, and wilt
not come after this message which I send thee in need, as thou
hast done before, then thou must expect that I will come against
thee with an armament; and let God decide between us; for we are
not in a condition to sit here at so great an expense, and with
so numerous a body of troops as are necessary here on account of
the enemy, and besides many other pressing charges, whilst thou
hast half of all the land-tax and other revenues of Norway.  Live
in the peace of God!"



9. OTTAR BIRTING'S SPEECH.

Then Ottar Birting stood up in the Thing, and first of all
answered thus: "This is King Sigurd's reply to his brother King
Inge -- that God will reward him for his good salutation, and
likewise for the trouble and burden which he and his friends have
in this kingdom, and in matters of necessity which effect them
both.  Although now some think there is something sharp in King
Inge's message to his brother Sigurd, yet he has in many respects
sufficient cause for it.  Now I will make known to you my
opinion, and we will hear if King Sigurd and the other people of
power will agree to it; and it is, that thou, King Sigurd, make
thyself ready, with all the people who will follow thee, to
defend thy country; and go as strong in men as possible to thy
brother King Inge as soon as thou art prepared, in order to
assist each other in all things that are for the common good; and
may God Almighty strengthen and assist you both!  Now, king, we
will have thy words."

Peter, a son of Saudaulf, who was afterwards called Peter
Byrdarsvein, bore King Sigurd to the Thing.  Then the king said,
"Ye must know that, if I am to advise, I will go as soon as
possible to my brother King Inge." Then others spoke, one after
the other; but although each began his speech in his own way, he
ended with agreeing to what Ottar Birting had proposed; and it
was determined to call together the war-forces, and go to the
east part of the country.  King Sigurd accordingly went with
great armament east to Viken, and there he met his brother King
Inge.



10. FALL OF MAGNUS THE BLIND.

The same autumn (A.D. 1139) Sigurd Slembe and Magnus the Blind
came from Denmark with thirty ships, manned both with Danes and
Northmen.  It was near to winter.  When the kings heard of this,
they set out with their people eastwards to meet them.  They met
at Hvalar, near Holm the Grey, the day after Martinmas, which was
a Sunday.  King Inge and King Sigurd had twenty ships, which were
all large.  There was a great battle; but, after the first
assault, the Danes fled home to Denmark with eighteen ships.  On
this Sigurd's and Magnus's ships were cleared; and as the last
was almost entirely bare of men, and Magnus was lying in his bed,
Hreidar Griotgardson, who had long followed him, and been his
courtman, took King Magnus in his arms, and tried to run with him
on board some other ship.  But Hreidar was struck by a spear,
which went between his shoulders; and people say King Magnus was
killed by the same spear.  Hreidar fell backwards upon the deck,
and Magnus upon him; and every man spoke of how honourably he had
followed his master and rightful sovereign.  Happy are they who
have such praise!  There fell, on King Magnus's ship, Lodin
Saupprud of Linustadar, Bruse Thormodson; and the forecastle-men
to Sigurd Slembidjakn, Ivar Kolbeinson and Halyard Faeger, who
had been in Sigurd Slembe's fore-hold.  This Ivar had been the
first who had gone in, in the night, to King Harald, and had laid
hands on him.  There fell a great number of the men of King
Magnus and Sigurd Slembe, for Inge's men let not a single one
escape if they got hold of him; but only a few are named here.
They killed upon a holm more than forty men, among whom were two
Icelanders -- the priest Sigurd Bergthorson, a grandson of Mas;
the other Clemet, a son of Are Einarson.  But three Icelanders
obtained their lives: namely, Ivar Skrauthanke, a son of Kalf
Range, and who afterwards was bishop of Throndhjem, and was
father of the archbishop Eirik.  Ivar had always followed King
Magnus, and he escaped into his brother Jon Kauda's ship.  Jon
was married to Cecilia, a daughter of Gyrd Bardson, and was then
in King Inge's and Sigurd's armament.  There were three in all
who escaped on board of Jon's ship.  The second was Arnbjorn
Ambe, who afterwards married Thorstein's daughter in Audsholt;
the third was Ivar Dynta, a son of Stare, but on the mother's
side of a Throndhjem family, -- a very agreeable man.  When the
troops came to know that these three were on board his ship, they
took their weapons and assaulted the vessel, and some blows were
exchanged, and the whole fleet had nearly come to a fight among
themselves; but it came to an agreement, so that Jon ransomed his
brothers Ivar and Arnbjorn for a fixed sum in ransom, which,
however, was afterwards remitted.  But Ivar Dynta was taken to
the shore, and beheaded; for Sigurd and Gyrd, the sons of
Kolbein, would not take any mulct for him, as they knew he had
been at their brother Beintein's murder.  Ivar the bishop said,
that never was there anything that touched him so nearly, as
Ivar's going to the shore under the axe, and turning to the
others with the wish that they might meet in joy here-after.
Gudrid Birger's daughter, a sister of Archbishop Jon, told Eirik
Odson that she heard Bishop Ivar say this.



11. SIGURD SLEMBE TAKEN PRISONER.

A man called Thrand Gialdkere was the steersman of King Inge's
ship.  It was come so far, that Inge's men were rowing in small
boats between the ships after those who were swimming in the
water, and killed those they could get hold of.  Sigurd Slembe
threw himself overboard after his ship had lost her crew,
stripped off his armour under the water, and then swam with his
shield over him.  Some men from Thrand's vessel took prisoner a
man who was swimming, and were about to kill him; but he begged
his life, and offered to tell them where Sigurd Slembe was, and
they agreed to it.  Shields and spears, dead men, weapons, and
clothes, were floating all around on the sea about the ships, "Ye
can see," said he, "a red shield floating on the water; he is
under it."  They rowed to it immediately, took him, and brought
him on board of Thrand's ship.  Thrand then sent a message to
Thjostolf, Ottar, and Amunde.  Sigurd Slembe had a tinder box on
him; and the tinder was in a walnut-shell, around which there was
wax.  This is related, because it seems an ingenious way of
preserving it from ever getting wet.  He swam with a shield over
him, because nobody could know one shield from another where so
many were floating about; and they would never have hit upon him,
if they had not been told where he was.  When Thrand came to the
land with Sigurd, and it was told to the troops that he was
taken, the army set up a shout of joy.  When Sigurd heard it he
said, "Many a bad man will rejoice over my head this day."  Then
Thjostolf Alason went to where Sigurd was sitting, struck from
his head a silk hat with silver fringes, and said. "Why wert thou
so impudent, thou son of a slave!  to dare to call thyself King
Magnus Barefoot's son?"

Sigurd replied, "Presume not to compare my father to a slave; for
thy father was of little worth compared to mine."

Hal, a son of the doctor Thorgeir Steinson, King Inge's court-
man, was present at this circumstance, and told it to Eirik
Odson, who afterwards wrote these relations in a book, which he
called "Hryggjarstykke".  In this book is told all concerning
Harald Gille and his sons, and Magnus the Blind, and Sigurd
Slembidjakn, until their deaths.  Eirik was a sensible man, who
was long in Norway about that time.  Some of his narratives he
wrote down from Hakon Mage's account; some were from lendermen of
Harald's sons, who along with his sons were in all this feud, and
in all the councils.  Eirik names, moreover, several men of
understanding and veracity, who told him these accounts, and were
so near that they saw or heard all that happened.  Something he
wrote from what he himself had heard or seen.



12. TORTURE OF SIGURD SLEMBE.

Hal says that the chiefs wished to have Sigurd killed instantly;
but the men who were the most cruel, and thought they had
injuries to avenge, advised torturing him; and for this they
named Beintein's brothers, Sigurd and Gyrd, the sons of Kolbein.
Peter Byrdarsvein would also avenge his brother Fin.  But the
chiefs and the greater part of the people went away.  They broke
his shin-bones and arms with an axe-hammer.  Then they stripped
him, and would flay him alive; but when they tried to take off
the skin, they could not do it for the gush of blood.  They took
leather whips and flogged him so long, that the skin was as much
taken off as if he had been flayed.  Then they stuck a piece of
wood in his back until it broke, dragged him to a tree and hanged
him; and then cut off his head, and brought the body and head to
a heap of stones and buried them there.  All acknowledge, both
enemies and friends, that no man in Norway, within memory of the
living, was more gifted with all perfections, or more
experienced, than Sigurd, but in some respects he was an unlucky
man.  Hal says that he spoke little, and answered only a few, and
in single words, under his tortures, although they spoke to him.
Hal says further, that he never moved when they tortured him,
more than if they were striking a stock or a stone.  This Hal
alleged as proof that he was a brave hero, who had courage to
endure tortures; for he still held his tongue, and never moved
from the spot.  And farther he says, that he never altered his
voice in the least, but spoke with as much ease as if he was
sitting at the ale-table; neither speaking higher nor lower, nor
in a more tremulous voice than he was used to do.  He spoke until
he gave up the ghost, and sang between whiles parts of the Psalm-
book, and which Hal considered beyond the powers and strength of
ordinary men.  And the priest who had the church in the
neighbourhood let Sigurd's body be transported thither to the
church.  This priest was a friend of Harald's sons: but when they
heard it they were angry at him, had the body carried back to
where it had been, and made the priest pay a fine.  Sigurd's
friends afterwards came from Denmark with a ship for his body,
carried it to Alaborg, and interred it in Mary church in that
town.  So said Dean Ketil, who officiated as priest at Mary
church, to Eirik; and that Sigurd was buried there.  Thjostolf
Alason transported Magnus the Blind's body to Oslo, and buried it
in Halvard's church, beside King Sigurd his father.  Lodin
Saupprud was transported to Tunsberg; but the others of the slain
were buried on the spot.



13. EYSTEIN HARALDSON COMES TO NORWAY.

When the kings Sigurd and Inge had ruled over Norway about six
years, Eystein, who was a son of Harald Gille, came in spring
from Scotland (A.D. 1142).  Arne Sturla, Thorleif Brynjolfson,
and Kolbein Hruga had sailed westward over the sea after Eystein,
accompanied him to Norway, and sailed immediately with him to
Throndhjem.  The Throndhjem people received him well; and at the
Eyra-thing of Ascension-day he was chosen king, so that he should
have the third part of Norway with his brothers Sigurd and Inge.
They were at this time in the east part of the country; and men
went between the kings who brought about a peace, and that
Eystein should have a third part of the kingdom.  People believed
what he said of his paternal descent, because King Harald himself
had testified to it, and he did not resort to the ordeal of iron.
King Eystein's mother was called Bjadok, and she followed him to
Norway.  Magnus was the name of King Harald Gille's fourth son,
who was fostered by Kyrpingaorm.  He also was chosen king, and
got a fourth part of the country; but Magnus was deformed in his
feet, lived but a short time, and died in his bed.  Einar
Skulason speaks of them: --

     "The generous Eystein money gave;
     Sigurd in fight was quick and brave;
     Inge loved well the war-alarm;
     Magnus to save his land from harm.
     No country boasts a nobler race
     The battle-field, or Thing, to grace.
     Four brothers of such high pretence
     The sun ne'er shone upon at once."



14. MURDER OF OTTAR BIRTING.

After King Harald Gille's death Queen Ingerid married Ottar
Birting, who was a lendermen and a great chief, and of a
Throndhjem family, who strengthened King Inge's government much
while he was in his childhood.  King Sigurd was not very friendly
to Ottar; because, as he thought, Ottar always took King Inge's
side.  Ottar Birting was killed north in the merchant town
(Nidaros), in an assault upon him in the twilight as he was going
to the evening song.  When he heard the whistling of the blow he
held up his cloak with his hands against it; thinking, no doubt,
it was a snowball thrown at him, as young boys do in the streets.
Ottar fell by the stroke; but his son, Alf Hrode, who just at the
same moment was coming into the churchyard, saw his father's
fall, and saw that the man who had killed him ran east about the
church.  Alf ran after him, and killed him at the corner of the
choir; and people said that he had good luck in avenging his
father, and afterwards was much more respected than he had been
before.



15. BEGINNING OF KING EYSTEIN.

King Eystein Haraldson was in the interior of the Throndhjem
district when he heard of Ottar's murder, and summoned to him the
bonde-army, with which he proceeded to the town; and he had many
men.  Ottar's relations and other friends accused King Sigurd,
who was in the town, of having instigated this deed; and the
bondes were much enraged against him.  But the king offered to
clear himself by the ordeal of iron, and thereby to establish the
truth of his denial; and accordingly a peace was made.  King
Sigurd went to the south end of the country, and the ordeal was
never afterwards heard of.



16. BEGINNING OF ORM THE KING-BROTHER.

Queen Ingerid had a son to Ivar Sneis, and he was called Orm, and
got the surname of King-brother.  He was a handsome man in
appearance, and became a great chief, as shall be told hereafter.
Ingerid afterwards married Arne of Stodreim, who was from this
called King's-mate; and their children were Inge, Nikolas, Philip
of Herdla, and Margaret, who was first married to Bjorn Buk, and
afterwards to Simon Karason.



17. JOURNEY OF ERLING SKAKKE AND EARL RAGNVALD.

Kyrpingaorm and Ragnhild, a daughter of Sveinke Steinarson, had a
son called Erling.  Kyrpingaorm was a son of Svein Sveinson, who
was a son of Erling of Gerd.  Otto's mother was Ragna, a daughter
of Earl Orm Eilifson and Sigrid, a daughter of Earl Fin Arnason.
The mother of Earl Orm was Ragnhild, a daughter of Earl Hakon the
Great.  Erling was a man of understanding, and a great friend of
King Inge, by whose assistance and counsel Erling obtained in
marriage Christina, a daughter of King Sigurd the Crusader and
Queen Malmfrid.  Erling possessed a farm at Studla in South
Hordaland.  Erling left the country; and with him went Eindride
Unge and several lendermen, who had chosen men with them.  They
intended to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and went across the
West sea to Orkney.  There Earl Ragnvald and Bishop William
joined them; and they had in all fifteen ships from Orkney, with
which they first sailed to the South Hebrides, from thence west
to Valland, and then the same way King Sigurd the Crusader had
sailed to Norvasund; and they plundered all around in the heathen
part of Spain.  Soon after they had sailed through the Norvasund,
Eindride Unge and his followers, with six ships, separated from
them; and then each was for himself.  Earl Ragnvald and Erling
Skakke fell in with a large ship of burden at sea called a
dromund, and gave battle to it with nine ships.  At last they
laid their cutters close under the dromund; but the heathens
threw both weapons and stones, and pots full of pitch and boiling
oil.  Erling laid his ship so close under the dromund, that the
missiles of the heathens fell without his ship.  Then Erling and
his men cut a hole in the dromund, some working below and some
above the water-mark; and so they boarded the vessel through it.
So says Thorbjorn Skakkaskald, in his poem on Erling: --

     "The axes of the Northmen bold
     A door into the huge ships' hold
     Hewed through her high and curved side,
     As snug beneath her bulge they ride.
     Their spears bring down the astonished foe,
     Who cannot see from whence the blow.
     The eagle's prey, they, man by man,
     Fall by the Northmen's daring plan."

Audunraude, Erling's forecastle-man, was the first man who got
into the dromund.  Then they carried her, killing an immense
number of people; making an extraordinarily valuable booty, and
gaining a famous victory.  Earl Ragnvald and Erling Skakke came
to Palestine in the course of their expedition, and all the way
to the river Jordan.  From thence they went first to
Constantinople, where they left their ships, travelled northwards
by land, and arrived in safety in Norway, where their journey was
highly praised.  Erling Skakke appeared now a much greater man
than before, both on account of his journey and of his marriage;
besides he was a prudent sensible man, rich, of great family,
eloquent, and devoted to King Inge by the strictest friendship
more than to the other royal brothers.



18. BIRTH OF HAKON HERDEBREID.

King Sigurd went to a feast east in Viken along with his court,
and rode past a house belonging to a great bonde called Simon.
While the king was riding past the house, he heard within such
beautiful singing that he was quite enchanted with it, and rode
up to the house, and saw a lovely girl standing at the handmill
and grinding.  The king got off his horse, and went to the girl
and courted her.  When the king went away, the bonde Simon came
to know what the object of the king's visit had been.  The girl
was called Thora, and she was Simon the bonde's servant-girl.
Simon took good care of her afterwards, and the girl brought
forth a male child (A.D. 1047), who was called Hakon, and was
considered King Sigurd's son.  Hakon was brought up by Simon
Thorbergson and his wife Gunhild.  Their own sons also, Onund and
Andreas, were brought up with Hakon, and were so dear to him that
death only could have parted them.



19. EYSTEIN AND THE PEASANTS OF HISING ISLE.

While King Eystein Haraldson was in Viken, he fell into disputes
with the bondes of Reine and the inhabitants of Hising Isle, who
assembled to oppose him; but he gave them battle at a place
called Leikberg, and afterwards burnt and destroyed all around in
Hising; so that the bondes submitted to his will, paid great
fines to the king, and he took hostages from them.  So says Einar
Skulason: --

     "The Viken men
     Won't strive again,
     With words or blows,
     The king to oppose.
     None safety found
     On Viken's ground,
     Till all, afraid,
     Pledge and scat paid."

And further: --

     "The king came near;
     He who is dear
     To all good men
     Came down the glen,
     By Leikberg hill.
     They who do ill,
     The Reine folk, fly
     Or quarter cry."



20. WAR EXPEDITION OF KING HARALDSON.

Soon after King Eystein began his journey out of the country over
sea to the West (A.D. 1153), and sailed first to Caithness.  Here
he heard that Earl Harald Maddad's son was in Thursa, to which he
sailed directly in three small boats.  The earl had a ship of
thirty banks of oars, and nearly eighty men in her.  But they
were not prepared to make resistance, so that King Eystein was
able to board the ship with his men; and he took the earl
prisoner, and carried him to his own ship, but the earl ransomed
himself with three marks of gold: and thus they parted.  Einar
Skulason tells of it thus: --

     "Earl Harald in his stout ship lay
     On the bright sand in Thursa bay;
     With fourscore men he had no fear,
     Nor thought the Norse king was so near,
     He who provides the eagle's meals
     In three small boats along-shore steals;
     And Maddad's son must ransom pay
     For his bad outlook that fair day."

From thence King Eystein sailed south along the east side of
Scotland, and brought up at a merchant-town in Scotland called
Aberdeen, where he killed many people, and plundered the town. 
So says Einar Skulason: --

     "At Aberdeen, too, I am told,
     Fell many by our Norsemen bold;
     Peace was disturbed, and blue swords broke
     With many a hard and bloody stroke."

The next battle was at Hartlepool in the south, with a party of
horsemen.  The king put them to flight, and seized some ships
there.  So says Einar: --

     "At Hartlepool, in rank and row,
     The king's court-men attack the foe.
     The king's sharp sword in blood was red,
     Blood dropped from every Norse spear-head.
     Ravens rejoice o'er the warm food
     Of English slain, each where he stood;
     And in the ships their thirst was quenched:
     The decks were in the foe's blood drenched."

Then he went southwards to England, and had his third battle at
Whitby, and gained the victory, and burnt the town.  So says
Einar: --

     "The ring of swords, the clash of shields,
     Were loud in Whitby's peaceful fields;
     For here the king stirred up the strife. --
     Man against man, for death or life.
     O'er roof and tower, rose on high
     The red wrath-fire in the sky;
     House after house the red fiend burns;
     By blackened walls the poor man mourns."

Thereafter he plundered wide around in England, where Stephen was
then the king.  After this King Eystein fought with some cavalry
at Skarpasker.  So says Einar: --

     "At Skarpasker the English horse
     Retire before the Norse king's force:
     The arrow-shower like snow-drift flew,
     And the shield-covered foemen slew."

He fought next at Pilavik, and gained the victory.  So says
Einar: --

     "At Pilavik the wild wolf feeds,
     Well furnished by the king's brave deeds
     He poured upon the grass-green plain
     A red shower from the Perthmen slain.
     On westwards in the sea he urges,
     With fire and sword the country purges:
     Langtown he burns; the country rang,
     For sword on shield incessant clang."


Here they burnt Langatun, a large village; and people say that
the town has never since risen to its former condition.  After
this King Eystein left England in autumn, and returned to Norway.
People spoke in various ways about this expedition.



21. OF HARALD'S SONS.

There was good peace maintained in Norway in the first years of
the government of Harald's sons; and as long as their old
counsellors were alive, there was some kind of unanimity among
them.  While Inge and Sigurd were in their childhood, they had a
court together; but Eystein, who was come to age of discretion,
had a court for himself.  But when Inge's and Sigurd's
counsellors were dead, -- namely, Sadagyrd Bardson, Ottar
Birting, Amunde Gyrdson, Thjostolf Alason, Ogmund Svipter, and
Ogmund Denger, a brother of Erling Skakke (Erling was not much
looked up to while Ogmund lived), -- the two kings, Inge and
Sigurd divided their courts.  King Inge then got great assistance
from Gregorius Dagson, a son of Dag Eilifson by Ragnhild a
daughter of Skapte Ogmundson.  Gregorius had much property, and
was himself a thriving, sagacious man.  He presided in the
governing the country under King Inge, and the king allowed him
to manage his property for him according to his own judgment.



22. HABITS AND MANNERS OF HARALD'S SONS.

When King Sigurd grew up he was a very ungovernable, restless man
in every way; and so was King Eystein, but Eystein was the more
reasonable of the two.  King Sigurd was a stout and strong man,
of a brisk appearance; he had light brown hair, an ugly mouth;
but otherwise a well-shaped countenance.  He was polite in his
conversation beyond any man, and was expert in all exercises.
Einar Skulason speaks of this: --

     "Sigurd, expert in every way
     To wield the sword in bloody fray,
     Showed well that to the bold and brave
     God always luck and victory gave.
     In speech, as well as bloody deeds,
     The king all other men exceeds;
     And when he speaks we think that none
     Has said a word but he alone."

King Eystein was dark and dingy in complexion, of middle height,
and a prudent able man; but what deprived him of consideration
and popularity with those under him were his avarice and
narrowness.  He was married to Ragna, a daughter of Nicolas Mase.
King Inge was the handsomest among them in countenance.  He had
yellow but rather thin hair, which was much curled.  His stature
was small; and he had difficulty in walking alone, because he had
one foot withered, and he had a hump both on his back and his
breast.  He was of cheerful conversation, and friendly towards
his friends; was generous, and allowed other chiefs to give him
counsel in governing the country.  He was popular, therefore,
with the public; and all this brought the kingdom and the mass of
the people on his side.  King Harald Gille's daughter Brigida was
first married to the Swedish king Inge Halsteinson, and
afterwards to Earl Karl Sonason, and then to the Swedish king
Magnus.  She and King Inge Haraldson were cousins by the mother's
side.  At last Brigida married Earl Birger Brose, and they had
four sons, namely, Earl Philip, Earl Knut, Folke, and Magnus.
Their daughters were Ingegerd, who was married to the Swedish
king Sorkver, and their son was King Jon; a second daughter was
called Kristin, and a third Margaret.  Harald Gille's second
daughter was called Maria, who was married to Simon Skalp, a son
of Halkel Huk; and their son was called Nikolas.  King Harald
Gille's third daughter was called Margaret, who was married to
Jon Halkelson, a brother of Simon.  Now many things occurred
between the brothers which occasioned differences and disputes;
but I will only relate what appears to me to have produced the
more important events.



23. CARDINAL NIKOLAS COMES TO THE COUNTRY.

In the days of Harald's sons Cardinal Nikolas came from Rome to
Norway, being sent there by the pope.  The cardinal had taken
offence at the brothers Sigurd and Eystein, and they were obliged
to come to a reconciliation with him; but, on the other hand, he
stood on the most affectionate terms with King Inge, whom he
called his son.  Now when they were all reconciled with him, he
moved them to let Jon Birgerson be consecrated archbishop of
Throndhjem and gave him a vestment which is called a pallium; and
settled moreover that the archbishop's seat should be in Nidaros,
in Christ church, where King Olaf the Saint reposes.  Before that
time there had only been common bishops in Norway.  The cardinal
introduced also the law, that no man should go unpunished who
appeared with arms in the merchant-town, excepting the twelve men
who were in attendancce on the king.  He improved many of the
customs of the Northmen while he was in the country.  There never
came a foreigner to Norway whom all men respected so highly, or
who could govern the people so well as he did.  After some time
he returned to the South with many friendly presents, and
declared ever afterwards that he was the greatest friend of the
people of Norway.  When he came south to Rome the former pope
died suddenly, and all the people of Rome would have Cardinal
Nikolas for pope, and he was consecrated under the name of
Adrian; and according to the report of men who went to Rome in
his days, he had never any business, however important, to settle
with other people, but he would break it off to speak with the
Northmen who desired to see him.  He was not long pope, and is
now considered a saint.



24. MIRACLE OF KING OLAF.

In the time of Harald Gille's sons, it happened that a man called
Haldor fell into the hands of the Vindland people, who took him
and mutilated him, cut open his neck, took out the tongue through
the opening, and cut out his tongue root.  He afterwards sought
out the holy King Olaf, fixed his mind entirely on the holy man,
and weeping besought King Olaf to restore his speech and health.
Thereupon he immediately recovered his speech by the good king's
compassion, went immediately into his service for all his life,
and became an excellent trustworthy man.  This miracle took place
a fortnight before the last Olafsmas, upon the day that Cardinal
Nikolas set foot on the land of Norway.



25. MIRACLES OF KING OLAF ON RICHARD.

In the Uplands were two brothers, men of great family, and men of
fortune, Einar and Andres, sons of Guthorm Grabard, and brothers
of King Sigurd Haraldson's mother; and they had great properties
and udal estates in that quarter.  They had a sister who was very
handsome, but did not pay sufficient regard to the scandal of
evil persons, as it afterwards appeared.  She was on a friendly
footing with an English priest called Richard, who had a welcome
to the house of her brothers, and on account of their friendship
for him she did many things to please him, and often to his
advantage; but the end of all this was, that an ugly report flew
about concerning this girl.  When this came into the mouth of the
public all men threw the blame on the priest.  Her brothers did
the same, and expressed publicly, as soon as they observed it,
that they laid the blame most on him.  The great friendship that
was between the earl and the priest proved a great misfortune to
both, which might have been expected, as the brothers were silent
about their secret determination, and let nothing be observed.
But one day they called the priest to them, who went, expecting
nothing but good from them; enticed him from home with them,
saying that they intended to go to another district, where they
had some needful business, and inviting him to go with them. 
They had with them a farm-servant who knew their purpose.  They
went in a boat along the shore of a lake which is called Rands
lake, and landed at a ness called Skiptisand, where they went on
shore and amused themselves awhile.  Then they went to a retired
place, and commanded their servant-man to strike the priest with
an axe-hammer.  He struck the priest so hard that he swooned; but
when he recovered he said, "Why are ye playing so roughly with
me?"  They replied, "Although nobody has told thee of it before,
thou shalt now find the consequence of what thou hast done." 
They then upbraided him; but he denied their accusations, and
besought God and the holy King Olaf to judge between them.  Then
they broke his leg-bones, and dragged him bound to the forest
with them; and then they put a string around his head, and put a
board under his head and shoulders, and made a knot on the
string, and bound his head fast to the board.  Then the elder
brother, Einar, took a wedge, and put it on the priest's eye, and
the servant who stood beside him struck upon it with an axe, so
that the eye flew out, and fell upon the board.  Then he set the
pin upon the other eye, and said to the servant, "Strike now more
softly."  He did so, and the wedge sprang from the eye-stone, and
tore the eyelid loose.  Then Einar took up the eyelid in his
hand, and saw that the eye-stone was still in its place; and he
set the wedge on the cheek, and when the servant struck it the
eye-stone sprang out upon the cheek-bone.  Thereafter they opened
his mouth, took his tongue and cut it off, and then untied his
hands and his head.  As soon as he came to himself, he thought of
laying the eye-stones in their place under the eyelids, and
pressing then with both hands as much as he could.  Then they
carried him on board, and went to a farm called Saeheimrud, where
they landed.  They sent up to the farm to say that a priest was
lying in the boat at the shore.  While the message was going to
the farm, they asked the priest if he could talk; and he made a
noise and attempted to speak.  Then said Einar to his brother,
"If he recover and the stump of his tongue grow, I am afraid he
will get his speech again."  Thereupon they seized the stump with
a pair of tongs, drew it out, cut it twice, and the third time to
the very roots, and left him lying half dead.  The housewife in
the farm was poor; but she hastened to the place with her
daughter, and they carried the priest home to their farm in their
cloaks.  They then brought a priest, and when he arrived he bound
all his wounds; and they attended to his comfort as much as they
were able.  And thus lay the wounded priest grievously handled,
but trusting always to God's grace, and never doubting; and
although he was speechless, he prayed to God in thought with a
sorrowful mind, but with the more confidence the worse he was. 
He turned his thoughts also to the mild King Olaf the Saint,
God's dear favourite, of whose excellent deeds he had heard so
much told, and trusted so much more zealously on him with all his
heart for help in his necessity.  As he lay there lame, and
deprived of all strength, he wept bitterly, moaned, and prayed
with a sore heart that the dear King Olaf would help him.  Now
when this wounded priest was sleeping after midnight, he thought
he saw a gallant man coming to him, who spoke these words, "Thou
art ill off, friend Richard, and thy strength is little."  He
thought he replied to this assentingly.  Then the man accosted
him again, "Thou requirest compassion?"  The priest replies, "I
need the compassion of Almighty God and the holy King Olaf."  He
answered, "Thou shalt get it."  Thereupon he pulled the tongue-
stump so hard that it gave the priest pain; then he stroked with
his hands his eyes, and legs, and other wounded members.  Then
the priest asked who he was.  He looked at him, and said, "Olaf,
come here from Throndhjem;" and then disappeared.  But the priest
awoke altogether sound, and thus he spoke: "Happy am I, and
thanks be to the Almighty God and the holy King Olaf, who have
restored me!"  Dreadfully mishandled as he had been, yet so
quickly was he restored from his misfortune that he scarcely
thought he had been wounded or sick.  His tongue was entire; both
his eyes were in their places, and were clear-sighted; his broken
legs and every other wound were healed, or were free from pain;
and, in short, he had got perfect health.  But as a proof that
his eyes had been punched out, there remained a white scar on
each eyelid, in order that this dear king's excellence might be
manifest on the man who had been so dreadfully misused.



26. KING INGE AND SIGURD HOLD A THING.

King Eystein and King Sigurd had quarrelled, because King Sigurd
had killed King Eystein's court-man Harald, the Viken man, who
owned a house in Bergen, and also the priest Jon Tapard, a son of
Bjarne Sigurdson.  On account of this affair, a conference to
settle it was appointed in winter in the Uplands.  The two sat
together in the conference for a long time, and so much was known
of their conference that all three brothers were to meet the
following summer in Bergen.  It was added, that their conference
was to the effect that King Inge should have two or three farms,
and as much income as would keep thirty men beside him, as he had
not health to be a king.  When King Inge and Gregorius heard this
report, they came to Bergen with many followers.  King Sigurd
arrived there a little later, and was not nearly so strong in
men.  Sigurd and Inge had then been nineteen years kings of
Norway (A.D. 1155).  King Eystein came later still from the south
than the other two from the north.  Then King Inge ordered the
Thing to be called together on the holm by the sound of trumpet;
and Sigurd and Inge came to it with a great many people.
Gregorius had two long-ships, and at the least ninety men, whom
he kept in provisions.  He kept his house-men better than other
lendermen; for he never took part in any entertainment where each
guest brings his liquor, without having all his house-men to
drink with him.  He went now to the Thing in a gold-mounted
helmet, and all his men had helmets on.  Then King Inge stood up,
and told the assembly what he had heard; how his brothers were
going to use him, and depose him from his kingdom; and asked for
their assistance.  The assembled people made a good return to his
speech, and declared they would follow him.



27. OF GREGORIUS DAGSON.

Then King Sigurd stood up and said it was a false accusation that
King Inge had made against him and his brother, and insisted that
Gregorius had invented it; and insinuated that it would not be
long, if he had his will, before they should meet so that the
golden helmet should be doffed; and ended his speech by hinting
that they could not both live.  Gregorius replied, that Sigurd
need not long so much for this, as he was ready now, if it must
be so.  A few days after, one of Gregorius's house-men was killed
out upon the street, and it was Sigurd's house-men who killed
him.  Gregorius would then have fallen upon King Sigurd and his
people; but King Inge, and many others, kept him back.  But one
evening, just as Queen Ingerid, King Inge's mother, was coming
from vespers, she came past where Sigurd Skrudhyrna, a courtman
of King Inge, lay murdered.  He was then an old man, and had
served many kings.  King Sigurd's courtmen, Halyard Gunnarson,
and Sigurd, a son of Eystein Trafale, had killed him; and people
suspected it was done by order of King Sigurd.  She went
immediately to King Inge, and told him he would be a little king
if he took no concern, but allowed his court-men to be killed,
the one after the other, like swine.  The king was angry at her
speech; and while they were scolding about it, came Gregorius in
helmet and armour, and told the king not to be angry, for she was
only saying the truth.  "And I am now," says he, "come to thy
assistance, if thou wilt attack King Sigurd; and here we are,
above 100 men in helmets and armour, and with them we will attack
where others think the attack may be worst."  But the most
dissuaded from this course, thinking that Sigurd would pay the
mulct for the slaughter done.  Now when Gregorius saw that there
would be no assault, he accosted King Inge thus: "Thou wilt
frighten thy men from thee in this way; for first they lately
killed my house-man, and now thy court-man, and afterwards they
will chase me, or some other of thy lendermen whom thou wouldst
feel the loss of, when they see that thou art indifferent about
such things; and at last, after thy friends are killed, they will
take the royal dignity from thee.  Whatever thy other lendermen
may do, I will not stay here longer to be slaughtered like an ox;
but Sigurd the king and I have a business to settle with each
other to-night, in whatever way it may turn out.  It is true that
there is but little help in thee on account of thy ill health,
but I should think thy will should not be less to hold thy hand
over thy friends, and I am now quite ready to go from hence to
meet Sigurd, and my banner is flying in the yard."

Then King Inge stood up, and called for his arms, and ordered
every man who wished to follow him to get ready, declaring it was
of no use to try to dissuade him; for he had long enough avoided
this, but now steel must determine between them.



28. OF KING SIGURD'S FALL.

King Sigurd sat and drank in Sigrid Saeta's house ready for
battle, although people thought it would not come to an assault
at all.  Then came King Inge with his men down the road from the
smithy shops, against the house.  Arne, the king's brother-in-
law, came out from the Sand-bridge, Aslak Erlendson from his own
house, and Gregorius from the street where all thought the
assault would be worst.  King Sigurd and his men made many shots
from the holes in the loft, broke down the fireplaces, and threw
stones on them.  Gregorius and his men cut down the gates of the
yard; and there in the port fell Einar, a son of Laxapaul, who
was of Sigurd's people, together with Halvard Gunnarson, who was
shot in a loft, and nobody lamented his death.  They hewed down
the houses, and many of King Sigurd's men left him, and
surrendered for quarter.  Then King Sigurd went up into a loft,
and desired to be heard.  He had a gilt shield, by which they
knew him, but they would not listen to him, and shot arrows at
him as thick as snow in a snow-shower, so that he could not stay
there.  As his men had now left him, and the houses were being
hewn down, he went out from thence, and with him his court-man
Thord Husfreyja from Viken.  They wanted to come where King Inge
was to be found, and Sigurd called to his brother King Inge, and
begged him to grant him life and safety; but both Thord and
Sigurd were instantly killed, and Thord fell with great glory.
King Sigurd was interred in the old Christ church out on the
holm.  King Inge gave Gregorius the ship King Sigurd had owned.
There fell many of King Sigurd's and King Inge's men, although I
only name a few; but of Gregorius's men there fell four; and also
some who belonged to no party, but were shot on the piers, or out
in the ships.  It was fought on a Friday, and fourteen days
before Saint John the Baptist's day (June 10, 1155).  Two or
three days after King Eystein came from the eastward with thirty
ships, and had along with him his brother's son Hakon, a son of
King Sigurd.  Eystein did not come up to the town, but lay in
Floruvagar, and good men went between to get a reconciliation
made.  But Gregorius wanted that they should go out against him,
thinking there never would be a better opportunity; and offered
to be himself the leader.  "For thou, king, shalt not go, for we
have no want of men."  But many dissuaded from this course, and
it came to nothing.  King Eystein returned back to Viken, and
King Inge to Throndhjem, and they were in a sort reconciled; but
they did not meet each other.



29. OF GREGORIUS DAGSON.

Somewhat later than King Eystein, Gregorius Dagson also set out
to the eastward and came to his farm Bratsberg in Hofund; but
King Eystein was up in the fjord at Oslo, and had his ships drawn
above two miles over the frozen sea, for there was much ice at
that time in Viken.  King Eystein went up to Hofund to take
Gregorius; but he got news of what was on foot, and escaped to
Thelemark with ninety men, from thence over the mountains, and
came down in Hardanger; and at last to Studla in Etne, to Erling
Skakke's farm.  Erling himself had gone north to Bergen; but his
wife Kristin, a daughter of King Sigurd, was at home, and offered
Gregorius all the assistance he wanted; and he was hospitably
received.  He got a long-ship there which belonged to Erling, and
everything else he required.  Gregorius thanked her kindly, and
allowed that she had behaved nobly, and as might have been
expected of her.  Gregorius then proceeded to Bergen, where he
met Erling, who thought also that his wife had done well.



30. RECONCILIATION OF EYSTEIN AND INGE.

Then Gregorius went north to Throndhjem, and came there before
Yule.  King Inge was rejoiced at his safety, and told him to use
his property as freely as his own, King Eystein having burnt
Gregorius's house, and slaughtered his stock of cattle.  The
ship-docks which King Eystein the Elder had constructed in the
merchant town of Nidaros, and which had been exceedingly
expensive, were also burnt this winter, together with some good
vessels belonging to King Inge.  This deed was ascribed to King
Eystein and Philip Gyrdson, King Sigurd's foster-brother, and
occasioned much displeasure and hatred.  The following summer
King Inge went south with a very numerous body of men; and King
Eystein came northwards, gathering men also.  They met in the
east (A.D. 1156) at the Seleys, near to the Naze; but King Inge
was by far the strongest in men.  It was nearly coming to a
battle; but at last they were reconciled on these conditions,
that King Eystein should be bound to pay forty-five marks of
gold, of which King Inge should have thirty marks, because King
Eystein had occasioned the burning of the docks and ships; and,
besides, that Philip, and all who had been accomplices in the
deed, should be outlawed.  Also that the men should be banished
the country, against whom it could be proved that they gave blow
or wound to King Sigurd; for King Eystein accused King Inge of
protecting these men; and that Gregorius should have fifteen
marks of gold for the value of his property burnt by King
Eystein.  King Eystein was ill pleased with these terms, and
looked upon the treaty as one forced upon him.  From that meeting
King Inge went eastward to Viken, and King Eystein north to
Throndhjem; and they had no intercourse with each other, nor were
the messages which passed between them very friendly, and on both
sides they killed each other's friends.  King Eystein, besides,
did not pay the money; and the one accused the other of not
fulfilling what was promised.  King Inge and Gregorius enticed
many people from King Eystein; among others, Bard Standale
Brynjolfson, Simon Skalp, a son of Halkel Huk, Halder
Brynjolfson, Jon Halkelson, and many other lendermen.



31. OF EYSTEIN AND INGE.

Two years after King Sigurd's fall (A.D. 1157) both kings
assembled armaments; namely, King Inge in the east of the
country, where he collected eighty ships; and King Eystein in the
north, where he had forty-five, and among these the Great Dragon,
which King Eystein Magnuson had built after the Long Serpent; and
they had on both sides many and excellent troops.  King Inge lay
with his ships south at Moster Isle, and King Eystein a little to
the north in Graeningasund.  King Eystein sent the young Aslak
Jonson, and Arne Sturla, a son of Snaebjorn, with one ship to
meet King Inge; but when the king's men knew them, they assaulted
them, killed many of their people, and took all that was in the
ship belonging to them.  Aslak and Arne and a few more escaped to
the land, went to King Eystein, and told him how King Inge had
received them.  Thereupon King Eystein held a House-thing, and
told his followers how ill King Inge had treated his men, and
desired the troops to follow him.  "I have," said he, "so many,
and such excellent men, that I have no intention to fly, if ye
will follow me."  But this speech was not received with much
favour.  Halkel Huk was there; but both his sons, Simon and Jon,
were with King Inge.  Halkel replied, so loud that many heard
him, "Let thy chests of gold follow thee, and let them defend thy
land."



32. KING EYSTEIN'S DEATH.

In the night many of King Eystein's ships rowed secretly away,
some of them joining King Inge, some going to Bergen, or up into
the fjords; so that when it was daylight in the morning the king
was lying behind with only ten ships.  Then he left the Great
Dragon, which was heavy to row, and several other vessels behind;
and cut and destroyed the Dragon, started out the ale, and
destroyed all that they could not take with them.  King Eystein
went on board of the ship of Eindride, a son of Jon Morner,
sailed north into Sogn, and then took the land-road eastwards to
Viken.  King Inge took the vessels, and sailed with them outside
of the isles to Viken.  King Eystein had then got east as far as
Fold, and had with him 1200 men; but when they saw King Inge's
force, they did not think themselves sufficiently strong to
oppose him, and they retired to the forest.  Every one fled his
own way, so that the king was left with but one man.  King Inge
and his men observed King Eystein's flight, and also that he had
but few people with him, and they went immediately to search for
him.  Simon Skalp met the king just as he was coming out of a
willow bush.  Simon saluted him.  "God save you, sire," said he.

The king replied, "I do not know if thou are not sire here." 

Simon replied, "That is as it may happen."

The king begged him to conceal him, and said it was proper to do
so.  "For there was long friendship between us, although it has
now gone differently."

Simon replied, it could not be.

Then the king begged that he might hear mass before he died,
which accordingly took place.  Then Eystein laid himself down on
his face on the grass, stretched out his hands on each side, and
told them to cut the sign of the cross between his shoulders, and
see whether he could not bear steel as King Inge's followers had
asserted of him.  Simon told the man who had to put the king to
death to do so immediately, for the king had been creeping about
upon the grass long enough.  He was accordingly slain, and he
appears to have suffered manfully.  His body was carried to Fors,
and lay all night under the hill at the south side of the church.
King Eystein was buried in Fors church, and his grave is in the
middle of the church-floor, where a fringed canopy is spread over
it, and he is considered a saint.  Where he was executed, and his
blood ran upon the ground, sprang up a fountain, and another
under the hill where his body lay all night.  From both these
waters many think they have received a cure of sickness and pain.
It is reported by the Viken people that many miracles were
wrought at King Eystein's grave, until his enemies poured upon it
soup made of boiled dog's flesh.  Simon Skalp was much hated for
this deed, which was generally ascribed to him; but some said
that when King Eystein was taken Simon sent a message to King
Inge, and the king commanded that King Eystein should not come
before his face.  So King Sverre has caused it to be written; but
Einar Skulason tells of it thus: --

     "Simon Skalp, the traitor bold,
     For deeds of murder known of old,
     His king betrayed; and ne'er will he
     God's blessed face hereafter see."



SAGA OF HAKON HERDEBREID (HAKON THE BROAD-SHOULDERED) (1)


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

This saga describes the feud between Hakon Sigurdson and his
uncle Inge.

The only skald quoted is Einar Skulason.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The period is from A.D. 1157 to 1161. -- L.



1. BEGINNING OF HAKON HERDEBREID.

Hakon, King Sigurd's son, was chosen chief of the troop which had
followed King Eystein, and his adherents gave him the title of
king.  He was ten years old.  At that time he had with him
Sigurd, a son of Halvard Hauld of Reyr, and Andreas and Onund,
the sons of Simon, his foster-brothers, and many chiefs, friends
of King Sigurd and King Eystein; and they went first up to
Gautland.  King Inge took possession of all the estates they had
left behind, and declared them banished.  Thereafter King Inge
went to Viken, and was sometimes also in the north of the
country.  Gregorius Dagson was in Konungahella, where the danger
was greatest, and had beside him a strong and handsome body of
men, with which he defended the country.



2. OF GREGORIUS DAGSON.

The summer after (A.D. 1158) Hakon came with his men, and
proceeded to Konungahella with a numerous and handsome troop.
Gregorius was then in the town, and summoned the bondes and
townspeople to a great Thing, at which he desired their aid; but
he thought the people did not hear him with much favour, so he
did not much trust them.  Gregorius set off with two ships to
Viken, and was very much cast down.  He expected to meet King
Inge there, having heard he was coming with a great army to
Viken.  Now when Gregorius had come but a short way north he met
Simon Skalp, Haldor Brynjolfson, and Gyrd Amundason, King Inge's
foster-brothers.  Gregorius was much delighted at this meeting,
and turned back with them, being all in one body, with eleven
ships.  As they were rowing up to Konungahella, Hakon, with his
followers, was holding a Thing without the town, and saw their
approach; and Sigurd of Reyr said, "Gregorius must be fey to be
throwing himself with so few men into our hands."  Gregorius
landed opposite the town to wait for King Inge, for he was
expected, but he did not come.  King Hakon put himself in order
in the town, and appointed Thorliot Skaufaskalle, who was a
viking and a robber, to be captain of the men in the merchant
ships that were afloat in the river; and King Hakon and Sigurd
were within the town, and drew up the men on the piers, for all
the townspeople had submitted to King Hakon.



3. KING HAKON'S FLIGHT.

Gregorius rowed up the river, and let the ship drive down with
the stream against Thorliot.  They shot at each other a while,
until Thorliot and his comrades jumped overboard; and some of
them were killed, some escaped to the land.  Then Gregorius rowed
to the piers, and let a gangway be cast on shore at the very feet
of Hakon's men.  There the man who carried his banner was slain,
just as he was going to step on shore.  Gregorius ordered Hal, a
son of Audun Halson, to take up the banner, which he did, and
bore the banner up to the pier.  Gregorius followed close after
him, held his shield over his head, and protected him as well as
himself.  As soon as Gregorius came upon the pier, and Hakon's
men knew him, they gave way, and made room for him on every side.
Afterwards more people landed from the ships, and then Gregorius
made a severe assault with his men; and Hakon's men first moved
back, and then ran up into the town.  Gregorius pursued them
eagerly, drove them twice from the town, and killed many of them.
By the report of all men, never was there so glorious an affair
as this of Gregorius; for Hakon had more than 4000 men, and
Gregorius not full 400.  After the battle, Gregorius said to Hal
Audunson, "Many men, in my opinion, are more agile in battle than
ye Icelanders are, for ye are not so exercised as we Norwegians;
but none, I think, are so bold under arms as ye are."  King Inge
came up soon after, and killed many of the men who had taken part
with Hakon; made some pay heavy fines, burnt the houses of some,
and some he drove out of the country, or treated otherwise very
ill.  Hakon fled at first up to Gautland with all his men; but
the winter after (A.D. 1159), he proceeded by the upper road to
Throndhjem, and came there before Easter.  The Throndhjem people
received him well, for they had always served under that shield.
It is said that the Throndhjem people took Hakon as king, on the
terms that he should have from Inge the third part of Norway as
his paternal heritage.  King Inge and Gregorius were in Viken,
and Gregorius wanted to make an expedition against the party in
the north; but it came to nothing that winter, as many dissuaded
from it.



4. FALL OF GYRD AND HAVARD.

King Hakon left Throndhjem in spring with thirty ships nearly;
and some of his men sailed before the rest with seven ships, and
plundered in North and South More.  No man could remember that
there ever before had been plundering between the two towns
(Bergen and Nidaros).  Jon the son of Halkel Huk collected the
bondes in arms, and proceeded against them; took Kolbein Ode
prisoner, killed every woman's son of them in his ship.  Then
they searched for the others, found them all assembled in seven
ships, and fought with them; but his father Halkel not coming to
his assistance as he had promised, many good bondes were killed,
and Jon himself was wounded.  Hakon proceeded south to Bergen
with his forces; but when he came to Stiornvelta, he heard that
King Inge and Gregorius had arrived a few nights before from the
east at Bergen, and therefore he did not venture to steer
thither.  They sailed the outer course southwards past Bergen,
and met three ships of King Inge's fleet, which had been
outsailed on the voyage from the east.  On board of them were
Gyrd Amundason, King Inge's foster-brother, who was married to
Gyrid a sister of Gregorius, and also lagman Gyrd Gunhildson, and
Havard Klining.  King Hakon had Gyrd Amundason and Havard Klining
put to death; but took lagman Gyrd southwards, and then proceeded
east to Viken.



5. OF THE CONSULTATIONS OF KING INGE.

When King Inge heard of this he sailed east after them, and they
met east in the Gaut river.  King Inge went up the north arm of
the river, and sent out spies to get news of Hakon and his fleet;
but he himself landed at Hising, and waited for his spies.  Now
when the spies came back they went to the king, and said that
they had seen King Hakon's forces, and all his ships which lay at
the stakes in the river, and Hakon's men had bound the stems of
their vessels to them.  They had two great East-country trading
vessels, which they had laid outside of the fleet, and on both
these were built high wooded stages (castles).  When King Inge
heard the preparations they had made, he ordered a trumpet to
call a House-thing of all the men; and when the Thing was seated
he asked his men for counsel, and applied particularly to
Gregorius Dagson, his brother-in-law Erling Skakke, and other
lendermen and ship-commanders, to whom he related the
preparations of Hakon and his men.

Then Gregorius Dagson replied first, and made known his mind in
the following words: -- "Sometimes we and Hakon have met, and
generally they had the most people; but, notwithstanding, they
fell short in battle against us.  Now, on the other hand, we have
by far the greatest force; and it will appear probable to the men
who a short time ago lost gallant relations by them, that this
will be a good occasion to get vengeance, for they have fled
before us the greater part of the summer; and we have often said
that if they waited for us, as appears now to be the case, we
would have a brush with them.  Now I will tell my opinion, which
is, that I will engage them, if it be agreeable to the king's
pleasure; for I think it will go now as formerly, that they must
give way before us if we attack them bravely; and I shall always
attack where others may think it most difficult."

The speech was received with much applause, and all declared they
were ready to engage in battle against Hakon.  Then they rowed
with all the ships up the river, until they came in sight of each
other, and then King Inge turned off from the river current under
the island.  Now the king addressed the lendermen again, and told
them to get ready for battle.  He turned himself especially to
Erling Skakke, and said, what was true, that no man in the army
had more understanding and knowledge in fighting battles,
although some were more hot.  The king then addressed himself to
several of the lendermen, speaking to them by name; and ended by
desiring that each man should make his attack where he thought it
would be of advantage, and thereafter all would act together.



6. ERLING'S SPEECH.

Erling Skakke replied thus to the king's speech: "It is my duty,
sire, not to be silent; and I shall give my advice, since it is
desired.  The resolution now adopted is contrary to my judgment;
for I call it foolhardy to fight under these circumstances,
although we have so many and such fine men.  Supposing we make an
attack on them, and row up against this river-current; then one
of the three men who are in each half room must be employed in
rowing only, and another must be covering with the shield the man
who rows; and what have we then to fight with but one third of
our men?  It appears to me that they can be of little use in the
battle who are sitting at their oars with their backs turned to
the enemy.  Give me now some time for consideration, and I
promise you that before three days are over I shall fall upon
some plan by which we can come into battle with advantage."

It was evident from Erling's speech that he dissuaded from an
attack; but, notwithstanding, it was urged by many who thought
that Hakon would now, as before, take to the land.  "And then,"
said they, "we cannot get hold of him; but now they have but few
men, and we have their fate in our own hands."

Gregorius said but little; but thought that Erling rather
dissuaded from an attack that Gregorius's advice should have no
effect, than that he had any better advice to give.



7. OF HAKON'S FLEET.

Then said King Inge to Erling, "Now we will follow thy advice,
brother, with regard to the manner of attacking; but seeing how
eager our counsellors are for it, we shall make the attack this
day."

Erling replied, "All the boats and light vessels we have should
row outside the island, and up the east arm of the river, and
then down with the stream upon them, and try if they cannot cut
them loose from the piles.  Then we, with the large ships, shall
row from below here against them; and I cannot tell until it be
tried, if those who are now so furiously warm will be much
brisker at the attack than I am."

This counsel was approved by all.  There was a ness stretched out
between their fleet and Hakon's, so that they could not see each
other.  Now when Hakon and his men, who had taken counsel with
each other in a meeting, saw the boat-squadron rowing down the
river, some thought King Inge intended to give them battle; but
many believed they did not dare, for it looked as if the attack
was given up; and they, besides, were very confident, both in
their preparations and men.  There were many great people with
Hakon: there were Sigurd of Reyr, and Simon's sons; Nikolas
Skialdvarson; Eindride, a son of Jon Mornef, who was the most
gallant and popular man in the Throndhjem country; and many other
lendermen and warriors.  Now when they saw that King Inge's men
with many ships were rowing out of the river, Hakon and his men
believed they were going to fly; and therefore they cut their
land-ropes with which they lay fast at the piles, seized their
oars, and rowed after them in pursuit.  The ships ran fast down
with the stream; but when they came further down the river,
abreast of the ness, they saw King Inge's main strength lying
quiet at the island Hising.  King Inge's people saw Hakon's ships
under way, and believed they were coming to attack them; and now
there was great bustle and clash of arms, and they encouraged
each other by a great war-shout.  Hakon with his fleet turned
northwards a little to the land, where there was a turn in the
bight of the river, and where there was no current.  They made
ready for battle, carried land-ropes to the shore, turned the
stems of their ships outwards, and bound them all together.  They
laid the large East-country traders without the other vessels,
the one above, the other below, and bound them to the long-ships.
In the middle of the fleet lay the king's ship, and next to it
Sigurd's; and on the other side of the king's ship lay Nikolas,
and next to him Endride Jonson.  All the smaller ships lay
farther off, and they were all nearly loaded with weapons and
stones.



8. SIGURD OF REYR'S SPEECH.

Then Sigurd of Reyr made the following speech: "Now there is hope
that the time is come which has been promised us all the summer,
that we shall meet King Inge in battle.  We have long prepared
ourselves for this; and many of our comrades have boasted that
they would never fly from or submit to King Inge and Gregorius,
and now let them remember their words.  But we who have sometimes
got the toothache in our conflicts with them, speak less
confidently; for it has happened, as all have heard, that we very
often have come off without glory.  But, nevertheless, it is now
necessary to fight manfully, and stand to it with steadiness; for
the only escape for us is in victory.  Although we have somewhat
fewer men than they, yet luck determines which side shall have
the advantage, and God knows that the right is on our side.  Inge
has killed two of his brothers; and it is obvious to all men that
the mulct he intends to pay King Hakon for his father's murder is
to murder him also, as well as his other relations, which will be
seen this day to be his intent.  King Hakon desired from the
beginning no more of Norway than the third part, which his father
had possessed, and which was denied him; and yet, in my opinion,
King Hakon has a better right to inherit after his father's
brother, King Eystein, than Inge or Simon Skalp, or the other men
who killed King Eystein.  Many of them who would save their
souls, and yet have defiled their hands with such bloody deeds as
Inge has done, must think it a presumption before God that he
takes the name of king; and I wonder God suffers such monstrous
wickedness as his; but it may be God's will that we shall now put
him down.  Let us fight then manfully, and God will give us
victory; and, if we fall, will repay us with joys unspeakable for
now allowing the might of the wicked to prevail over us.  Go
forth then in confidence, and be not afraid when the battle
begins.  Let each watch over his own and his comrade's safety,
and God protect us all."  There went a good report abroad of this
speech of Sigurd, and all promised fairly, and to do their duty.
King Hakon went on board of the great East-country ship, and a
shield-bulwark was made around him; but his standard remained on
the long-ship in which it had been before.



9. OF KING INGE'S MEN.

Now must we tell about King Inge and his men.  When they saw that
King Hakon and his people were ready for battle, and the river
only was between them, they sent a light vessel to recall the
rest of the fleet which had rowed away; and in the meantime the
king waited for them, and arranged the troops for the attack.
Then the chiefs consulted in presence of the army, and told their
opinions; first, which ships should lie nearest to the enemy; and
then where each should attack.

Gregorius spoke thus: "We have many and fine men; and it is my
advice, King Inge, that you do not go to the assault with us, for
everything is preserved if you are safe.  And no man knows where
an arrow may hit, even from the hands of a bad bowman; and they
have prepared themselves so, that missiles and stones can be
thrown from the high stages upon the merchant ships, so that
there is less danger for those who are farthest from them.  They
have not more men than we lendermen can very well engage with.  I
shall lay my ship alongside their largest ship, and I expect the
conflict between us will be but short; for it has often been so
in our former meetings, although there has been a much greater
want of men with us than now."  All thought well of the advice
that the king himself should not take part in the battle.

Then Erling Skakke said, "I agree also to the counsel that you,
sire, should not go into the battle.  It appears to me that their
preparations are such, that we require all our precaution not to
suffer a great defeat from them; and whole limbs are the easiest
cured.  In the council we held before to-day many opposed what I
said, and ye said then that I did not want to fight; but now I
think the business has altered its appearance, and greatly to our
advantage, since they have hauled off from the piles, and now it
stands so that I do not dissuade from giving battle; for I see,
what all are sensible of, how necessary it is to put an end to
this robber band who have gone over the whole country with
pillage and destruction, in order that people may cultivate the
land in peace, and serve a king so good and just as King Inge who
has long had trouble and anxiety from the haughty unquiet spirit
of his relations, although he has been a shield of defence for
the whole people, and has been exposed to manifold perils for the
peace of the country."  Erling spoke well and long, and many
other chiefs also; and all to the same purpose -- all urging to
battle.  In the meantime they waited until all the fleet should
be assembled.  King Inge had the ship Baekisudin; and, at the
entreaty of his friends, he did not join the battle, but lay
still at the island.



10. BEGINNING OF THE BATTLE.

When the army was ready they rowed briskly against the enemy, and
both sides raised a war-shout.  Inge's men did not bind their
ships together, but let them be loose; for they rowed right
across the current, by which the large ships were much swayed.
Erling Skakke laid his ship beside King Hakon's ship, and ran the
stem between his and Sigurd's ship, by which the battle began.
But Gregorius's ship swung upon the ground, and heeled very much
over, so that at first she could not come into the battle; and
when Hakon's men saw this they laid themselves against her, and
attacked Gregorius's ship on all sides.  Ivar, Hakon Mage's son,
laid his ship so that the stems struck together; and he got a
boat-hook fastened on Gregorius, on that part of his body where
the waist is smallest, and dragged him to him, by which Gregorius
stumbled against the ship's rails; but the hook slipped to one
side, or Gregorius would have been dragged over-board. 
Gregorius, however, was but little wounded, for he had on a plate
coat of armour.  Ivar called out to him, that he had a "thick
bark."  Gregorius replied, that if Ivar went on so he would
"require it all, and not have too much."  It was very near then
that Gregorius and his men had sprung overboard; but Aslak Unge
threw an anchor into their ship, and dragged them off the ground.
Then Gregorius laid himself against Ivar's ship, and they fought
a long while; but Gregorius's ship being both higher sided and
more strongly manned, many people fell in Ivar's ship, and some
jumped overboard.  Ivar was so severely wounded that he could not
take part in the fight.  When his ship was cleared of the men,
Gregorius let Ivar be carried to the shore, so that he might
escape; and from that time they were constant friends.



11. KING HAKON'S FLIGHT.

When King Inge and his men saw that Gregorius was aground, he
encouraged his crew to row to his assistance.  "It was," he said,
"the most imprudent advice that we should remain lying here,
while our friends are in battle; for we have the largest and best
ship in all the fleet.  But now I see that Gregorius, the man to
whom I owe the most, is in need of help; so we must hasten to the
fight where it is sharpest.  It is also most proper that I should
be in the battle; for the victory, if we win it, will belong to
me.  And if I even knew beforehand that our men were not to gain
the battle, yet our place is where our friends are; for I can do
nothing if I lose the men who are justly called the defence of
the country, who are the bravest, and have long ruled for me and
my kingdom."  Thereupon he ordered his banner to be set up, which
was done; and they rowed across the river.  Then the battle
raged, and the king could not get room to attack, so close lay
the ships before him.  First he lay under the East-country
trading ship, and from it they threw down upon his vessel spears,
iron-shod stakes, and such large stones that it was impossible to
hold out longer there, and he had to haul off.  Now when the
king's people saw that he was come they made place for him, and
then he laid alongside of Eindride Jonson's ship.  Now King
Hakon's men abandoned the small ships, and went on board the
large merchant vessels; but some of them sprang on shore.  Erling
Skakke and his men had a severe conflict.  Erling himself was on
the forecastle, and called his forecastlemen, and ordered them to
board the king's ship; but they answered, this was no easy
matter, for there were beams above with an iron comb on them.
Then Erling himself went to the bow, and stayed there a while,
until they succeeded in getting on board the king's ship: and
then the ship was cleared of men on the bows, and the whole army
gave way.  Many sprang into the water, many fell, but the greater
number got to the land.  So says Einar Skulason: --

     "Men fall upon the slippery deck --
     Men roll off from the blood-drenched wreck;
     Dead bodies float down with the stream,
     And from the shores witch-ravens scream.
     The cold blue river now runs red
     With the warm blood of warriors dead,
     And stains the waves in Karmt Sound
     With the last drops of the death-wound.

     "All down the stream, with unmann'd prow,
     Floats many an empty long-ship now,
     Ship after ship, shout after shout,
     Tell that Kign Hakon can't hold out.
     The bowmen ply their bows of elm,
     The red swords flash o'er broken helm:
     King Hakon's men rush to the strand,
     Out of their ships, up through the land."

Einar composed a song about Gregorius Dagson, which is called the
River-song.  King Inge granted life and peace to Nikolas
Skialdvarson when his ship was deserted, and thereupon he went
into King Inge's service, and remained in it as long as the king
lived.  Eindride Jonson leaped on board of King Inge's ship when
his own was cleared of men, and begged for his life.  King Inge
wished to grant it; but Havard Klining's son ran up, and gave him
a mortal wound, which was much blamed; but he said Eindride had
been the cause of his father's death.  There was much lamentation
at Eindride's death, but principally in the Throndhjem district.
Many of Hakon's people fell here, but not many chiefs.  Few of
King Inge's people fell, but many were wounded.  King Hakon fled
up the country, and King Inge went north to Viken with his
troops; and he, as well as Gregorius, remained in Viken all
winter (A.D. 1160).  When King Inge's men, Bergliot and his
brothers, sons of Ivar of Elda, came from the battle to Bergen,
they slew Nickolas Skeg, who had been Hakon's treasurer, and then
went north to Throndhjem.

King Hakon came north before Yule, and Sigurd was sometimes home
at Reyr; for Gregorius, who was nearly related to Sigurd, had
obtained for him life and safety from King Inge, so that he
retained all his estates.  King Hakon was in the merchant-town of
Nidaros in Yule; and one evening in the beginning of Yule his men
fought in the room of the court, and in this affray eight men
were killed, and many were wounded.  The eighth day of Yule, King
Hakon's man Alf Rode, son of Ottar Birting, with about eighty
men, went to Elda, and came in the night unexpectedly on the
people, who were very drunk, and set fire to the room; but they
went out, and defended themselves bravely.  There fell Bergliot,
Ivar's son, and Ogmund, his brother, and many more.  They had
been nearly thirty altogether in number.  In winter died, north
in the merchant-town, Andres Simonson, King Hakon's foster-
brother; and his death was much deplored.  Erling Skakke and
Inge's men, who were in Bergen, threatened that in winter they
would proceed against Hakon and his men; but it came to nothing.
Gregorius sent word from the east, from Konungahella, that if he
were so near as Erling and his men, he would not sit quietly in
Bergen while Hakon was killing King Inge's friends and their
comrades in war north in the Throndhjem country.



12. THE CONFLICT UPON THE PIERS.

King Inge and Gregorius left the east in spring, and came to
Bergen; but as soon as Hakon and Sigurd heard that Inge had left
Viken, they went there by land.  When King Inge and his people
came to Bergen, a quarrel arose between Haldor Brynjolfson and
Bjorn Nikolason.  Bjorn's house-man asked Haldor's when they met
at the pier, why he looked so pale.

He replied, because he had been bled.

"I could not look so pale if I tried, at merely being bled." 

"I again think," retorted the other, "that thou wouldst have
borne it worse, and less manfully."  And no other beginning was
there for their quarrel than this.  Afterwards one word followed
another, till from brawling they came to fighting.  It was told
to Haldor Brynjolfson, who was in the house drinking, that his
house-man was wounded down on the pier and he went there
immediately.  But Bjorn's house-men had come there before, and as
Haldor thought his house-man had been badly treated, he went up
to them and beat them; and it was told to Bjorn Buk that the
people of Viken were beating his house-men on the pier.  Then
Bjorn and his house-men took their weapons, hurried down to the
pier, and would avenge their men; and a bloody strife began.  It
was told Gregorius that his relation Haldor required assistance,
and that his house-men were being cut down in the street; on
which Gregorius and his men ran to the place in their armour. 
Now it was told Erling Skakke that his sister's son Bjorn was
fighting with Gregorius and Haldor down on the piers, and that he
needed help.  Then he proceeded thither with a great force, and
exhorted the people to stand by him; saying it would be a great
disgrace never to be wiped out, if the Viken people should
trample upon them in their own native place.  There fell thirteen
men, of whom nine were killed on the spot, and four died of their
wounds, and many were wounded.  When the word came to King Inge
that Gregorius and Erling were fighting down on the piers, he
hastened there, and tried to separate them; but could do nothing,
so mad were they on both sides.  Then Gregorius called to Inge,
and told him to go away; for it was in vain to attempt coming
between them, as matters now stood.  He said it would be the
greatest misfortune if the king mixed himself up with it; for he
could not be certain that there were not people in the fray who
would commit some great misdeed if they had opportunity.  Then
King Inge retired; and when the greatest tumult was over,
Gregorius and his men went to Nikolas church, and Erling behind
them, calling to each other.  Then King Inge came a second time,
and pacified them; and both agreed that he should mediate between
them.

When King Inge and Gregorius heard that King Hakon was in Viken,
they went east with many ships; but when they came King Hakon
fled from them, and there was no battle.  Then King Inge went to
Oslo, and Gregorius was in Konungahella.



13. MUNAN'S DEATH.

Soon after Gregorius heard that Hakon and his men were at a farm
called Saurby, which lies up beside the forest.  Gregorius
hastened there; came in the night; and supposing that King Hakon
and Sigurd would be in the largest of the houses, set fire to the
buildings there.  But Hakon and his men were in the smaller
house, and came forth, seeing the fire, to help their people.
There Munan fell, a son of Ale Uskeynd, a brother of King Sigurd
Hakon's father.  Gregorius and his men killed him, because he was
helping those whom they were burning within the house.  Some
escaped, but many were killed.  Asbjorn Jalda, who had been a
very great viking, escaped from the house, but was grievously
wounded.  A bonde met him, and he offered the man money to let
him get away; but the bonde replied, he would do what he liked
best; and, adding that he had often been in fear of his life for
him, he slew him.  King Hakon and Sigurd escaped, but many of
their people were killed.  Thereafter Gregorius returned home to
Konungahella.  Soon after King Hakon and Sigurd went to Haldor
Brynjolfson's farm of Vettaland, set fire to the house, and burnt
it.  Haldor went out, and was cut down instantly with his house-
men; and in all there were about twenty men killed.  Sigrid,
Haldor's wife, was a sister of Gregorius, and they allowed her to
escape into the forest in her night-shift only; but they took
with them Amunde, who was a son of Gyrd Amundason and of Gyrid
Dag's daughter, and a sister's son of Gregorius, and who was then
a boy about five years old.



14. OF THE FALL OF GREGORIUS DAGSON.

When Gregorius heard the news he took it much to heart, and
inquired carefully where they were.  Gregorius set out from
Konungahella late in Yule, and came to Fors the thirteenth day of
Yule, where he remained a night, and heard vespers the last day
of Yule, which was a Saturday, and the holy Evangel was read
before him.  When Gregorius and his followers saw the men of King
Hakon and Sigurd, the king's force appeared to them smaller than
their own.  There was a river called Befia between them, where
they met; and there was unsound ice on the river, for there went
a stream under the ice from it.  King Hakon and his men had cut a
rent in the ice, and laid snow over it, so that nobody could see
it.  When Gregorius came to the ice on the river the ice appeared
to him unsound, he said; and he advised the people to go to the
bridge, which was close by, to cross the river.  The bonde-troops
replied, that they did not know why he should be afraid to go
across the ice to attack so few people as Hakon had, and the ice
was good enough.  Gregorius said it was seldom necessary to
encourage him to show bravery, and it should not be so now.  Then
he ordered them to follow him, and not to be standing on the land
while he was on the ice, and he said it was their council to go
out upon the dangerous ice, but he had no wish to do so, or to be
led by them.  Then he ordered the banner to be advanced, and
immediately went out on the ice with the men.  As soon as the
bondes found that the ice was unsound they turned back. 
Gregorius fell through the ice, but not very deep, and he told
his men to take care.  There were not more than twenty men with
him, the others having turned back.  A man of King Hakon's troop
shot an arrow at Gregorius, which hit him under the throat, and
thus ended his life.  Gregorius fell, and ten men with him.  It
is the talk of all men that he had been the most gallant
lenderman in Norway that any man then living could remember; and
also he behaved the best towards us Icelanders of any chief since
King Eystein the Elder's death.  Gregorius's body was carried to
Hofund, and interred at Gimsey Isle, in a nunnery which is there,
of which Gregorius's sister, Baugeid, was then the abbess.



15. KING INGE HEARS OF GREGORIUS'S FALL.

Two bailiffs went to Oslo to bring the tidings to King Inge. 
When they arrived they desired to speak to the king: and he
asked, what news they brought.

"Gregorius Dagson's death," said they.

"How came that misfortune?" asked the king.

When they had told him how it happened, he said, "They gave
advice who understood the least."

It is said he took it so much to heart that he cried like a
child.  When he recovered himself he said, "I wanted to go to
Gregorius as soon as I heard of Haldor's murder; for I thought
that Gregorius would not sit long before thinking. of revenge.
But the people here would think nothing so important as their
Yule feasts, and nothing could move them away; and I am confident
that if I had been there, he would either have proceeded more
cautiously, or I and Gregorius would now have shared one lodging.
Now he is gone, the man who has been my best friend, and more
than any other has kept the kingdom in my hands; and I think it
will be but a short space between us.  Now I make an oath to go
forth against Hakon, and one of two things shall happen: I shall
either come to my death, or shall walk over Hakon and his people;
and such a man as Gregorius is not avenged, even if all were to
pay the penalty of their lives for him."

There was a man present who replied, "Ye need not seek after
them, for they intend to seek you."

Kristin, King Sigurd's daughter and King Inge's cousin, was then
in Oslo.  The king heard that she intended going away.  He sent a
message to her to inquire why she wished to leave the town.

She thought it was dangerous and unsafe for a female to be there. 
The king would not let her go. "For if it go well with me, as I
hope, you will be well here; and if I fall, my friends may not
get leave to dress my body; but you can ask permission, and it
will not be denied you, and you will thereby best requite what I
have done for you."



16. OF KING INGE.

On Saint Blasius' day (February 3, 1161), in the evening, King
Inge's spies brought him the news that King Hakon was coming
towards the town.  Then King Inge ordered the war-horns to call
together all the troops up from the town; and when he drew them
up he could reckon them to be nearly 4000 men.  The king let the
array be long, but not more than five men deep.  Then some said
that the king should not be himself in the battle, as they
thought the risk too great; but that his brother Orm should be
the leader of the army.  The king replied, "I think if Gregorius
were alive and here now, and I had fallen and was to be avenged,
he would not lie concealed, but would be in the battle.  Now,
although I, on account of my ill health, am not fit for the
combat as he was, yet will I show as good will as he would have
had; and it is not to be thought of that I should not be in the
battle."

People say that Gunhild, who was married to Simon, King Hakon's
foster-brother, had a witch employed to sit out all night and
procure the victory for Hakon; and that the answer was obtained,
that they should fight King Inge by night, and never by day, and
then the result would be favourable.  The witch who, as people
say, sat out was called Thordis Skeggia; but what truth there may
be in the report I know not.

Simon Skalp had gone to the town, and was gone to sleep, when the
war-shouts awoke him.  When the night was well advanced, King
Inge's spies came to him, and told him that King Hakon and his
army were coming over the ice; for the ice lay the whole way from
the town to Hofud Isle.



17. KING INGE'S SPEECH.

Thereupon King Inge went with his army out on the ice, and he
drew it up in order of battle in front of the town.  Simon Skalp
was in that wing of the array which was towards Thraelaberg; and
on the other wing, which was towards the Nunnery, was Gudrod, the
king of the South Hebudes, a son of Olaf Klining, and Jon, a son
of Svein Bergthor Buk.  When King Hakon and his army came near to
King Inge's array, both sides raised a war-shout.  Gudrod and Jon
gave King Hakon and his men a sign, and let them know where they
were in the line; and as soon as Hakon's men in consequence
turned thither, Gudrod immediately fled with 1500 men; and Jon,
and a great body of men with him, ran over to King Hakon's army,
and assisted them in the fight.  When this news was told to King
Inge, he said, "Such is the difference between my friends.  Never
would Gregorius have done so in his life!"  There were some who
advised King Inge to get on horseback, and ride from the battle
up to Raumarike; "where," said they, "you would get help enough,
even this very day."  The king replied, he had no inclination to
do so.  "I have heard you often say, and I think truly, that it
was of little use to my brother, King Eystein, that he took to
flight; and yet he was a man distinguished for many qualities
which adorn a king.  Now I, who labour under so great
decrepitude, can see how bad my fate would be, if I betook myself
to what proved so unfortunate for him; with so great a difference
as there is between our activity, health, and strength.  I was in
the second year of my age when I was chosen king of Norway, and I
am now twenty-five; and I think I have had misfortune and sorrow
under my kingly dignity, rather than pleasure and peaceful days.
I have had many battles, sometimes with more, sometimes with
fewer people; and it is my greatest luck that I have never fled.
God will dispose of my life, and of how long it shall be; but I
shall never betake myself to flight."



18. KING INGE'S FALL.

Now as Jon and his troop had broken the one wing of King Inge's
array, many of those who were nearest to him fled, by which the
whole array was dispersed, and fell into disorder.  But Hakon and
his men went briskly forwards; and now it was near daybreak.  An
assault was made against King Inge's banner, and in this conflict
King Inge fell; but his brother Orm continued the battle, while
many of the army fled up into the town.  Twice Orm went to the
town after the king's fall to encourage the people, and both
times returned, and went out again upon the ice to continue the
battle.  Hakon's men attacked the wing of the array which Simon
Skalp led; and in that assault fell of King Inge's men his
brother-in-law, Gudbrand Skafhogson.  Simon Skalp and Halvard
Hikre went against each other with their troops, and fought while
they drew aside past Thraelaberg; and in this conflict both Simon
and Halvard fell.  Orm, the king's brother, gained great
reputation in this battle; but he at last fled.  Orm the winter
before had been contracted with Ragna, a daughter of Nikolas
Mase, who had been married before to King Eystein Haraldson; and
the wedding was fixed for the Sunday after Saint Blasius's mass,
which was on a Friday.  Orm fled east to Svithjod, where his
brother Magnus was then king; and their brother Ragnvald was an
earl there at that time.  They were the sons of Queen Ingerid and
Henrik Halte, who was a son of the Danish king Svein Sveinson.
The princess Kristin took care of King Inge's body, which was
laid on the stone wall of Halvard's church, on the south side
without the choir.  He had then been king for twenty-three years
(A.D. 1137-1161).  In this battle many fell on both sides, but
principally of King Inge's men.  Of King Hakon's people fell Arne
Frirekson.  Hakon's men took all the feast and victuals prepared
for the wedding, and a great booty besides.



19. OF KING HAKON AND QUEEN KRISTIN.

Then King Hakon took possession of the whole country, and
distributed all the offices among his own friends, both in the
towns and in the country.  King Hakon and his men had a meeting
in Halvard's church, where they had a private conference
concerning the management of the country.  Kristin the princess
gave the priest who kept the church keys a large sum of money to
conceal one of her men in the church, so that she might know what
Hakon and his counsellors intended.  When she learnt what they
had said, she sent a man to Bergen to her husband Erling Skakke,
with the message that he should never trust Hakon or his men.



20. OF OLAF'S MIRACLE.

It happened at the battle of Stiklestad, as before related, that
King Olaf threw from him the sword called Hneiter when he
received his wound.  A Swedish man, who had broken his own sword,
took it up, and fought with it.  When this man escaped with the
other fugitives he came to Svithjod, and went home to his house.
From that time he kept the sword all his days, and afterwards his
son, and so relation after relation; and when the sword shifted
its owner, the one told to the other the name of the sword and
where it came from.  A long time after, in the days of Kirjalax
the emperor of Constantinople, when there was a great body of
Varings in the town, it happened in the summer that the emperor
was on a campaign, and lay in the camp with his army.  The
Varings who had the guard, and watched over the emperor, lay on
the open plain without the camp.  They changed the watch with
each other in the night, and those who had been before on watch
lay down and slept; but all completely armed.  It was their
custom, when they went to sleep, that each should have his helmet
on his head, his shield over him, sword under the head, and the
right hand on the sword-handle.  One of these comrades, whose lot
it was to watch the latter part of the night, found, on awakening
towards morning, that his sword was gone.  He looked after it,
and saw it lying on the flat plain at a distance from him.  He
got up and took the sword, thinking that his comrades who had
been on watch had taken the sword from him in a joke; but they
all denied it.  The same thing happened three nights.  Then he
wondered at it, as well as they who saw or heard of it; and
people began to ask him how it could have happened.  He said that
his sword was called Hneiter, and had belonged to King Olaf the
Saint, who had himself carried it in the battle of Stiklestad;
and he also related how the sword since that time had gone from
one to another.  This was told to the emperor, who called the man
before him to whom the sword belonged, and gave him three times
as much gold as the sword was worth; and the sword itself he had
laid in Saint Olaf's church, which the Varings supported, where
it has been ever since over the altar.  There was a lenderman of
Norway while Harald Gille's sons, Eystein, Inge, and Sigurd
lived, who was called Eindride Unge; and he was in Constantinople
when these events took place.  He told these circumstances in
Norway, according to what Einar Skulason says in his song about
King Olaf the Saint, in which these events are sung.



21. OLAF'S MIRACLE IN FAVOUR OF THE VARINGS.

It happened once in the Greek country, when Kirjalax was emperor
there, that he made an expedition against Blokumannaland.  When
he came to the Pezina plains, a heathen king came against him
with an innumerable host.  He brought with him many horsemen, and
many large waggons, in which were large loop-holes for shooting
through.  When they prepared for their night quarters they drew
up their waggons, one by the side of the other, without their
tents, and dug a great ditch without; and all which made a
defence as strong as a castle.  The heathen king was blind.  Now
when the Greek king came, the heathens drew up their array on the
plains before their waggon-fortification.  The Greeks drew up
their array opposite, and they rode on both sides to fight with
each other; but it went on so ill and so unfortunately, that the
Greeks were compelled to fly after suffering a great defeat, and
the heathens gained a victory.  Then the king drew up an array of
Franks and Flemings, who rode against the heathens, and fought
with them; but it went with them as with the others, that many
were killed, and all who escaped took to flight.  Then the Greek
king was greatly incensed at his men-at-arms; and they replied,
that he should now take his wine-bags, the Varings.  The king
says that he would not throw away his jewels, and allow so few
men, however bold they might be, to attack so vast an army.  Then
Thorer Helsifig, who at that time was leader of the Varings
replied to the king's words, "If there was burning fire in the
way, I and my people would run into it, if I knew the king's
advantage required it."  Then the king replied, "Call upon your
holy King Olaf for help and strength."  The Varings, who were 450
men, made a vow with hand and word to build a church in
Constantinople, at their own expense and with the aid of other
good men, and have the church consecrated to the honour and glory
of the holy King Olaf; and thereupon the Varings rushed into the
plain.  When the heathens saw them, they told their king that
there was another troop of the Greek king's army come out upon
the plain; but they were only a handful of people.  The king
says, "Who is that venerable man riding on a white horse at the
head of the troop?"  They replied, "We do not see him."  There
was so great a difference of numbers, that there were sixty
heathens for every Christian man; but notwithstanding the Varings
went boldly to the attack.  As soon as they met terror and alarm
seized the army of the heathens, and they instantly began to fly;
but the Varings pursued, and soon killed a great number of them.
When the Greeks and Franks who before had fled from the heathens
saw this, they hastened to take part, and pursue the enemy with
the others.  Then the Varings had reached the waggon-
fortification, where the greatest defeat was given to the enemy.
The heathen king was taken in the flight of his people, and the
Varings brought him along with them; after which the Christians
took the camp of the heathens, and their waggon-fortification.



MAGNUS ERLINGSON'S SAGA.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.

With this saga, which describes a series of conflicts, Snorre's
"Heimskringla" ends.  King Eystein died in 1177, but Magnus
Erlingson continued to reign until his death in 1184.  The
conflicts continued until the opposition party was led to victory
by King Sverre.

The only skald quoted is Thorbjorn Skakkaskald.



1. OF MAGNUS ERLINGSON'S BEGINNING.

When Erling got certain intelligence of the determinations of
Hakon and his counsellors, he sent a message to all the chiefs
who he knew had been steady friends of King Inge, and also to his
court-men and his retinue, who had saved themselves by flight,
and also to all Gregorius's house-men, and called them together
to a meeting.  When they met, and conversed with each other, they
resolved to keep their men together; and which resolution they
confirmed by oath and hand-shake to each other.  Then they
considered whom they should take to be king.  Erling Skakke first
spoke, and inquired if it was the opinion of the chiefs and other
men of power that Simon Skalp's son, the son of the daughter of
King Harald Gille, should be chosen king, and Jon Halkelson be
taken to lead the army; but Jon refused it.  Then it was inquired
if Nikolas Skialdvarson, a sister's son of King Magnus Barefoot,
would place himself at the head of the army; but he answered
thus: -- It was his opinion that some one should be chosen king
who was of the royal race; and, for leader of the troops, some
one from whom help and understanding were to be looked for; and
then it would be easier to gather an army.  It was now tried
whether Arne would let any of his sons, King Inge's brothers, be
proclaimed king.  Arne replies, that Kristin's son, she was the
daughter of King Sigurd the Crusader, was nearest by propinquity
of descent to the crown of Norway.  "And here is also a man to be
his adviser, and whose duty it is to take care of him and of the
kingdom; and that man is his father Erling, who is both prudent,
brave, experienced in war, and an able man in governing the
kingdom; he wants no capability of bringing this counsel into
effect, if luck be with him."  Many thought well of this advice.

Erling replied to it, "As far as I can see or hear in this
meeting, the most will rather be excused from taking upon
themselves such a difficult business.  Now it appears to me
altogether uncertain, provided we begin this work, whether he who
puts himself at the head of it will gain any honour; or whether
matters will go as they have done before when any one undertakes
such great things, that he loses all his property and possibly
his life.  But if this counsel be adopted, there may be men who
will undertake to carry it through; but he who comes under such
an obligation must seek, in every way, to prevent any opposition
or enmity from those who are now in this council."

All gave assurance that they would enter into this confederacy
with perfect fidelity.  Then said Erling, "I can say for myself
that it would almost be my death to serve King Hakon; and however
dangerous it may be, I will rather venture to adopt your advice,
and take upon me to lead this force, if that be the will,
counsel, and desire of you all, and if you will all bind
yourselves to this agreement by oath."

To this they all agreed; and in this meeting it was determined to
take Erling's son Magnus to be king.  They afterwards held a
Thing in the town; and at this Thing Magnus Erlingson, then five
years old, was elected king of the whole country.  All who had
been servants of King Inge went into his service, and each of
them retained the office and dignity he had held under King Inge
(A.D. 1161).



2. KING MAGNUS GOES TO DENMARK.

Erling Skakke made himself ready to travel, fitted out ships, and
had with him King Magnus, together with the household-men who
were on the spot.  In this expedition were the king's relatives,
-- Arne; Ingerid, King Inge's mother, with her two sons; besides
Jon Kutiza, a son of Sigurd Stork, and Erling's house-men, as
well as those who had been Gregorius's house-men; and they had in
all ten ships.  They went south to Denmark to King Valdemar and
Buriz Heinrekson, King Inge's brother.  King Valdemar was King
Magnus's blood-relation; for Ingebjorg, mother of King Valdemar,
and Malmfrid, mother of Kristin, King Magnus's mother, were
cousins.  The Danish king received them hospitably, and he and
Erling had private meetings and consultations: and so much was
known of their counsels, that King Valdemar was to aid King
Magnus with such help as might be required from his kingdom to
win and retain Norway.  On the other hand, King Valdemar should
get that domain in Norway which his ancestors Harald Gormson and 
Svein Forked-beard had possessed; namely, the whole of Viken as
far north as Rygiarbit.  This agreement was confirmed by oath and
a fixed treaty.  Then Erling and King Magnus made themselves
ready to leave Denmark, and they sailed out of Vendilskage.



3. BATTLE OF TUNSBERG.

King Hakon went in spring, after the Easter week, north to
Throndhjem, and had with him the whole fleet that had belonged to
King Inge.  He held a Thing there in the merchant-town, and was
chosen king of the whole country.  Then he made Sigurd of Reyr an
earl, and gave him an earldom, and afterwards proceeded
southwards with his followers all the way to Viken.  The king
went to Tunsberg; but sent Earl Sigurd east to Konungahella, to
defend the country with a part of the forces in case Erling
should come from the south.  Erling and his fleet came to Agder,
and went straight north to Bergen, where they killed Arne
Brigdarskalle, King Hakon's officer, and came back immediately
against King Hakon.  Earl Sigurd, who had not observed the
journey of Erling and his followers from the south, was at that
time east in the Gaut river, and King Hakon was in Tunsberg.
Erling brought up at Hrossanes, and lay there some nights.  In
the meantime King Hakon made preparations in the town.  When
Erling and his fleet were coming up to the town, they took a
merchant vessel, filled it with wood and straw, and set fire to
it; and the wind blowing right towards the town, drove the vessel
against the piers.  Erling had two cables brought on board the
vessel, and made fast to two boats, and made them row along as
the vessel drove.  Now when the fire was come almost abreast of
the town, those who were in the boats held back the vessel by the 
ropes, so that the town could not be set on fire; but so thick a
smoke spread from it over the town, that one could not see from
the piers where the king's array was.  Then Erling drew the whole
fleet in where the wind carried the fire, and shot at the enemy.
When the townspeople saw that the fire was approaching their
houses, and many were wounded by the bowmen, they resolved to
send the priest Hroald, the long-winded speaker, to Erling, to
beg him to spare them and the town; and they dissolved the array
in favour of Hakon, as soon as Hroald told them their prayer was
granted.  Now when the array of towns-people had dispersed, the
men on the piers were much thinned: however, some urged Hakon's
men to make resistance: but Onund Simonson, who had most
influence over the army, said, "I will not fight for Earl
Sigurd's earldom, since he is not here himself."  Then Onund
fled, and was followed by all the people, and by the king
himself; and they hastened up the country.  King Hakon lost many
men here; and these verses were made about it: --

     "Onund declares he will not go
     In battle 'gainst Earl Sigurd's foe,
     If Earl Sigurd does not come,
     But with his house-men sits at home.
     King Magnus' men rush up the street,
     Eager with Hakon's troop to meet;
     But Hakon's war-hawks, somewhat shy,
     Turn quick about, and off they fly."

Thorbjorn Skakkaskald also said: --

     "The Tunsberg men would not be slow
     In thy good cause to risk a blow;
     And well they knew the chief could stain
     The wolves' mouths on a battle-plain.
     But the town champion rather fears
     The sharp bright glance of levelled spears;
     Their steel-clad warrior loves no fight
     Where bowstring twangs, or fire flies bright."

King Hakon then took the land-road northwards to Throndhjem. 
When Earl Sigurd heard of this, he proceeded with all the ships
he could get the seaway north-wards, to meet King Hakon there.



4. OF ERLING AND HAKON.

Erling Skakke took all the ships in Tunsberg belonging to King
Hakon, and there he also took the Baekisudin which had belonged
to King Inge.  Then Erling proceeded, and reduced the whole of
Viken in obedience to King Magnus, and also the whole country
north wheresoever he appeared up to Bergen, where he remained all
winter.  There Erling killed Ingebjorn Sipil, King Hakon's
lenderman of the north part of the Fjord district.  In winter
(A.D. 1162) King Hakon was in Throndhjem; but in the following
spring he ordered a levy, and prepared to go against Erling.  He
had with him Earl Sigurd, Jon Sveinson, Eindride Unge, Onund
Simonson, Philip Peterson, Philip Gyrdson, Ragnvald Kunta, Sigurd
Kapa, Sigurd Hiupa, Frirek Keina, Asbjorn of Forland, Thorbjorn,
a son of Gunnar the treasurer, and Stradbjarne.



5. OF ERLING'S PEOPLE.

Erling was in Bergen with a great armament, and resolved to lay a
sailing prohibition on all the merchant vessels which were going
north to Nidaros; for he knew that King Hakon would soon get
tidings of him, if ships were sailing between the towns. 
Besides, he gave out that it was better for Bergen to get the
goods, even if the owners were obliged to sell them cheaper than
they wished than that they should fall into the hands of enemies
and thereby strengthen them.  And now a great many vessels were
assembled at Bergen, for many arrived every day, and none were
allowed to go away.  Then Erling let some of the lightest of his
vessels be laid ashore, and spread the report that he would wait
for Hakon, and, with the help of his friends and relations,
oppose the enemy there.  He then one day called a meeting of the
ship-masters, and gave them and all the merchant ships and their
steersmen leave to go where they pleased.  When the men who had
charge of the cargoes, and were all ready to sail away with their
goods, some for trade, others on various business, had got leave
from Erling Skakke to depart, there was a soft and favourable
wind for sailing north along the coast.  Before the evening all
who were ready had set sail, and hastened on as fast as they
could, according to the speed of their vessels, the one vying
with the other.  When this fleet came north to More, Hakon's
fleet had arrived there before them: and he himself was there
fully engaged in collecting people, and summoning to him the
lendermen, and all liable to serve in the levy, without having
for a long time heard any news from Bergen.  Now, however, they
heard, as the latest news, that Erling Skakke had laid his ships
up in Bergen, and there they would find him; and also that he had
a large force with him.  King Hakon sailed from thence to Veey,
and sent away Earl Sigurd and Onund Simonson to gather people,
and sent men also to both the More districts.  After King Hakon
had remained a few days at the town he sailed farther, and
proceeded to the South, thinking that it would both promote his
journey and enable new levies to join him sooner.

Erling Skakke had given leave on Sunday to all the merchant
vessels to leave Bergen; and on Tuesday, as soon as the early
mass was over, he ordered the warhorns to sound, summoned to him
the men-at-arms and the townsmen, and let the ships which were
laid up on shore be drawn down into the water.  Then Erling held
a House-Thing with his men and the people of the levy; told them
his intentions; named ship commanders; and had the names called
over of the men who were to be on board of the king's ship.  This
Thing ended with Erling's order to every man to make himself
ready in his berth wherever a place was appointed him; and
declared that he who remained in the town after the Baekisudin
was hauled out, should be punished by loss of life or limb.  Orm,
the king's brother, laid his ships out in the harbour immediately
that evening, and many others, and the greater number were afloat
before.



6. OF ERLING SKAKKE.

On Wednesday, before mass was sung in the town, Erling sailed
from Bergen with all his fleet, consisting of twenty-one ships;
and there was a fresh breeze for sailing northwards along the
coast.  Erling had his son King Magnus with him, and there were
many lendermen accompanied by the finest men.  When Erling came
north, abreast of the Fjord district, he sent a boat on shore to
Jon Halkelson's farm, and took Nikolas, a son of Simon Skalp and
of Maria, Harald Gille's daughter, and brought him out to the
fleet, and put him on board the king's ship.  On Friday,
immediately after matins, they sailed to Steinavag, and King
Hakon, with thirteen ships, was lying in the harbour in the
neighbourhood.  He himself and his men were up at play upon the
island, and the lendermen were sitting on the hill, when they saw
a boat rowing from the south with two men in it, who were bending
back deep towards the keel, and taking hasty strokes with their
oars.  When they came to the shore they did not belay the boat,
but both ran from it.  The great men seeing this, said to each
other, "These men must have some news to tell;" and got up to
meet them.  When they met, Onund Simonson asked, "Have ye any
news of Erling Skakke, that ye are running so fast?"

They answered, as soon as they could get out the words, for they
had lost their breath, "Here comes Erling against you, sailing
from the south, with twenty-one ships, or thereabouts, of which
many are great enough; and now ye will soon see their sails." 

Then said Eindride Unge, "Too near to the nose, said the peasant,
when his eye was knocked out."

They went in haste now to where the games were playing, and
immediately the war-horns resounded, and with the battle-call all
the people were gathered down to the ships in the greatest haste.
It was just the time of day when their meat was nearly cooked.
All the men rushed to the ships, and each ran on board the vessel
that was nearest to him, so that the ships were unequally manned. 
Some took to the oars; some raised the masts, turned the heads of
the vessels to the north, and steered for Veey, where they
expected much assistance from the towns.



7. FALL OF KING HAKON.

Soon after they saw the sails of Erling's fleet, and both fleets
came in sight of each other.  Eindride Unge had a ship called
Draglaun, which was a large buss-like long-ship, but which had
but a small crew; for those who belonged to her had run on board
of other ships, and she was therefore the hindmost of Hakon's
fleet.  When Eindride came abreast of the island Sek, the
Baekisudin, which Erling Skakke himself commanded, came up with
her; and these two ships were bound fast together.  King Hakon
and his followers had arrived close to Veey; but when they heard
the war-horn they turned again to assist Eindride.  Now they
began the battle on both sides, as the vessels came up.  Many of
the sails lay midships across the vessels; and the ships were not
made fast to each other, but they lay side by side.  The conflict
was not long before there came disorder in Hakon's ship; and some
fell, and others sprang overboard.  Hakon threw over him a grey
cloak, and jumped on board another ship; but when he had been
there a short time he thought he had got among his enemies; and
when he looked about him he saw none of his men nor of his ships
near him.  Then he went into the Baekisudin to the forecastle-
men, and begged his life.  They took him in their keeping, and
gave him quarter.  In this conflict there was a great loss of
people, but principally of Hakon's men.  In the Baekisudin fell
Nikolas, Simon Skalp's son; and Erling's men are accused of
having killed him themselves.  Then there was a pause in the
battle, and the vessels separated.  It was now told to Erling
that Hakon was on board of his ship; that the forecastle-men had
taken him, and threatened that they would defend him with arms.
Erling sent men forwards in the ship to bring the forecastle-men
his orders to guard Hakon well, so that he should not get away.
He at the same time let it be understood that he had no objection
to giving the king life and safety, if the other chiefs were
willing, and a peace could be established.  All the forecastle-
men gave their chief great credit and honour for these words.
Then Erling ordered anew a blast of the war-horns, and that the
ships should be attacked which had not lost their men; saying
that they would never have such another opportunity of avenging
King Inge.  Thereupon they all raised a war-shout, encouraged
each other, and rushed to the assault.  In this tumult King Hakon
received his death-wound.  When his men knew he had fallen they
rowed with all their might against the enemy, threw away their
shields, slashed with both hands, and cared not for life.  This
heat and recklessness, however, proved soon a great loss to them;
for Erling's men saw the unprotected parts of their bodies, and
where their blows would have effect.  The greater part of Hakon's
men who remained fell here; and it was principally owing to the
want of numbers, as they were not enough to defend themselves.
They could not get quarter, also excepting those whom the chiefs
took under their protection and bound themselves to pay ransom
for.  The following of Hakon's people fell: Sigurd Kapa, Sigurd
Hiupa, and Ragnvald Kunta; but some ships crews got away, rowed
into the fjords, and thus saved their lives.  Hakon's body was
carried to Raumsdal, and buried there; but afterwards his
brother, King Sverre, had the body transported north to the
merchant town Nidaros, and laid in the stone wall of Christ
church south of the choir.



8. FLIGHT OF THE CHIEFS OF HAKON'S MEN.

Earl Sigurd, Eindride Unge, Onund Simonson, Frirek Keina, and
other chiefs kept the troop together, left the ships in Raumsdal,
and went up to the Uplands.  King Magnus and his father Erling
sailed with their troops north to Nidaros in Throndhjem, and
subdued the country as they went along.  Erling called together
an Eyra-thing, at which King Magnus was proclaimed king of all
Norway.  Erling, however, remained there but a short time; for he
thought the Throndhjem people were not well affected towards him
and his son.  King Magnus was then called king of the whole
country.

King Hakon had been a handsome man in appearance, well grown,
tall and thin; but rather broad-shouldered, on which account his
men called him Herdebreid.  As he was young in years, his
lendermen ruled for him.  He was cheerful and friendly in
conversation, playful and youthful in his ways, and was much
liked by the people.



9. OF KING SIGURD'S BEGINNING.

There was an Upland man called Markus of Skog, who was a relation
of Earl Sigurd.  Markus brought up a son of King Sigurd Mun, who
was also called Sigurd.  This Sigurd was chosen king (A.D. 1162)
by the Upland people, by the advice of Earl Sigurd and the other
chiefs who had followed King Hakon.  They had now a great army,
and the troops were divided in two bodies; so that Markus and the
king were less exposed where there was anything to do, and Earl
Sigurd and his troop, along with the lendermen, were most in the
way of danger.  They went with their troops mostly through the
Uplands, and sometimes eastwards to Viken.  Erling Skakke had his
son King Magnus always with him, and he had also the whole fleet
and the land defence under him.  He was a while in Bergen in
autumn; but went from thence eastward to Viken, where he settled
in Tunsberg for his winter quarters (A.D. 1163), and collected in
Viken all the taxes and revenues that belonged to Magnus as king;
and he had many and very fine troops.  As Earl Sigurd had but a
small part of the country, and kept many men on foot, he soon was
in want of money; and where there was no chief in the
neighbourhood he had to seek money by unlawful ways, -- sometimes
by unfounded accusations and fines, sometimes by open robbery.



10. EARL SIGURD'S CONDEMNATION.

At that time the realm of Norway was in great prosperity.  The
bondes were rich and powerful, unaccustomed to hostilities or
violence, and the oppression of roving troops; so that there was
soon a great noise and scandal when they were despoiled and
robbed.  The people of Viken were very friendly to Erling and
King Magnus, principally from the popularity of the late King
Inge Haraldson; for the Viken people had always served under his
banner.  Erling kept a guard in the town, and twelve men were on
watch every night.  Erling had Things regularly with the bondes,
at which the misdeeds of Sigurd's people were often talked over;
and by the representations of Erling and his adherents, the
bondes were brought unanimously to consider that it would be a
great good fortune if these bands should be rooted out.  Arne,
the king's relation, spoke well and long on this subject, and at
last severely; and required that all who were at the Thing, --
men-at-arms, bondes, towns-men, and merchants, -- should come to
the resolution to sentence according to law Earl Sigurd and all
his troop, and deliver them to Satan, both living and dead.  From
the animosity and hatred of the people, this was agreed to by
all; and thus the unheard-of deed was adopted and confirmed by
oath, as if a judgment in the case was delivered there by the
Thing according to law.  The priest Hroald the Long-winded, who
was a very eloquent man, spoke in the case; but his speech was to
the same purpose as that of others who had spoken before.  Erling
gave a feast at Yule in Tunsberg, and paid the wages of the
men-at-arms at Candlemas.



11. OF ERLING.

Earl Sigurd went with his best troops down to Viken, where many
people were obliged to submit to his superior force, and many had
to pay money.  He drove about thus widely higher up the country,
penetrating into different districts.  But there were some in his
troop who desired privately to make peace with Erling; but they
got back the answer, that all who asked for their lives should
obtain quarter, but they only should get leave to remain in the
country who had not been guilty of any great offenses against
Erling.  And when Sigurd's adherents heard that they would not
get leave to remain in the country, they held together in one
body; for there were many among them who knew for certain that
Erling would look upon them as guilty of offences against him.
Philip Gyrdson made terms with Erling, got his property back, and
went home to his farm; but soon after Sigurd's men came there,
and killed him.  They committed many crimes against each other,
and many men were slain in their mutual persecution; but here
what was committed by the chiefs only is written down.



12. ERLING GETS NEWS OF EARL SIGURD.

It was in the beginning of Lent that news came to Erling that
Earl Sigurd intended to come upon him; and news of him came here
and there, sometimes nearer, sometimes farther off.  Erling sent
out spies in all quarters around to discover where they were.
Every evening he assembled all the men-at-arms by the war-horn
out of the town; and for a long time in the winter they lay under
arms all night, ready to be drawn up in array.  At last Erling
got intelligence that Sigurd and his followers were not far
distant, up at the farm Re.  Erling then began his expedition out
of the town, and took with him all the towns-people who were able
to carry arms and had arms, and likewise all the merchants; and
left only twelve men behind to keep watch in the town.  Erling
went out of the town on Thursday afternoon, in the second week of
Lent (February 19); and every man had two days' provisions with
him.  They marched by night, and it was late before they got out
of the town with the men.  Two men were with each shield and each
horse; and the people, when mustered, were about 1200 men.  When
they met their spies, they were informed that Sigurd was at Re,
in a house called Rafnnes, and had 500 men.  Then Erling called
together his people; told them the news he had received, and all
were eager to hasten their march, fall on them in the houses, or
engage them by night.

Erling replied to them thus: -- "It is probable that we and Earl
Sigurd shall soon meet.  There are also many men in this band
whose handy-work remains in our memories; such as cutting down
King Inge, and so many more of our friends, that it would take
long to reckon them up.  These deeds they did by the power of
Satan, by witchcraft, and by villainy; for it stands in our laws
and country rights, that however highly a man may have been
guilty, it shall be called villainy and cowardly murder to kill
him in the night.  This band has had its luck hitherto by
following the counsel of men acquainted with witchcraft and
fighting by night, and not in the light of day; and by this
proceeding have they been victorious hitherto over the chiefs
whose heads they have laid low on the earth.  Now we have often
seen, and proved, how unsuitable and improper it is to go into
battle in the nighttime; therefore let us rather have before our
eyes the example of chiefs better known to us, and who deserve
better to be imitated, and fight by open day in regular battle
array, and not steal upon sleeping men in the night.  We have
people enough against them, so few as they are.  Let us,
therefore, wait for day and daylight, and keep together in our
array in case they attack us."

Thereafter the whole army sat down.  Some opened up bundles of
hay, and made a bed of it for themselves; some sat upon their
shields, and thus waited the daydawn.  The weather was raw, and
there was a wet snowdrift.



13. OF EARL SIGURD'S BATTLE ARRAY.

Earl Sigurd got the first intelligence of Erling's army, when it
was already near to the house.  His men got up, and armed
themselves; but not knowing how many men Erling had with him,
some were inclined to fly, but the most determined to stand. 
Earl Sigurd was a man of understanding, and could talk well, but
certainly was not considered brave enough to take a strong
resolution; and indeed the earl showed a great inclination to
fly, for which he got many stinging words from his men-at-arms.
As day dawned, they began on both sides to draw up their battle
array.  Earl Sigurd placed his men on the edge of a ridge between
the river and the house, at a place at which a little stream runs
into the river.  Erling and his people placed their array on the
other side of the river; but at the back of his array were men on
horseback well armed, who had the king with them.  When Earl
Sigurd's men saw that there was so great a want of men on their
side, they held a council, and were for taking to the forest. 
But Earl Sigurd said, "Ye alleged that I had no courage, but it
will now be proved; and let each of you take care not to fail, or
fly, before I do so.  We have a good battle-field.  Let them
cross the bridge; but as soon as the banner comes over it let us
then rush down the hill upon them, and none desert his
neighbour."

Earl Sigurd had on a red-brown kirtle, and a red cloak, of which
the corners were tied and turned back; shoes on his feet; and a
shield and sword called Bastard.  The earl said, "God knows that
I would rather get at Erling Skakke with a stroke of Bastard,
than receive much gold."



14. EARL SIGURD'S FALL.

Erling Skakke's army wished to go on to the bridge; but Erling
told them to go up along the river, which was small, and not
difficult to cross, as its banks were flat; and they did so. 
Earl Sigurd's array proceeded up along the ridge right opposite
to them; but as the ridge ended, and the ground was good and
level over the river, Erling told his men to sing a Paternoster,
and beg God to give them the victory who best deserved it.  Then
they all sang aloud "Kyrie Eleison", and struck with their
weapons on their shields.  But with this singing 300 men of
Erling's people slipped away and fled.  Then Erling and his
people went across the river, and the earl's men raised the
war-shout; but there was no assault from the ridge down upon
Erling's array, but the battle began upon the hill itself.  They
first used spears then edge weapons; and the earl's banner soon
retired so far back, that Erling and his men scaled the ridge.
The battle lasted but a short time before the earl's men fled to
the forest, which they had close behind them.  This was told Earl
Sigurd, and his men bade him fly; but he replied, "Let us on
while we can."  And his men went bravely on, and cut down on all
sides.  In this tumult fell Earl Sigurd and Jon Sveinson, and
nearly sixty men.  Erling lost few men, and pursued the fugitives
to the forest.  There Erling halted his troops, and turned back.
He came just as the king's slaves were about stripping the
clothes off Earl Sigurd, who was not quite lifeless.  He had put
his sword in the sheath, and it lay by his side.  Erling took it,
struck the slaves with it, and drove them away.  Then Erling,
with his troops, returned, and sat down in Tunsberg.  Seven days
after Earl Sigurd's fall Erling's men took Eindride Unge
prisoner, and killed him, with all his ship's crew.



15. MARKUS OF SKOG, AND SIGURD SIGURDSON.

Markus of Skog, and King Sigurd, his foster-son, rode down to
Viken towards spring, and there got a ship; but when Erling heard
it he went eastwards against them, and they met at Konungahella.
Markus fled with his followers to the island Hising; and there
the country people of Hising came down in swarms, and placed
themselves in Markus's and Sigurd's array.  Erling and his men
rowed to the shore; but Markus's men shot at them.  Then Erling
said to his people, "Let us take their ships, but not go up to
fight with a land force.  The Hisingers are a bad set to quarrel
with, -- hard, and without understanding.  They will keep this
troop but a little while among them, for Hising is but a small
spot."  This was done: they took the ships, and brought them over
to Konungahella.  Markus and his men went up to the forest
district, from which they intended to make assaults, and they had
spies out on both sides.  Erling had many men-at-arms with him,
whom he brought from other districts, and they made attacks on
each other in turn.



16. BEGINNING OF ARCHBISHOP EYSTEIN.

Eystein, a son of Erlend Himaide, was selected to be archbishop,
after Archbishop Jon's death; and he was consecrated the same
year King Inge was killed.  Now when Archbishop Eystein came to
his see, he made himself beloved by all the country, as an
excellent active man of high birth.  The Throndhjem people, in
particular, received him with pleasure; for most of the great
people in the Throndhjem district were connected with the
archbishop by relationship or other connection, and all were his
friends.  The archbishop brought forward a request to the bondes
in a speech, in which he set forth the great want of money for
the see, and also how much greater improvement of the revenues
would be necessary to maintain it suitably, as it was now of much
more importance than formerly when the bishop's see was first
established.  He requested of the bondes that they should give
him, for determining law-suits, an ore of silver value, instead
of what they had before paid, which was an ore of judgment money,
of that kind which was paid to the king in judging cases; and the
difference between the two kinds of ore was, that the ore he
desired was a half greater than the other.  By help of the
archbishop's relations and friends, and his own activity, this
was carried; and it was fixed by law in all the Throndhjem
district, and in all the districts belonging to his
archbishopric.



17. OF MARKUS AND KING SIGURD.

When Sigurd and Markus lost their ships in the Gaut river, and
saw they could get no hold on Erling, they went to the Uplands,
and proceeded by land north to Throndhjem.  Sigurd was received
there joyfully, and chosen king at an Eyra-thing; and many
gallant men, with their sons, attached themselves to his party.
They fitted out ships, rigged them for a voyage, and proceeded
when summer came southwards to More, and took up all the royal
revenues wheresoever they came.  At this time the following
lendermen were appointed in Bergen for the defence of the
country: -- Nikolas Sigurdson, Nokve Palson, and several military
leaders; as Thorolf Dryl, Thorbjorn Gjaldkere, and many others.
As Markus and Sigurd sailed south, they heard that Erling's men
were numerous in Bergen; and therefore they sailed outside the
coast-rocks, and southwards past Bergen.  It was generally
remarked, that Markus's men always got a fair wind, wherever they
wished to sail to.



18. MARKUS AND KING SIGURD KILLED.

As soon as Erling Skakke heard that Sigurd and Markus had sailed
southwards, he hastened to Viken, and drew together an armed
force; and he soon had a great many men, and many stout ships.
But when he came farther in Viken, he met with a strong contrary
wind, which kept him there in port the whole summer.  Now when
Sigurd and Markus came east to Lister, they heard that Erling had
a great force in Viken; so they turned to the north again.  But
when they reached Hordaland, with the intention of sailing to
Bergen, and came opposite the town, Nikolas and his men rowed out
against them, with more men and larger ships than they had.
Sigurd and Markus saw no other way of escaping but to row away
southwards.  Some of them went out to sea, others got south to
the sound, and some got into the Fjords.  Markus, and some people
with him, sprang upon an isle called Skarpa.  Nikolas and his men
took their ships, gave Jon Halkelson and a few others quarter,
but killed the most of them they could get hold of.  Some days
after Eindride Heidafylja found Sigurd and Markus, and they were
brought to Bergen.  Sigurd was beheaded outside of Grafdal, and
Markus and another man were hanged at Hvarfsnes.  This took place
on Michaelmas day (September 29, 1163), and the band which had
followed them was dispersed.



19. ERLING AND THE PEOPLE OF HISING ISLE.

Frirek Keina and Bjarne the Bad, Onund Simonson and Ornolf Skorpa
had rowed out to sea with some ships, and sailed outside along
the land to the east.  Wheresoever they came to the land they
plundered, and killed Erling's friends.  Now when Erling heard
that Sigurd and Markus were killed, he gave leave to the
lendermen and people of the levy to return home; but he himself,
with his men, set his course eastward across the Folden fjord,
for he heard of Markus's men there.  Erling sailed to
Konungahella, where he remained the autumn; and in the first week
of winter Erling went out to the island Hising with his men, and
called the bondes to a Thing.  When the Hising people came to the
Thing, Erling laid his law-suit against them for having joined
the bands of Sigurd and Markus, and having raised men against
him.  Assur was the name of one of the greatest of the bondes on
the island, and he answered Erling on account of the others.  The
Thing was long assembled; but at the close the bondes gave the
case into Erling's own power, and he appointed a meeting in the
town within one week, and named fifteen bondes who should appear
there.  When they came, he condemned them to pay a penalty of 300
head of cattle; and the bondes returned home ill pleased at this
sentence.  Soon after the Gaut river was frozen, and Erling's
ships were fast in the ice; and the bondes kept back the mulct,
and lay assembled for some time.  Erling made a Yule feast in the
town; but the Hising people had joint-feasts with each other, and
kept under arms during Yule.  The night after the fifth day of
Yule Erling went up to Hising, surrounded Assur's house, and
burnt him in it.  He killed one hundred men in all, burnt three
houses, and then returned to Konungahella.  The bondes came then,
according to agreement, to pay the mulct.



20. DEATH OF FRIREK KEINA AND BJARNE.

Erling Skakke made ready to sail in spring as soon as he could
get his ships afloat for ice, and sailed from Konungahella; for
he heard that those who had formerly been Markus's friends were
marauding in the north of Viken.  Erling sent out spies to learn
their doings, searched for them, and found them lying in a
harbour.  Onund Simonson and Ornolf Skorpa escaped, but Frirek
Keina and Bjarne the Bad were taken, and many of their followers
were killed.  Erling had Frirek bound to an anchor and thrown
overboard; and for that deed Erling was much detested in the
Throndhjem country, for the most powerful men there were
relatives of Frirek.  Erling ordered Bjarne the Bad to be hanged;
and he uttered, according to his custom, many dreadful
imprecations during his execution.  Thorbjorn Skakkaskald tells
of this business: --

     "East of the Fjord beyond the land,
     Unnoticed by the pirate band,
     Erling stole on them ere they knew,
     And seized and killed all Keina's crew.
     Keina, fast to an anchor bound,
     Was thrown into the deep-blue Sound;
     And Bjarne swung high on gallows-tree,
     A sight all good men loved to see."

Onund and Ornolf, with the band that had escaped, fled to
Denmark; but were sometimes in Gautland, or in Viken.



21. CONFERENCE BETWEEN ERLING AND EYSTEIN.

Erling Skakke sailed after this to Tunsberg, and remained there
very long in spring (A.D. 1164); but when summer came he
proceeded north to Bergen, where at that time a great many people
were assembled.  There was the legate from Rome, Stephanus; the
Archbishop Eystein, and other bishops of the country.  There was
also Bishop Brand, who was consecrated bishop of Iceland, and Jon
Loptson, a daughter's son of King Magnus Barefoot; and on this
occasion King Magnus and Jon's other relations acknowledged the
relationship with him.

Archbishop Eystein and Erling Skakke often conversed together in
private; and, among other things, Erling asked one day, "Is it
true, sir, what people tell me, that you have raised the value of
the ore upon the people north in Throndhjem, in the law cases in
which money-fees are paid you ?"

"It is so," said the archbishop, "that the bondes have allowed me
an advance on the ore of law casualties; but they did it
willingly, and without any kind of compulsion, and have thereby
added to their honour for God and the income of the bishopric."

Erling replies, "Is this according to the law of the holy Olaf?
or have you gone to work more arbitrarily in this than is written
down in the lawbook?"

The archbishop replies, "King Olaf the Holy fixed the laws, to
which he received the consent and affirmative of the people; but
it will not be found in his laws that it is forbidden to increase
God's right."

Erling: "If you augment your right, you must assist us to augment
as much the king's right."

The archbishop: "Thou hast already augmented enough thy son's
power and dominion; and if I have exceeded the law in taking an
increase of the ore from the Throndhjem people, it is, I think, a
much greater breach of the law that one is king over the country
who is not a king's son, and which has neither any support in the
law, nor in any precedent here in the country."

Erling: "When Magnus was chosen king, it was done with your
knowledge and consent, and also of all the other bishops here in
the country."

Archbishop: "You promised then, Erling, that provided we gave our
consent to electing Magnus king, you would, on all occasions, and
with all your power, strengthen God's rights."

Erling: "I may well admit that I have promised to preserve and
strengthen God's commands and the laws of the land with all my
power, and with the king's strength; and now I consider it to be
much more advisable, instead of accusing each other of a breach
of our promises, to hold firmly by the agreement entered into
between us.  Do you strengthen Magnus in his dominion, according
to what you have promised; and I will, on my part, strengthen
your power in all that can be of advantage or honour."

The conversation now took a more friendly turn; and Erling said,
"Although Magnus was not chosen king according to what has been
the old custom of this country, yet can you with your power give
him consecration as king, as God's law prescribes, by anointing
the king to sovereignty; and although I be neither a king, nor of
kingly race, yet most of the kings, within my recollection, have
not known the laws or the constitution of the country so well as
I do.  Besides, the mother of King Magnus is the daughter of a
king and queen born in lawful wedlock, and Magnus is son of a
queen and a lawfully married wife.  Now if you will give him
royal consecration, no man can take royalty from him.  William
Bastard was not a king's son; but he was consecrated and crowned
king of England, and the royalty in England has ever since
remained with his race, and all have been crowned.  Svein Ulfson
was not a king's son in Denmark, and still he was a crowned king,
and his sons likewise, and all his descendants have been crowned
kings.  Now we have here in Norway an archiepiscopal seat, to the
glory and honour of the country; let us also have a crowned king,
as well as the Danes and Englishmen."

Erling and the archbishop afterwards talked often of this matter,
and they were quite agreed.  Then the archbishop brought the
business before the legate, and got him easily persuaded to give
his consent.  Thereafter the archbishop called together the
bishops, and other learned men, and explained the subject to
them.  They all replied in the same terms, that they would follow
the counsels of the archbishop, and all were eager to promote the
consecration as soon as the archbishop pleased.



22. KING MAGNUS'S CONSECRATION.

Erling Skakke then had a great feast prepared in the king's
house.  The large hall was covered with costly cloth and
tapestry, and adorned with great expense.  The court-men and all
the attendants were there entertained, and there were numerous
guests, and many chiefs.  Then King Magnus received the royal
consecration from the Archbishop Eystein; and at the consecration
there were five other bishops and the legate, besides a number of
other clergy.  Erling Skakke, and with him twelve other
lendermen, administered to the king the oath of the law; and the
day of the consecration the king and Erling had the legate, the
archbishop, and all the other bishops as guests; and the feast
was exceedingly magnificent, and the father and son distributed
many great presents.  King Magnus was then eight years of age,
and had been king for three years.



23. KING VALDEMAR'S EMBASSY.

When the Danish king Valdemar heard the news from Norway that
Magnus was become king of the whole country, and all the other
parties in the country were rooted out, he sent his men with a
letter to King Magnus and Erling, and reminded them of the
agreement which Erling had entered into, under oath, with King
Valdemar, of which we have spoken before; namely, that Viken from
the east to Rygiarbit should be ceded to King Valdemar, if Magnus
became the sole king of Norway.  When the ambassadors came
forward and showed Erling the letter of the Danish king, and he
heard the Danish king's demand upon Norway, he laid it before the
other chiefs by whose counsels he usually covered his acts.  All,
as one man, replied that the Danes should never hold the
slightest portion of Norway; for never had things been worse in
the land than when the Danes had power in it.  The ambassadors of
the Danish king were urgent with Erling for an answer, and
desired to have it decided; but Erling begged them to proceed
with him east to Viken, and said he would give his final answer
when he had met with the men of most understanding and influence
in Viken.



24. ERLING AND THE PEOPLE OF VIKEN.

Erling Skakke proceeded in autumn to Viken, and stayed in
Tunsberg, from whence he sent people to Sarpsborg to summon a
Thing (1) of four districts; and then Erling went there with his
people.

When the Thing was seated Erling made a speech in which he
explained the resolutions which had been settled upon between him
and the Danish king, the first time he collected troops against
his enemies.  "I will," said Erling, "keep faithfully the
agreement which we then entered into with the king, if it be your
will and consent, bondes, rather to serve the Danish king than
the king who is now consecrated and crowned king of this
country."

The bondes replied thus to Erling's speech: "Never will we become
the Danish king's men, as long as one of us Viken men is in
life."  And the whole assembly, with shouts and cries, called on
Erling to keep the oath he had taken to defend his son's
dominions, "should we even all follow thee to battle."  And so
the Thing was dissolved.

The ambassadors of the Danish king then returned home, and told
the issue of their errand.  The Danes abused Erling, and all
Northmen, and declared that evil only proceeded from them; and
the report was spread, that in Spring the Danish king would send
out an army and lay waste Norway.  Erling returned in autumn
north to Bergen, stayed there all winter, and gave their pay to
his people.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  This reference to a Thing of the people in the affairs of
     the country is a striking example of the right of the Things
     being recognised, in theory at least, as fully as the right
     of our parliaments in later times. -- L.



25. LETTERS OF THE THRONDHJEM PEOPLE.

The same winter (A.D. 1165) some Danish people came by land
through the Uplands, saying they were to go, as was then the
general practice, to the holy King Olaf's festival.  But when
they came to the Throndhjem country, they went to many men of
influence, and told their business; which was, that the Danish
king had sent them to desire their friendship, and consent, if he
came to the country, promising them both power and money.  With
this verbal message came also the Danish king's letter and seal,
and a message to the Throndhjem people that they should send back
their letters and seals to him.  They did so, and the most of
them received well the Danish king's message; whereupon the
messengers returned back towards Lent.  Erling was in Bergen; and
towards spring Erling's friends told him the loose reports they
had heard by some merchant vessels that had arrived from
Throndhjem, that the Throndhjem people were in hostility openly
against him; and had declared that if Erling came to Throndhjem,
he should never pass Agdanes in life.  Erling said this was mere
folly and idle talk.  Erling now made it known that he would go
to Unarheim to the Gangdag-thing; and ordered a cutter of twenty
rowing benches to be fitted out, a boat of fifteen benches, and a
provision-ship.  When the vessels were ready, there came a strong
southerly gale.  On the Thursday of the Ascension week, Erling
called his people by sound of trumpet to their departure; but the
men were loath to leave the town, and were ill inclined to row
against the wind.  Erling brought his vessels to Biskupshafn.
"Well," said Erling, "since ye are so unwilling to row against
the wind, raise the mast, hoist the sails, and let the ship go
north."  They did so, and sailed northwards both day and night.
On Wednesday, in the evening, they sailed in past Agdanes, where
they found a fleet assembled of many merchant vessels, rowing
craft, and boats, all going towards the town to the celebration
of the festival, -- some before them, some behind them -- so that
the townspeople paid no attention to the long-ships coming.



26. ERLING AND THE PEOPLE OF THRONDHJEM.

Erling came to the town just as vespers was being sung in Christ
church.  He and his men ran into the town, to where it was told
them that the lenderman, Alf Rode, a son of Ottar Birting, was
still sitting at table, and drinking with his men.  Erling fell
upon them; and Alf was killed, with almost all his men.  Few
other men were killed; for they had almost all gone to church, as
this was the night before Christ's Ascension-day.  In the morning
early, Erling called all the people by sound of trumpet to a
Thing out upon Evrar.  At the Thing Erling laid a charge against
the Throndhjem people, accusing them of intending to betray the
country, and take it from the king; and named Bard Standale, Pal
Andreason, and Razabard, who then presided over the town's
affairs, and many others.  They, in their defence, denied the
accusation; but Erling's writer stood up, produced many letters
with seals, and asked if they acknowledged their seals which they
had sent to the Danish king; and thereupon the letters were read.
There was also a Danish man with Erling who had gone with the
letters in winter, and whom Erling for that purpose had taken
into his service.  He told to these men the very words which each
of them had used.  "And you, Razabard, spoke, striking your
breast; and the very words you used were, `Out of this breast are
all these counsels produced.'"  Bard replied, "I was wrong in the
head, sirs, when I spoke so."  There was now nothing to be done
but to submit the case entirely to the sentence Erling might give
upon it.  He took great sums of money from many as fines, and
condemned all those who had been killed as lawless, and their
deeds as lawless; making their deaths thereby not subject to
mulct.  Then Erling returned south to Bergen.



27. KING VALDEMAR'S EXPEDITION TO NORWAY.

The Danish king Valdemar assembled in spring (A.D. 1165) a great
army, and proceeded with it north to Viken.  As soon as he
reached the dominions of the king of Norway, the bondes assembled
in a great multitude.  The king advanced peacefully; but when
they came to the mainland, the people shot at them even when
there were only two or three together, from which the ill-will of
the country people towards them was evident.  When they came to
Tunsberg, King Valdemar summoned a Hauga-thing; but nobody
attended it from the country parts.  Then Valdemar spoke thus to
his troops: "It is evident that all the country-people are
against us; and now we have two things to choose: the one to go
through the country, sword in hand, sparing neither man nor
beast; the other is to go back without effecting our object.  And
it is more my inclination to go with the army to the East against
the heathens, of whom we have enough before us in the East
country, than to kill Christian people here, although they have
well deserved it."  All the others had a greater desire for a
foray; but the king ruled, and they all returned back to Denmark
without effecting their purpose.  They pillaged, however, all
around in the distant islands, or where the king was not in the
neighbourhood.  They then returned south to Denmark without doing
anything.



28. ERLING'S EXPEDITION TO JUTLAND.

As soon as Erling heard that a Danish force had come to Viken, he
ordered a levy through all the land, both of men and ships, so
that there was a great assemblage of men in arms; and with this
force he proceeded eastward along the coast.  But when he came to
Lidandisnes, he heard that the Danish army had returned south to
Denmark, after plundering all around them in Viken.  Then Erling
gave all the people of the levy permission to return home; but he
himself and some lendermen, with many vessels, sailed to Jutland
after the Danes.  When they came to a place called Dyrsa, the
Danes who had returned from the expedition lay there with many
ships.  Erling gave them battle, and there was a fight, in which
the Danes soon fled with the loss of many people; and Erling and
his men plundered the ships and the town, and made a great booty,
with which they returned to Norway.  Thereafter, for a time,
there was hostility between Norway and Denmark.



29. ERLING'S EXPEDITION TO DENMARK.

The princess Krisfin went south in autumn (A.D. 1165) to Denmark,
to visit her relation King Valdemar, who was her cousin.  The
king received her kindly, and gave her fiefs in his kingdom, so
that she could support her household well.  She often conversed
with the king, who was remarkably kind towards her.  In the
spring following (A.D. 1166) Kristin sent to Erling, and begged
him to pay a visit to the Danish king, and enter into a peace
with him.  In summer Erling was in Viken, where he fitted out a
long-ship, manned it with his finest lads, and sailed (a single
ship) over to Jutland.  When he heard that the Danish king
Valdemar was in Randaros, Erling sailed thither, and came to the
town just as the king sat at the dinner-table, and most of the
people were taking their meal.  When his people had made
themselves ready according to Erling's orders, set up the
ship-tents, and made fast the ship, Erling landed with twelve
men, all in armour, with hats over their helmets, and swords
under their cloaks.  They went to the king's lodging, where the
doors stood open, and the dishes were being carried in.  Erling
and his people went in immediately, and drew up in front of the
high-seat.  Erling said, "Peace and safe conduct we desire, king,
both here and to return home."

The king looked at him, and said, "Art thou here, Erling?"

He replies, "Here is Erling; and tell us, at once, if we shall
have peace and safe conduct."

There were eighty of the king's men in the room, but all unarmed.
The king replies, "Peace ye shall have, Erling, according to thy
desire; for I will not use force or villainy against a man who
comes to visit me."

Erling then kissed the king's hand, went out, and down to his
ship.  Erling stayed at Randaros some time with the king, and
they talked about terms of peace between them and between the
countries.  They agreed that Erling should remain as hostage with
the Danish king; and that Asbjorn Snara, Bishop Absalon's
brother, should go to Norway as hostage on the other part. 



30. KING VALDEMAR AND ERLING.

In a conference which King Valdemar and Erling once had together.
Erling said, "Sire, it appears to me likely that it might lead to
a peace between the countries if you got that part of Norway
which was promised you in our agreement; but if it should be so,
what chief would you place over it?  Would he be a Dane?"

"No," replied the king; "no Danish chief would go to Norway,
where he would have to manage an obstinate hard people, when he
has it so easy here with me."

Erling: "It was on that very consideration that I came here; for
I would not on any account in the world deprive myself of the
advantage of your friendship.  In days of old other men, Hakon
Ivarson and Fin Arnason, came also from Norway to Denmark, and
your predecessor, King Svein, made them both earls.  Now I am not
a man of less power in Norway than they were then, and my
influence is not less than theirs; and the king gave them the
province of Halland to rule over, which he himself had and owned
before.  Now it appears to me, sire, that you, if I become your
man and vassal, can allow me to hold of you the fief which my son
Magnus will not deny me, by which I will be bound in duty, and
ready, to undertake all the service belonging to that title."

Erling spoke such things, and much more in the same strain, until
it came at last to this, that Erling became Valdemar's man and
vassal; and the king led Erling to the earl's seat one day, and
gave him the title of earl, and Viken as a fief under his rule.
Earl Erling went thereafter to Norway, and was earl afterwards as
long as he lived; and also the peace with the Danish king was
afterwards always preserved.  Earl Erling had four sons by his
concubines.  The one was called Hreidar, the next Ogmund; and
these by two different mothers: the third was called Fin; the
fourth Sigurd: these were younger, and their mother was Asa the
Fair.  The princess Kristin and Earl Erling had a daughter called
Ragnhild, who was married to Jon Thorbergson of Randaberg.
Kristin went away from the country with a man called Grim Rusle;
and they went to Constantinople, where they were for a time, and
had some children.



31. BEGINNING OF OLAF.

Olaf, a son of Gudbrand Skafhaug, and Maria, a daughter of King
Eystein Magnuson, were brought up in the house of Sigurd Agnhot
in the Uplands.  While Earl Erling was in Denmark (A.D. 1166),
Olaf and his foster-father gathered a troop together, and many
Upland people joined them; and Olaf was chosen king by them. 
They went with their bands through the Uplands, and sometimes
down to Viken, and sometimes east to the forest settlements; but
never came on board of ships.  Now when, Earl Erling got news of
this troop, he hastened to Viken with his forces; and was there
in summer in his ships, and in Oslo in autumn (A.D. 1167) and
kept Yule there.  He had spies up the country after this troop,
and went himself, along with Orm, the King-brother, up the
country to follow them.  Now when they came to a lake called....
.... (1) they took all the vessels that were upon the lake.


ENDNOTES:
(1)  The name of the lake not given.



32. OF ERLING.

The priest who performed divine service at a place called
Rydiokul, close by the lake, invited the earl to a feast at
Candlemas.  The earl promised to come; and thinking it would be
good to hear mass there, he rowed with his attendants over the
lake the night before Candlemas day.  But the priest had another
plan on hand.  He sent men to bring Olaf news of Earl Erling's
arrival.  The priest gave Erling strong drink in the evening, and
let him have an excessive quantity of it.  When the earl wished
to lie down and sleep, the beds were made ready in the drinking-
room; but when they had slept a short time the earl awoke, and
asked if it was not the hour for matins.  The priest replied,
that only a small part of the night was gone, and told him to
sleep in peace.  The earl replied, "I dream of many things
to-night, and I sleep ill." He slumbered again, but awoke soon,
and told the priest to get up and sing mass.  The priest told the
earl to sleep, and said it was but midnight.  Then the earl again
lay down, slept a little while, and, springing out of bed,
ordered his men to put on their clothes.  They did so; took their
weapons, went to the church, and laid their arms outside while
the priest was singing matins.



33. BATTLE AT RYDIOKUL.

As Olaf got the message in the evening, they travelled in the
night six miles, which people considered an extraordinarily long
march.  They arrived at Rydiokul while the priest was still
singing mass, and it was pitch-dark.  Olaf and his men went into
the room, raised a war-shout, and killed some of the earl's men
who had not gone to the early mass.  Now when Erling and his men
heard the war-shout, they ran to their weapons, and hastened down
to their ships.  Olaf and his men met them at a fence, at which
there was a sharp conflict.  Erling and his men retreated along
the fence, which protected them.  Erling had far fewer men, and
many of them had fallen, and still more were wounded.  What
helped Earl Erling and his men the most was, that Olaf's men
could not distinguish them, it was so dark; and the earl's men
were always drawing down to their ships.  Are Thorgeirson, father
of Bishop Gudmund fell there, and many other of Erling's court-
men.  Erling himself was wounded in the left side; but some say
he did it himself in drawing his sword.  Orm the King-brother was
also severely wounded; and with great difficulty they escaped to
their ships, and instantly pushed off from land.  It was
generally considered as a most unlucky meeting for Olaf's people,
as Earl Erling was in a manner sold into their hands, if they had
proceeded with common prudence.  He was afterwards called Olaf
the Unlucky; but others called his people Hat-lads.  They went
with their bands through the Uplands as before.  Erling again
went down to Viken to his ships, and remained there all summer.
Olaf was in the Uplands, and sometimes east in the forest
districts, where he and his troop remained all the next winter
(A.D. 1168).



34. BATTLE AT STANGAR.

The following spring the Hat-lads went down to Viken, and raised
the king's taxes all around, and remained there long in summer.
When Earl Erling heard this, he hastened with his troops to meet
them in Viken, and fell in with them east of the Fjord, at a
place called Stangar; where they had a great battle, in which
Erling was victorious.  Sigurd Agnhot, and many others of Olaf's
men, fell there; but Olaf escaped by flight, went south to
Denmark, and was all winter (A.D. 1169) in Alaborg in Jutland.
The following spring Olaf fell into an illness which ended in
death, and he was buried in the Maria church; and the Danes call
him a saint.



35. HARALD'S DEATH.

King Magnus had a lenderman called Nikolas Kufung, who was a son
of Pal Skaptason.  He took Harald prisoner, who called himself a
son of King Sigurd Haraldson and the princess Kristin, and a
brother of King Magnus by the mother's side.  Nikolas brought
Harald to Bergen, and delivered him into Earl Erling's hands.  It
was Erling's custom when his enemies came before him, that he
either said nothing to them, or very little, and that in all
gentleness, when he had determined to put them to death; or rose
with furious words against them, when he intended to spare their
lives.  Erling spoke but little to Harald, and many, therefore,
suspected his intentions; and some begged King Magnus to put in a
good word for Harald with the earl; and the king did so.  The
earl replies, "Thy friends advise thee badly.  Thou wouldst
govern this kingdom but a short time in peace and safety, if thou
wert to follow the counsels of the heart only."  Earl Erling
ordered Harald to be taken to Nordnes, where he was beheaded.



36. EYSTEIN EYSTEINSON AND THE BIRKEBEINS.

There was a man called Eystein, who gave himself out for a son of
King Eystein Haraldson.  He was at this time young, and not full
grown.  It is told of him that he one summer appeared in
Svithjod, and went to Earl Birger Brosa, who was then married to
Brigida, Eystein's aunt, a daughter of King Harald Gille. 
Eystein explained his business to him, and asked their
assistance.  Both Earl Birger and his wife listened to him in a
friendly way, and promised him their confidence, and he stayed
with them a while.  Earl Birger gave him some assistance of men,
and a good sum for travelling expenses; and both promised him
their friendship on his taking leave.  Thereafter Eystein
proceeded north into Norway (A.D. 1174), and when he came down to
Viken people flocked to him in crowds; and Eystein was there
proclaimed king, and he remained in Viken in winter.  As they
were very poor in money, they robbed all around, wherefore the
lendermen and bondes raised men against them; and being thus
overpowered by numbers, they fled away to the forests and
deserted hill grounds, where they lived for a long time.  Their
clothes being worn out, they wound the bark of the birch-tree
about their legs, and thus were called by the bondes Birkebeins.
They often rushed down upon the settled districts, pushed on here
or there, and made an assault where they did not find many people
to oppose them.  They had several battles with the bondes with
various success; and the Birkebeins held three battles in regular
array, and gained the victory in them all.  At Krokaskog they had
nearly made an unlucky expedition, for a great number of bondes
and men-at-arms were assembled there against them; but the
Birkebeins felled brushwood across the roads, and retired into
the forest.  They were two years (A.D. 1175-1176) in Viken before
they showed themselves in the northern parts of the country.



37. BIRKEBEINS, KING EYSTEIN, AND SKAKKE.

Magnus had been king for thirteen years when the Birkebeins first
made their appearance.  They got themselves ships in the third
summer (A.D. 1176), with which they sailed along the coast
gathering goods and men.  They were first in Viken; but when
summer advanced they proceeded northwards, and so rapidly that no
news preceded them until they came to Throndhjem.  The
Birkebeins' troop consisted principally of hill-men and Elfgrims,
and many were from Thelemark; and all were well armed.  Their
king, Eystein, was a handsome man, and with a little but good
countenance; and he was not of great stature, for his men called
him Eystein Meyla.  King Magnus and Earl Erling were in Bergen
when the Birkebeins sailed past it to the north; but they did not
hear of them.

Earl Erling was a man of great understanding and power, an
excellent leader in war, and an able and prudent ruler of the
country; but he had the character of being cruel and severe.  The
cause of this was principally that he never allowed his enemies
to remain in the country, even when they prayed to him for mercy;
and therefore many joined the bands which were collected against
him.  Erling was a tall strong-made man, somewhat short-necked
and high-shouldered; had a long and sharp countenance of a light
complexion, and his hair became very grey.  He bore his head a
little on one side; was free and agreeable in his manners.  He
wore the old fashion of clothes, -- long body-pieces and long
arms to his coats, foreign cloak, and high shoes.  He made the
king wear the same kind of dress in his youth; but when he grew
up, and acted for himself, he dressed very sumptuously.

King Magnus was of a light turn of mind, full of jokes; a great
lover of mirth, and not less of women.



38. OF NIKOLAS.

Nikolas was a son of Sigurd Hranason and of Skialdvor, a daughter
of Brynjolf Ulfalde, and a sister of Haldor Brynjolfson by the
father's side, and of King Magnus Barefoot by the mother's side.
Nikolas was a distinguished chief, who had a farm at Ongul in
Halogaland, which was called Steig.  Nikolas had also a house in
Nidaros, below Saint Jon's church, where Thorgeir the scribe
lately dwelt.  Nikolas was often in the town, and was president
of the townspeople.  Skialdvor, Nikolas's daughter, was married
to Eirik Arnason, who was also a lenderman.



39. OF EIRIK AND NIKOLAS.

As the people of the town were coming from matins the last day of
Marymas (September 8th), Eirik came up to Nikolas, and said,
"Here are some fishermen come from the sea, who report that some
long-ships are sailing into the fjord; and people conjecture that
these may be the Birkebeins.  It would be advisable to call the
townspeople together with the war-horns, to meet under arms out
on Eyrar."

Nikolas replies, "I don't go after fishermen's reports; but I
shall send out spies to the fjord, and in the meantime hold a
Thing to-day."

Eirik went home; but when they were ringing to high mass, and
Nikolas was going to church, Eirik came to hint again, and said,
"I believe the news to be true; for here are men who say they saw
them under sail; and I think it would be most advisable to ride
out of town, and gather men with arms; for it appears to me the
townspeople will be too few."

Nikolas replies, "Thou art mixing everything together; let us
first hear mass, and then take our resolution."

Nikolas then went into the church.  When the mass was over Eirik
went to Nikolas, and said, "My horses are saddled; I will ride
away."

Nikolas replies, "Farewell, then: we will hold a Thing to-day on
the Eyrar, and examine what force of men there may be in the
town."

Eirik rode away, and Nikolas went to his house, and then to
dinner.



40. THE FALL OF NIKOLAS.

The meat was scarcely put on the table, when a man came into the
house to tell Nikolas that the Birkebeins were roving up the
river.  Then Nikolas called to his men to take their weapons.
When they were armed Nikolas ordered them to go up into the loft.
But that was a most imprudent step; for if they had remained in
the yard, the townspeople might have come to their assistance;
but now the Birkebeins filled the whole yard, and from thence
scrambled from all sides up to the loft.  They called to Nikolas,
and offered him quarter, but he refused it.  Then they attacked
the loft.  Nikolas and his men defended themselves with bow-shot,
hand-shot, and stones of the chimney; but the Birkebeins hewed
down the houses, broke up the loft, and returned shot for shot
from bow or hand.  Nikolas had a red shield in which were gilt
nails, and about it was a border of stars.  The Birkebeins shot
so that the arrows went in up to the arrow feather.  Then said
Nikolas, "My shield deceives me."  Nikolas and a number of his
people fell, and his death was greatly lamented.  The Birkebeins
gave all the towns-people their lives.



41. EYSTEIN PROCLAIMED KING.

Eystein was then proclaimed king, and all the people submitted to
him.  He stayed a while in the town, and then went into the
interior of the Throndhjem land, where many joined him, and among
them Thorfin Svarte of Snos with a troop of people.  When the
Birkebeins, in the beginning of winter (A.D. 1177), came again
into the town, the sons of Gudrun from Saltnes, Jon Ketling,
Sigurd, and William, joined them; and when they proceeded
afterwards from Nidaros up Orkadal, they could number nearly 2000
men.  They afterwards went to the Uplands, and on to Thoten and
Hadaland, and from thence to Ringerike, and subdued the country
wheresover they came.



42. THE FALL OF KING EYSTEIN.

King Magnus went eastward to Viken in autumn with a part of his
men and with him Orm, the king's brother; but Earl Erling
remained behind in Bergen to meet the Berkebeins in case they
took the sea route.  King Magnus went to Tunsberg, where he and
Orm held their Yule (A.D. 1177).  When King Magnus heard that the
Birkebeins were up in Re, the king and Orm proceeded thither with
their men.  There was much snow, and it was dreadfully cold. 
When they came to the farm they left the beaten track on the
road, and drew up their array outside of the fence, and trod a
path through the snow with their men, who were not quite 1500 in
number.  The Birkebeins were dispersed here and there in other
farms, a few men in each house.  When they perceived King
Magnus's army they assembled, and drew up in regular order; and
as they thought their force was larger than his, which it
actually was, they resolved to fight; but when they hurried
forward to the road only a few could advance at a time, which
broke their array, and the men fell who first advanced upon the
beaten way.  Then the Birkebeins' banner was cut down; those who
were nearest gave way and some took to flight.  King Magnus's men
pursued them, and killed one after the other as they came up with
them.  Thus the Birkebeins could never form themselves in array;
and being exposed to the weapons of the enemy singly, many of
them fell, and many fled.  It happened here, as it often does,
that although men be brave and gallant, if they have once been
defeated and driven to flight, they will not easily be brought to
turn round.  Now the main body of the Birkebeins began to fly,
and many fell; because Magnus's men killed all they could lay
hold of, and not one of them got quarter.  The whole body became
scattered far and wide.  Eystein in his flight ran into a house,
and begged for his life, and that the bonde would conceal him;
but the bonde killed him, and then went to King Magnus, whom he
found at Rafnnes, where the king was in a room warming himself by
the fire along with many people.  Some went for the corpse, and
bore it into the room, where the king told the people to come and
inspect the body.  A man was sitting on a bench in the corner,
and he was a Birkebein, but nobody had observed him; and when he
saw and recognised his chief's body he sprang up suddenly and
actively, rushed out upon the floor, and with an axe he had in
his hands made a blow at King Magnus's neck between the
shoulders.  A man saw the axe swinging, and pulled the king to a
side, by which the axe struck lower in the shoulder, and made a
large wound.  He then raised the axe again, and made a blow at
Orm, the King-brother, who was lying on a bench, and the blow was
directed at both legs; but Orm seeing the man about to kill him,
drew in his feet instantly, threw them over his head, and the
blow fell on the bench, in which the axe stuck fast; and then the
blows at the Birkebein came so thick that he could scarcely fall
to the ground.  It was discovered that he had dragged his
entrails after him over the floor; and this man's bravery was
highly praised.  King Magnus's men followed the fugitives, and
killed so many that they were tired of it.  Thorfin of Snos, and
a very great number of Throndhjem people, fell there.



43. OF THE BIRKEBEINS.

The faction which called itself the Birkebeins had gathered
together in great numbers.  They were a hardy people, and the
boldest of men under arms; but wild, and going forward madly when
they had a strong force.  They had few men in their faction who
were good counsellors, or accustomed to rule a country by law, or
to head an army; and if there were such men among them who had
more knowledge, yet the many would only allow of those measures
which they liked, trusting always to their numbers and courage.
Of the men who escaped many were wounded, and had lost both their
clothes and their arms, and were altogether destitute of money.
Some went east to the borders, some went all the way east to
Svithjod; but the most of them went to Thelemark, where they had
their families.  All took flight, as they had no hope of getting
their lives from King Magnus or Earl Erling.



44. OF KING MAGNUS ERLINGSON.

King Magnus then returned to Tunsberg, and got great renown by
this victory; for it had been an expression in the mouths of all,
that Earl Erling was the shield and support of his son and
himself.  But after gaining a victory over so strong and numerous
a force with fewer troops, King Magnus was considered by all as
surpassing other leaders, and that he would become a warrior as
much greater than his father, Earl Erling, as he was younger.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Heimskringla, by Snorri Sturlson

