**The Project Gutenberg Etext of A. V. Laider, by Max Beerbohm**
#3 in our series by Max Beerbohm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


A. V. Laider

by Max Beerbohm

December, 1996 [Etext #761]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of A. V. Laider, by Max Beerbohm**
*****This file should be named laidr10.txt or laidr10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, laidr11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, laidr10a.txt.


This etext was created by Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska.
The equipment: an IBM-compatible 486/50, a Hewlett-Packard
ScanJet IIc flatbed scanner, and Calera Recognition Systems'
M/600 Series Professional OCR software and RISC accelerator board
donated by Calera Recognition Systems.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





A. V. Laider

By MAX BEERBOHM





I UNPACKED my things and went down to await luncheon.

It was good to be here again in this little old sleepy hostel by the
sea.  Hostel I say, though it spelt itself without an "s" and even placed a
circumflex above the "o."  It made no other pretension.  It was very cozy
indeed.

I had been here just a year before, in mid-February, after an attack
of influenza.  And now I had returned, after an attack of influenza.
Nothing was changed.  It had been raining when I left, and the waiter--
there was but a single, a very old waiter--had told me it was only a 
shower.  That waiter was still here, not a day older.  And the shower had
not ceased.

Steadfastly it fell on to the sands, steadfastly into the iron-gray sea.
I stood looking out at it from the windows of the hall, admiring it very
much.  There seemed to be little else to do.  What little there was I did.  I
mastered the contents of a blue hand-bill which, pinned to the wall just
beneath the framed engraving of Queen Victoria's Coronation, gave
token of a concert that was to be held--or, rather, was to have been held 
some weeks ago--in the town hall for the benefit of the Life-Boat Fund.  I
looked at the barometer, tapped it, was not the wiser.  I wandered to the
letter-board.

These letter-boards always fascinate me.  Usually some two or three
of the envelops stuck into the cross-garterings have a certain newness
and freshness.  They seem sure they will yet be claimed.  Why not?  Why
SHOULDN'T John Doe, Esq., or Mrs. Richard Roe turn up at any 
moment?  I do not know.  I can only say that nothing in the world seems
to me more unlikely.  Thus it is that these young bright envelops touch
my heart even more than do their dusty and sallowed seniors.  Sour
resignation is less touching than impatience for what will not be, than the 
eagerness that has to wane and wither.  Soured beyond measure these old 
envelops are.  They are not nearly so nice as they should be to the young
ones.  They lose no chance of sneering and discouraging.  Such dialogues
as this are only too frequent:

A Very Young Envelop: Something in me whispers that he
will come to-day!

A Very Old Envelop: He?  Well, that's good!  Ha, ha, ha!
Why didn't he come last week, when YOU came?  What reason
have you for supposing he'll ever come now?  It isn't as if he were a
frequenter of the place.  He's never been here.  His name is utterly
unknown here.  You don't suppose he's coming on the chance of finding
YOU?

A. V. Y. E.: It may seem silly, but--something in me
whispers--

A. V. O. E.: Something in YOU? One has only to
look at you to see there's nothing in you but a note scribbled to him by a 
cousin.  Look at ME!  There are three sheets, closely written, in
ME.  The lady to whom I am addressed--

A. V. Y. E.: Yes, sir, yes; you told me all about her
yesterday.

A. V. O. E.: And I shall do so to-day and to-morrow and
every day and all day long.  That young lady was a widow.  She stayed 
here many times.  She was delicate, and the air suited her.  She was poor,
and the tariff was just within her means.  She was lonely, and had need
of love.  I have in me for her a passionate avowal and strictly honorable 
proposal, written to her, after many rough copies, by a gentleman who
had made her acquaintance under this very roof.  He was rich, he was
charming, he was in the prime of life.  He had asked if he might write to 
her.  She had flutteringly granted his request.  He posted me to 
her the day after his return to London.  I looked forward to being torn
open by her.  I was very sure she would wear me and my contents next to
her bosom.  She was gone.  She had left no address.  She never returned.
This I tell you, and shall continue to tell you, not because I want any of
your callow sympathy,--no, THANK you!--but that you may judge
how much less than slight are the probabilities that you yourself--

But my reader has overheard these dialogues as often as I.  He
wants to know what was odd about this particular letter-board before
which I was standing.  At first glance I saw nothing odd about it.  But
presently I distinguished a handwriting that was vaguely familiar.  It was
mine.  I stared, I wondered.  There is always a slight shock in seeing an
envelop of one's own after it has gone through the post.  It looks as if it
had gone through so much.  But this was the first time I had ever seen an
envelop of mine eating its heart out in bondage on a letter-board.  This
was outrageous.  This was hardly to be believed.  Sheer kindness had
impelled me to write to "A. V. Laider, Esq.," and this was the result!  I
hadn't minded receiving no answer.  Only now, indeed, did I remember
that I hadn't received one.  In multitudinous London the memory of A. V.
Laider and his trouble had soon passed from my mind.  But--well, what a
lesson not to go out of one's way to write to casual acquaintances!

My envelop seemed not to recognize me as its writer.  Its gaze was
the more piteous for being blank.  Even so had I once been gazed at by a
dog that I had lost and, after many days, found in the Battersea Home. 
"I don't know who you are, but, whoever you are, claim me, take me out
of this!"  That was my dog's appeal.  This was the appeal of my envelop.

I raised my hand to the letter-board, meaning to effect a swift and
lawless rescue, but paused at sound of a footstep behind me.  The old
waiter had come to tell me that my luncheon was ready.  I followed him
out of the hall, not, however, without a bright glance across my shoulder
to reassure the little captive that I should come back.

I had the sharp appetite of the convalescent, and this the sea air had 
whetted already to a finer edge.  In touch with a dozen oysters, and with
stout, I soon shed away the unreasoning anger I had felt against A. V.
Laider.  I became merely sorry for him that he had not received a letter
which might perhaps have comforted him.  In touch with cutlets, I felt
how sorely he had needed comfort.  And anon, by the big bright fireside
of that small dark smoking-room where, a year ago, on the last evening
of my stay here, he and I had at length spoken to each other, I reviewed
in detail the tragic experience he had told me; and I simply reveled in
reminiscent sympathy with him.

A. V. LAIDER--I had looked him up in the visitors'-book on the night of
his arrival.  I myself had arrived the day before, and had been rather sorry
there was no one else staying here.  A convalescent by the sea likes to
have some one to observe, to wonder about, at meal-time.  I was glad 
when, on my second evening, I found seated at the table opposite to mine 
another guest.  I was the gladder because he was just the right kind of
guest.  He was enigmatic.  By this I mean that he did not look soldierly or
financial or artistic or anything definite at all.  He offered a clean slate
for speculation.  And, thank heaven! he evidently wasn't going to spoil
the fun by engaging me in conversation later on.  A decently unsociable
man, anxious to be left alone.

The heartiness of his appetite, in contrast with his extreme fragility
of aspect and limpness of demeanor, assured me that he, too, had just had
influenza.  I liked him for that.  Now and again our eyes met and were
instantly parted.  We managed, as a rule, to observe each other indirectly.
I was sure it was not merely because he had been ill that he looked
interesting.  Nor did it seem to me that a spiritual melancholy,
though I imagined him sad at the best of times, was his sole asset.
I conjectured that he was clever.  I thought he might also be
imaginative.  At first glance I had mistrusted him.  A shock of
white hair, combined with a young face and dark eyebrows, does somehow
make a man look like a charlatan.  But it is foolish to be guided by an
accident of color.  I had soon rejected my first impression of my
fellow-diner.  I found him very sympathetic.

Anywhere but in England it would be impossible for two solitary
men, howsoever much reduced by influenza, to spend five or six days in
the same hostel and not exchange a single word.  That is one of the 
charms of England.  Had Laider and I been born and bred in any other
land than Eng we should have become acquainted before the end of our
first evening in the small smoking-room, and have found ourselves 
irrevocably committed to go on talking to each other throughout the rest
of our visit.  We might, it is true, have happened to like each other more
than any one we had ever met.  This off chance may have occurred to 
us both.  But it counted for nothing against the certain surrender of
quietude and liberty.  We slightly bowed to each other as we entered or
left the dining-room or smoking-room, and as we met on the wide-spread
sands or in the shop that had a small and faded circulating library.  That 
was all.  Our mutual aloofness was a positive bond between us.

Had he been much older than I, the responsibility for our silence
would of course have been his alone.  But he was not, I judged, more
than five or six years ahead of me, and thus I might without impropriety
have taken it on myself to perform that hard and perilous feat which
English people call, with a shiver, "breaking the ice."  He had reason,
therefore, to be as grateful to me as I to him.  Each of us, not the less
frankly because silently, recognized his obligation to the other.  And
when, on the last evening of my stay, the ice actually was broken there
was no ill-will between us: neither of us was to blame.

It was a Sunday evening.  I had been out for a long last walk and
had come in very late to dinner.  Laider had left his table almost directly
after I sat down to mine.  When I entered the smoking-room I found him
reading a weekly review which I had bought the day before.  It was a
crisis.  He could not silently offer nor could I have silently accepted, six-pence.  It was a
crisis.  We faced it like men.  He made, by word of
mouth, a graceful apology.  Verbally, not by signs, I besought him to go
on reading.  But this, of course, was a vain counsel of perfection.  The
social code forced us to talk now.  We obeyed it like men.  To reassure
him that our position was not so desperate as it might seem, I took the
earliest opportunity to mention that I was going away early next morning. 
In the tone of his "Oh, are you?" he tried bravely to imply that he was
sorry, even now, to hear that.  In a way, perhaps, he really was sorry.  We
had got on so well together, he and I.  Nothing could efface the memory
of that.  Nay, we seemed to be hitting it off even now.  Influenza was  not
our sole theme.  We passed from that to the aforesaid weekly review, and
to a correspondence that was raging therein on faith and reason.

This correspondence had now reached its fourth and penultimate
stage--its Australian stage.  It is hard to see why these correspondences
spring up; one only knows that they do spring up, suddenly, like street
crowds.  There comes, it would seem, a moment when the whole
English-speaking race is unconsciously bursting to have its say about
some one thing--the split infinitive, or the habits of migratory birds, or
faith and reason, or what-not.  Whatever weekly review happens at such
a moment to contain a reference, however remote, to the theme in
question reaps the storm.  Gusts of letters come in from all corners of the
British Isles.  These are presently reinforced by Canada in full blast.  A
few weeks later the Anglo-Indians weigh in.  In due course we have the
help of our Australian cousins.  By that time, however, we of the mother
country have got our second wind, and so determined are we to
make the most of it that at last even the editor suddenly loses patience
and says, "This correspondence must now cease.--Ed." and wonders why
on earth he ever allowed anything so tedious and idiotic to begin.

I pointed out to Laider one of the Australian letters that had
especially pleased me in the current issue.  It was from "A Melbourne
Man," and was of the abrupt kind which declares that "all your
correspondents have been groping in the dark" and then settles the whole
matter in one short sharp flash.  The flash in this instance was "Reason is
faith, faith reason--that is all we know on earth and all we need to know."
The writer then inclosed his card and was, etc., "A Melbourne Man."  I
said to Laider how very restful it was, after influenza, to read anything
that meant nothing whatsoever.  Laider was inclined to take the letter
more seriously than I, and to be mildly metaphysical.  I said that for me
faith and reason were two separate things, and as I am no good at
metaphysics, however mild, I offered a definite example, to coax the talk 
on to ground where I should be safer.

"Palmistry, for example," I said.  "Deep down in my heart I believe
in palmistry."

Laider turned in his chair.

"You believe in palmistry?"

I hesitated.

"Yes, somehow I do.  Why?  I haven't the slightest notion.  I can
give myself all sorts of reasons for laughing it to scorn.  My common
sense utterly rejects it.  Of course the shape of the hand means
something, is more or less an index of character.  But the idea that my
past and future are neatly mapped out on my palms--" I shrugged my
shoulders.

"You don't like that idea?" asked Laider in his gentle, rather
academic voice.

"I only say it's a grotesque idea."

"Yet you do believe in it?"

"I've a grotesque belief in it, yes."

"Are you sure your reason for calling this idea 'grotesque' isn't
merely that you dislike it?"

"Well," I said, with the thrilling hope that he was a companion in
absurdity, "doesn't it seem grotesque to you?"

"It seems strange."

"You believe in it?"

"Oh, absolutely."

"Hurrah!"

He smiled at my pleasure, and I, at the risk of reentanglement
in metaphysics, claimed him as standing shoulder to shoulder with me
against "A Melbourne Man."  This claim he gently disputed.

"You may think me very prosaic," he said, "but I can't believe
without evidence."

"Well, I'm equally prosaic and equally at a disadvantage: I can't take
my own belief as evidence, and I've no other evidence to go on."

He asked me if I had ever made a study of palmistry.  I said I had
read one of Desbarolles's books years ago, and one of Heron-Allen's. 
But, he asked, had I tried to test them by the lines on my own hands or on
the hands of my friends?  I confessed that my actual practice in palmistry
had been of a merely passive kind--the prompt extension of my palm to
any one who would be so good as to "read" it and truckle for a few
minutes to my egoism.  (I hoped Laider might do this.)

"Then I almost wonder," he said, with his sad smile, "that you
haven't lost your belief, after all the nonsense you must have heard. 
There are so many young girls who go in for palmistry.  I am sure all the
five foolish virgins were 'awfully keen on it' and used to say, 'You can be
led, but not driven,' and, 'You are likely to have a serious illness between
the ages of forty and forty-five,' and, 'You are by nature rather lazy, but
can be very energetic by fits and starts.'  And most of the professionals,
I'm told, are as silly as the young girls."

For the honor of the profession, I named three practitioners whom I
had found really good at reading character.  He asked whether any of
them had been right about past events.  I confessed that, as a matter of 
fact, all three of them had been right in the main.  This seemed to amuse
him.  He asked whether any of them had predicted anything
which had since come true.  I confessed that all three had predicted that 
I should do several things which I had since done rather unexpectedly.
He asked if I didn't accept this as, at any rate, a scrap of evidence.  I said
I could only regard it as a fluke--a rather remarkable fluke.

The superiority of his sad smile was beginning to get on my nerves.
I wanted him to see that he was as absurd as I.

"Suppose," I said--"suppose, for the sake of argument, that you and
I are nothing but helpless automata created to do just this and that, and to
have just that and this done to us.  Suppose, in fact, we HAVEN'T
any free will whatsoever.  Is it likely or conceivable that the Power which 
fashioned us would take the trouble to jot down in cipher on our hands
just what was in store for us?"

Laider did not answer this question; he did but annoyingly ask me
another.

"You believe in free will?"

"Yes, of course.  I'll be hanged if I'm an automaton."

"And you believe in free will just as in palmistry--without any
reason?"

"Oh, no.  Everything points to our having free will."

"Everything?  What, for instance?"

This rather cornered me.  I dodged out, as lightly as I could, by
saying:

"I suppose YOU would say it's written in my hand that I
should be a believer in free will."

"Ah, I've no doubt it is."

I held out my palms.  But, to my great disappointment, he looked
quickly away from them.  He had ceased to smile.  There was agitation in
his voice as he explained that he never looked at people's hands now.
"Never now--never again."  He shook his head as though to beat off some 
memory.

I was much embarrassed by my indiscretion.  I hastened to tide over
the awkward moment by saying that if _I_ could read hands I
wouldn't, for fear of the awful things I might see there.

"Awful things, yes," he whispered, nodding at the fire.

"Not," I said in self-defense, "that there's anything very awful, so
far as I know, to be read in MY hands."

He turned his gaze from the fire to me.

"You aren't a murderer, for example?"

"Oh, no," I replied, with a nervous laugh.

"_I_ am."

This was a more than awkward, it was a painful, moment for me;
and I am afraid I must have started or winced, for he instantly begged my
pardon.

"I don't know," he exclaimed, "why I said it.  I'm usually a very
reticent man.  But sometimes--" He pressed his brow.  "What you must
think of me!"

I begged him to dismiss the matter from his mind.

"It's very good of you to say that; but--I've placed myself as well as
you in a false position.  I ask you to believe that I'm not the sort of man
who is 'wanted' or ever was 'wanted' by the police.  I should be bowed out
of any police-station at which I gave myself up.  I'm not a murderer in
any bald sense of the word.  No."

My face must have perceptibly brightened, for, "Ah," he said, "don't 
imagine I'm not a murderer at all.  Morally, I am."  He looked at the
clock. I pointed out that the night was young.  He assured me that his
story was not a long one.  I assured him that I hoped it was.  He said I
was very kind.  I denied this.  He warned me that what he had to tell
might rather tend to stiffen my unwilling faith in palmistry, and to shake
my opposite and cherished faith in free will.  I said, "Never mind."  He
stretched his hands pensively toward the fire.  I settled myself back in my
chair.

"My hands," he said, staring at the backs of them, "are the hands of
a very weak man.  I dare say you know enough of palmistry to see that
for yourself.  You notice the slightness of the thumbs and of he two 'little'
fingers.  They are the hands of a weak and over-sensitive man--a man
without confidence, a man who would certainly waver in an emergency. 
Rather Hamletish hands," he mused.  "And I'm like Hamlet in other respects,
too: I'm no fool, and I've rather a noble disposition, and I'm unlucky.
But Hamlet was luckier than I in one thing: he was a murderer by accident,
whereas the murders that I committed one day fourteen years ago--for I must
tell you it wasn't one murder, but many murders that I committed--were all
of them due to the wretched inherent weakness of my own wretched self.

"I was twenty-six--no, twenty-seven years old, and rather a
nondescript person, as I am now.  I was supposed to have been called to
the bar.  In fact, I believe I HAD been called to the bar.  I hadn't
listened to the call.  I never intended to practise, and I never did practise.
I only wanted an excuse in the eyes of the world for existing.  I suppose
the nearest I have ever come to practicing is now at this moment: I am 
defending a murderer.  My father had left me well enough provided with
money.  I was able to go my own desultory way, riding my hobbies where
I would.  I had a good stableful of hobbies.  Palmistry was one of them.  I
was rather ashamed of this one.  It seemed to me absurd, as it seems to 
you.  Like you, though, I believed in it.  Unlike you, I had done more
than merely read a book about it.  I had read innumerable books
about it.  I had taken casts of all my friends' hands.  I had tested and
tested again the points at which Desbarolles dissented from the Gipsies,
and--well, enough that I had gone into it all rather thoroughly, and was as
sound a palmist, as a man may be without giving his whole life to
palmistry.

"One of the first things I had seen in my own hand, as soon as I had
learned to read it, was that at about the age of twenty-six I should have a
narrow escape from death--from a violent death.  There was a clean break
in the life-line, and a square joining it--the protective square, you know. 
The markings were precisely the same in both hands.  It was to be the
narrowest escape possible.  And I wasn't going to escape without injury,
either.  That is what bothered me.  There was a faint line connecting the
break in the lifeline with a star on the line of health.  Against that star 
was another square.  I was to recover from the injury, whatever it might
be.  Still, I didn't exactly look forward to it.  Soon after I had reached the
age of twenty-five, I began to feel uncomfortable.  The thing might be 
going to happen at any moment.  In palmistry, you know, it is impossible
to pin an event down hard and fast to one year.  This particular event was
to be when I was ABOUT twenty-six; it mightn't be till I was 
twenty-seven; it might be while I was only twenty-five.

"And I used to tell myself it mightn't be at all.  My reason rebelled
against the whole notion of palmistry, just as yours does.  I despised my
faith in the thing, just as you despise yours.  I used to try not to be so 
ridiculously careful as I was whenever I crossed a street.  I lived in
London at that time.  Motor-cars had not yet come in, but--what hours,
all told, I must have spent standing on curbs, very circumspect, very 
lamentable!  It was a pity, I suppose, that I had no definite occupation--
something to take me out of myself.  I was one of the victims of private
means.  There came a time when I drove in four-wheelers rather than 
in hansoms, and was doubtful of four-wheelers.  Oh, I assure you, I was
very lamentable indeed.

"If a railway-journey could be avoided, I avoided it.  My uncle had
a place in Hampshire.  I was very fond of him and of his wife.  Theirs
was the only house I ever went to stay in now.  I was there for a week in
November, not long after my twenty-seventh birthday.  There were other 
people staying there, and at the end of the week we all traveled back to
London together.  There were six of us in the carriage: Colonel Elbourn
and his wife and their daughter, a girl of seventeen; and another married
couple, the Bretts.  I had been at Winchester with Brett, but had hardly
seen him since that time.  He was in the Indian Civil, and was home on
leave.  He was sailing for India next week.  His wife was to remain in
England for some months, and then join him out there.  They had been 
married five years.  She was now just twenty-four years old.  He told me
that this was her age.  The Elbourns I had never met before.  They were
charming people.  We had all been very happy together.  The only trouble
had been that on the last night, at dinner, my uncle asked me if I still
went in for 'the Gipsy business,' as he always called it; and of course the
three ladies were immensely excited, and implored me to 'do' their hands.
I told them it was all nonsense, I said I had forgotten all I once knew, I
made various excuses; and the matter dropped.  It was quite true that I
had given up reading hands.  I avoided anything that might remind me of
what was in my own hands.  And so, next morning, it was a great bore to
me when, soon after the train started, Mrs. Elbourn said it would be 'too
cruel' of me if I refused to do their hands now.  Her daughter and Mrs.
Brett also said it would be 'brutal'; and they were all taking off their
gloves, and--well, of course I had to give in.

"I went to work methodically on Mrs. Elbourn's hands, in the usual
way, you know, first sketching the character from the backs of them;
and there was the usual hush, broken by the usual little noises--
grunts of assent from the husband, cooings  of recognition from the
daughter.  Presently I asked to see the palms, and from them I filled in
the details of Mrs. Elbourn's character before going on to the events in
her life.  But while I talked I was calculating how old Mrs. Elbourn might
be.  In my first glance at her palms I had seen that she could not have
been less than twenty-five when she married.  The daughter was
seventeen.  Suppose the daughter had been born a year later--how old
would the mother be?  Forty-three, yes.  Not less than that, poor woman!"

Laider looked at me.

"Why 'poor woman!' you wonder?  Well, in that first glance I had
seen other things than her marriage-line.  I had seen a very complete
break in the lines of life and of fate.  I had seen violent death there.  At
what age?  Not later, not possibly LATER, than forty-three.  While I
talked to her about the things that had happened in her girlhood, the back
of my brain was hard at work on those marks of catastrophe.  I was
horribly wondering that she was still alive.  It was impossible that
between her and that catastrophe there could be more than a few short
months.  And all the time I was talking; and I suppose I acquitted myself
well, for I remember that when I ceased I had a sort of ovation from the
Elbourns.

"It was a relief to turn to another pair of hands.  Mrs. Brett was an
amusing young creature, and her hands were very characteristic, and
prettily odd in form.  I allowed myself to be rather whimsical about her
nature, and having begun in that vein, I went on in it, somehow, even 
after she had turned her palms.  In those palms were reduplicated the
signs I had seen in Mrs. Elbourn's.  It was as though they had been copied
neatly out.  The only difference was in the placing of them; and it was
this difference that was the most horrible point.  The fatal age in Mrs.
Brett's hands was--not past, no, for here SHE was.  But she might
have died when she was twenty-one.  Twenty-three seemed to be the
utmost span.  She was twenty-four, you know.

"I have said that I am a weak man.  And you will have good proof
of that directly.  Yet I showed a certain amount of strength that day--yes,
even on that day which has humiliated and saddened the rest of my life. 
Neither my face nor my voice betrayed me when in the palms of Dorothy
Elbourn I was again confronted with those same signs.  She was all for
knowing the future, poor child!  I believe I told her all manner of things
that were to be.  And she had no future--none, none in THIS
world--except--

"And then, while I talked, there came to me suddenly a suspicion.  I
wondered it hadn't come before.  You guess what it was?  It made me
feel very cold and strange.  I went on talking.  But, also, I went on--quite
separately--thinking.  The suspicion wasn't a certainty.  This mother and
daughter were always together.  What was to befall the one might
anywhere--anywhere--befall the other.  But a like fate, in an equally near 
future, was in store for that other lady.  The coincidence was curious,
very.  Here we all were together--here, they and I--I who was narrowly to
escape, so soon now, what they, so soon now, were to suffer.  Oh, there
was an inference to be drawn.  Not a sure inference, I told myself.  And
always I was talking, talking, and the train was swinging and swaying
noisily along--to what?  It was a fast train.  Our carriage was near the
engine.  I was talking loudly.  Full well I had known what I should see in
the colonel's hands.  I told myself I had not known.  I told myself that
even now the thing I dreaded was not sure to be.  Don't think I was
dreading it for myself.  I wasn't so 'lamentable' as all that--now.  It was
only of them that I thought--only for them.  I hurried over the colonel's
character and career; I was perfunctory.  It was Brett's hands that I
wanted. THEY were the hands that mattered.  If THEY had
the marks-- Remember, Brett was to start for India in the coming week,
his wife was to remain in England.  They would be apart.  Therefore--

"And the marks were there.  And I did nothing--nothing but hold
forth on the subtleties of Brett's character.  There was a thing for
me to do.  I wanted to do it.  I wanted to spring to the window and pull
the communication-cord.  Quite a simple thing to do.  Nothing easier
than to stop a train.  You just give a sharp pull, and the train slows down,
comes to a standstill.  And the guard appears at your window.  You
explain to the guard.

"Nothing easier than to tell him there is going to be a collision.
Nothing easier than to insist that you and your friends and every other
passenger in the train must get out at once.  There ARE easier
things than this?  Things that need less courage than this?  Some of
THEM I could have done, I dare say.  This thing I was going to do.
Oh, I was determined that I would do it--directly.

"I had said all I had to say about Brett's hands.  I had brought my
entertainment to an end.  I had been thanked and complimented all
round.  I was quite at liberty.  I was going to do what I had to do.  I was
determined, yes.

"We were near the outskirts of London.  The air was gray,
thickening; and Dorothy Elbourn had said: 'Oh, this horrible old London!
I suppose there's the same old fog!'  And presently I heard her father
saying something about 'prevention' and 'a short act of Parliament' and
'anthracite.'  And I sat and listened and agreed and--"

Laider closed his eyes.  He passed his hand slowly through the air.

"I had a racking headache.  And when I said so, I was told not to
talk.  I was in bed, and the nurses were always telling me not to talk.  I
was in a hospital.  I knew that; but I didn't know why I was there.  One
day I thought I should like to know why, and so I asked.  I was feeling
much better now.  They told me by degrees that I had had concussion of
the brain.  I had been brought there unconscious, and had remained
unconscious for forty-eight hours.  I had been in an accident--a
railway-accident.  This seemed to me odd.  I had arrived quite safely at
my uncle's place, and I had no memory of any journey since that.  In
cases of concussion, you know, it's not uncommon for the patient to
forget all that happened just before the accident; there may be a blank for
several hours. So it was in my case.  One day my uncle was allowed to
come and see me.  And somehow, suddenly, at sight of him, the blank
was filled in.  I remembered, in a flash, everything.  I was quite calm,
though.  Or I made myself seem so, for I wanted to know how the
collision had happened. My uncle told me that the engine-driver had
failed to see a signal because of the fog, and our train had crashed into a
goods-train.

"I didn't ask him about the people who were with me.  You see,
there was no need to ask.

"Very gently my uncle began to tell me, but--I had begun to talk
strangely, I suppose.  I remember the frightened look of my uncle's face,
and the nurse scolding him in whispers.

"After that, all a blur.  It seems that I became very ill indeed, wasn't
expected to live.

"However, I live."

There was a long silence.  Laider did not look at me, nor I at him.
The fire was burning low, and he watched it.

At length he spoke:

"You despise me.  Naturally.  I despise myself."

"No, I don't despise you; but--"

"You blame me."  I did not meet his gaze.  "You blame me," he
repeated.

"Yes."

"And there, if I may say so, you are a little unjust.  It isn't my fault
that I was born weak."

"But a man may conquer his weakness."

"Yes, if he is endowed with the strength for that."

His fatalism drew from me a gesture of disgust.

"Do you really mean," I asked, "that because you didn't pull that
cord, you COULDN'T have pulled it?"

"Yes."

"And it's written in your hands that you couldn't?"

He looked at the palms of his hands.

"They are the hands of a very weak man," he said.

"A man so weak that he cannot believe in the possibility of free will
for himself or for any one?"

"They are the hands of an intelligent man, who can weigh evidence
and see things as they are."

"But answer me: Was it foreordained that you should not pull that
cord?"

"It was foreordained."

"And was it actually marked in your hands that you were not going
to pull it?"

"Ah, well, you see, it is rather the things one IS going to do
that are actually marked.  The things one isn't going to do,--the
innumerable negative things,--how could one expect THEM to be
marked?"

"But the consequences of what one leaves undone may be
positive?"

"Horribly positive.  My hand is the hand of a man who has suffered
a great deal in later life."

"And was it the hand of a man DESTINED to suffer?"

"Oh, yes.  I thought I told you that."

There was a pause.

"Well," I said, with awkward sympathy, "I suppose all hands are the
hands of people destined to suffer."

"Not of people destined to suffer so much as _I_ have
suffered--as I still suffer."

The insistence of his self-pity chilled me, and I harked back to a
question he had not straightly answered.

"Tell me: Was it marked in your hands that you were not going to
pull that cord?"

Again he looked at his hands, and then, having pressed them for a
moment to his face, "It was marked very clearly," he answered, "in
THEIR hands."

Two or three days after this colloquy there had occurred to me in London
an idea--an ingenious and comfortable doubt.  How was Laider to be sure
that his brain, recovering from concussion, had REMEMBERED what 
happened in the course of that railway-journey?  How was he to know
that his brain hadn't simply, in its abeyance, INVENTED all this for
him?  It might be that he had never seen those signs in those hands.
Assuredly, here was a bright loophole.  I had forthwith written to Laider, 
pointing it out.

This was the letter which now, at my second visit, I had found
miserably pent on the letter-board.  I remembered my promise to rescue
it.  I arose from the retaining fireside, stretched my arms, yawned, and
went forth to fulfil my Christian purpose.  There was no one in the hall.
The "shower" had at length ceased.  The sun had positively come out,
and the front door had been thrown open in its honor.  Everything along
the sea-front was beautifully gleaming, drying, shimmering.  But I was
not to be diverted from my purpose.  I went to the letter-board.  And--my
letter was not there!  Resourceful and plucky little thing--it had escaped! 
I did hope it would not be captured and brought back.  Perhaps the alarm
had already been raised by the tolling of that great bell which warns the
inhabitants for miles around that a letter has broken loose from the
letter-board.  I had a vision of my envelop skimming wildly along the 
coast-line, pursued by the old, but active, waiter and a breathless pack of
local worthies.  I saw it outdistancing them all, dodging past
coast-guards, doubling on its tracks, leaping breakwaters, unluckily
injuring itself, losing speed, and at last, in a splendor of desperation,
taking to the open sea.  But suddenly I had another idea.  Perhaps Laider
had returned?

He had.  I espied afar on the sands a form that was recognizably, by
the listless droop of it, his.  I was glad and sorry--rather glad, because he
completed the scene of last year; and very sorry, because this time we
should be at each other's mercy: no restful silence and liberty for either of
us this time.  Perhaps he had been told I was here, and had gone out to
avoid me while he yet could.  Oh weak, weak! Why palter?  I put on my
hat and coat, and marched out to meet him.

"Influenza, of course?" we asked simultaneously.

There is a limit to the time which one man may spend in talking to
another about his own influenza; and presently, as we paced the sands, I
felt that Laider had passed this limit.  I wondered that he didn't break off
and thank me now for my letter.  He must have read it.  He ought to have 
thanked me for it at once.  It was a very good letter, a remarkable letter.
But surely he wasn't waiting to answer it by post?  His silence about it
gave me the absurd sense of having taken a liberty, confound him!
He was evidently ill at ease while he talked.  But it wasn't for me to help
him out of his difficulty, whatever that might be.  It was for him to
remove the strain imposed on myself.

Abruptly, after a long pause, he did now manage to say:

"It was--very good of you to--to write me that letter."  He told me
he had only just got it, and he drifted away into otiose explanations of
this fact.  I thought he might at least say it was a remarkable letter; and
you can imagine my annoyance when he said, after another interval, "I
was very much touched indeed."  I had wished to be convincing, not
touching. I can't bear to be called touching.

"Don't you," I asked, "think it IS quite possible that your
brain invented all those memories of what--what happened before that
accident?"

He drew a sharp sigh.

"You make me feel very guilty."

"That's exactly what I tried to make you NOT feel!"

"I know, yes.  That's why I feel so guilty."

We had paused in our walk.  He stood nervously prodding the hard
wet sand with his walking-stick.

"In a way," he said, "your theory was quite right.  But--it didn't go
far enough.  It's not only possible, it's a fact, that I didn't see those signs
in those hands.  I never examined those hands.  They weren't there.
_I_ wasn't there.  I haven't an uncle in Hampshire, even.  I never
had."

I, too, prodded the sand.

"Well," I said at length, "I do feel rather a fool."

"I've no right even to beg your pardon, but--''

"Oh, I'm not vexed.  Only--I rather wish you hadn't told me this."

"I wish I hadn't had to.  It was your kindness, you see, that forced
me.  By trying to take an imaginary load off my conscience, you laid a
very real one on it."

"I'm sorry.  But you, of your own free will, you know, exposed your
conscience to me last year.  I don't yet quite understand why you did
that."

"No, of course not.  I don't deserve that you should.  But I think you
will.  May I explain?  I'm afraid I've talked a great deal already about my
influenza, and I sha'n't be able to keep it out of my explanation.  Well, 
my weakest point--I told you this last year, but it happens to be perfectly
true that my weakest point--is my will.  Influenza, as you know, fastens
unerringly on one's weakest point.  It doesn't attempt to undermine my
imagination.  That would be a forlorn hope.  I have, alas! a very strong 
imagination.  At ordinary times my imagination allows itself to be
governed by my will.  My will keeps it in check by constant nagging. 
But when my will isn't strong enough even to nag, then my imagination
stampedes.  I become even as a little child.  I tell myself the most
preposterous fables, and--the trouble is--I can't help telling them to my
friends.  Until I've thoroughly shaken off influenza, I'm not fit company
for any one.  I perfectly realize this, and I have the good sense to go right
away till I'm quite well again.  I come here usually.  It seems absurd, but I 
must confess I was sorry last year when we fell into conversation.  I knew
I should very soon be letting myself go, or, rather, very soon be swept
away.  Perhaps I ought to have warned you; but--I'm a rather shy man.
And then you mentioned the subject of palmistry.  You said you believed
in it.  I wondered at that.  I had once read Desbarolles's book about it, but
I am bound to say I thought the whole thing very great nonsense indeed."

"Then," I gasped, "it isn't even true that you believe in palmistry?"

"Oh, no.  But I wasn't able to tell you that.  You had begun by
saying that you believed in palmistry, and then you proceeded to scoff at
it.  While you scoffed I saw myself as a man with a terribly good reason
for NOT scoffing; and in a flash I saw the terribly good reason; I
had the whole story--at least I had the broad outlines of it--clear before
me."

"You hadn't ever thought of it before?"  He shook his
head. My eyes beamed.  "The whole thing was a sheer improvisation?"

"Yes," said Laider, humbly, "I am as bad as all that.  I don't say that
all the details of the story I told you that evening were filled in at the very
instant of its conception.  I was filling them in while we talked about 
palmistry in general, and while I was waiting for the moment when the
story would come in most effectively.  And I've no doubt I added some
extra touches in the course of the actual telling.  Don't imagine that I took
the slightest pleasure in deceiving you.  It's only my will, not my
conscience, that is weakened after influenza.  I simply can't help telling
what I've made up, and telling it to the best of my ability.  But I'm
thoroughly ashamed all the time."

"Not of your ability, surely?"

"Yes, of that, too," he said, with his sad smile.  "I always feel that
I'm not doing justice to my idea."

"You are too stern a critic, believe me."

"It is very kind of you to say that.  You are very kind altogether.
Had I known that you were so essentially a man of the world, in the best
sense of that term, I shouldn't have so much dreaded seeing you just now
and having to confess to you.  But I'm not going to take advantage of
your urbanity and your easy-going ways.  I hope that some day we may
meet somewhere when I haven't had influenza and am a not wholly
undesirable acquaintance.  As it is, I refuse to let you associate with me. 
I am an older man than you, and so I may without impertinence warn you
against having anything to do with me."

I deprecated this advice, of course; but for a man of weakened will
he showed great firmness.

"You," he said, "in your heart of hearts, don't want to have to walk
and talk continually with a person who might at any moment try to
bamboozle you with some ridiculous tale.  And I, for my part, don't want
to degrade myself by trying to bamboozle any one, especially one whom I 
have taught to see through me.  Let the two talks we have had be as
though they had not been.  Let us bow to each other, as last year, but let
that be all.  Let us follow in all things the precedent of last year."

With a smile that was almost gay he turned on his heel, and moved
away with a step that was almost brisk.  I was a little disconcerted.  But I
was also more than a little glad.  The restfulness of silence, the charm of
liberty--these things were not, after all, forfeit.  My heart thanked Laider 
for that; and throughout the week I loyally seconded him in the system he
had laid down for us.  All was as it had been last year.  We did not smile
to each other, we merely bowed, when we entered or left the dining-room
or smoking-room, and when we met on the wide-spread sands or in that 
shop which had a small and faded but circulating library.

Once or twice in the course of the week it did occur to me that
perhaps Laider had told the simple truth at our first interview and an
ingenious lie at our second.  I frowned at this possibility.  The idea of any 
one wishing to be quit of ME was most distasteful.  However, I
was to find reassurance.  On the last evening of my stay I suggested, in
the small smoking-room, that he and I should, as sticklers for precedent,
converse.  We did so very pleasantly.  And after a while I happened to
say that I had seen this afternoon a great number of sea-gulls flying close
to the shore.

"Sea-gulls?" said Laider, turning in his chair.

"Yes.  And I don't think I had ever realized how extraordinarily
beautiful they are when their wings catch the light."

Laider threw a quick glance at me and away from me.

"You think them beautiful?"

"Surely."

"Well, perhaps they are, yes; I suppose they are.  But--I don't like
seeing them.  They always remind me of something--rather an awful
thing--that once happened to me."

IT was a very awful thing indeed.






End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of A. V. Laider, by Max Beerbohm






Note: I have closed contractions in the text, e.g.,
"does n't" has become "doesn't" etc.;
in addition, on page 18, paragraph 3, line 5,
I have changed "Dyott" to "Dyatt"





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of A. V. Laider, by Max Beerbohm

