***The Project Gutenberg Etext of Malbone: An Oldport Romance***
by Thomas Wentworth Higginson


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Malbone: An Oldport Romance

by Thomas Wentworth Higginson

July, 1997 [Etext #993]


***The Project Gutenberg Etext of Malbone: An Oldport Romance***
******This file should be named malbn10.txt or malbn10.zip******


Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, malbn11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, malbn10a.txt.


This etext was prepared by Judy Boss, Omaha, NE


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.


Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1997 for a total of 1000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 100 billion Etexts given away.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This etext was prepared by Judy Boss, Omaha, NE





MALBONE:  AN OLDPORT ROMANCE.

by THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.



"What is Nature unless there is an eventful human life passing
within her?

Many joys and many sorrows are the lights and shadows in which
she shows most beautiful."--THOREAU, MS.  Diary.




CONTENTS.

PRELUDE
    I.  AN ARRIVAL
   II.  PLACE AUX DAMES!
  III.  A DRIVE ON THE AVENUE
   IV.  AUNT JANE DEFINES HER POSITION
    V.  A MULTIVALVE HEART
   VI.  "SOME LOVER'S CLEAR DAY"
  VII.  AN INTERNATIONAL EXPOSITION
 VIII.  TALKING IT OVER
   IX.  DANGEROUS WAYS
    X.  REMONSTRANCES
   XI.  DESCENSUS AVERNI
  XII.  A NEW ENGAGEMENT
 XIII.  DREAMING DREAMS
  XIV.  THE NEMESIS OF FASHION
   XV.  ACROSS THE BAY
  XVI.  ON THE STAIRS
 XVII.  DISCOVERY
XVIII.  HOPE'S VIGIL
  XIX.  DE PROFUNDIS 
   XX.  AUNT JANE TO THE RESCUE
  XXI.  A STORM
 XXII.  OUT OF THE DEPTHS
XXIII.  REQUIESCAT




MALBONE.

PRELUDE.

AS one wanders along this southwestern promontory of the Isle
of Peace, and looks down upon the green translucent water which
forever bathes the marble slopes of the Pirates' Cave, it is
natural to think of the ten wrecks with which the past winter
has strewn this shore. Though almost all trace of their
presence is already gone, yet their mere memory lends to these
cliffs a human interest. Where a stranded vessel lies, thither
all steps converge, so long as one plank remains upon another.
There centres the emotion. All else is but the setting, and the
eye sweeps with indifference the line of unpeopled rocks.  They
are barren, till the imagination has tenanted them with
possibilities of danger and dismay. The ocean provides the
scenery and properties of a perpetual tragedy, but the interest
arrives with the performers.  Till then the shores remain
vacant, like the great conventional armchairs of the French
drama, that wait for Rachel to come and die.

Yet as I ride along this fashionable avenue in August, and
watch the procession of the young and fair,--as I look at
stately houses, from each of which has gone forth almost within
my memory a funeral or a bride,--then every thoroughfare of
human life becomes in fancy but an ocean shore, with its
ripples and its wrecks. One learns, in growing older, that no
fiction can be so strange nor appear so improbable as would the
simple truth; and that doubtless even Shakespeare did but
timidly transcribe a few of the deeds and passions he had
personally known. For no man of middle age can dare trust
himself to portray life in its full intensity, as he has
studied or shared it; he must resolutely set aside as
indescribable the things most worth describing, and must expect
to be charged with exaggeration, even when he tells the rest.



I.

AN ARRIVAL.

IT was one of the changing days of our Oldport midsummer. In
the morning it had rained in rather a dismal way, and Aunt Jane
had said she should put it in her diary.  It was a very serious
thing for the elements when they got into Aunt Jane's diary. By
noon the sun came out as clear and sultry as if there had never
been a cloud, the northeast wind died away, the bay was
motionless, the first locust of the summer shrilled from the
elms, and the robins seemed to be serving up butterflies hot
for their insatiable second brood, while nothing seemed
desirable for a human luncheon except ice-cream and fans. In
the afternoon the southwest wind came up the bay, with its line
of dark-blue ripple and its delicious coolness; while the hue
of the water grew more and more intense, till we seemed to be
living in the heart of a sapphire.

The household sat beneath the large western doorway of the old
Maxwell House,--he rear door, which looks on the water.  The
house had just been reoccupied by my Aunt Jane, whose
great-grandfather had built it, though it had for several
generations been out of the family. I know no finer specimen of
those large colonial dwellings in which the genius of Sir
Christopher Wren bequeathed traditions of stateliness to our
democratic days.  Its central hall has a carved archway; most
of the rooms have painted tiles and are wainscoted to the
ceiling; the sashes are red-cedar, the great staircase
mahogany; there are pilasters with delicate Corinthian
capitals; there are cherubs' heads and wings that go astray and
lose themselves in closets and behind glass doors; there are
curling acanthus-leaves that cluster over shelves and ledges,
and there are those graceful shell-patterns which one often
sees on old furniture, but rarely in houses.  The high front
door still retains its Ionic cornice; and the western entrance,
looking on the bay, is surmounted by carved fruit and flowers,
and is crowned, as is the roof, with that pineapple in whose
symbolic wealth the rich merchants of the last century
delighted.

Like most of the statelier houses in that region of Oldport,
this abode had its rumors of a ghost and of secret chambers.
The ghost had never been properly lionized nor laid, for Aunt
Jane, the neatest of housekeepers, had discouraged all silly
explorations, had at once required all barred windows to be
opened, all superfluous partitions to be taken down, and
several highly eligible dark-closets to be nailed up. If there
was anything she hated, it was nooks and odd corners. Yet there
had been times that year, when the household would have been
glad to find a few more such hiding-places; for during the
first few weeks the house had been crammed with guests so
closely that the very mice had been ill-accommodated and
obliged to sit up all night, which had caused them much
discomfort and many audible disagreements.

But this first tumult had passed away; and now there remained
only the various nephews and nieces of the house, including a
due proportion of small children.  Two final guests were to
arrive that day, bringing the latest breath of Europe on their
wings,--Philip Malbone, Hope's betrothed; and little Emilia,
Hope's half-sister.

None of the family had seen Emilia since her wandering mother
had taken her abroad, a fascinating spoiled child of four, and
they were all eager to see in how many ways the succeeding
twelve years had completed or corrected the spoiling.  As for
Philip, he had been spoiled, as Aunt Jane declared, from the
day of his birth, by the joint effort of all friends and
neighbors. Everybody had conspired to carry on the process
except Aunt Jane herself, who directed toward him one of her
honest, steady, immovable dislikes, which may be said to have
dated back to the time when his father and mother were married,
some years before he personally entered on the scene.

The New York steamer, detained by the heavy fog of the night
before, now came in unwonted daylight up the bay.  At the first
glimpse, Harry and the boys pushed off in the row-boat; for, as
one of the children said, anybody who had been to Venice would
naturally wish to come to the very house in a gondola. In
another half-hour there was a great entanglement of embraces at
the water-side, for the guests had landed.

Malbone's self-poised easy grace was the same as ever; his
chestnut-brown eyes were as winning, his features as handsome;
his complexion, too clearly pink for a man, had a sea bronze
upon it: he was the same Philip who had left home, though with
some added lines of care.  But in the brilliant little fairy
beside him all looked in vain for the Emilia they remembered as
a child. Her eyes were more beautiful than ever,--the darkest
violet eyes, that grew luminous with thought and almost black
with sorrow. Her gypsy taste, as everybody used to call it,
still showed itself in the scarlet and dark blue of her dress;
but the clouded gypsy tint had gone from her cheek, and in its
place shone a deep carnation, so hard and brilliant that it
appeared to be enamelled on the surface, yet so firm and
deep-dyed that it seemed as if not even death could ever blanch
it. There is a kind of beauty that seems made to be painted on
ivory, and such was hers.  Only the microscopic pencil of a
miniature-painter could portray those slender eyebrows, that
arched caressingly over the beautiful eyes,--or the silky hair
of darkest chestnut that crept in a wavy line along the
temples, as if longing to meet the brows,--or those unequalled
lashes! "Unnecessarily long," Aunt Jane afterwards pronounced
them; while Kate had to admit that they did indeed give Emilia
an overdressed look at breakfast, and that she ought to have a
less showy set to match her morning costume.

But what was most irresistible about Emilia,--that which we all
noticed in this interview, and which haunted us all
thenceforward,--was a certain wild, entangled look she wore, as
of some untamed out-door thing, and a kind of pathetic lost
sweetness in her voice, which made her at once and forever a
heroine of romance with the children. Yet she scarcely seemed
to heed their existence, and only submitted to the kisses of
Hope and Kate as if that were a part of the price of coming
home, and she must pay it.

Had she been alone, there might have been an awkward pause; for
if you expect a cousin, and there alights a butterfly of the
tropics, what hospitality can you offer?  But no sense of
embarrassment ever came near Malbone, especially with the
children to swarm over him and claim him for their own.
Moreover, little Helen got in the first remark in the way of
serious conversation.

"Let me tell him something!" said the child.  "Philip! that
doll of mine that you used to know, only think! she was sick
and died last summer, and went into the rag-bag. And the other
split down the back, so there was an end of her."

Polar ice would have been thawed by this reopening of
communication. Philip soon had the little maid on his
shoulder,--the natural throne of all children,--and they went
in together to greet Aunt Jane.

Aunt Jane was the head of the house,--a lady who had spent more
than fifty years in educating her brains and battling with her
ailments. She had received from her parents a considerable
inheritance in the way of whims, and had nursed it up into a
handsome fortune. Being one of the most impulsive of human
beings, she was naturally one of the most entertaining; and
behind all her eccentricities there was a fund of the soundest
sense and the tenderest affection. She had seen much and varied
society, had been greatly admired in her youth, but had chosen
to remain unmarried. Obliged by her physical condition to make
herself the first object, she was saved from utter selfishness
by sympathies as democratic as her personal habits were
exclusive.  Unexpected and commonly fantastic in her doings,
often dismayed by small difficulties, but never by large ones,
she sagaciously administered the affairs of all those around
her,--planned their dinners and their marriages, fought out
their bargains and their feuds.

She hated everything irresolute or vague; people might play at
cat's-cradle or study Spinoza, just as they pleased; but,
whatever they did, they must give their minds to it. She kept
house from an easy-chair, and ruled her dependants with
severity tempered by wit, and by the very sweetest voice in
which reproof was ever uttered.  She never praised them, but if
they did anything particularly well, rebuked them
retrospectively, asking why they had never done it well before? 
But she treated them munificently, made all manner of plans for
their comfort, and they all thought her the wisest and wittiest
of the human race. So did the youths and maidens of her large
circle; they all came to see her, and she counselled, admired,
scolded, and petted them all. She had the gayest spirits, and
an unerring eye for the ludicrous, and she spoke her mind with
absolute plainness to all comers. Her intuitions were
instantaneous as lightning, and, like that, struck very often
in the wrong place.  She was thus extremely unreasonable and
altogether charming.

Such was the lady whom Emilia and Malbone went up to
greet,--the one shyly, the other with an easy assurance, such
as she always disliked. Emilia submitted to another kiss, while
Philip pressed Aunt Jane's hand, as he pressed all women's, and
they sat down.

"Now begin to tell your adventures," said Kate.  "People always
tell their adventures till tea is ready."

"Who can have any adventures left," said Philip, "after such
letters as I wrote you all?"

"Of which we got precisely one!" said Kate.  "That made it such
an event, after we had wondered in what part of the globe you
might be looking for the post-office! It was like finding a
letter in a bottle, or disentangling a person from the Dark
Ages."

"I was at Neuchatel two months; but I had no adventures. I
lodged with a good Pasteur, who taught me geology and German."

"That is suspicious," said Kate.  "Had he a daughter passing
fair?"

"Indeed he had."

"And you taught her English?  That is what these beguiling
youths always do in novels."

"Yes."

"What was her name?"

"Lili."

"What a pretty name!  How old was she?"

"She was six."

"O Philip!" cried Kate; "but I might have known it. Did she
love you very much?"

Hope looked up, her eyes full of mild reproach at the
possibility of doubting any child's love for Philip.  He had
been her betrothed for more than a year, during which time she
had habitually seen him wooing every child he had met as if it
were a woman,--which, for Philip, was saying a great deal.
Happily they had in common the one trait of perfect amiability,
and she knew no more how to be jealous than he to be constant.

"Lili was easily won," he said.  "Other things being equal,
people of six prefer that man who is tallest."

"Philip is not so very tall," said the eldest of the boys, who
was listening eagerly, and growing rapidly.

"No," said Philip, meekly.  "But then the Pasteur was short,
and his brother was a dwarf."

"When Lili found that she could reach the ceiling from Mr.
Malbone's shoulder," said Emilia, "she asked no more."

"Then you knew the pastor's family also, my child," said Aunt
Jane, looking at her kindly and a little keenly.

"I was allowed to go there sometimes," she began, timidly.

"To meet her American Cousin," interrupted Philip.  "I got some
relaxation in the rules of the school.  But, Aunt Jane, you
have told us nothing about your health."

"There is nothing to tell," she answered.  "I should like, if
it were convenient, to be a little better.  But in this life,
if one can walk across the floor, and not be an idiot, it is
something. That is all I aim at."

"Isn't it rather tiresome?" said Emilia, as the elder lady
happened to look at her.

"Not at all," said Aunt Jane, composedly.  "I naturally fall
back into happiness, when left to myself."

"So you have returned to the house of your fathers," said
Philip.  "I hope you like it."

"It is commonplace in one respect," said Aunt Jane.  "General
Washington once slept here."

"Oh!" said Philip.  "It is one of that class of houses?"

"Yes," said she.  "There is not a village in America that has
not half a dozen of them, not counting those where he only
breakfasted. Did ever man sleep like that man?  What else could
he ever have done? Who governed, I wonder, while he was asleep? 
How he must have travelled! The swiftest horse could scarcely
have carried him from one of these houses to another."

"I never was attached to the memory of Washington," meditated
Philip; "but I always thought it was the pear-tree. It must
have been that he was such a very unsettled person."

"He certainly was not what is called a domestic character,"
said Aunt Jane.

"I suppose you are, Miss Maxwell," said Philip.  "Do you often
go out?"

"Sometimes, to drive," said Aunt Jane.  "Yesterday I went
shopping with Kate, and sat in the carriage while she bought
under-sleeves enough for a centipede.  It is always so with
that child. People talk about the trouble of getting a daughter
ready to be married; but it is like being married once a month
to live with her."

"I wonder that you take her to drive with you," suggested
Philip, sympathetically.

"It is a great deal worse to drive without her," said the
impetuous lady. "She is the only person who lets me enjoy
things, and now I cannot enjoy them in her absence.  Yesterday
I drove alone over the three beaches, and left her at home with
a dress-maker. Never did I see so many lines of surf; but they
only seemed to me like some of Kate's ball-dresses, with the
prevailing flounces, six deep.  I was so enraged that she was
not there, I wished to cover my face with my handkerchief. By
the third beach I was ready for the madhouse."

"Is Oldport a pleasant place to live in?" asked Emilia,
eagerly.

"It is amusing in the summer," said Aunt Jane, "though the
society is nothing but a pack of visiting-cards. In winter it
is too dull for young people, and only suits quiet old women
like me, who merely live here to keep the Ten Commandments and
darn their stockings."

Meantime the children were aiming at Emilia, whose butterfly
looks amazed and charmed them, but who evidently did not know
what to do with their eager affection.

"I know about you," said little Helen; "I know what you said
when you were little."

"Did I say anything?" asked Emilia, carelessly.

"Yes," replied the child, and began to repeat the oft-told
domestic tradition in an accurate way, as if it were a school
lesson. "Once you had been naughty, and your papa thought it
his duty to slap you, and you cried; and he told you in French,
because he always spoke French with you, that he did not punish
you for his own pleasure. Then you stopped crying, and asked,
'Pour le plaisir de qui alors?' That means 'For whose pleasure
then?'  Hope said it was a droll question for a little girl to
ask."

"I do not think it was Emilia who asked that remarkable
question, little girl," said Kate.

"I dare say it was," said Emilia; "I have been asking it all my
life." Her eyes grew very moist, what with fatigue and
excitement. But just then, as is apt to happen in this world,
they were all suddenly recalled from tears to tea, and the
children smothered their curiosity in strawberries and cream.

They sat again beside the western door, after tea.  The young
moon came from a cloud and dropped a broad path of glory upon
the bay; a black yacht glided noiselessly in, and anchored amid
this tract of splendor. The shadow of its masts was on the
luminous surface, while their reflection lay at a different
angle, and seemed to penetrate far below. Then the departing
steamer went flashing across this bright realm with gorgeous
lustre; its red and green lights were doubled in the paler
waves, its four reflected chimneys chased each other among the
reflected masts. This jewelled wonder passing, a single
fishing-boat drifted silently by, with its one dark sail; and
then the moon and the anchored yacht were left alone.

Presently some of the luggage came from the wharf. Malbone
brought out presents for everybody; then all the family went to
Europe in photographs, and with some reluctance came back to
America for bed.



II.

PLACE AUX DAMES!

IN every town there is one young maiden who is the universal
favorite, who belongs to all sets and is made an exception to
all family feuds, who is the confidante of all girls and the
adopted sister of all young men, up to the time when they
respectively offer themselves to her, and again after they are
rejected.  This post was filled in Oldport, in those days, by
my cousin Kate.

Born into the world with many other gifts, this last and least
definable gift of popularity was added to complete them all.
Nobody criticised her, nobody was jealous of her, her very
rivals lent her their new music and their lovers; and her own
discarded wooers always sought her to be a bridesmaid when they
married somebody else.

She was one of those persons who seem to have come into the
world well-dressed. There was an atmosphere of elegance around
her, like a costume; every attitude implied a presence-chamber
or a ball-room. The girls complained that in private
theatricals no combination of disguises could reduce Kate to
the ranks, nor give her the "make-up" of a waiting-maid. Yet as
her father was a New York merchant of the precarious or
spasmodic description, she had been used from childhood to the
wildest fluctuations of wardrobe;--a year of Paris
dresses,--then another year spent in making over ancient
finery, that never looked like either finery or antiquity when
it came from her magic hands. Without a particle of vanity or
fear, secure in health and good-nature and invariable
prettiness, she cared little whether the appointed means of
grace were ancient silk or modern muslin. In her periods of
poverty, she made no secret of the necessary devices; the other
girls, of course, guessed them, but her lovers never did,
because she always told them. There was one particular tarlatan
dress of hers which was a sort of local institution.  It was
known to all her companions, like the State House.  There was a
report that she had first worn it at her christening; the
report originated with herself. The young men knew that she was
going to the party if she could turn that pink tarlatan once
more; but they had only the vaguest impression what a tarlatan
was, and cared little on which side it was worn, so long as
Kate was inside.

During these epochs of privation her life, in respect to dress,
was a perpetual Christmas-tree of second-hand gifts. Wealthy
aunts supplied her with cast-off shoes of all sizes, from two
and a half up to five, and she used them all. She was reported
to have worn one straw hat through five changes of fashion.  It
was averred that, when square crowns were in vogue, she
flattened it over a tin pan, and that, when round crowns
returned, she bent it on the bedpost.  There was such a charm
in her way of adapting these treasures, that the other girls
liked to test her with new problems in the way of millinery and
dress-making; millionnaire friends implored her to trim their
hats, and lent her their own things in order to learn how to
wear them. This applied especially to certain rich cousins, shy
and studious girls, who adored her, and to whom society only
ceased to be alarming when the brilliant Kate took them under
her wing, and graciously accepted a few of their newest
feathers. Well might they acquiesce, for she stood by them
superbly, and her most favored partners found no way to her
hand so sure as to dance systematically through that staid
sisterhood. Dear, sunshiny, gracious, generous Kate!--who has
ever done justice to the charm given to this grave old world by
the presence of one free-hearted and joyous girl?

At the time now to be described, however, Kate's purse was well
filled; and if she wore only second-best finery, it was because
she had lent her very best to somebody else.  All that her
doting father asked was to pay for her dresses, and to see her
wear them; and if her friends wore a part of them, it only made
necessary a larger wardrobe, and more varied and pleasurable
shopping. She was as good a manager in wealth as in poverty,
wasted nothing, took exquisite care of everything, and saved
faithfully for some one else all that was not needed for her
own pretty person.

Pretty she was throughout, from the parting of her jet-black
hair to the high instep of her slender foot; a glancing,
brilliant, brunette beauty, with the piquant charm of perpetual
spirits, and the equipoise of a perfectly healthy nature.  She
was altogether graceful, yet she had not the fresh, free grace
of her cousin

Hope, who was lithe and strong as a hawthorne spray:  Kate's
was the narrower grace of culture grown hereditary, an in-door
elegance that was born in her, and of which dancing-school was
but the natural development. You could not picture Hope to your
mind in one position more than in another; she had an endless
variety of easy motion.  When you thought of Kate, you
remembered precisely how she sat, how she stood, and how she
walked. That was all, and it was always the same.  But is not
that enough? We do not ask of Mary Stuart's portrait that it
should represent her in more than one attitude, and why should
a living beauty need more than two or three?

Kate was betrothed to her cousin Harry, Hope's brother, and,
though she was barely twenty, they had seemed to appertain to
each other for a time so long that the memory of man or maiden
aunt ran not to the contrary. She always declared, indeed, that
they were born married, and that their wedding-day would seem
like a silver wedding. Harry was quiet, unobtrusive, and manly. 
He might seem commonplace at first beside the brilliant Kate
and his more gifted sister; but thorough manhood is never
commonplace, and he was a person to whom one could anchor. His
strong, steadfast physique was the type of his whole nature;
when he came into the room, you felt as if a good many people
had been added to the company.  He made steady progress in his
profession of the law, through sheer worth; he never dazzled,
but he led. His type was pure Saxon, with short, curling hair,
blue eyes, and thin, fair skin, to which the color readily
mounted.  Up to a certain point he was imperturbably patient
and amiable, but, when overtaxed, was fiery and impetuous for a
single instant, and no more. It seemed as if a sudden flash of
anger went over him, like the flash that glides along the
glutinous stem of the fraxinella, when you touch it with a
candle; the next moment it had utterly vanished, and was
forgotten as if it had never been.

Kate's love for her lover was one of those healthy and assured
ties that often outlast the ardors of more passionate natures.
For other temperaments it might have been inadequate; but
theirs matched perfectly, and it was all sufficient for them. 
If there was within Kate's range a more heroic and ardent
emotion than that inspired by Harry, it was put forth toward
Hope.  This was her idolatry; she always said that it was
fortunate Hope was Hal's sister, or she should have felt it her
duty to give them to each other, and not die till the wedding
was accomplished.  Harry shared this adoration to quite a
reasonable extent, for a brother; but his admiration for Philip
Malbone was one that Kate did not quite share. Harry's quieter
mood had been dazzled from childhood by Philip, who had always
been a privileged guest in the household. Kate's clear,
penetrating, buoyant nature had divined Phil's weaknesses, and
had sometimes laughed at them, even from her childhood; though
she did not dislike him, for she did not dislike anybody. But
Harry was magnetized by him very much as women were; believed
him true, because he was tender, and called him only fastidious
where Kate called him lazy.

Kate was spending that summer with her aunt Jane, whose
especial pet and pride she was.  Hope was spending there the
summer vacation of a Normal School in which she had just become
a teacher. Her father had shared in the family ups and downs,
but had finally stayed down, while the rest had remained up. 
Fortunately, his elder children were indifferent to this, and
indeed rather preferred it; it was a tradition that Hope had
expressed the wish, when a child, that her father might lose
his property, so that she could become a teacher. As for Harry,
he infinitely preferred the drudgery of a law office to that of
a gentleman of leisure; and as for their step-mother, it turned
out, when she was left a widow, that she had secured for
herself and Emilia whatever property remained, so that she
suffered only the delightful need of living in Europe for
economy.

The elder brother and sister had alike that fine physical vigor
which New England is now developing, just in time to save it
from decay. Hope was of Saxon type, though a shade less blonde
than her brother; she was a little taller, and of more
commanding presence, with a peculiarly noble carriage of the
shoulders.  Her brow was sometimes criticised as being a little
too full for a woman; but her nose was straight, her mouth and
teeth beautiful, and her profile almost perfect. Her complexion
had lost by out-door life something of its delicacy, but had
gained a freshness and firmness that no sunlight could impair.
She had that wealth of hair which young girls find the most
enviable point of beauty in each other.  Hers reached below her
knees, when loosened, or else lay coiled, in munificent braids
of gold, full of sparkling lights and contrasted shadows, upon
her queenly head.

Her eyes were much darker than her hair, and had a way of
opening naively and suddenly, with a perfectly infantine
expression, as if she at that moment saw the sunlight for the
first time. Her long lashes were somewhat like Emilia's, and
she had the same deeply curved eyebrows; in no other point was
there a shade of resemblance between the half-sisters. As
compared with Kate, Hope showed a more abundant physical life;
there was more blood in her; she had ampler outlines, and
health more absolutely unvaried, for she had yet to know the
experience of a day's illness. Kate seemed born to tread upon a
Brussels carpet, and Hope on the softer luxury of the forest
floor.  Out of doors her vigor became a sort of ecstasy, and
she walked the earth with a jubilee of the senses, such as
Browning attributes to his Saul.

This inexhaustible freshness of physical organization seemed to
open the windows of her soul, and make for her a new heaven and
earth every day. It gave also a peculiar and almost
embarrassing directness to her mental processes, and suggested
in them a sort of final and absolute value, as if truth had for
the first time found a perfectly translucent medium.  It was
not so much that she said rare things, but her very silence was
eloquent, and there was a great deal of it. Her girlhood had in
it a certain dignity as of a virgin priestess or sibyl.  Yet
her hearty sympathies and her healthy energy made her at home
in daily life, and in a democratic society.  To Kate, for
instance, she was a necessity of existence, like light or air.
Kate's nature was limited; part of her graceful equipoise was
narrowness. Hope was capable of far more self-abandonment to a
controlling emotion, and, if she ever erred, would err more
widely, for it would be because the whole power of her
conscience was misdirected.  "Once let her take wrong for
right," said Aunt Jane, "and stop her if you can; these born
saints give a great deal more trouble than children of this
world, like my Kate."  Yet in daily life Hope yielded to her
cousin nine times out of ten; but the tenth time was the key to
the situation. Hope loved Kate devotedly; but Kate believed in
her as the hunted fugitive believes in the north star.

To these maidens, thus united, came Emilia home from Europe. 
The father of Harry and Hope had been lured into a second
marriage with Emilia's mother, a charming and unscrupulous
woman, born with an American body and a French soul.  She
having once won him to Paris, held him there life-long, and
kept her step-children at a safe distance.  She arranged that,
even after her own death, her daughter should still remain
abroad for education; nor was Emilia ordered back until she
brought down some scandal by a romantic attempt to elope from
boarding-school with a Swiss servant. It was by weaning her
heart from this man that Philip Malbone had earned the thanks
of the whole household during his hasty flight through Europe.
He possessed some skill in withdrawing the female heart from an
undesirable attachment, though it was apt to be done by
substituting another. It was fortunate that, in this case, no
fears could be entertained. Since his engagement Philip had not
permitted himself so much as a flirtation; he and Hope were to
be married soon; he loved and admired her heartily, and had an
indifference to her want of fortune that was quite amazing,
when we consider that he had a fortune of his own.



III.

A DRIVE ON THE AVENUE.

OLDPORT AVENUE is a place where a great many carriages may be
seen driving so slowly that they might almost be photographed
without halting, and where their occupants already wear the
dismal expression which befits that process. In these fine
vehicles, following each other in an endless file, one sees
such faces as used to be exhibited in ball-rooms during the
performance of quadrilles, before round dances came in,--faces
marked by the renunciation of all human joy. Sometimes a faint
suspicion suggests itself on the Avenue, that these torpid
countenances might be roused to life, in case some horse should
run away.  But that one chance never occurs; the riders may not
yet be toned down into perfect breeding, but the horses are.  I
do not know what could ever break the gloom of this joyless
procession, were it not that youth and beauty are always in
fashion, and one sometimes meets an exceptional barouche full
of boys and girls, who could absolutely be no happier if they
were a thousand miles away from the best society. And such a
joyous company were our four youths and maidens when they went
to drive that day, Emilia being left at home to rest after the
fatigues of the voyage.

"What beautiful horses!" was Hope's first exclamation. "What
grave people!" was her second.

          "What though in solemn silence all
            Roll round --"

quoted Philip.

"Hope is thinking," said Harry, "whether 'in reason's ear they
all rejoice.'"

"How COULD you know that?" said she, opening her eyes.

"One thing always strikes me," said Kate.  "The sentence of
stupefaction does not seem to be enforced till after
five-and-twenty. That young lady we just met looked quite
lively and juvenile last year, I remember, and now she has
graduated into a dowager."

"Like little Helen's kitten," said Philip.  "She justly remarks
that, since I saw it last, it is all spoiled into a great big
cat."

"Those must be snobs," said Harry, as a carriage with unusually
gorgeous liveries rolled by.

"I suppose so," said Malbone, indifferently.  "In Oldport we
call all new-comers snobs, you know, till they have invited us
to their grand ball.  Then we go to it, and afterwards speak
well of them, and only abuse their wine."

"How do you know them for new-comers?" asked Hope, looking
after the carriage.

"By their improperly intelligent expression," returned Phil. 
"They look around them as you do, my child, with the air of
wide-awake curiosity which marks the American traveller.  That
is out of place here. The Avenue abhors everything but a
vacuum."

"I never can find out," continued Hope, "how people recognize
each other here.  They do not look at each other, unless they
know each other: and how are they to know if they know, unless
they look first?"

"It seems an embarrassment," said Malbone.  "But it is supposed
that fashion perforates the eyelids and looks through.  If you
attempt it in any other way, you are lost.  Newly arrived
people look about them, and, the more new wealth they have, the
more they gaze.  The men are uneasy behind their recently
educated mustaches, and the women hold their parasols with
trembling hands. It takes two years to learn to drive on the
Avenue.  Come again next summer, and you will see in those same
carriages faces of remote superciliousness, that suggest
generations of gout and ancestors."

"What a pity one feels," said Harry, "for these people who
still suffer from lingering modesty, and need a master to teach
them to be insolent!"

"They learn it soon enough," said Kate.  "Philip is right.
Fashion lies in the eye.  People fix their own position by the
way they don't look at you."

"There is a certain indifference of manner," philosophized
Malbone, "before which ingenuous youth is crushed.  I may know
that a man can hardly read or write, and that his father was a
ragpicker till one day he picked up bank-notes for a million. 
No matter. If he does not take the trouble to look at me, I
must look reverentially at him."

"Here is somebody who will look at Hope," cried Kate, suddenly.

A carriage passed, bearing a young lady with fair hair, and a
keen, bright look, talking eagerly to a small and quiet youth
beside her.

Her face brightened still more as she caught the eye of Hope,
whose face lighted up in return, and who then sank back with a
sort of sigh of relief, as if she had at last seen somebody she
cared for. The lady waved an un-gloved hand, and drove by.

"Who is that?" asked Philip, eagerly.  He was used to knowing
every one.

"Hope's pet," said Kate, "and she who pets Hope, Lady Antwerp."

"Is it possible?" said Malbone.  "That young creature? I
fancied her ladyship in spectacles, with little side curls. Men
speak of her with such dismay."

"Of course," said Kate, "she asks them sensible questions."

"That is bad," admitted Philip.  "Nothing exasperates
fashionable Americans like a really intelligent foreigner. They
feel as Sydney Smith says the English clergy felt about
Elizabeth Fry; she disturbs their repose, and gives rise to
distressing comparisons,--they long to burn her alive. It is
not their notion of a countess."

"I am sure it was not mine," said Hope; "I can hardly remember
that she is one; I only know that I like her, she is so simple
and intelligent. She might be a girl from a Normal School."

"It is because you are just that," said Kate, "that she likes
you. She came here supposing that we had all been at such
schools. Then she complained of us,--us girls in what we call
good society, I mean,--because, as she more than hinted, we did
not seem to know anything."

"Some of the mothers were angry," said Hope.  "But Aunt Jane
told her that it was perfectly true, and that her ladyship had
not yet seen the best-educated girls in America, who were
generally the daughters of old ministers and well-to-do
shopkeepers in small New England towns, Aunt Jane said."

"Yes," said Kate, "she said that the best of those girls went
to High Schools and Normal Schools, and learned things
thoroughly, you know; but that we were only taught at
boarding-schools and by governesses, and came out at eighteen,
and what could we know? Then came Hope, who had been at those
schools, and was the child of refined people too, and Lady
Antwerp was perfectly satisfied."

"Especially," said Hope, "when Aunt Jane told her that, after
all, schools did not do very much good, for if people were born
stupid they only became more tiresome by schooling. She said
that she had forgotten all she learned at school except the
boundaries of ancient Cappadocia."

Aunt Jane's fearless sayings always passed current among her
nieces; and they drove on, Hope not being lowered in Philip's
estimation, nor raised in her own, by being the pet of a
passing countess.

Who would not be charmed (he thought to himself) by this noble
girl, who walks the earth fresh and strong as a Greek goddess,
pure as Diana, stately as Juno?  She belongs to the unspoiled
womanhood of another age, and is wasted among these dolls and
butterflies.

He looked at her.  She sat erect and graceful, unable to droop
into the debility of fashionable reclining,--her breezy hair
lifted a little by the soft wind, her face flushed, her full
brown eyes looking eagerly about, her mouth smiling happily. 
To be with those she loved best, and to be driving over the
beautiful earth! She was so happy that no mob of fashionables
could have lessened her enjoyment, or made her for a moment
conscious that anybody looked at her.  The brilliant equipages
which they met each moment were not wholly uninteresting even
to her, for her affections went forth to some of the riders and
to all the horses. She was as well contented at that moment, on
the glittering Avenue, as if they had all been riding home
through country lanes, and in constant peril of being jolted
out among the whortleberry-bushes.

Her face brightened yet more as they met a carriage containing
a graceful lady dressed with that exquisiteness of taste that
charms both man and woman, even if no man can analyze and no
woman rival its effect. She had a perfectly high-bred look, and
an eye that in an instant would calculate one's ancestors as
far back as Nebuchadnezzar, and bow to them all together.  She
smiled good-naturedly on Hope, and kissed her hand to Kate.

"So, Hope," said Philip, "you are bent on teaching music to
Mrs. Meredith's children."

"Indeed I am!" said Hope, eagerly.  "O Philip, I shall enjoy it
so! I do not care so very much about her, but she has dear
little girls. And you know I am a born drudge.  I have not been
working hard enough to enjoy an entire vacation, but I shall be
so very happy here if I can have some real work for an hour or
two every other day."

"Hope," said Philip, gravely, "look steadily at these people
whom we are meeting, and reflect.  Should you like to have them
say, 'There goes Mrs. Meredith's music teacher'?"

"Why not?" said Hope, with surprise.  "The children are young,
and it is not very presumptuous.  I ought to know enough for
that."

Malbone looked at Kate, who smiled with delight, and put her
hand on that of Hope.  Indeed, she kept it there so long that
one or two passing ladies stopped their salutations in mid
career, and actually looked after them in amazement at their
attitude, as who should say, "What a very mixed society!"

So they drove on,--meeting four-in-hands, and tandems, and
donkey-carts, and a goat-cart, and basket-wagons driven by
pretty girls, with uncomfortable youths in or out of livery
behind. They met, had they but known it, many who were aiming
at notoriety, and some who had it; many who looked contented
with their lot, and some who actually were so.  They met some
who put on courtesy and grace with their kid gloves, and laid
away those virtues in their glove-boxes afterwards; while to
others the mere consciousness of kid gloves brought uneasiness,
redness of the face, and a general impression of being all made
of hands. They met the four white horses of an
ex-harness-maker, and the superb harnesses of an
ex-horse-dealer. Behind these came the gayest and most plebeian
equipage of all, a party of journeymen carpenters returning
from their work in a four-horse wagon. Their only fit compeers
were an Italian opera-troupe, who were chatting and
gesticulating on the piazza of the great hotel, and planning,
amid jest and laughter, their future campaigns. Their work
seemed like play, while the play around them seemed like work. 
Indeed, most people on the Avenue seemed to be happy in inverse
ratio to their income list.

As our youths and maidens passed the hotel, a group of French
naval officers strolled forth, some of whom had a good deal of
inexplicable gold lace dangling in festoons from their
shoulders,--"topsail halyards" the American midshipmen called
them. Philip looked hard at one of these gentlemen.

"I have seen that young fellow before," said he, "or his twin
brother. But who can swear to the personal identity of a
Frenchman?"



IV.

AUNT JANE DEFINES HER POSITION.

THE next morning had that luminous morning haze, not quite
dense enough to be called a fog, which is often so lovely in
Oldport.  It was perfectly still; the tide swelled and swelled
till it touched the edge of the green lawn behind the house,
and seemed ready to submerge the slender pier; the water looked
at first like glass, till closer gaze revealed long sinuous
undulations, as if from unseen water-snakes beneath. A few rags
of storm-cloud lay over the half-seen hills beyond the bay, and
behind them came little mutterings of thunder, now here, now
there, as if some wild creature were roaming up and down,
dissatisfied, in the shelter of the clouds. The pale haze
extended into the foreground, and half veiled the schooners
that lay at anchor with their sails up. It was sultry, and
there was something in the atmosphere that at once threatened
and soothed.  Sometimes a few drops dimpled the water and then
ceased; the muttering creature in the sky moved northward and
grew still.  It was a day when every one would be tempted to go
out rowing, but when only lovers would go. Philip and Hope
went.

Kate and Harry, meanwhile, awaited their opportunity to go in
and visit Aunt Jane.  This was a thing that never could be done
till near noon, because that dear lady was very deliberate in
her morning habits, and always averred that she had never seen
the sun rise except in a panorama. She hated to be hurried in
dressing, too; for she was accustomed to say that she must have
leisure to understand herself, and this was clearly an affair
of time.

But she was never more charming than when, after dressing and
breakfasting in seclusion, and then vigilantly watching her
handmaiden through the necessary dustings and arrangements, she
sat at last, with her affairs in order, to await events. Every
day she expected something entirely new to happen, and was
never disappointed.  For she herself always happened, if
nothing else did; she could no more repeat herself than the
sunrise can; and the liveliest visitor always carried away
something fresher and more remarkable than he brought.

Her book that morning had displeased her, and she was boiling
with indignation against its author.

"I am reading a book so dry," she said, "it makes me cough. No
wonder there was a drought last summer.  It was printed then.
Worcester's Geography seems in my memory as fascinating as
Shakespeare, when I look back upon it from this book. How can a
man write such a thing and live?"

"Perhaps he lived by writing it," said Kate.

"Perhaps it was the best he could do," added the more literal
Harry.

"It certainly was not the best he could do, for he might have
died,--died instead of dried.  O, I should like to prick that
man with something sharp, and see if sawdust did not run out of
him! Kate, ask the bookseller to let me know if he ever really
dies, and then life may seem fresh again."

"What is it?" asked Kate.

"Somebody's memoirs," said Aunt Jane.  "Was there no man left
worth writing about, that they should make a biography about
this one? It is like a life of Napoleon with all the battles
left out. They are conceited enough to put his age in the upper
corner of each page too, as if anybody cared how old he was."

"Such pretty covers!" said Kate.  "It is too bad."

"Yes," said Aunt Jane.  "I mean to send them back and have new
leaves put in. These are so wretched, there is not a teakettle
in the land so insignificant that it would boil over them. 
Don't let us talk any more about it. Have Philip and Hope gone
out upon the water?"

"Yes, dear," said Kate.  "Did Ruth tell you?"

"When did that aimless infant ever tell anything?"

"Then how did you know it?"

"If I waited for knowledge till that sweet-tempered parrot
chose to tell me," Aunt Jane went on, "I should be even more
foolish than I am."

"Then how did you know?"

"Of course I heard the boat hauled down, and of course I knew
that none but lovers would go out just before a thunder-storm.
Then you and Harry came in, and I knew it was the others."

"Aunt Jane," said Kate, "you divine everything:  what a brain
you have!"

"Brain! it is nothing but a collection of shreds, like a little
girl's work-basket,--a scrap of blue silk and a bit of white
muslin."

"Now she is fishing for compliments," said Kate, "and she shall
have one. She was very sweet and good to Philip last night."

"I know it," said Aunt Jane, with a groan.  "I waked in the
night and thought about it.  I was awake a great deal last
night.  I have heard cocks crowing all my life, but I never
knew what that creature could accomplish before. So I lay and
thought how good and forgiving I was; it was quite
distressing."

"Remorse?" said Kate.

"Yes, indeed.  I hate to be a saint all the time.  There ought
to be vacations.  Instead of suffering from a bad conscience, I
suffer from a good one."

"It was no merit of yours, aunt," put in Harry.  "Who was ever
more agreeable and lovable than Malbone last night?"

"Lovable!" burst out Aunt Jane, who never could be managed or
manipulated by anybody but Kate, and who often rebelled against
Harry's blunt assertions.  "Of course he is lovable, and that
is why I dislike him.  His father was so before him.  That is
the worst of it. I never in my life saw any harm done by a
villain; I wish I could. All the mischief in this world is done
by lovable people. Thank Heaven, nobody ever dared to call me
lovable!"

"I should like to see any one dare call you anything else,--you
dear, old, soft-hearted darling!" interposed Kate.

"But, aunt," persisted Harry, "if you only knew what the mass
of young men are--"

"Don't I?" interrupted the impetuous lady.  "What is there that
is not known to any woman who has common sense, and eyes enough
to look out of a window?"

"If you only knew," Harry went on, "how superior Phil Malbone
is, in his whole tone, to any fellow of my acquaintance."

"Lord help the rest!" she answered.  "Philip has a sort of
refinement instead of principles, and a heart instead of a
conscience,--just heart enough to keep himself happy and
everybody else miserable."

"Do you mean to say," asked the obstinate Hal, "that there is
no difference between refinement and coarseness?"

"Yes, there is," she said.

"Well, which is best?"

"Coarseness is safer by a great deal," said Aunt Jane, "in the
hands of a man like Philip.  What harm can that swearing
coachman do, I should like to know, in the street yonder? To be
sure it is very unpleasant, and I wonder they let people swear
so, except, perhaps, in waste places outside the town; but that
is his way of expressing himself, and he only frightens people,
after all."

"Which Philip does not," said Hal.

"Exactly.  That is the danger.  He frightens nobody, not even
himself, when he ought to wear a label round his neck marked
'Dangerous,' such as they have at other places where it is
slippery and brittle. When he is here, I keep saying to myself,
'Too smooth, too smooth!'"

"Aunt Jane," said Harry, gravely, "I know Malbone very well,
and I never knew any man whom it was more unjust to call a
hypocrite."

"Did I say he was a hypocrite?" she cried. "He is worse than
that; at least, more really dangerous. It is these high-strung
sentimentalists who do all the mischief; who play on their own
lovely emotions, forsooth, till they wear out those fine
fiddlestrings, and then have nothing left but the flesh and the
D. Don't tell me!"

"Do stop, auntie," interposed Kate, quite alarmed, "you are
really worse than a coachman.  You are growing very profane
indeed."

"I have a much harder time than any coachman, Kate," retorted
the injured lady.  "Nobody tries to stop him, and you are
always hushing me up."

"Hushing you up, darling?" said Kate.  "When we only spoil you
by praising and quoting everything you say."

"Only when it amuses you," said Aunt Jane.  "So long as I sit
and cry my eyes out over a book, you all love me, and when I
talk nonsense, you are ready to encourage it; but when I begin
to utter a little sense, you all want to silence me, or else
run out of the room!  Yesterday I read about a newspaper
somewhere, called the 'Daily Evening Voice'; I wish you would
allow me a daily morning voice."

"Do not interfere, Kate," said Hal.  "Aunt Jane and I only wish
to understand each other."

"I am sure we don't," said Aunt Jane; "I have no desire to
understand you, and you never will understand me till you
comprehend Philip."

"Let us agree on one thing," Harry said.  "Surely, aunt, you
know how he loves Hope?"

Aunt Jane approached a degree nearer the equator, and said,
gently, "I fear I do."

"Fear?"

"Yes, fear.  That is just what troubles me.  I know precisely
how he loves her.  Il se laisse aimer.  Philip likes to be
petted, as much as any cat, and, while he will purr, Hope is
happy. Very few men accept idolatry with any degree of grace,
but he unfortunately does."

"Unfortunately?" remonstrated Hal, as far as ever from being
satisfied. "This is really too bad.  You never will do him any
justice."

"Ah?" said Aunt Jane, chilling again, "I thought I did. I
observe he is very much afraid of me, and there seems to be no
other reason."

"The real trouble is," said Harry, after a pause, "that you
doubt his constancy."

"What do you call constancy?" said she.  "Kissing a woman's
picture ten years after a man has broken her heart?  Philip
Malbone has that kind of constancy, and so had his father
before him."

This was too much for Harry, who was making for the door in
indignation, when little Ruth came in with Aunt Jane's
luncheon, and that lady was soon absorbed in the hopeless task
of keeping her handmaiden's pretty blue and white gingham
sleeve out of the butter-plate.



V.

A MULTIVALVE HEART.

PHILIP MALBONE had that perfectly sunny temperament which is
peculiarly captivating among Americans, because it is so rare.
He liked everybody and everybody liked him; he had a thousand
ways of affording pleasure, and he received it in the giving.
He had a personal beauty, which, strange to say, was recognized
by both sexes,--for handsome men must often consent to be
mildly hated by their own.  He had travelled much, and had
mingled in very varied society; he had a moderate fortune, no
vices, no ambition, and no capacity of ennui.

He was fastidious and over-critical, it might be, in his
theories, but in practice he was easily suited and never vexed.

He liked travelling, and he liked staying at home; he was so
continually occupied as to give an apparent activity to all his
life, and yet he was never too busy to be interrupted,
especially if the intruder were a woman or a child.  He liked
to be with people of his own age, whatever their condition; he
also liked old people because they were old, and children
because they were young. In travelling by rail, he would woo
crying babies out of their mothers' arms, and still them; it
was always his back that Irishwomen thumped, to ask if they
must get out at the next station; and he might be seen handing
out decrepit paupers, as if they were of royal blood and bore
concealed sceptres in their old umbrellas. Exquisitely nice in
his personal habits, he had the practical democracy of a
good-natured young prince; he had never yet seen a human being
who awed him, nor one whom he had the slightest wish to awe.
His courtesy, had, therefore, that comprehensiveness which we
call republican, though it was really the least republican
thing about him. All felt its attraction; there was really no
one who disliked him, except Aunt Jane; and even she admitted
that he was the only person who knew how to cut her
lead-pencil.

That cheerful English premier who thought that any man ought to
find happiness enough in walking London streets and looking at
the lobsters in the fish-markets, was not more easily satisfied
than Malbone.  He liked to observe the groups of boys fishing
at the wharves, or to hear the chat of their fathers about
coral-reefs and penguins' eggs; or to sketch the fisher's
little daughter awaiting her father at night on some deserted
and crumbling wharf, his blue pea-jacket over her fair
ring-leted head, and a great cat standing by with tail
uplifted, her sole protector.  He liked the luxurious indolence
of yachting, and he liked as well to float in his wherry among
the fleet of fishing schooners getting under way after a three
days' storm, each vessel slipping out in turn from the closely
packed crowd, and spreading its white wings for flight. He
liked to watch the groups of negro boys and girls strolling by
the window at evening, and strumming on the banjo,--the only
vestige of tropical life that haunts our busy Northern zone.
But he liked just as well to note the ways of well-dressed
girls and boys at croquet parties, or to sit at the club window
and hear the gossip.  He was a jewel of a listener, and was not
easily bored even when Philadelphians talked about families, or
New Yorkers about bargains, or Bostonians about books. A man
who has not one absorbing aim can get a great many
miscellaneous things into each twenty-four hours; and there was
not a day in which Philip did not make himself agreeable and
useful to many people, receive many confidences, and give much
good-humored advice about matters of which he knew nothing. His
friends' children ran after him in the street, and he knew the
pet theories and wines of elderly gentlemen. He said that he
won their hearts by remembering every occurrence in their lives
except their birthdays.

It was, perhaps, no drawback on the popularity of Philip
Malbone that he had been for some ten years reproached as a
systematic flirt by all women with whom he did not happen at
the moment to be flirting. The reproach was unjust; he had
never done anything systematically in his life; it was his
temperament that flirted, not his will. He simply had that most
perilous of all seductive natures, in which the seducer is
himself seduced.  With a personal refinement that almost
amounted to purity, he was constantly drifting into loves more
profoundly perilous than if they had belonged to a grosser man.
Almost all women loved him, because he loved almost all; he
never had to assume an ardor, for he always felt it. His heart
was multivalve; he could love a dozen at once in various modes
and gradations, press a dozen hands in a day, gaze into a dozen
pair of eyes with unfeigned tenderness; while the last pair
wept for him, he was looking into the next. In truth, he loved
to explore those sweet depths; humanity is the highest thing to
investigate, he said, and the proper study of mankind is woman. 
Woman needs to be studied while under the influence of emotion;
let us therefore have the emotions. This was the reason he gave
to himself; but this refined Mormonism of the heart was not
based on reason, but on temperament and habit. In such matters
logic is only for the by-standers.

His very generosity harmed him, as all our good qualities may
harm us when linked with bad ones; he had so many excuses for
doing kindnesses to his friends, it was hard to quarrel with
him if he did them too tenderly. He was no more capable of
unkindness than of constancy; and so strongly did he fix the
allegiance of those who loved him, that the women to whom he
had caused most anguish would still defend him when accused;
would have crossed the continent, if needed, to nurse him in
illness, and would have rained rivers of tears on his grave. 
To do him justice, he would have done almost as much for
them,--for any of them.  He could torture a devoted heart, but
only through a sort of half-wilful unconsciousness; he could
not bear to see tears shed in his presence, nor to let his
imagination dwell very much on those which flowed in his
absence. When he had once loved a woman, or even fancied that
he loved her, he built for her a shrine that was never
dismantled, and in which a very little faint incense would
sometimes be found burning for years after; he never quite
ceased to feel a languid thrill at the mention of her name; he
would make even for a past love the most generous sacrifices of
time, convenience, truth perhaps,--everything, in short, but
the present love. To those who had given him all that an
undivided heart can give he would deny nothing but an undivided
heart in return.  The misfortune was that this was the only
thing they cared to possess.

This abundant and spontaneous feeling gave him an air of
earnestness, without which he could not have charmed any woman,
and, least of all, one like Hope.  No woman really loves a
trifler; she must at least convince herself that he who trifles
with others is serious with her. Philip was never quite serious
and never quite otherwise; he never deliberately got up a
passion, for it was never needful; he simply found an object
for his emotions, opened their valves, and then watched their
flow.  To love a charming woman in her presence is no test of
genuine passion; let us know how much you long for her in
absence. This longing had never yet seriously troubled Malbone,
provided there was another charming person within an easy walk.

If it was sometimes forced upon him that all this ended in
anguish to some of these various charmers, first or last, then
there was always in reserve the pleasure of repentance. He was
very winning and generous in his repentances, and he enjoyed
them so much they were often repeated. He did not pass for a
weak person, and he was not exactly weak; but he spent his life
in putting away temptations with one hand and pulling them back
with the other. There was for him something piquant in being
thus neither innocent nor guilty, but always on some delicious
middle ground. He loved dearly to skate on thin ice,--that was
the trouble,--especially where he fancied the water to be just
within his depth. Unluckily the sea of life deepens rather
fast.

Malbone had known Hope from her childhood, as he had known her
cousins, but their love dated from their meetings beside the
sickbed of his mother, over whom he had watched with unstinted
devotion for weary months. She had been very fond of the young
girl, and her last earthly act was to place Hope's hand in
Philip's. Long before this final consecration, Hope had won his
heart more thoroughly, he fancied, than any woman he had ever
seen.  The secret of this crowning charm was, perhaps, that she
was a new sensation.  He had prided himself on his knowledge of
her sex, and yet here was a wholly new species.  He was
acquainted with the women of society, and with the women who
only wished to be in society. But here was one who was in the
chrysalis, and had never been a grub, and had no wish to be a
butterfly, and what should he make of her? He was like a
student of insects who had never seen a bee.  Never had he
known a young girl who cared for the things which this maiden
sought, or who was not dazzled by things to which Hope seemed
perfectly indifferent. She was not a devotee, she was not a
prude; people seemed to amuse and interest her; she liked them,
she declared, as much as she liked books. But this very way of
putting the thing seemed like inverting the accustomed order of
affairs in the polite world, and was of itself a novelty.

Of course he had previously taken his turn for a while among
Kate's admirers; but it was when she was very young, and,
moreover, it was hard to get up anything like a tender and
confidential relation with that frank maiden; she never would
have accepted Philip Malbone for herself, and she was by no
means satisfied with his betrothal to her best beloved. But
that Hope loved him ardently there was no doubt, however it
might be explained.  Perhaps it was some law of opposites, and
she needed some one of lighter nature than her own. As her
resolute purpose charmed him, so she may have found a certain
fascination in the airy way in which he took hold on life; he
was so full of thought and intelligence; possessing infinite
leisure, and yet incapable of ennui; ready to oblige every one,
and doing so many kind acts at so little personal sacrifice;
always easy, graceful, lovable, and kind. In her just
indignation at those who called him heartless, she forgot to
notice that his heart was not deep. He was interested in all
her pursuits, could aid her in all her studies, suggest schemes
for her benevolent desires, and could then make others work for
her, and even work himself. People usually loved Philip, even
while they criticised him; but Hope loved him first, and then
could not criticise him at all.

Nature seems always planning to equalize characters, and to
protect our friends from growing too perfect for our deserts. 
Love, for instance, is apt to strengthen the weak, and yet
sometimes weakens the strong. Under its influence Hope
sometimes appeared at disadvantage. Had the object of her love
been indifferent, the result might have been otherwise, but her
ample nature apparently needed to contract itself a little, to
find room within Philip's heart. Not that in his presence she
became vain or petty or jealous; that would have been
impossible.  She only grew credulous and absorbed and blind. A
kind of gentle obstinacy, too, developed itself in her nature,
and all suggestion of defects in him fell off from her as from
a marble image of Faith.  If he said or did anything, there was
no appeal; that was settled, let us pass to something else.

I almost blush to admit that Aunt Jane--of whom it could by no
means be asserted that she was a saintly lady, but only a very
charming one--rather rejoiced in this transformation.

"I like it better, my dear," she said, with her usual
frankness, to Kate.  "Hope was altogether too heavenly for my
style. When she first came here, I secretly thought I never
should care anything about her.  She seemed nothing but a
little moral tale. I thought she would not last me five
minutes.  But now she is growing quite human and ridiculous
about that Philip, and I think I may find her very attractive
indeed."



VI.

"SOME LOVER'S CLEAR DAY."

"HOPE!" said Philip Malbone, as they sailed together in a
little boat the next morning, "I have come back to you from
months of bewildered dreaming.  I have been wandering,--no
matter where. I need you.  You cannot tell how much I need
you."

"I can estimate it," she answered, gently, "by my need of you."

"Not at all," said Philip, gazing in her trustful face. "Any
one whom you loved would adore you, could he be by your side.
You need nothing.  It is I who need you."

"Why?" she asked, simply.

"Because," he said, "I am capable of behaving very much like a
fool. Hope, I am not worthy of you; why do you love me? why do
you trust me?"

"I do not know how I learned to love you," said Hope.  "It is a
blessing that was given to me.  But I learned to trust you in
your mother's sick-room."

"Ay," said Philip, sadly, "there, at least, I did my full
duty."

"As few would have done it," said Hope, firmly,--"very few.
Such prolonged self-sacrifice must strengthen a man for life."

"Not always," said Philip, uneasily.  "Too much of that sort of
thing may hurt one, I fancy, as well as too little. He may come
to imagine that the balance of virtue is in his favor, and that
he may grant himself a little indulgence to make up for lost
time.  That sort of recoil is a little dangerous, as I
sometimes feel, do you know?"

"And you show it," said Hope, ardently, "by fresh sacrifices!
How much trouble you have taken about Emilia!  Some time, when
you are willing, you shall tell me all about it. You always
seemed to me a magician, but I did not think that even you
could restore her to sense and wisdom so soon."

Malbone was just then very busy putting the boat about; but
when he had it on the other tack, he said, "How do you like
her?"

"Philip," said Hope, her eyes filling with tears, "I wonder if
you have the slightest conception how my heart is fixed on that
child. She has always been a sort of dream to me, and the
difficulty of getting any letters from her has only added to
the excitement. Now that she is here, my whole heart yearns
toward her.  Yet, when I look into her eyes, a sort of blank
hopelessness comes over me. They seem like the eyes of some
untamable creature whose language I shall never learn.  Philip,
you are older and wiser than I, and have shown already that you
understand her.  Tell me what I can do to make her love me?"

"Tell me how any one could help it?" said Malbone, looking
fondly on the sweet, pleading face before him.

"I am beginning to fear that it can be helped," she said. Her
thoughts were still with Emilia.

"Perhaps it can," said Phil, "if you sit so far away from
people. Here we are alone on the bay.  Come and sit by me,
Hope."

She had been sitting amidships, but she came aft at once, and
nestled by him as he sat holding the tiller.  She put her face
against his knee, like a tired child, and shut her eyes; her
hair was lifted by the summer breeze; a scent of roses came
from her; the mere contact of anything so fresh and pure was a
delight. He put his arm around her, and all the first ardor of
passion came back to him again; he remembered how he had longed
to win this Diana, and how thoroughly she was won.

"It is you who do me good," said she.  "O Philip, sail as
slowly as you can." But he only sailed farther, instead of more
slowly, gliding in and out among the rocky islands in the light
north wind, which, for a wonder, lasted all that day,--dappling
the bare hills of the Isle of Shadows with a shifting beauty. 
The tide was in and brimming, the fishing-boats were busy,
white gulls soared and clattered round them, and heavy
cormorants flapped away as they neared the rocks.  Beneath the
boat the soft multitudinous jellyfishes waved their fringed
pendants, or glittered with tremulous gold along their pink,
translucent sides. Long lines and streaks of paler blue lay
smoothly along the enamelled surface, the low, amethystine
hills lay couched beyond them, and little clouds stretched
themselves in lazy length above the beautiful expanse. They
reached the ruined fort at last, and Philip, surrendering Hope
to others, was himself besieged by a joyous group.

As you stand upon the crumbling parapet of old Fort Louis, you
feel yourself poised in middle air; the sea-birds soar and
swoop around you, the white surf lashes the rocks far below,
the white vessels come and go, the water is around you on all
sides but one, and spreads its pale blue beauty up the lovely
bay, or, in deeper tints, southward towards the horizon line. I
know of no ruin in America which nature has so resumed; it
seems a part of the living rock; you cannot imagine it away.

It is a single round, low tower, shaped like the tomb of
Cacilia Metella.  But its stately position makes it rank with
the vast sisterhood of wave-washed strongholds; it might be
King Arthur's Cornish Tyntagel; it might be "the teocallis
tower" of Tuloom.  As you gaze down from its height, all things
that float upon the ocean seem equalized. Look at the crowded
life on yonder frigate, coming in full-sailed before the steady
sea-breeze. To furl that heavy canvas, a hundred men cluster
like bees upon the yards, yet to us upon this height it is all
but a plaything for the eyes, and we turn with equal interest
from that thronged floating citadel to some lonely boy in his
skiff.

Yonder there sail to the ocean, beating wearily to windward, a
few slow vessels.  Inward come jubilant white schooners,
wing-and-wing. There are fishing-smacks towing their boats
behind them like a family of children; and there are slender
yachts that bear only their own light burden. Once from this
height I saw the whole yacht squadron round Point Judith, and
glide in like a flock of land-bound sea-birds; and above them,
yet more snowy and with softer curves, pressed onward the white
squadrons of the sky.

Within, the tower is full of debris, now disintegrated into one
solid mass, and covered with vegetation.  You can lie on the
blossoming clover, where the bees hum and the crickets chirp
around you, and can look through the arch which frames its own
fair picture.  In the foreground lies the steep slope overgrown
with bayberry and gay with thistle blooms; then the little
winding cove with its bordering cliffs; and the rough pastures
with their grazing sheep beyond.  Or, ascending the parapet,
you can look across the bay to the men making hay picturesquely
on far-off lawns, or to the cannon on the outer works of Fort
Adams, looking like vast black insects that have crawled forth
to die.

Here our young people spent the day; some sketched, some played
croquet, some bathed in rocky inlets where the kingfisher
screamed above them, some rowed to little craggy isles for wild
roses, some fished, and then were taught by the boatmen to cook
their fish in novel island ways. The morning grew more and more
cloudless, and then in the afternoon a fog came and went again,
marching by with its white armies, soon met and annihilated by
a rainbow.

The conversation that day was very gay and incoherent,--little
fragments of all manner of things; science, sentiment,
everything:  "Like a distracted dictionary," Kate said.  At
last this lively maiden got Philip away from the rest, and
began to cross-question him.

"Tell me," she said, "about Emilia's Swiss lover. She shuddered
when she spoke of him.  Was he so very bad?"

"Not at all," was the answer.  "You had false impressions of
him. He was a handsome, manly fellow, a little
over-sentimental. He had travelled, and had been a merchant's
clerk in Paris and London.  Then he came back, and became a
boatman on the lake, some said, for love of her."

"Did she love him?"

"Passionately, as she thought."

"Did he love her much?"

"I suppose so."

"Then why did she stop loving him?"

"She does not hate him?"

"No," said Kate, "that is what surprises me.  Lovers hate, or
those who have been lovers.  She is only indifferent.  Philip,
she had wound silk upon a torn piece of his carte-de-visite,
and did not know it till I showed it to her. Even then she did
not care."

"Such is woman!" said Philip.

"Nonsense," said Kate.  "She had seen somebody whom she loved
better, and she still loves that somebody.  Who was it?  She
had not been introduced into society.  Were there any superior
men among her teachers? She is just the girl to fall in love
with her teacher, at least in Europe, where they are the only
men one sees."

"There were some very superior men among them," said Philip. 
"Professor Schirmer has a European reputation; he wears blue
spectacles and a maroon wig."

"Do not talk so," said Kate.  "I tell you, Emilia is not
changeable, like you, sir.  She is passionate and constant. She
would have married that man or died for him.  You may think
that your sage counsels restrained her, but they did not; it
was that she loved some one else.  Tell me honestly. Do you not
know that there is somebody in Europe whom she loves to
distraction?"

"I do not know it," said Philip.

"Of course you do not KNOW it," returned the questioner. "Do
you not think it?"

"I have no reason to believe it."

"That has nothing to do with it," said Kate.  "Things that we
believe without any reason have a great deal more weight with
us. Do you not believe it?"

"No," said Philip, point-blank.

"It is very strange," mused Kate.  "Of course you do not know
much about it. She may have misled you, but I am sure that
neither you nor any one else could have cured her of a passion,
especially an unreasonable one, without putting another in its
place.  If you did it without that, you are a magician, as Hope
once called you.  Philip, I am afraid of you."

"There we sympathize," said Phil.  "I am sometimes afraid of
myself, but I discover within half an hour what a very
commonplace land harmless person I am."

Meantime Emilia found herself beside her sister, who was
sketching. After watching Hope for a time in silence, she began
to question her.

"Tell me what you have been doing in all these years," she
said.

"O, I have been at school," said Hope.  "First I went through
the High School; then I stayed out of school a year, and
studied Greek and German with my uncle, and music with my aunt,
who plays uncommonly well. Then I persuaded them to let me go
to the Normal School for two years, and learn to be a teacher."

"A teacher!" said Emilia, with surprise.  "Is it necessary that
you should be a teacher?"

"Very necessary," replied Hope.  "I must have something to do,
you know, after I leave school."

"To do?" said the other.  "Cannot you go to parties?"

"Not all the time," said her sister.

"Well," said Emilia, "in the mean time you can go to drive, or
make calls, or stay at home and make pretty little things to
wear, as other girls do."

"I can find time for that too, little sister, when I need them.
But I love children, you know, and I like to teach interesting
studies. I have splendid health, and I enjoy it all.  I like it
as you love dancing, my child, only I like dancing too, so I
have a greater variety of enjoyments."

"But shall you not sometimes find it very hard?" said Emilia.

"That is why I shall like it," was the answer.

"What a girl you are!" exclaimed the younger sister. "You know
everything and can do everything."

"A very short everything," interposed Hope.

"Kate says," continued Emilia, "that you speak French as well
as I do, and I dare say you dance a great deal better; and
those are the only things I know."

"If we both had French partners, dear," replied the elder
maiden, "they would soon find the difference in both respects. 
My dancing came by nature, I believe, and I learned French as a
child, by talking with my old uncle, who was half a Parisian. 
I believe I have a good accent, but I have so little practice
that I have no command of the language compared to yours. In a
week or two we can both try our skill, as there is to be a ball
for the officers of the French corvette yonder," and Hope
pointed to the heavy spars, the dark canvas, and the high
quarter-deck which made the "Jean Hoche" seem as if she had
floated out of the days of Nelson.

The calm day waned, the sun drooped to his setting amid a few
golden bars and pencilled lines of light.  Ere they were ready
for departure, the tide had ebbed, and, in getting the boats to
a practicable landing-place, Malbone was delayed behind the
others.  As he at length brought his boat to the rock, Hope sat
upon the ruined fort, far above him, and sang. Her noble
contralto voice echoed among the cliffs down to the smooth
water; the sun went down behind her, and still she sat stately
and noble, her white dress looking more and more spirit-like
against the golden sky; and still the song rang on,--

"Never a scornful word should grieve thee,
I'd smile on thee, sweet, as the angels do;
Sweet as thy smile on me shone ever,
Douglas, Douglas, tender and true."

All sacredness and sweetness, all that was pure and brave and
truthful, seemed to rest in her.  And when the song ceased at
his summons, and she came down to meet him,--glowing,
beautiful, appealing, tender,--then all meaner spells vanished,
if such had ever haunted him, and he was hers alone.

Later that evening, after the household had separated, Hope
went into the empty drawing-room for a light.  Philip, after a
moment's hesitation, followed her, and paused in the doorway.
She stood, a white-robed figure, holding the lighted candle;
behind her rose the arched alcove, whose quaint cherubs looked
down on her; she seemed to have stepped forth, the awakened
image of a saint.  Looking up, she saw his eager glance; then
she colored, trembled, and put the candle down. He came to her,
took her hand and kissed it, then put his hand upon her brow
and gazed into her face, then kissed her lips. She quietly
yielded, but her color came and went, and her lips moved as if
to speak.  For a moment he saw her only, thought only of her.

Then, even while he gazed into her eyes, a flood of other
memories surged over him, and his own eyes grew dim.  His head
swam, the lips he had just kissed appeared to fade away, and
something of darker, richer beauty seemed to burn through those
fair features; he looked through those gentle eyes into orbs
more radiant, and it was as if a countenance of eager passion
obliterated that fair head, and spoke with substituted lips,
"Behold your love." There was a thrill of infinite ecstasy in
the work his imagination did; he gave it rein, then suddenly
drew it in and looked at Hope.  Her touch brought pain for an
instant, as she laid her hand upon him, but he bore it. Then
some influence of calmness came; there swept by him a flood of
earlier, serener memories; he sat down in the window-seat
beside her, and when she put her face beside his, and her soft
hair touched his cheek, and he inhaled the rose-odor that
always clung round her, every atom of his manhood stood up to
drive away the intruding presence, and he again belonged to her
alone.

When he went to his chamber that night, he drew from his pocket
a little note in a girlish hand, which he lighted in the
candle, and put upon the open hearth to burn.  With what a
cruel, tinkling rustle the pages flamed and twisted and opened,
as if the fire read them, and collapsed again as if in
agonizing effort to hold their secret even in death! The
closely folded paper refused to burn, it went out again and
again; while each time Philip Malbone examined it ere
relighting, with a sort of vague curiosity, to see how much
passion had already vanished out of existence, and how much yet
survived.  For each of these inspections he had to brush aside
the calcined portion of the letter, once so warm and beautiful
with love, but changed to something that seemed to him a
semblance of his own heart just then,--black, trivial, and
empty.

Then he took from a little folded paper a long tress of dark
silken hair, and, without trusting himself to kiss it, held it
firmly in the candle. It crisped and sparkled, and sent out a
pungent odor, then turned and writhed between his fingers, like
a living thing in pain. What part of us has earthly immortality
but our hair? It dies not with death.  When all else of human
beauty has decayed beyond corruption into the more agonizing
irrecov-erableness of dust, the hair is still fresh and
beautiful, defying annihilation, and restoring to the powerless
heart the full association of the living image.  These
shrinking hairs, they feared not death, but they seemed to fear
Malbone.  Nothing but the hand of man could destroy what he was
destroying; but his hand shrank not, and it was done.



VII.

AN INTERNATIONAL EXPOSITION.

AT the celebrated Oldport ball for the French officers, the
merit of each maiden was estimated by the number of foreigners
with whom she could talk at once, for there were more gentlemen
than ladies, and not more than half the ladies spoke French. 
Here Emilia was in her glory; the ice being once broken,
officers were to her but like so many school-girls, and she
rattled away to the admiral and the fleet captain and two or
three lieutenants at once, while others hovered behind the
circle of her immediate adorers, to pick up the stray shafts of
what passed for wit.  Other girls again drove two-in-hand, at
the most, in the way of conversation; while those least gifted
could only encounter one small Frenchman in some safe corner,
and converse chiefly by smiles and signs.

On the whole, the evening opened gayly.  Newly arrived
Frenchmen are apt to be so unused to the familiar society of
unmarried girls, that the most innocent share in it has for
them the zest of forbidden fruit, and the most blameless
intercourse seems almost a bonne fortune. Most of these
officers were from the lower ranks of French society, but they
all had that good-breeding which their race wears with such
ease, and can unhappily put off with the same.

The admiral and the fleet captain were soon turned over to
Hope, who spoke French as she did English, with quiet grace. 
She found them agreeable companions, while Emilia drifted among
the elder midshipmen, who were dazzling in gold lace if not in
intellect.  Kate fell to the share of a vehement little
surgeon, who danced her out of breath. Harry officiated as
interpreter between the governor of the State and a lively
young ensign, who yearned for the society of dignitaries. The
governor was quite aware that he himself could not speak
French; the Frenchman was quite unaware that he himself could
not speak English; but with Harry's aid they plunged boldly
into conversation. Their talk happened to fall on
steam-engines, English, French, American; their comparative
cost, comparative power, comparative cost per horse
power,--until Harry, who was not very strong upon the
steam-engine in his own tongue, and was quite helpless on that
point in any other, got a good deal astray among the numerals,
and implanted some rather wild statistics in the mind of each. 
The young Frenchman was far more definite, when requested by
the governor to state in English the precise number of men
engaged on board the corvette.  With the accuracy of his
nation, he beamingly replied, "Seeshun-dredtousand."

As is apt to be the case in Oldport, other European
nationalities beside the French were represented, though the
most marked foreign accent was of course to be found among
Americans just returned. There were European diplomatists who
spoke English perfectly; there were travellers who spoke no
English at all; and as usual each guest sought to practise
himself in the tongue he knew least. There was the usual
eagerness among the fashionable vulgar to make acquaintance
with anything that combined broken English and a title; and two
minutes after a Russian prince had seated himself comfortably
on a sofa beside Kate, he was vehemently tapped on the shoulder
by Mrs. Courtenay Brash with the endearing summons:  "Why! 
Prince, I didn't see as you was here.  Do you set comfortable
where you be? Come over to this window, and tell all you know!"

The prince might have felt that his summons was abrupt, but
knew not that it was ungrammatical, and so was led away in
triumph. He had been but a month or two in this country, and so
spoke our language no more correctly than Mrs. Brash, but only
with more grace. There was no great harm in Mrs. Brash; like
most loquacious people, she was kind-hearted, with a tendency
to corpulence and good works. She was also afflicted with a
high color, and a chronic eruption of diamonds.  Her husband
had an eye for them, having begun life as a jeweller's
apprentice, and having developed sufficient sharpness of vision
in other directions to become a millionnaire, and a
Congressman, and to let his wife do as she pleased.

What goes forth from the lips may vary in dialect, but wine and
oysters speak the universal language.  The supper-table brought
our party together, and they compared notes.

"Parties are very confusing," philosophized Hope,--"especially
when waiters and partners dress so much alike.  Just now I saw
an ill-looking man elbowing his way up to Mrs. Meredith, and I
thought he was bringing her something on a plate. Instead of
that, it was his hand he held out, and she put hers into it;
and I was told that he was one of the leaders of society. There
are very few gentlemen here whom I could positively tell from
the waiters by their faces, and yet Harry says the fast set are
not here."

"Talk of the angels!" said Philip.  "There come the
Inglesides."

Through the door of the supper-room they saw entering the
drawing-room one of those pretty, fair-haired women who grow
older up to twenty-five and then remain unchanged till sixty.
She was dressed in the loveliest pale blue silk, very low in
the neck, and she seemed to smile on all with her white teeth
and her white shoulders.  This was Mrs. Ingleside.  With her
came her daughter Blanche, a pretty blonde, whose bearing
seemed at first as innocent and pastoral as her name. Her dress
was of spotless white, what there was of it; and her skin was
so snowy, you could hardly tell where the dress ended. Her
complexion was exquisite, her eyes of the softest blue; at
twenty-three she did not look more than seventeen; and yet
there was such a contrast between these virginal traits, and
the worn, faithless, hopeless expression, that she looked, as
Philip said, like a depraved lamb.  Does it show the higher
nature of woman, that, while "fast young men" are content to
look like well-dressed stable boys and billiard-markers, one
may observe that girls of the corresponding type are apt to
addict themselves to white and rosebuds, and pose themselves
for falling angels?

Mrs. Ingleside was a stray widow (from New Orleans via Paris),
into whose antecedents it was best not to inquire too closely.
After many ups and downs, she was at present up. It was
difficult to state with certainty what bad deed she had ever
done, or what good deed.  She simply lived by her wits, and
perhaps by some want of that article in her male friends. Her
house was a sort of gentlemanly clubhouse, where the presence
of two women offered a shade less restraint than if there had
been men alone.  She was amiable and unscrupulous, went
regularly to church, and needed only money to be the most
respectable and fastidious of women.  It was always rather a
mystery who paid for her charming little dinners; indeed,
several things in her demeanor were questionable, but as the
questions were never answered, no harm was done, and everybody
invited her because everybody else did. Had she committed some
graceful forgery tomorrow, or some mild murder the next day,
nobody would have been surprised, and all her intimate friends
would have said it was what they had always expected.

Meantime the entertainment went on.

"I shall not have scalloped oysters in heaven," lamented Kate,
as she finished with healthy appetite her first instalment.

"Are you sure you shall not?" said the sympathetic Hope, who
would have eagerly followed Kate into Paradise with a supply of
whatever she liked best.

"I suppose you will, darling," responded Kate, "but what will
you care? It seems hard that those who are bad enough to long
for them should not be good enough to earn them."

At this moment Blanche Ingleside and her train swept into the
supper-room; the girls cleared a passage, their attendant
youths collected chairs. Blanche tilted hers slightly against a
wall, professed utter exhaustion, and demanded a fresh bottle
of champagne in a voice that showed no signs of weakness. 
Presently a sheepish youth drew near the noisy circle.

"Here comes that Talbot van Alsted," said Blanche, bursting at
last into a loud whisper.  "What a goose he is, to be sure!
Dear baby, it promised its mother it wouldn't drink wine for
two months. Let's all drink with him.  Talbot, my boy, just in
time! Fill your glass.  Stosst an!"

And Blanche and her attendant spirits in white muslin thronged
around the weak boy, saw him charged with the three glasses
that were all his head could stand, and sent him reeling home
to his mother. Then they looked round for fresh worlds to
conquer.

"There are the Maxwells!" said Miss Ingleside, without lowering
her voice.  "Who is that party in the high-necked dress? Is she
the schoolmistress?  Why do they have such people here? Society
is getting so common, there is no bearing it. That Emily who is
with her is too good for that slow set. She's the school-girl
we heard of at Nice, or somewhere; she wanted to elope with
somebody, and Phil Malbone stopped her, worse luck. She will be
for eloping with us, before long."

Emilia colored scarlet, and gave a furtive glance at Hope, half
of shame, half of triumph.  Hope looked at Blanche with
surprise, made a movement forward, but was restrained by the
crowd, while the noisy damsel broke out in a different
direction.

"How fiendishly hot it is here, though!  Jones junior, put your
elbow through that window!  This champagne is boiling. What a
tiresome time we shall have to-morrow, when the Frenchmen are
gone! Ah, Count, there you are at last!  Ready for the German? 
Come for me? Just primed and up to anything, and so I tell
you!"

But as Count Posen, kissing his hand to her, squeezed his way
through the crowd with Hal, to be presented to Hope, there came
over Blanche's young face such a mingled look of hatred and
weariness and chagrin, that even her unobserving friends saw
it, and asked with tender commiseration what was up.

The dancing recommenced.  There was the usual array of
partners, distributed by mysterious discrepancies, like
soldiers' uniforms, so that all the tall drew short, and all
the short had tall.  There were the timid couples, who danced
with trembling knees and eyes cast over their shoulders; the
feeble couples, who meandered aimlessly and got tangled in
corners; the rash couples, who tore breathlessly through the
rooms and brought up at last against the large white waistcoat
of the violon-cello. There was the professional lady-killer,
too supreme and indolent to dance, but sitting amid an admiring
bevy of fair women, where he reared his head of raven curls,
and pulled ceaselessly his black mustache. And there were
certain young girls who, having astonished the community for a
month by the lowness of their dresses, now brought to bear
their only remaining art, and struck everybody dumb by
appearing clothed. All these came and went and came again, and
had their day or their night, and danced until the robust Hope
went home exhausted and left her more fragile cousins to dance
on till morning.  Indeed, it was no easy thing for them to tear
themselves away; Kate was always in demand; Philip knew
everybody, and had that latest aroma of Paris which the soul of
fashion covets; Harry had the tried endurance which befits
brothers and lovers at balls; while Emilia's foreign court held
out till morning, and one handsome young midshipman, in
special, kept revolving back to her after each long orbit of
separation, like a gold-laced comet.

The young people lingered extravagantly late at that ball, for
the corvette was to sail next day, and the girls were willing
to make the most of it. As they came to the outer door, the
dawn was inexpressibly beautiful,--deep rose melting into
saffron, beneath a tremulous morning star. With a sudden
impulse, they agreed to walk home, the fresh air seemed so
delicious.  Philip and Emilia went first, outstripping the
others.

Passing the Jewish cemetery, Kate and Harry paused a moment.
The sky was almost cloudless, the air was full of a thousand
scents and songs, the rose-tints in the sky were deepening, the
star paling, while a few vague clouds went wandering upward,
and dreamed themselves away.

"There is a grave in that cemetery," said Kate, gently, "where
lovers should always be sitting.  It lies behind that tall
monument; I cannot see it for the blossoming boughs. There were
two young cousins who loved each other from childhood, but were
separated, because Jews do not allow such unions. Neither of
them was ever married; and they lived to be very old, the one
in New Orleans, the other at the North.  In their last
illnesses each dreamed of walking in the fields with the other,
as in their early days; and the telegraphic despatches that
told their deaths crossed each other on the way. That is his
monument, and her grave was made behind it; there was no room
for a stone."

Kate moved a step or two, that she might see the graves. The
branches opened clear.  What living lovers had met there, at
this strange hour, above the dust of lovers dead? She saw with
amazement, and walked on quickly that Harry might not also see.

It was Emilia who sat beside the grave, her dark hair drooping
and dishevelled, her carnation cheek still brilliant after the
night's excitement; and he who sat at her feet, grasping her
hand in both of his, while his lips poured out passionate words
to which she eagerly listened, was Philip Malbone.

Here, upon the soil of a new nation, lay a spot whose
associations seemed already as old as time could make
them,--the last footprint of a tribe now vanished from this
island forever,--the resting-place of a race whose very
funerals would soon be no more.  Each April the robins built
their nests around these crumbling stones, each May they reared
their broods, each June the clover blossomed, each July the
wild strawberries grew cool and red; all around was youth and
life and ecstasy, and yet the stones bore inscriptions in an
unknown language, and the very graves seemed dead.

And lovelier than all the youth of Nature, little Emilia sat
there in the early light, her girlish existence gliding into
that drama of passion which is older than the buried nations,
older than time, than death, than all things save life and God.



VIII.

TALKING IT OVER.

AUNT JANE was eager to hear about the ball, and called
everybody into her breakfast-parlor the next morning. She was
still hesitating about her bill of fare.

"I wish somebody would invent a new animal," she burst forth.
"How those sheep bleated last night!  I know it was an
expression of shame for providing such tiresome food."

"You must not be so carnally minded, dear," said Kate.  "You
must be very good and grateful, and not care for your
breakfast. Somebody says that mutton chops with wit are a great
deal better than turtle without."

"A very foolish somebody," pronounced Aunt Jane.  "I have had a
great deal of wit in my life, and very little turtle. Dear
child, do not excite me with impossible suggestions. There are
dropped eggs, I might have those.  They look so beautifully, if
it only were not necessary to eat them. Yes, I will certainly
have dropped eggs.  I think Ruth could drop them; she drops
everything else."

"Poor little Ruth!" said Kate.  "Not yet grown up!"

"She will never grow up," said Aunt Jane, "but she thinks she
is a woman; she even thinks she has a lover.  O that in early
life I had provided myself with a pair of twins from some
asylum; then I should have had some one to wait on me."

"Perhaps they would have been married too," said Kate.

"They should never have been married," retorted Aunt Jane. 
"They should have signed a paper at five years old to do no
such thing.  Yesterday I told a lady that I was enraged that a
servant should presume to have a heart, and the woman took it
seriously and began to argue with me. To think of living in a
town where one person could be so idiotic! Such a town ought to
be extinguished from the universe."

"Auntie!" said Kate, sternly, "you must grow more charitable."

"Must I?" said Aunt Jane; "it will not be at all becoming. I
have thought about it; often have I weighed it in my mind
whether to be monotonously lovely; but I have always thrust it
away. It must make life so tedious.  It is too late for me to
change,--at least, anything about me but my countenance, and
that changes the wrong way.  Yet I feel so young and fresh; I
look in my glass every morning to see if I have not a new face,
but it never comes. I am not what is called well-favored. In
fact, I am not favored at all. Tell me about the party."

"What shall I tell?" said Kate.

"Tell me what people were there," said Aunt Jane, "and how they
were dressed; who were the happiest and who the most miserable.
I think I would rather hear about the most miserable,--at
least, till I have my breakfast."

"The most miserable person I saw," said Kate, "was Mrs.
Meredith.  It was very amusing to hear her and Hope talk at
cross-purposes. You know her daughter Helen is in Paris, and
the mother seemed very sad about her. A lady was asking if
something or other were true; 'Too true,' said Mrs. Meredith;
'with every opportunity she has had no real success. It was not
the poor child's fault.  She was properly presented; but as yet
she has had no success at all.'

"Hope looked up, full of sympathy.  She thought Helen must be
some disappointed school-teacher, and felt an interest in her
immediately. 'Will there not be another examination?' she
asked. 'What an odd phrase,' said Mrs. Meredith, looking rather
disdainfully at Hope.  'No, I suppose we must give it up, if
that is what you mean. The only remaining chance is in the
skating.  I had particular attention paid to Helen's skating on
that very account. How happy shall I be, if my foresight is
rewarded!'

"Hope thought this meant physical education, to be sure, and
fancied that handsome Helen Meredith opening a school for
calisthenics in Paris!  Luckily she did not say anything. Then
the other lady said, solemnly, 'My dear Mrs. Meredith, it is
too true.  No one can tell how things will turn out in society.
How often do we see girls who were not looked at in America,
and yet have a great success in Paris; then other girls go out
who were here very much admired, and they have no success at
all.'

"Hope understood it all then, but she took it very calmly. I
was so indignant, I could hardly help speaking.  I wanted to
say that it was outrageous.  The idea of American mothers
training their children for exhibition before what everybody
calls the most corrupt court in Europe!  Then if they can catch
the eye of the Emperor or the Empress by their faces or their
paces, that is called success!"

"Good Americans when they die go to Paris," said Philip, "so
says the oracle. Naughty Americans try it prematurely, and go
while they are alive. Then Paris casts them out, and when they
come back, their French disrepute is their stock in trade."

"I think," said the cheerful Hope, "that it is not quite so
bad." Hope always thought things not so bad.  She went on. "I
was very dull not to know what Mrs. Meredith was talking about.
Helen Meredith is a warm-hearted, generous girl, and will not
go far wrong, though her mother is not as wise as she is
well-bred. But Kate forgets that the few hundred people one
sees here or at Paris do not represent the nation, after all."

"The most influential part of it," said Emilia.

"Are you sure, dear?" said her sister.  "I do not think they
influence it half so much as a great many people who are too
busy to go to either place. I always remember those hundred
girls at the Normal School, and that they were not at all like
Mrs. Meredith, nor would they care to be like her, any more
than she would wish to be like them."

"They have not had the same advantages," said Emilia.

"Nor the same disadvantages," said Hope.  "Some of them are not
so well bred, and none of them speak French so well, for she
speaks exquisitely. But in all that belongs to real training of
the mind, they seem to me superior, and that is why I think
they will have more influence."

"None of them are rich, though, I suppose," said Emilia, "nor
of very nice families, or they would not be teachers. So they
will not be so prominent in society."

"But they may yet become very prominent in society," said
Hope,--"they or their pupils or their children. At any rate, it
is as certain that the noblest lives will have most influence
in the end, as that two and two make four."

"Is that certain?" said Philip.  "Perhaps there are worlds
where two and two do not make just that desirable amount."

"I trust there are," said Aunt Jane.  "Perhaps I was intended
to be born in one of them, and that is why my housekeeping
accounts never add up."

Here hope was called away, and Emilia saucily murmured, "Sour
grapes!"

"Not a bit of it!" cried Kate, indignantly.  "Hope might have
anything in society she wishes, if she would only give up some
of her own plans, and let me choose her dresses, and her rich
uncles pay for them. Count Posen told me, only yesterday, that
there was not a girl in Oldport with such an air as hers."

"Not Kate herself?" said Emilia, slyly.

"I?" said Kate.  "What am I?  A silly chit of a thing, with
about a dozen ideas in my head, nearly every one of which was
planted there by Hope.  I like the nonsense of the world very
well as it is, and without her I should have cared for nothing
else. Count Posen asked me the other day, which country
produced on the whole the most womanly women, France or
America.  He is one of the few foreigners who expect a rational
answer. So I told him that I knew very little of Frenchwomen
personally, but that I had read French novels ever since I was
born, and there was not a woman worthy to be compared with Hope
in any of them, except Consuelo, and even she told lies."

"Do not begin upon Hope," said Aunt Jane.  "It is the only
subject on which Kate can be tedious.  Tell me about the
dresses. Were people over-dressed or under-dressed?"

"Under-dressed," said Phil.  "Miss Ingleside had a half-inch
strip of muslin over her shoulder."

Here Philip followed Hope out of the room, and Emilia presently
followed him.

"Tell on!" said Aunt Jane.  "How did Philip enjoy himself?"

"He is easily amused, you know," said Kate.  "He likes to
observe people, and to shoot folly as it flies."

"It does not fly," retorted the elder lady.  "I wish it did.
You can shoot it sitting, at least where Philip is."

"Auntie," said Kate, "tell me truly your objection to Philip. 
I think you did not like his parents.  Had he not a good
mother?"

"She was good," said Aunt Jane, reluctantly, "but it was that
kind of goodness which is quite offensive."

"And did you know his father well?"

"Know him!" exclaimed Aunt Jane.  "I should think I did. I have
sat up all night to hate him."

"That was very wrong," said Kate, decisively.  "You do not mean
that. You only mean that you did not admire him very much."

"I never admired a dozen people in my life, Kate.  I once made
a list of them.  There were six women, three men, and a
Newfoundland dog."

"What happened?" said Kate.  "The Is-raelites died after
Pharaoh, or somebody, numbered them.  Did anything happen to
yours?"

"It was worse with mine," said Aunt Jane.  "I grew tired of
some and others I forgot, till at last there was nobody left
but the dog, and he died."

"Was Philip's father one of them?"

"No."

"Tell me about him," said Kate, firmly.

"Ruth," said the elder lady, as her young handmaiden passed the
door with her wonted demureness, "come here; no, get me a glass
of water.  Kate!  I shall die of that girl. She does some
idiotic thing, and then she looks in here with that contented,
beaming look. There is an air of baseless happiness about her
that drives me nearly frantic."

"Never mind about that," persisted Kate.  "Tell me about
Philip's father. What was the matter with him?"

"My dear," Aunt Jane at last answered,--with that fearful
moderation to which she usually resorted when even her stock of
superlatives was exhausted,--"he belonged to a family for whom
truth possessed even less than the usual attractions."

This neat epitaph implied the erection of a final tombstone
over the whole race, and Kate asked no more.

Meantime Malbone sat at the western door with Harry, and was
running on with one of his tirades, half jest, half earnest,
against American society.

"In America," he said, "everything which does not tend to money
is thought to be wasted, as our Quaker neighbor thinks the
children's croquet-ground wasted, because it is not a potato
field."

"Not just!" cried Harry.  "Nowhere is there more respect for
those who give their lives to intellectual pursuits."

"What are intellectual pursuits?" said Philip.  "Editing daily
newspapers?  Teaching arithmetic to children? I see no others
flourishing hereabouts."

"Science and literature," answered Harry.

"Who cares for literature in America," said Philip, "after a
man rises three inches above the newspaper level? Nobody reads
Thoreau; only an insignificant fraction read Emerson, or even
Hawthorne.  The majority of people have hardly even heard their
names.  What inducement has a writer? Nobody has any weight in
America who is not in Congress, and nobody gets into Congress
without the necessity of bribing or button-holing men whom he
despises."

"But you do not care for public life?" said Harry.

"No," said Malbone, "therefore this does not trouble me, but it
troubles you. I am content.  My digestion is good.  I can
always amuse myself. Why are you not satisfied?"

"Because you are not," said Harry.  "You are dissatisfied with
men, and so you care chiefly to amuse yourself with women and
children."

"I dare say," said Malbone, carelessly.  "They are usually less
ungraceful and talk better grammar."

"But American life does not mean grace nor grammar. We are all
living for the future.  Rough work now, and the graces by and
by."

"That is what we Americans always say," retorted Philip. 
"Everything is in the future.  What guaranty have we for that
future?  I see none. We make no progress towards the higher
arts, except in greater quantities of mediocrity.  We sell
larger editions of poor books. Our artists fill larger frames
and travel farther for materials; but a ten-inch canvas would
tell all they have to say."

"The wrong point of view," said Hal.  "If you begin with high
art, you begin at the wrong end.  The first essential for any
nation is to put the mass of the people above the reach of
want. We are all usefully employed, if we contribute to that."

"So is the cook usefully employed while preparing dinner," said
Philip.  "Nevertheless, I do not wish to live in the kitchen."

"Yet you always admire your own country," said Harry, "so long
as you are in Europe."

"No doubt," said Philip.  "I do not object to the kitchen at
that distance. And to tell the truth, America looks well from
Europe.  No culture, no art seems so noble as this far-off
spectacle of a self-governing people. The enthusiasm lasts till
one's return.  Then there seems nothing here but to work hard
and keep out of mischief."

"That is something," said Harry.

"A good deal in America," said Phil.  "We talk about the
immorality of older countries.  Did you ever notice that no
class of men are so apt to take to drinking as highly
cultivated Americans?  It is a very demoralizing position, when
one's tastes outgrow one's surroundings. Positively, I think a
man is more excusable for coveting his neighbor's wife in
America than in Europe, because there is so little else to
covet."

"Malbone!" said Hal, "what has got into you?  Do you know what
things you are saying?"

"Perfectly," was the unconcerned reply.  "I am not arguing; I
am only testifying.  I know that in Paris, for instance, I
myself have no temptations.  Art and history are so delightful,
I absolutely do not care for the society even of women; but
here, where there is nothing to do, one must have some
stimulus, and for me, who hate drinking, they are, at least, a
more refined excitement."

"More dangerous," said Hal.  "Infinitely more dangerous, in the
morbid way in which you look at life.  What have these sickly
fancies to do with the career that opens to every brave man in
a great nation?"

"They have everything to do with it, and there are many for
whom there is no career.  As the nation develops, it must
produce men of high culture. Now there is no place for them
except as bookkeepers or pedagogues or newspaper reporters. 
Meantime the incessant unintellectual activity is only a
sublime bore to those who stand aside."

"Then why stand aside?" persisted the downright Harry.

"I have no place in it but a lounging-place," said Malbone.  "I
do not wish to chop blocks with a razor.  I envy those men,
born mere Americans, with no ambition in life but to 'swing a
railroad' as they say at the West.  Every morning I hope to
wake up like them in the fear of God and the love of money."

"You may as well stop," said Harry, coloring a little.
"Malbone, you used to be my ideal man in my boyhood, but"--

"I am glad we have got beyond that," interrupted the other,
cheerily, "I am only an idler in the land.  Meanwhile, I have
my little interests,--read, write, sketch--"

"Flirt?" put in Hal, with growing displeasure.

"Not now," said Phil, patting his shoulder, with imperturbable
good-nature. "Our beloved has cured me of that.  He who has won
the pearl dives no more."

"Do not let us speak of Hope," said Harry.  "Everything that
you have been asserting Hope's daily life disproves."

"That may be," answered Malbone, heartily.  "But, Hal, I never
flirted; I always despised it.  It was always a grande passion
with me, or what I took for such.  I loved to be loved, I
suppose; and there was always something new and fascinating to
be explored in a human heart, that is, a woman's."

"Some new temple to profane?" asked Hal severely.

"Never!" said Philip.  "I never profaned it.  If I deceived, I
shared the deception, at least for a time; and, as for
sensuality, I had none in me."

"Did you have nothing worse?  Rousseau ends where Tom Jones
begins."

"My temperament saved me," said Philip.  "A woman is not a
woman to me, without personal refinement."

"Just what Rousseau said," replied Harry.

"I acted upon it," answered Malbone.  "No one dislikes Blanche
Ingleside and her demi monde more than I."

"You ought not," was the retort.  "You help to bring other
girls to her level."

"Whom?" said Malbone, startled.

"Emilia."

"Emilia?" repeated the other, coloring crimson.  "I, who have
warned her against Blanche's society."

"And have left her no other resource," said Harry, coloring
still more. "Malbone, you have gained (unconsciously of course)
too much power over that girl, and the only effect of it is, to
keep her in perpetual excitement. So she seeks Blanche, as she
would any other strong stimulant. Hope does not seem to have
discovered this, but Kate has, and I have."

Hope came in, and Harry went out.  The next day he came to
Philip and apologized most warmly for his unjust and
inconsiderate words. Malbone, always generous, bade him think
no more about it, and Harry for that day reverted strongly to
his first faith. "So noble, so high-toned," he said to Kate. 
Indeed, a man never appears more magnanimous than in forgiving
a friend who has told him the truth.



IX.

DANGEROUS WAYS.

IT was true enough what Harry had said.  Philip Malbone's was
that perilous Rousseau-like temperament, neither sincere enough
for safety, nor false enough to alarm; the winning tenderness
that thrills and softens at the mere neighborhood of a woman,
and fascinates by its reality those whom no hypocrisy can
deceive. It was a nature half amiable, half voluptuous, that
disarmed others, seeming itself unarmed.  He was never wholly
ennobled by passion, for it never touched him deeply enough;
and, on the other hand, he was not hardened by the habitual
attitude of passion, for he was never really insincere. 
Sometimes it seemed as if nothing stood between him and utter
profligacy but a little indolence, a little kindness, and a
good deal of caution.

"There seems no such thing as serious repentance in me," he had
once said to Kate, two years before, when she had upbraided him
with some desperate flirtation which had looked as if he would
carry it as far as gentlemen did under King Charles II.  "How
does remorse begin?"

"Where you are beginning," said Kate.

"I do not perceive that," he answered.  "My conscience seems,
after all, to be only a form of good-nature. I like to be
stirred by emotion, I suppose, and I like to study character. 
But I can always stop when it is evident that I shall cause
pain to somebody. Is there any other motive?"

"In other words," said she, "you apply the match, and then turn
your back on the burning house."

Philip colored.  "How unjust you are!  Of course, we all like
to play with fire, but I always put it out before it can
spread. Do you think I have no feeling?"

Kate stopped there, I suppose.  Even she always stopped soon,
if she undertook to interfere with Malbone.  This charming
Alcibiades always convinced them, after the wrestling was over,
that he had not been thrown.

The only exception to this was in the case of Aunt Jane.  If
she had anything in common with Philip,--and there was a
certain element of ingenuous unconsciousness in which they were
not so far unlike,--it only placed them in the more complete
antagonism. Perhaps if two beings were in absolutely no respect
alike, they never could meet even for purposes of hostility;
there must be some common ground from which the aversion may
proceed. Moreover, in this case Aunt Jane utterly disbelieved
in Malbone because she had reason to disbelieve in his father,
and the better she knew the son the more she disliked the
father retrospectively.

Philip was apt to be very heedless of such aversions,--indeed,
he had few to heed,--but it was apparent that Aunt Jane was the
only person with whom he was not quite at ease.  Still, the
solicitude did not trouble him very much, for he instinctively
knew that it was not his particular actions which vexed her, so
much as his very temperament and atmosphere,--things not to be
changed.  So he usually went his way; and if he sometimes felt
one of her sharp retorts, could laugh it off that day and sleep
it off before the next morning.

For you may be sure that Philip was very little troubled by
inconvenient memories.  He never had to affect forgetfulness of
anything. The past slid from him so easily, he forgot even to
try to forget. He liked to quote from Emerson, "What have I to
do with repentance?" "What have my yesterday's errors," he
would say, "to do with the life of to-day?"

"Everything," interrupted Aunt Jane, "for you will repeat them
to-day, if you can."

"Not at all," persisted he, accepting as conversation what she
meant as a stab.  "I may, indeed, commit greater errors,"--here
she grimly nodded, as if she had no doubt of it,--"but never
just the same. To-day must take thought for itself."

"I wish it would," she said, gently, and then went on with her
own thoughts while he was silent.  Presently she broke out
again in her impulsive way.

"Depend upon it," she said, "there is very little direct
retribution in this world."

Phil looked up, quite pleased at her indorsing one of his
favorite views. She looked, as she always did, indignant at
having said anything to please him.

"Yes," said she, "it is the indirect retribution that crushes.
I've seen enough of that, God knows.  Kate, give me my
thimble."

Malbone had that smooth elasticity of surface which made even
Aunt Jane's strong fingers slip from him as they might from a
fish, or from the soft, gelatinous stem of the water-target.
Even in this case he only laughed good-naturedly, and went out,
whistling like a mocking-bird, to call the children round him.

Toward the more wayward and impulsive Emilia the good lady was
far more merciful.  With all Aunt Jane's formidable keenness,
she was a little apt to be disarmed by youth and beauty, and
had no very stern retributions except for those past middle
age. Emilia especially charmed her while she repelled.  There
was no getting beyond a certain point with this strange girl,
any more than with Philip; but her depths tantalized, while his
apparent shallows were only vexatious.  Emilia was usually
sweet, winning, cordial, and seemed ready to glide into one's
heart as softly as she glided into the room; she liked to
please, and found it very easy. Yet she left the impression
that this smooth and delicate loveliness went but an inch
beyond the surface, like the soft, thin foam that enamels
yonder tract of ocean, belongs to it, is a part of it, yet is,
after all, but a bequest of tempests, and covers only a dark
abyss of crossing currents and desolate tangles of rootless
kelp. Everybody was drawn to her, yet not a soul took any
comfort in her. Her very voice had in it a despairing
sweetness, that seemed far in advance of her actual history; it
was an anticipated miserere, a perpetual dirge, where nothing
had yet gone down.  So Aunt Jane, who was wont to be perfectly
decisive in her treatment of every human being, was fluctuating
and inconsistent with Emilia.  She could not help being
fascinated by the motherless child, and yet scorned herself for
even the doubting love she gave.

"Only think, auntie," said Kate, "how you kissed Emilia,
yesterday!"

"Of course I did," she remorsefully owned.  "I have kissed her
a great many times too often.  I never will kiss her again.
There is nothing but sorrow to be found in loving her, and her
heart is no larger than her feet.  Today she was not even
pretty! If it were not for her voice, I think I should never
wish to see her again."

But when that soft, pleading voice came once more, and Emilia
asked perhaps for luncheon, in tones fit for Ophelia, Aunt Jane
instantly yielded. One might as well have tried to enforce
indignation against the Babes in the Wood.

This perpetual mute appeal was further strengthened by a
peculiar physical habit in Emilia, which first alarmed the
household, but soon ceased to inspire terror.  She fainted very
easily, and had attacks at long intervals akin to faintness,
and lasting for several hours. The physicians pronounced them
cataleptic in their nature, saying that they brought no danger,
and that she would certainly outgrow them. They were sometimes
produced by fatigue, sometimes by excitement, but they brought
no agitation with them, nor any development of abnormal powers.
They simply wrapped her in a profound repose, from which no
effort could rouse her, till the trance passed by.  Her eyes
gradually closed, her voice died away, and all movement ceased,
save that her eyelids sometimes trembled without opening, and
sweet evanescent expressions chased each other across her
face,--the shadows of thoughts unseen. For a time she seemed to
distinguish the touch of different persons by preference or
pain; but soon even this sign of recognition vanished, and the
household could only wait and watch, while she sank into deeper
and yet deeper repose.

There was something inexpressibly sweet, appealing, and
touching in this impenetrable slumber, when it was at its
deepest. She looked so young, so delicate, so lovely; it was as
if she had entered into a shrine, and some sacred curtain had
been dropped to shield her from all the cares and perplexities
of life. She lived, she breathed, and yet all the storms of
life could but beat against her powerless, as the waves beat on
the shore. Safe in this beautiful semblance of death,--her
pulse a little accelerated, her rich color only softened, her
eyelids drooping, her exquisite mouth curved into the sweetness
it had lacked in waking,--she lay unconscious and supreme, the
temporary monarch of the household, entranced upon her throne.
A few hours having passed, she suddenly waked, and was a
self-willed, passionate girl once more.  When she spoke, it was
with a voice wholly natural; she had no recollection of what
had happened, and no curiosity to learn.



X.

REMONSTRANCES.

IT had been a lovely summer day, with a tinge of autumnal
coolness toward nightfall, ending in what Aunt Jane called a
"quince-jelly sunset." Kate and Emilia sat upon the Blue Rocks,
earnestly talking.

"Promise, Emilia!" said Kate.

Emilia said nothing.

"Remember," continued Kate, "he is Hope's betrothed. Promise,
promise, promise!"

Emilia looked into Kate's face and saw it flushed with a
generous eagerness, that called forth an answering look in her.
She tried to speak, and the words died into silence. There was
a pause, while each watched the other.

When one soul is grappling with another for life, such silence
may last an instant too long; and Kate soon felt her grasp
slipping. Momentarily the spell relaxed.  Other thoughts
swelled up, and Emilia's eyes began to wander; delicious
memories stole in, of walks through blossoming paths with
Malbone,--of lingering steps, half-stifled words and sentences
left unfinished;--then, alas! of passionate caresses,--other
blossoming paths that only showed the way to sin, but had never
quite led her there, she fancied. There was so much to tell,
more than could ever be explained or justified.  Moment by
moment, farther and farther strayed the wandering thoughts, and
when the poor child looked in Kate's face again, the mist
between them seemed to have grown wide and dense, as if neither
eyes nor words nor hands could ever meet again. When she spoke
it was to say something evasive and unimportant, and her voice
was as one from the grave.

In truth, Philip had given Emilia his heart to play with at
Neuchatel, that he might beguile her from an attachment they
had all regretted. The device succeeded.  The toy once in her
hand, the passionate girl had kept it, had clung to him with
all her might; he could not shake her off. Nor was this the
worst, for to his dismay he found himself responding to her
love with a self-abandonment of ardor for which all former
loves had been but a cool preparation.  He had not intended
this; it seemed hardly his fault:  his intentions had been
good, or at least not bad. This piquant and wonderful fruit of
nature, this girlish soul, he had merely touched it and it was
his.  Its mere fragrance was intoxicating. Good God! what
should he do with it?

No clear answer coming, he had drifted on with that terrible
facility for which years of self-indulged emotion had prepared
him. Each step, while it was intended to be the last, only made
some other last step needful.

He had begun wrong, for he had concealed his engagement,
fancying that he could secure a stronger influence over this
young girl without the knowledge.  He had come to her simply as
a friend of her Transatlantic kindred; and she, who was always
rather indifferent to them, asked no questions, nor made the
discovery till too late.  Then, indeed, she had burst upon him
with an impetuous despair that had alarmed him. He feared, not
that she would do herself any violence, for she had a childish
dread of death, but that she would show some desperate
animosity toward Hope, whenever they should meet. After a long
struggle, he had touched, not her sense of justice, for she had
none, but her love for him; he had aroused her tenderness and
her pride.

Without his actual assurance, she yet believed that he would
release himself in some way from his betrothal, and love only
her.

Malbone had fortunately great control over Emilia when near
her, and could thus keep the sight of this stormy passion from
the pure and unconscious Hope.  But a new distress opened
before him, from the time when he again touched Hope's hand. 
The close intercourse of the voyage had given him for the time
almost a surfeit of the hot-house atmosphere of Emilia's love. 
The first contact of Hope's cool, smooth fingers, the soft
light of her clear eyes, the breezy grace of her motions, the
rose-odors that clung around her, brought back all his early
passion. Apart from this voluptuousness of the heart into which
he had fallen, Malbone's was a simple and unspoiled nature; he
had no vices, and had always won popularity too easily to be
obliged to stoop for it; so all that was noblest in him paid
allegiance to Hope.  From the moment they again met, his
wayward heart reverted to her.  He had been in a dream, he said
to himself; he would conquer it and be only hers; he would go
away with her into the forests and green fields she loved, or
he would share in the life of usefulness for which she yearned.
But then, what was he to do with this little waif from the
heart's tropics,--once tampered with, in an hour of mad
dalliance, and now adhering in-separably to his life? 
Supposing him ready to separate from her, could she be detached
from him?

Kate's anxieties, when she at last hinted them to Malbone, only
sent him further into revery.  "How is it," he asked himself,
"that when I only sought to love and be loved, I have thus
entangled myself in the fate of others? How is one's heart to
be governed?  Is there any such governing? Mlle. Clairon
complained that, so soon as she became seriously attached to
any one, she was sure to meet somebody else whom she liked
better. Have human hearts," he said, "or at least, has my
heart, no more stability than this?"

It did not help the matter when Emilia went to stay awhile with
Mrs. Meredith.  The event came about in this way. Hope and Kate
had been to a dinner-party, and were as usual reciting their
experiences to Aunt Jane.

"Was it pleasant?" said that sympathetic lady.

"It was one of those dreadfully dark dining-rooms," said Hope,
seating herself at the open window.

"Why do they make them look so like tombs?" said Kate.

"Because," said her aunt, "most Americans pass from them to the
tomb, after eating such indigestible things. There is a wish
for a gentle transition."

"Aunt Jane," said Hope, "Mrs. Meredith asks to have a little
visit from Emilia.  Do you think she had better go?"

"Mrs. Meredith?" asked Aunt Jane.  "Is that woman alive yet?"

"Why, auntie!" said Kate.  "We were talking about her only a
week ago."

"Perhaps so," conceded Aunt Jane, reluctantly.  "But it seems
to me she has great length of days!"

"How very improperly you are talking, dear!" said Kate.  "She
is not more than forty, and you are--"

"Fifty-four," interrupted the other.

"Then she has not seen nearly so many days as you."

"But they are such long days!  That is what I must have meant.
One of her days is as long as three of mine.  She is so
tiresome!"

"She does not tire you very often," said Kate.

"She comes once a year," said Aunt Jane.  "And then it is not
to see me. She comes out of respect to the memory of my
great-aunt, with whom Talleyrand fell in love, when he was in
America, before Mrs. Meredith was born. Yes, Emilia may as well
go."

So Emilia went.  To provide her with companionship, Mrs.
Meredith kindly had Blanche Ingleside to stay there also.
Blanche stayed at different houses a good deal. To do her
justice, she was very good company, when put upon her best
behavior, and beyond the reach of her demure mamma. She was
always in spirits, often good-natured, and kept everything in
lively motion, you may be sure.  She found it not unpleasant,
in rich houses, to escape some of those little domestic
parsimonies which the world saw not in her own; and to secure
this felicity she could sometimes lay great restraints upon
herself, for as much as twenty-four hours. She seemed a little
out of place, certainly, amid the precise proprieties of Mrs.
Meredith's establishment. But Blanche and her mother still held
their place in society, and it was nothing to Mrs. Meredith who
came to her doors, but only from what other doors they came.

She would have liked to see all "the best houses" connected by
secret galleries or underground passages, of which she and a
few others should hold the keys.  A guest properly presented
could then go the rounds of all unerringly, leaving his card at
each, while improper acquaintances in vain howled for admission
at the outer wall. For the rest, her ideal of social happiness
was a series of perfectly ordered entertainments, at each of
which there should be precisely the same guests, the same
topics, the same supper, and the same ennui.



XI.

DESCENSUS AVERNI.

MALBONE stood one morning on the pier behind the house. A two
days' fog was dispersing.  The southwest breeze rippled the
deep blue water; sailboats, blue, red, and green, were darting
about like white-winged butterflies; sloops passed and
repassed, cutting the air with the white and slender points of
their gaff-topsails. The liberated sunbeams spread and
penetrated everywhere, and even came up to play (reflected from
the water) beneath the shadowy, overhanging counters of dark
vessels. Beyond, the atmosphere was still busy in rolling away
its vapors, brushing the last gray fringes from the low hills,
and leaving over them only the thinnest aerial veil.  Farther
down the bay, the pale tower of the crumbling fort was now
shrouded, now revealed, then hung with floating lines of vapor
as with banners.

Hope came down on the pier to Malbone, who was looking at the
boats. He saw with surprise that her calm brow was a little
clouded, her lips compressed, and her eyes full of tears.

"Philip," she said, abruptly, "do you love me?"

"Do you doubt it?" said he, smiling, a little uneasily.

Fixing her eyes upon him, she said, more seriously: "There is a
more important question, Philip.  Tell me truly, do you care
about Emilia?"

He started at the words, and looked eagerly in her face for an
explanation. Her expression only showed the most anxious
solicitude.

For one moment the wild impulse came up in his mind to put an
entire trust in this truthful woman, and tell her all. Then the
habit of concealment came back to him, the dull hopelessness of
a divided duty, and the impossibility of explanations. How
could he justify himself to her when he did not really know
himself? So he merely said, "Yes."

"She is your sister," he added, in an explanatory tone, after a
pause; and despised himself for the subterfuge. It is amazing
how long a man may be false in action before he ceases to
shrink from being false in words.

"Philip," said the unsuspecting Hope, "I knew that you cared
about her.  I have seen you look at her with so much affection;
and then again I have seen you look cold and almost stern. She
notices it, I am sure she does, this changeableness. But this
is not why I ask the question.  I think you must have seen
something else that I have been observing, and if you care
about her, even for my sake, it is enough."

Here Philip started, and felt relieved.

"You must be her friend," continued Hope, eagerly.  "She has
changed her whole manner and habits very fast.  Blanche
Ingleside and that set seem to have wholly controlled her, and
there is something reckless in all her ways. You are the only
person who can help her."

"How?"

"I do not know how," said Hope, almost impatiently.  "You know
how. You have wonderful influence.  You saved her before, and
will do it again. I put her in your hands."

"What can I do for her?" asked he, with a strange mingling of
terror and delight.

"Everything," said she.  "If she has your society, she will not
care for those people, so much her inferiors in character.
Devote yourself to her for a time."

"And leave you?" said Philip, hesitatingly.

"Anything, anything," said she.  "If I do not see you for a
month, I can bear it.  Only promise me two things.  First, that
you will go to her this very day.  She dines with Mrs.
Ingleside."

Philip agreed.

"Then," said Hope, with saddened tones, "you must not say it
was I who sent you.  Indeed you must not.  That would spoil
all. Let her think that your own impulse leads you, and then
she will yield. I know Emilia enough for that."

Malbone paused, half in ecstasy, half in dismay. Were all the
events of life combining to ruin or to save him? This young
girl, whom he so passionately loved, was she to be thrust back
into his arms, and was he to be told to clasp her and be
silent? And that by Hope, and in the name of duty?

It seemed a strange position, even for him who was so eager for
fresh experiences and difficult combinations. At Hope's appeal
he was to risk Hope's peace forever; he was to make her sweet
sisterly affection its own executioner. In obedience to her
love he must revive Emilia's. The tender intercourse which he
had been trying to renounce as a crime must be rebaptized as a
duty.  Was ever a man placed, he thought, in a position so
inextricable, so disastrous?  What could he offer Emilia?  How
could he explain to her his position? He could not even tell
her that it was at Hope's command he sought her.

He who is summoned to rescue a drowning man, knowing that he
himself may go down with that inevitable clutch around his
neck, is placed in some such situation as Philip's. Yet Hope
had appealed to him so simply, had trusted him so nobly!
Suppose that, by any self-control, or wisdom, or unexpected aid
of Heaven, he could serve both her and Emilia, was it not his
duty? What if it should prove that he was right in loving them
both, and had only erred when he cursed himself for tampering
with their destinies?  Perhaps, after all, the Divine Love had
been guiding him, and at some appointed signal all these
complications were to be cleared, and he and his various loves
were somehow to be ingeniously provided for, and all be made
happy ever after.

He really grew quite tender and devout over these meditations. 
Phil was not a conceited fellow, by any means, but he had been
so often told by women that their love for him had been a
blessing to their souls, that he quite acquiesced in being a
providential agent in that particular direction. Considered as
a form of self-sacrifice, it was not without its pleasures.

Malbone drove that afternoon to Mrs. Ingleside's charming
abode, whither a few ladies were wont to resort, and a great
many gentlemen. He timed his call between the hours of dining
and driving, and made sure that Emilia had not yet emerged. 
Two or three equipages beside his own were in waiting at the
gate, and gay voices resounded from the house. A servant
received him at the door, and taking him for a tardy guest,
ushered him at once into the dining-room. He was indifferent to
this, for he had been too often sought as a guest by Mrs.
Ingleside to stand on any ceremony beneath her roof.

That fair hostess, in all the beauty of her shoulders, rose to
greet him, from a table where six or eight guests yet lingered
over flowers and wine. The gentlemen were smoking, and some of
the ladies were trying to look at ease with cigarettes. 
Malbone knew the whole company, and greeted them with his
accustomed ease.  He would not have been embarrassed if they
had been the Forty Thieves.  Some of them, indeed, were not so
far removed from that fabled band, only it was their fortunes,
instead of themselves, that lay in the jars of oil.

"You find us all here," said Mrs. Ingleside, sweetly.  "We will
wait till the gentlemen finish their cigars, before driving."

"Count me in, please," said Blanche, in her usual vein of
frankness. "Unless mamma wishes me to conclude my weed on the
Avenue.  It would be fun, though.  Fancy the dismay of the
Frenchmen and the dowagers!"

"And old Lambert," said one of the other girls, delightedly.

"Yes," said Blanche.  "The elderly party from the rural
districts, who talks to us about the domestic virtues of the
wife of his youth."

"Thinks women should cruise with a broom at their mast-heads,
like Admiral somebody in England," said another damsel, who was
rolling a cigarette for a midshipman.

"You see we do not follow the English style," said the smooth
hostess to Philip.  "Ladies retiring after dinner!  After all,
it is a coarse practice.  You agree with me, Mr. Malbone?"

"Speak your mind," said Blanche, coolly.  "Don't say yes if
you'd rather not. Because we find a thing a bore, you've no
call to say so."

"I always say," continued the matron, "that the presence of
woman is needed as a refining influence."

Malbone looked round for the refining influences. Blanche was
tilted back in her chair, with one foot on the rung of the
chair before her, resuming a loud-toned discourse with Count
Posen as to his projected work on American society. She was
trying to extort a promise that she should appear in its pages,
which, as we all remember, she did. One of her attendant nymphs
sat leaning her elbows on the table, "talking horse" with a
gentleman who had an undoubted professional claim to a
knowledge of that commodity. Another, having finished her
manufactured cigarette, was making the grinning midshipman open
his lips wider and wider to receive it. Mrs. Ingleside was
talking in her mincing way with a Jew broker, whose English was
as imperfect as his morals, and who needed nothing to make him
a millionnaire but a turn of bad luck for somebody else. Half
the men in the room would have felt quite ill at ease in any
circle of refined women, but there was not one who did not feel
perfectly unembarrassed around Mrs. Ingleside's board.

"Upon my word," thought Malbone, "I never fancied the English
after-dinner practice, any more than did Napoleon.  But if this
goes on, it is the gentlemen who ought to withdraw. Cannot
somebody lead the way to the drawing-room, and leave the ladies
to finish their cigars?"

Till now he had hardly dared to look at Emilia.  He saw with a
thrill of love that she was the one person in the room who
appeared out of place or ill at ease.  She did not glance at
him, but held her cigarette in silence and refused to light it.
She had boasted to him once of having learned to smoke at
school.

"What's the matter, Emmy?" suddenly exclaimed Blanche.  "Are
you under a cloud, that you don't blow one?"

"Blanche, Blanche," said her mother, in sweet reproof. "Mr.
Malbone, what shall I do with this wild girl?  Such a light way
of talking!  But I can assure you that she is really very fond
of the society of intellectual, superior men.  I often tell her
that they are, after all, her most congenial associates. More
so than the young and giddy."

"You'd better believe it," said the unabashed damsel. "Take
notice that whenever I go to a dinner-party I look round for a
clergyman to drink wine with."

"Incorrigible!" said the caressing mother.  "Mr. Malbone would
hardly imagine you had been bred in a Christian land."

"I have, though," retorted Blanche.  "My esteemed parent always
accustomed me to give up something during Lent,--champagne, or
the New York Herald, or something."

The young men roared, and, had time and cosmetics made it
possible, Mrs. Ingleside would have blushed becomingly. After
all, the daughter was the better of the two. Her bluntness was
refreshing beside the mother's suavity; she had a certain
generosity, too, and in a case of real destitution would have
lent her best ear-rings to a friend.

By this time Malbone had edged himself to Emilia's side. "Will
you drive with me?" he murmured in an undertone.

She nodded slightly, abruptly, and he withdrew again.

"It seems barbarous," said he aloud, "to break up the party.
But I must claim my promised drive with Miss Emilia."

Blanche looked up, for once amazed, having heard a different
programme arranged.  Count Posen looked up also. But he thought
he must have misunderstood Emilia's acceptance of his previous
offer to drive her; and as he prided himself even more on his
English than on his gallantry, he said no more. It was no great
matter.  Young Jones's dog-cart was at the door, and always
opened eagerly its arms to anybody with a title.



XII.

A NEW ENGAGEMENT.

TEN days later Philip came into Aunt Jane's parlor, looking
excited and gloomy, with a letter in his hand.  He put it down
on her table without its envelope,--a thing that always
particularly annoyed her.  A letter without its envelope, she
was wont to say, was like a man without a face, or a key
without a string,--something incomplete, preposterous.  As
usual, however, he strode across her prejudices, and said, "I
have something to tell you. It is a fact."

"Is it?" said Aunt Jane, curtly.  "That is refreshing in these
times."

"A good beginning," said Kate.  "Go on.  You have prepared us
for something incredible."

"You will think it so," said Malbone.  "Emilia is engaged to
Mr. John Lambert."  And he went out of the room.

"Good Heavens!" said Aunt Jane, taking off her spectacles.
"What a man!  He is ugly enough to frighten the neighboring
crows. His face looks as if it had fallen together out of
chaos, and the features had come where it had pleased Fate. 
There is a look of industrious nothingness about him, such as
busy dogs have. I know the whole family.  They used to bake our
bread."

"I suppose they are good and sensible," said Kate.

"Like boiled potatoes, my dear," was the response,--"wholesome
but perfectly uninteresting."

"Is he of that sort?" asked Kate.

"No," said her aunt; "not uninteresting, but ungracious. But I
like an ungracious man better than one like Philip, who hangs
over young girls like a soft-hearted avalanche. This Lambert
will govern Emilia, which is what she needs."

"She will never love him," said Kate, "which is the one thing
she needs. There is nothing that could not be done with Emilia
by any person with whom she was in love; and nothing can ever
be done with her by anybody else. No good will ever come of
this, and I hope she will never marry him."

With this unusual burst, Kate retreated to Hope.  Hope took the
news more patiently than any one, but with deep solicitude.  A
worldly marriage seemed the natural result of the Ingleside
influence, but it had not occurred to anybody that it would
come so soon.  It had not seemed Emilia's peculiar temptation;
and yet nobody could suppose that she looked at John Lambert
through any glamour of the affections.

Mr. John Lambert was a millionnaire, a politician, and a
widower. The late Mrs. Lambert had been a specimen of that
cheerful hopelessness of temperament that one finds abundantly
developed among the middle-aged women of country towns.  She
enjoyed her daily murders in the newspapers, and wept profusely
at the funerals of strangers.  On every occasion, however
felicitous, she offered her condolences in a feeble voice, that
seemed to have been washed a great many times and to have
faded. But she was a good manager, a devoted wife, and was more
cheerful at home than elsewhere, for she had there plenty of
trials to exercise her eloquence, and not enough joy to make it
her duty to be doleful. At last her poor, meek, fatiguing voice
faded out altogether, and her husband mourned her as heartily
as she would have bemoaned the demise of the most insignificant
neighbor.  After her death, being left childless, he had
nothing to do but to make money, and he naturally made it.
Having taken his primary financial education in New England, he
graduated at that great business university, Chicago, and then
entered on the public practice of wealth in New York.

Aunt Jane had perhaps done injustice to the personal appearance
of Mr. John Lambert.  His features were irregular, but not
insignificant, and there was a certain air of slow command
about him, which made some persons call him handsome. He was
heavily built, with a large, well-shaped head, light whiskers
tinged with gray, and a sort of dusty complexion. His face was
full of little curved wrinkles, as if it were a slate just
ruled for sums in long division, and his small blue eyes winked
anxiously a dozen different ways, as if they were doing the
sums.  He seemed to bristle with memorandum-books, and kept
drawing them from every pocket, to put something down. He was
slow of speech, and his very heaviness of look added to the
impression of reserved power about the man.

All his career in life had been a solid progress, and his
boldest speculations seemed securer than the legitimate
business of less potent financiers. Beginning business life by
peddling gingerbread on a railway train, he had developed such
a genius for railway management as some men show for chess or
for virtue; and his accumulating property had the momentum of a
planet.

He had read a good deal at odd times, and had seen a great deal
of men. His private morals were unstained, he was equable and
amiable, had strong good sense, and never got beyond his depth.
He had travelled in Europe and brought home many statistics,
some new thoughts, and a few good pictures selected by his
friends. He spent his money liberally for the things needful to
his position, owned a yacht, bred trotting-horses, and had
founded a theological school. He submitted to these and other
social observances from a vague sense of duty as an American
citizen; his real interest lay in business and in politics. 
Yet he conducted these two vocations on principles
diametrically opposite.  In business he was more honest than
the average; in politics he had no conception of honesty, for
he could see no difference between a politician and any other
merchandise. He always succeeded in business, for he thoroughly
understood its principles; in politics he always failed in the
end, for he recognized no principles at all.  In business he
was active, resolute, and seldom deceived; in politics he was
equally active, but was apt to be irresolute, and was deceived
every day of his life.  In both cases it was not so much from
love of power that he labored, as from the excitement of the
game. The larger the scale the better he liked it; a large
railroad operation, a large tract of real estate, a big and
noisy statesman,--these investments he found irresistible.

On which of his two sets of principles he would manage a wife
remained to be proved.  It is the misfortune of what are called
self-made men in America, that, though early accustomed to the
society of men of the world, they often remain utterly
unacquainted with women of the world, until those charming
perils are at last sprung upon them in full force, at New York
or Washington.  John Lambert at forty was as absolutely
ignorant of the qualities and habits of a cultivated woman as
of the details of her toilet. The plain domesticity of his
departed wife he had understood and prized; he remembered her
household ways as he did her black alpaca dress; indeed, except
for that item of apparel, she was not so unlike himself. In
later years he had seen the women of society; he had heard them
talk; he had heard men talk about them, wittily or wickedly, at
the clubs; he had perceived that a good many of them wished to
marry him, and yet, after all, he knew no more of them than of
the rearing of humming-birds or orchids,--dainty, tropical
things which he allowed his gardener to raise, he keeping his
hands off, and only paying the bills. Whether there was in
existence a class of women who were both useful and
refined,--any intermediate type between the butterfly and the
drudge,--was a question which he had sometimes asked himself,
without having the materials to construct a reply.

With imagination thus touched and heart unfilled, this man had
been bewitched from the very first moment by Emilia.  He kept
it to himself, and heard in silence the criticisms made at the
club-windows. To those perpetual jokes about marriage, which
are showered with such graceful courtesy about the path of
widowers, he had no reply; or at most would only admit that he
needed some elegant woman to preside over his establishment,
and that he had better take her young, as having habits less
fixed. But in his secret soul he treasured every tone of this
girl's voice, every glance of her eye, and would have kept in a
casket of gold and diamonds the little fragrant glove she once
let fall. He envied the penniless and brainless boys, who, with
ready gallantry, pushed by him to escort her to her carriage;
and he lay awake at night to form into words the answer he
ought to have made, when she threw at him some careless phrase,
and gave him the opportunity to blunder.

And she, meanwhile, unconscious of his passion, went by him in
her beauty, and caught him in the net she never threw. Emilia
was always piquant, because she was indifferent; she had never
made an effort in her life, and she had no respect for persons. 
She was capable of marrying for money, perhaps, but the
sacrifice must all be completed in a single vow. She would not
tutor nor control herself for the purpose. Hand and heart must
be duly transferred, she supposed, whenever the time was up;
but till then she must be free.

This with her was not art, but necessity; yet the most
accomplished art could have devised nothing so effectual to
hold her lover. His strong sense had always protected him from
the tricks of matchmaking mammas and their guileless maids. 
Had Emilia made one effort to please him, once concealed a
dislike, once affected a preference, the spell might have been
broken.  Had she been his slave, he might have become a very
unyielding or a very heedless despot. Making him her slave, she
kept him at the very height of bliss. This king of railways and
purchaser of statesmen, this man who made or wrecked the
fortunes of others by his whim, was absolutely governed by a
reckless, passionate, inexperienced, ignorant girl.

And this passion was made all the stronger by being a good deal
confined to his own breast.  Somehow it was very hard for him
to talk sentiment to Emilia; he instinctively saw she disliked
it, and indeed he liked her for not approving the stiff phrases
which were all he could command. Nor could he find any relief
of mind in talking with others about her. It enraged him to be
clapped on the back and congratulated by his compeers; and he
stopped their coarse jokes, often rudely enough.  As for the
young men at the club, he could not bear to hear them mention
his darling's name, however courteously.  He knew well enough
that for them the betrothal had neither dignity nor purity;
that they held it to be as much a matter of bargain and sale as
their worst amours.  He would far rather have talked to the
theological professors whose salaries he paid, for he saw that
they had a sort of grave, formal tradition of the sacredness of
marriage. And he had a right to claim that to him it was
sacred, at least as yet; all the ideal side of his nature was
suddenly developed; he walked in a dream; he even read
Tennyson.

Sometimes he talked a little to his future brother-in-law,
Harry,--assuming, as lovers are wont, that brothers see sisters
on their ideal side.  This was quite true of Harry and Hope,
but not at all true as regarded Emilia.  She seemed to him
simply a beautiful and ungoverned girl whom he could not
respect, and whom he therefore found it very hard to idealize.
Therefore he heard with a sort of sadness the outpourings of
generous devotion from John Lambert.

"I don't know how it is, Henry," the merchant would gravely
say, "I can't get rightly used to it, that I feel so strange.
Honestly, now, I feel as if I was beginning life over again. It
ain't a selfish feeling, so I know there's some good in it. I
used to be selfish enough, but I ain't so to her. You may not
think it, but if it would make her happy, I believe I could lie
down and let her carriage roll over me. By -----, I would build
her a palace to live in, and keep the lodge at the gate myself,
just to see her pass by. That is, if she was to live in it
alone by herself. I couldn't stand sharing her.  It must be me
or nobody."

Probably there was no male acquaintance of the parties, however
hardened, to whom these fine flights would have seemed more
utterly preposterous than to the immediate friend and
prospective bridesmaid, Miss Blanche Ingleside.  To that young
lady, trained sedulously by a devoted mother, life was really a
serious thing.  It meant the full rigor of the marriage market,
tempered only by dancing and new dresses. There was a stern
sense of duty beneath all her robing and disrobing; she
conscientiously did what was expected of her, and took her
little amusements meanwhile.  It was supposed that most of the
purchasers in the market preferred slang and bare shoulders,
and so she favored them with plenty of both.  It was merely the
law of supply and demand. Had John Lambert once hinted that he
would accept her in decent black, she would have gone to the
next ball as a Sister of Charity; but where was the need of it,
when she and her mother both knew that, had she appeared as the
Veiled Prophet of Khorassan, she would not have won him? So her
only resource was a cheerful acquiescence in Emilia's luck, and
a judicious propitiation of the accepted favorite.

"I wouldn't mind playing Virtue Rewarded myself, young woman,"
said Blanche, "at such a scale of prices.  I would do it even
to so slow an audience as old Lambert.  But you see, it isn't
my line. Don't forget your humble friends when you come into
your property, that's all."  Then the tender coterie of
innocents entered on some preliminary consideration of
wedding-dresses.

When Emilia came home, she dismissed the whole matter lightly
as a settled thing, evaded all talk with Aunt Jane, and coolly
said to Kate that she had no objection to Mr. Lambert, and
might as well marry him as anybody else.

"I am not like you and Hal, you know," said she.  "I have no
fancy for love in a cottage.  I never look well in anything
that is not costly. I have not a taste that does not imply a
fortune.  What is the use of love? One marries for love, and is
unhappy ever after.  One marries for money, and perhaps gets
love after all.  I dare say Mr. Lambert loves me, though I do
not see why he should."

"I fear he does," said Kate, almost severely.

"Fear?" said Emilia.

"Yes," said Kate.  "It is an unequal bargain, where one side
does all the loving."

"Don't be troubled," said Emilia.  "I dare say he will not love
me long. Nobody ever did!"  And her eyes filled with tears
which she dashed away angrily, as she ran up to her room.

It was harder yet for her to talk with Hope, but she did it,
and that in a very serious mood.  She had never been so open
with her sister.

"Aunt Jane once told me," she said, "that my only safety was in
marrying a good man.  Now I am engaged to one."

"Do you love him, Emilia?" asked Hope, gravely.

"Not much," said Emilia, honestly.  "But perhaps I shall, by
and by."

"Emilia," cried Hope, "there is no such thing as happiness in a
marriage without love."

"Mine is not without love," the girl answered. "He loves me. 
It frightens me to see how much he loves me. I can have the
devotion of a lifetime, if I will. Perhaps it is hard to
receive it in such a way, but I can have it. Do you blame me
very much?"

Hope hesitated.  "I cannot blame you so much, my child," she
said, "as if I thought it were money for which you cared. It
seems to me that there must be something beside that, and
yet--"

"O Hope, how I thank you," interrupted Emilia.  "It is not
money. You know I do not care about money, except just to buy
my clothes and things.  At least, I do not care about so much
as he has,--more than a million dollars, only think!  Perhaps
they said two million. Is it wrong for me to marry him, just
because he has that?"

"Not if you love him."

"I do not exactly love him, but O Hope, I cannot tell you about
it. I am not so frivolous as you think.  I want to do my duty.
I want to make you happy too:  you have been so sweet to me."

"Did you think it would make me happy to have you married?"
asked Hope, surprised, and kissing again and again the young,
sad face. And the two girls went upstairs together, brought for
the moment into more sisterly nearness by the very thing that
had seemed likely to set them forever apart.



XIII.

DREAMING DREAMS.

SO short was the period between Emilia's betrothal and her
marriage, that Aunt Jane's sufferings over trousseau and visits
did not last long. Mr. Lambert's society was the worst thing to
bear.

"He makes such long calls!" she said, despairingly.  "He should
bring an almanac with him to know when the days go by."

"But Harry and Philip are here all the time," said Kate, the
accustomed soother.

"Harry is quiet, and Philip keeps out of the way lately," she
answered. "But I always thought lovers the most inconvenient
thing about a house. They are more troublesome than the mice,
and all those people who live in the wainscot; for though the
lovers make less noise, yet you have to see them."

"A necessary evil, dear," said Kate, with much philosophy.

"I am not sure," said the complainant.  "They might be excluded
in the deed of a house, or by the terms of the lease. The next
house I take, I shall say to the owner, 'Have you a good well
of water on the premises?  Are you troubled with rats or
lovers?' That will settle it."

It was true, what Aunt Jane said about Malbone.  He had changed
his habits a good deal.  While the girls were desperately busy
about the dresses, he beguiled Harry to the club, and sat on
the piazza, talking sentiment and sarcasm, regardless of
hearers.

"When we are young," he would say, "we are all idealists in
love. Every imaginative boy has such a passion, while his
intellect is crude and his senses indifferent.  It is the
height of bliss. All other pleasures are not worth its pains. 
With older men this ecstasy of the imagination is rare; it is
the senses that clutch or reason which holds."

"Is that an improvement?" asked some juvenile listener.

"No!" said Philip, strongly.  "Reason is cold and sensuality
hateful; a man of any feeling must feed his imagination; there
must be a woman of whom he can dream."

"That is," put in some more critical auditor, "whom he can love
as a woman loves a man."

"For want of the experience of such a passion," Malbone went
on, unheeding, "nobody comprehends Petrarch.  Philosophers and
sensualists all refuse to believe that his dream of Laura went
on, even when he had a mistress and a child.  Why not? Every
one must have something to which his dreams can cling, amid the
degradations of actual life, and this tie is more real than the
degradation; and if he holds to the tie, it will one day save
him."

"What is the need of the degradation?" put in the clear-headed
Harry.

"None, except in weakness," said Philip.  "A stronger nature
may escape it.  Good God! do I not know how Petrarch must have
felt? What sorrow life brings!  Suppose a man hopelessly
separated from one whom he passionately loves.  Then, as he
looks up at the starry sky, something says to him:  'You can
bear all these agonies of privation, loss of life, loss of
love,--what are they? If the tie between you is what you
thought, neither life nor death, neither folly nor sin, can
keep her forever from you.' Would that one could always feel
so!  But I am weak. Then comes impulse, it thirsts for some
immediate gratification; I yield, and plunge into any happiness
since I cannot obtain her. Then comes quiet again, with the
stars, and I bitterly reproach myself for needing anything more
than that stainless ideal. And so, I fancy, did Petrarch."

Philip was getting into a dangerous mood with his
sentimentalism. No lawful passion can ever be so bewildering or
ecstatic as an unlawful one. For that which is right has all
the powers of the universe on its side, and can afford to wait;
but the wrong, having all those vast forces against it, must
hurry to its fulfilment, reserve nothing, concentrate all its
ecstasies upon to-day. Malbone, greedy of emotion, was drinking
to the dregs a passion that could have no to-morrow.

Sympathetic persons are apt to assume that every refined
emotion must be ennobling.  This is not true of men like
Malbone, voluptuaries of the heart.  He ordinarily got up a
passion very much as Lord Russell got up an appetite,--he, of
Spence's Anecdotes, who went out hunting for that sole purpose,
and left the chase when the sensation came. Malbone did not
leave his more spiritual chase so soon,--it made him too happy. 
Sometimes, indeed, when he had thus caught his emotion, it
caught him in return, and for a few moments made him almost
unhappy. This he liked best of all; he nursed the delicious
pain, knowing that it would die out soon enough, there was no
need of hurrying it to a close. At least, there had never been
need for such solicitude before.

Except for his genius for keeping his own counsel, every
acquaintance of Malbone's would have divined the meaning of
these reveries. As it was, he was called whimsical and
sentimental, but he was a man of sufficiently assured position
to have whims of his own, and could even treat himself to an
emotion or so, if he saw fit. Besides, he talked well to
anybody on anything, and was admitted to exhibit, for a man of
literary tastes, a good deal of sense. If he had engaged
himself to a handsome schoolmistress, it was his fancy, and he
could afford it.  Moreover she was well connected, and had an
air.  And what more natural than that he should stand at the
club-window and watch, when his young half-sister (that was to
be) drove by with John Lambert?  So every afternoon he saw them
pass in a vehicle of lofty description, with two wretched
appendages in dark blue broadcloth, who sat with their backs
turned to their masters, kept their arms folded, and nearly
rolled off at every corner. Hope would have dreaded the close
neighborhood of those Irish ears; she would rather have ridden
even in an omnibus, could she and Philip have taken all the
seats.  But then Hope seldom cared to drive on the Avenue at
all, except as a means of reaching the ocean, whereas with most
people it appears the appointed means to escape from that
spectacle. And as for the footmen, there was nothing in the
conversation worth their hearing or repeating; and their
presence was a relief to Emilia, for who knew but Mr. Lambert
himself might end in growing sentimental?

Yet she did not find him always equally tedious.  Their drives
had some variety.  For instance, he sometimes gave her some
lovely present before they set forth, and she could feel that,
if his lips did not yield diamonds and rubies, his pockets did.
Sometimes he conversed about money and investments, which she
rather liked; this was his strong and commanding point; he
explained things quite clearly, and they found, with mutual
surprise, that she also had a shrewd little brain for those
matters, if she would but take the trouble to think about them.
Sometimes he insisted on being tender, and even this was not so
bad as she expected, at least for a few minutes at a time; she
rather enjoyed having her hand pressed so seriously, and his
studied phrases amused her.  It was only when he wished the
conversation to be brilliant and intellectual, that he became
intolerable; then she must entertain him, must get up little
repartees, must tell him lively anecdotes, which he swallowed
as a dog bolts a morsel, being at once ready for the next.  He
never made a comment, of course, but at the height of his
enjoyment he gave a quick, short, stupid laugh, that so jarred
upon her ears, she would have liked to be struck deaf rather
than hear it again.

At these times she thought of Malbone, how gifted he was, how
inexhaustible, how agreeable, with a faculty for happiness that
would have been almost provoking had it not been contagious.
Then she looked from her airy perch and smiled at him at the
club-window, where he stood in the most negligent of attitudes,
and with every faculty strained in observation. A moment and
she was gone.

Then all was gone, and a mob of queens might have blocked the
way, without his caring to discuss their genealogies, even with
old General Le Breton, who had spent his best (or his worst)
years abroad, and was supposed to have been confidential
adviser to most of the crowned heads of Europe.

For the first time in his life Malbone found himself in the
grasp of a passion too strong to be delightful. For the first
time his own heart frightened him. He had sometimes feared that
it was growing harder, but now he discovered that it was not
hard enough.

He knew it was not merely mercenary motives that had made
Emilia accept John Lambert; but what troubled him was a vague
knowledge that it was not mere pique.  He was used to dealing
with pique in women, and had found it the most manageable of
weaknesses. It was an element of spasmodic conscience than he
saw here, and it troubled him.

Something told him that she had said to herself:  "I will be
married, and thus do my duty to Hope.  Other girls marry
persons whom they do not love, and it helps them to forget. 
Perhaps it will help me. This is a good man, they say, and I
think he loves me."

"Think?"  John Lambert had adored her when she had passed by
him without looking at him; and now when the thought came over
him that she would be his wife, he became stupid with bliss.
And as latterly he had thought of little else, he remained more
or less stupid all the time.

To a man like Malbone, self-indulgent rather than selfish, this
poor, blind semblance of a moral purpose in Emilia was a great
embarrassment. It is a terrible thing for a lover when he
detects conscience amidst the armory of weapons used against
him, and faces the fact that he must blunt a woman's principles
to win her heart. Philip was rather accustomed to evade
conscience, but he never liked to look it in the face and defy
it.

Yet if the thought of Hope at this time came over him, it came
as a constraint, and he disliked it as such; and the more
generous and beautiful she was, the greater the constraint. He
cursed himself that he had allowed himself to be swayed back to
her, and so had lost Emilia forever.  And thus he drifted on,
not knowing what he wished for, but knowing extremely well what
he feared.



XIV.

THE NEMESIS OF PASSION.

MALBONE was a person of such ready, emotional nature, and such
easy expression, that it was not hard for Hope to hide from
herself the gradual ebbing of his love.  Whenever he was fresh
and full of spirits, he had enough to overflow upon her and
every one. But when other thoughts and cares were weighing on
him, he could not share them, nor could he at such times, out
of the narrowing channel of his own life, furnish more than a
few scanty drops for her.

At these times he watched with torturing fluctuations the signs
of solicitude in Hope, the timid withdrawing of her fingers,
the questioning of her eyes, the weary drooping of her whole
expression. Often he cursed himself as a wretch for paining
that pure and noble heart. Yet there were moments when a vague
inexpressible delight stole in; a glimmering of shame-faced
pleasure as he pondered on this visible dawning of distrust; a
sudden taste of freedom in being no longer fettered by her
confidence.  By degrees he led himself, still half ashamed, to
the dream that she might yet be somehow weaned from him, and
leave his conscience free.  By constantly building upon this
thought, and putting aside all others, he made room upon the
waste of his life for a house of cards, glittering,
unsubstantial, lofty,--until there came some sudden breath that
swept it away; and then he began on it again.

In one of those moments of more familiar faith which still
alternated with these cold, sad intervals, she asked him with
some sudden impulse, how he should feel if she loved another?
She said it, as if guided by an instinct, to sound the depth of
his love for her.  Starting with amazement, he looked at her,
and then, divining her feeling, he only replied by an
expression of reproach, and by kissing her hands with an
habitual tenderness that had grown easy to him,--and they were
such lovely hands! But his heart told him that no spent swimmer
ever transferred more eagerly to another's arms some precious
burden beneath which he was consciously sinking, than he would
yield her up to any one whom she would consent to love, and who
could be trusted with the treasure. Until that ecstasy of
release should come, he would do his duty,--yes, his duty.

When these flushed hopes grew pale, as they soon did, he could
at least play with the wan fancies that took their place. Hour
after hour, while she lavished upon him the sweetness of her
devotion, he was half consciously shaping with his tongue some
word of terrible revealing that should divide them like a
spell, if spoken, and then recalling it before it left his
lips. Daily and hourly he felt the last agony of a weak and
passionate nature,--to dream of one woman in another's arms.

She, too, watched him with an ever-increasing instinct of
danger, studied with a chilly terror the workings of his face,
weighed and reweighed his words in absence, agonized herself
with new and ever new suspicions; and then, when these had
accumulated beyond endurance, seized them convulsively and
threw them all away.  Then, coming back to him with a great
overwhelming ardor of affection, she poured upon him more and
more in proportion as he gave her less.

Sometimes in these moments of renewed affection he half gave
words to his remorse, accused himself before her of unnamed
wrong, and besought her to help him return to his better self.
These were the most dangerous moments of all, for such appeals
made tenderness and patience appear a duty; she must put away
her doubts as sins, and hold him to her; she must refuse to see
his signs of faltering faith, or treat them as mere symptoms of
ill health. Should not a wife cling the closer to her husband
in proportion as he seemed alienated through the wanderings of
disease? And was not this her position?  So she said within
herself, and meanwhile it was not hard to penetrate her
changing thoughts, at least for so keen an observer as Aunt
Jane.  Hope, at length, almost ceased to speak of Malbone, and
revealed her grief by this evasion, as the robin reveals her
nest by flitting from it.

Yet there were times when he really tried to force himself into
a revival of this calmer emotion.  He studied Hope's beauty
with his eyes, he pondered on all her nobleness. He wished to
bring his whole heart back to her--or at least wished that he
wished it.  But hearts that have educated themselves into
faithlessness must sooner or later share the suffering they
give.  Love will be avenged on them. Nothing could have now
recalled this epicure in passion, except, possibly, a little
withholding or semi-coquetry on Hope's part, and this was
utterly impossible for her. Absolute directness was a part of
her nature; she could die, but not manouvre.

It actually diminished Hope's hold on Philip, that she had at
this time the whole field to herself.  Emilia had gone for a
few weeks to the mountains, with the household of which she was
a guest. An ideal and unreasonable passion is strongest in
absence, when the dream is all pure dream, and safe from the
discrepancies of daily life. When the two girls were together,
Emilia often showed herself so plainly Hope's inferior, that it
jarred on Philip's fine perceptions. But in Emilia's absence
the spell of temperament, or whatever else brought them
together, resumed its sway unchecked; she became one great
magnet of attraction, and all the currents of the universe
appeared to flow from the direction where her eyes were
shining. When she was out of sight, he needed to make no
allowance for her defects, to reproach himself with no overt
acts of disloyalty to Hope, to recognize no criticisms of his
own intellect or conscience. He could resign himself to his
reveries, and pursue them into new subtleties day by day.

There was Mrs. Meredith's house, too, where they had been so
happy. And now the blinds were pitilessly closed, all but one
where the Venetian slats had slipped, and stood half open as if
some dainty fingers held them, and some lovely eyes looked
through. He gazed so long and so often on that silent
house,--by day, when the scorching sunshine searched its pores
as if to purge away every haunting association, or by night,
when the mantle of darkness hung tenderly above it, and seemed
to collect the dear remembrances again,--that his fancy by
degrees grew morbid, and its pictures unreal. "It is
impossible," he one day thought to himself, "that she should
have lived in that room so long, sat in that window, dreamed on
that couch, reflected herself in that mirror, breathed that
air, without somehow detaching invisible fibres of her being,
delicate films of herself, that must gradually, she being gone,
draw together into a separate individuality an image not quite
bodiless, that replaces her in her absence, as the holy
Theocrite was replaced by the angel. If there are ghosts of the
dead, why not ghosts of the living also?" This lover's fancy so
pleased him that he brought to bear upon it the whole force of
his imagination, and it grew stronger day by day.  To him,
thenceforth, the house was haunted, and all its floating traces
of herself visible or invisible,--from the ribbon that he saw
entangled in the window-blind to every intangible and fancied
atom she had imparted to the atmosphere,--came at last to
organize themselves into one phantom shape for him and looked
out, a wraith of Emilia, through those relentless blinds. As
the vision grew more vivid, he saw the dim figure moving
through the house, wan, restless, tender, lingering where they
had lingered, haunting every nook where they had been happy
once. In the windy moanings of the silent night he could put
his ear at the keyhole, and could fancy that he heard the wild
signals of her love and despair.



XV.

ACROSS THE BAY.

THE children, as has been said, were all devoted to Malbone,
and this was, in a certain degree, to his credit. But it is a
mistake to call children good judges of character, except in
one direction, namely, their own. They understand it, up to the
level of their own stature; they know who loves them, but not
who loves virtue. Many a sinner has a great affection for
children, and no child will ever detect the sins of such a
friend; because, toward them, the sins do not exist.

The children, therefore, all loved Philip, and yet they turned
with delight, when out-door pleasures were in hand, to the
strong and adroit Harry.  Philip inclined to the daintier
exercises, fencing, billiards, riding; but Harry's vigorous
physique enjoyed hard work. He taught all the household to
swim, for instance.  Jenny, aged five, a sturdy, deep-chested
little thing, seemed as amphibious as himself. She could
already swim alone, but she liked to keep close to him, as all
young animals do to their elders in the water, not seeming to
need actual support, but stronger for the contact. Her favorite
position, however, was on his back, where she triumphantly
clung, grasping his bathing-dress with one hand, swinging
herself to and fro, dipping her head beneath the water, singing
and shouting, easily shifting her position when he wished to
vary his, and floating by him like a little fish, when he was
tired of supporting her. It was pretty to see the child in her
one little crimson garment, her face flushed with delight, her
fair hair glistening from the water, and the waves rippling and
dancing round her buoyant form. As Harry swam farther and
farther out, his head was hidden from view by her small person,
and she might have passed for a red seabird rocking on the
gentle waves.  It was one of the regular delights of the
household to see them bathe.

Kate came in to Aunt Jane's room, one August morning, to say
that they were going to the water-side. How differently people
may enter a room!  Hope always came in as the summer breeze
comes, quiet, strong, soft, fragrant, resistless. Emilia never
seemed to come in at all; you looked up, and she had somehow
drifted where she stood, pleading, evasive, lovely. This was
especially the case where one person was awaiting her alone;
with two she was more fearless, with a dozen she was buoyant,
and with a hundred she forgot herself utterly and was a spirit
of irresistible delight.

But Kate entered any room, whether nursery or kitchen, as if it
were the private boudoir of a princess and she the favorite
maid of honor. Thus it was she came that morning to Aunt Jane.

"We are going down to see the bathers, dear," said Kate. 
"Shall you miss me?"

"I miss you every minute," said her aunt, decisively.  "But I
shall do very well.  I have delightful times here by myself.
What a ridiculous man it was who said that it was impossible to
imagine a woman's laughing at her own comic fancies. I sit and
laugh at my own nonsense very often."

"It is a shame to waste it," said Kate.

"It is a blessing that any of it is disposed of while you are
not here," said Aunt Jane.  "You have quite enough of it."

"We never have enough," said Kate.  "And we never can make you
repeat any of yesterday's."

"Of course not," said Aunt Jane.  "Nonsense must have the dew
on it, or it is good for nothing."

"So you are really happiest alone?"

"Not so happy as when you are with me,--you or Hope.  I like to
have Hope with me now; she does me good.  Really, I do not care
for anybody else. Sometimes I think if I could always have four
or five young kittens by me, in a champagne-basket, with a
nurse to watch them, I should be happier. But perhaps not; they
would grow up so fast!"

"Then I will leave you alone without compunction," said Kate.

"I am not alone," said Aunt Jane; "I have my man in the boat to
watch through the window.  What a singular being he is! I think
he spends hours in that boat, and what he does I can't
conceive. There it is, quietly anchored, and there is he in it.
I never saw anybody but myself who could get up so much
industry out of nothing.  He has all his housework there, a
broom and a duster, and I dare say he has a cooking-stove and a
gridiron.  He sits a little while, then he stoops down, then he
goes to the other end. Sometimes he goes ashore in that absurd
little tub, with a stick that he twirls at one end."

"That is called sculling," interrupted Kate.

"Sculling!  I suppose he runs for a baked potato.  Then he goes
back. He is Robinson Crusoe on an island that never keeps still
a single instant. It is all he has, and he never looks away,
and never wants anything more. So I have him to watch.  Think
of living so near a beaver or a water-rat with clothes on! 
Good-by. Leave the door ajar, it is so warm."

And Kate went down to the landing.  It was near the "baptismal
shore," where every Sunday the young people used to watch the
immersions; they liked to see the crowd of spectators, the
eager friends, the dripping convert, the serene young minister,
the old men and girls who burst forth in song as the new
disciple rose from the waves.  It was the weekly festival in
that region, and the sunshine and the ripples made it
gladdening, not gloomy. Every other day in the week the
children of the fishermen waded waist-deep in the water, and
played at baptism.

Near this shore stood the family bathing-house; and the girls
came down to sit in its shadow and watch the swimming. It was
late in August, and on the first of September Emilia was to be
married.

Nothing looked cool, that day, but the bay and those who were
going into it. Out came Hope from the bathing-house, in a new
bathing-dress of dark blue, which was evidently what the others
had come forth to behold.

"Hope, what an imposter you are!" cried Kate instantly. "You
declined all my proffers of aid in cutting that dress, and now
see how it fits you!  You never looked so beautifully in your
life.  There is not such another bathing-dress in Oldport, nor
such a figure to wear it."

And she put both her arms round that supple, stately waist,
that might have belonged to a Greek goddess, or to some queen
in the Nibelungen Lied.

The party watched the swimmers as they struck out over the
clear expanse. It was high noon; the fishing-boats were all
off, but a few pleasure-boats swung different ways at their
moorings, in the perfect calm. The white light-house stood
reflected opposite, at the end of its long pier; a few vessels
lay at anchor, with their sails up to dry, but with that
deserted look which coasters in port are wont to wear. A few
fishes dimpled the still surface, and as the three swam out
farther and farther, their merry voices still sounded close at
hand. Suddenly they all clapped their hands and called; then
pointed forward to the light-house, across the narrow harbor.

"They are going to swim across," said Kate.  "What creatures
they are! Hope and little Jenny have always begged for it, and
now Harry thinks it is so still a day they can safely venture. 
It is more than half a mile. See! he has called that boy in a
boat, and he will keep near them. They have swum farther than
that along the shore."

So the others went away with no fears.

Hope said afterwards that she never swam with such delight as
on that day. The water seemed to be peculiarly thin and clear,
she said, as well as tranquil, and to retain its usual buoyancy
without its density. It gave a delicious sense of freedom; she
seemed to swim in air, and felt singularly secure.  For the
first time she felt what she had always wished to
experience,--that swimming was as natural as walking, and might
be indefinitely prolonged.  Her strength seemed limitless, she
struck out more and more strongly; she splashed and played with
little Jenny, when the child began to grow weary of the long
motion. A fisherman's boy in a boat rowed slowly along by their
side.

Nine tenths of the distance had been accomplished, when the
little girl grew quite impatient, and Hope bade Harry swim on
before her, and land his charge. Light and buoyant as the child
was, her tightened clasp had begun to tell on him.

"It tires you, Hal, to bear that weight so long, and you know I
have nothing to carry.  You must see that I am not in the least
tired, only a little dazzled by the sun.  Here, Charley, give
me your hat, and then row on with Mr. Harry."  She put on the
boy's torn straw hat, and they yielded to her wish.  People
almost always yielded to Hope's wishes when she expressed
them,--it was so very seldom.

Somehow the remaining distance seemed very great, as Hope saw
them glide away, leaving her in the water alone, her feet
unsupported by any firm element, the bright and pitiless sky
arching far above her, and her head burning with more heat than
she had liked to own. She was conscious of her full strength,
and swam more vigorously than ever; but her head was hot and
her ears rang, and she felt chilly vibrations passing up and
down her sides, that were like, she fancied, the innumerable
fringing oars of the little jelly-fishes she had so often
watched. Her body felt almost unnaturally strong, and she took
powerful strokes; but it seemed as if her heart went out into
them and left a vacant cavity within.  More and more her life
seemed boiling up into her head; queer fancies came to her, as,
for instance, that she was an inverted thermometer with the
mercury all ascending into a bulb at the top. She shook her
head and the fancy cleared away, and then others came.

She began to grow seriously anxious, but the distance was
diminishing; Harry was almost at the steps with the child, and
the boy had rowed his skiff round the breakwater out of sight;
a young fisherman leaned over the railing with his back to her,
watching the lobster-catchers on the other side. She was almost
in; it was only a slight dizziness, yet she could not see the
light-house. Concentrating all her efforts, she shut her eyes
and swam on, her arms still unaccountably vigorous, though the
rest of her body seemed losing itself in languor. The sound in
her ear had grown to a roar, as of many mill-wheels. It seemed
a long distance that she thus swam with her eyes closed. Then
she half opened her eyes, and the breakwater seemed all in
motion, with tier above tier of eager faces looking down on
her. In an instant there was a sharp splash close beside her,
and she felt herself grasped and drawn downwards, with a whirl
of something just above her, and then all consciousness went
out as suddenly as when ether brings at last to a patient,
after the roaring and the tumult in his brain, its blessed
foretaste of the deliciousness of death.

When Hope came again to consciousness, she found herself
approaching her own pier in a sail-boat, with several very wet
gentlemen around her, and little Jenny nestled close to her,
crying as profusely as if her pretty scarlet bathing-dress were
being wrung out through her eyes. Hope asked no questions, and
hardly felt the impulse to inquire what had happened.  The
truth was, that in the temporary dizziness produced by her
prolonged swim, she had found herself in the track of a
steamboat that was passing the pier, unobserved by her brother.
A young man, leaping from the dock, had caught her in his arms,
and had dived with her below the paddle-wheels, just as they
came upon her. It was a daring act, but nothing else could have
saved her.  When they came to the surface, they had been picked
up by Aunt Jane's Robinson Crusoe, who had at last unmoored his
pilot-boat and was rounding the light-house for the outer
harbor.

She and the child were soon landed, and given over to the
ladies. Due attention was paid to her young rescuer, whose
dripping garments seemed for the moment as glorious as a
blood-stained flag. He seemed a simple, frank young fellow of
French or German origin, but speaking English remarkably well;
he was not high-bred, by any means, but had apparently the
culture of an average German of the middle class. Harry fancied
that he had seen him before, and at last traced back the
impression of his features to the ball for the French officers.
It turned out, on inquiry, that he had a brother in the
service, and on board the corvette; but he himself was a
commercial agent, now in America with a view to business,
though he had made several voyages as mate of a vessel, and
would not object to some such berth as that. He promised to
return and receive the thanks of the family, read with interest
the name on Harry's card, seemed about to ask a question, but
forbore, and took his leave amid the general confusion, without
even giving his address.  When sought next day, he was not to
be found, and to the children he at once became as much a
creature of romance as the sea-serpent or the Flying Dutchman.

Even Hope's strong constitution felt the shock of this
adventure. She was confined to her room for a week or two, but
begged that there might be no postponement of the wedding,
which, therefore, took place without her. Her illness gave
excuse for a privacy that was welcome to all but the
bridesmaids, and suited Malbone best of all.



XVI.

ON THE STAIRS.

AUGUST drew toward its close, and guests departed from the
neighborhood.

"What a short little thing summer is," meditated Aunt Jane,
"and butterflies are caterpillars most of the time after all.
How quiet it seems.  The wrens whisper in their box above the
window, and there has not been a blast from the peacock for a
week. He seems ashamed of the summer shortness of his tail. He
keeps glancing at it over his shoulder to see if it is not
looking better than yesterday, while the staring eyes of the
old tail are in the bushes all about."

"Poor, dear little thing!" said coaxing Katie.  "Is she tired
of autumn, before it is begun?"

"I am never tired of anything," said Aunt Jane, "except my maid
Ruth, and I should not be tired of her, if it had pleased
Heaven to endow her with sufficient strength of mind to sew on
a button. Life is very rich to me. There is always something
new in every season; though to be sure I cannot think what
novelty there is just now, except a choice variety of spiders.
There is a theory that spiders kill flies.  But I never miss a
fly, and there does not seem to be any natural scourge divinely
appointed to kill spiders, except Ruth.  Even she does it so
feebly, that I see them come back and hang on their webs and
make faces at her. I suppose they are faces; I do not
understand their anatomy, but it must be a very unpleasant
one."

"You are not quite satisfied with life, today, dear," said
Kate; "I fear your book did not end to your satisfaction."

"It did end, though," said the lady, "and that is something.
What is there in life so difficult as to stop a book?" If I
wrote one, it would be as long as ten 'Sir Charles Grandisons,'
and then I never should end it, because I should die. And there
would be nobody left to read it, because each reader would have
been dead long before."

"But the book amused you!" interrupted Kate.  "I know it did."

"It was so absurd that I laughed till I cried; and it makes no
difference whether you cry laughing or cry crying; it is
equally bad when your glasses come off.  Never mind. Whom did
you see on the Avenue?"

"O, we saw Philip on horseback.  He rides so beautifully; he
seems one with his horse."

"I am glad of it," interposed his aunt.  "The riders are
generally so inferior to them."

"We saw Mr. and Mrs. Lambert, too.  Emilia stopped and asked
after you, and sent you her love, auntie."

"Love!" cried Aunt Jane.  "She always does that.  She has sent
me love enough to rear a whole family on,--more than I ever
felt for anybody in all my days. But she does not really love
any one."

"I hope she will love her husband," said Kate, rather
seriously.

"Mark my words, Kate!" said her aunt.  "Nothing but unhappiness
will ever come of that marriage.  How can two people be happy
who have absolutely nothing in common?"

"But no two people have just the same tastes," said Kate,
"except Harry and myself.  It is not expected.  It would be
absurd for two people to be divorced, because the one preferred
white bread and the other brown."

"They would be divorced very soon," said Aunt Jane, "for the
one who ate brown bread would not live long."

"But it is possible that he might live, auntie, in spite of
your prediction. And perhaps people may be happy, even if you
and I do not see how."

"Nobody ever thinks I see anything," said Aunt Jane, in some
dejection. "You think I am nothing in the world but a sort of
old oyster, making amusement for people, and having no more to
do with real life than oysters have."

"No, dearest!" cried Kate.  "You have a great deal to do with
all our lives.  You are a dear old insidious sapper-and-miner,
looking at first very inoffensive, and then working your way
into our affections, and spoiling us with coaxing. How you
behave about children, for instance!"

"How?" said the other meekly.  "As well as I can."

"But you pretend that you dislike them."

"But I do dislike them.  How can anybody help it? Hear them
swearing at this moment, boys of five, paddling in the water
there!  Talk about the murder of the innocents! There are so
few innocents to be murdered!  If I only had a gun and could
shoot!"

"You may not like those particular boys," said Kate, "but you
like good, well-behaved children, very much."

"It takes so many to take care of them!  People drive by here,
with carriages so large that two of the largest horses can
hardly draw them, and all full of those little beings. They
have a sort of roof, too, and seem to expect to be out in all
weathers."

"If you had a family of children, perhaps you would find such a
travelling caravan very convenient," said Kate.

"If I had such a family," said her aunt, "I would have a
separate governess and guardian for each, very moral persons.
They should come when each child was two, and stay till it was
twenty. The children should all live apart, in order not to
quarrel, and should meet once or twice a day and bow to each
other. I think that each should learn a different language, so
as not to converse, and then, perhaps, they would not get each
other into mischief."

"I am sure, auntie," said Kate, "you have missed our small
nephews and nieces ever since their visit ended. How still the
house has been!"

"I do not know," was the answer.  "I hear a great many noises
about the house.  Somebody comes in late at night. Perhaps it
is Philip; but he comes very softly in, wipes his feet very
gently, like a clean thief, and goes up stairs."

"O auntie!" said Kate, "you know you have got over all such
fancies."

"They are not fancies," said Aunt Jane.  "Things do happen in
houses! Did I not look under the bed for a thief during fifteen
years, and find one at last?  Why should I not be allowed to
hear something now?"

"But, dear Aunt Jane," said Kate, "you never told me this
before."

"No," said she.  "I was beginning to tell you the other day,
but Ruth was just bringing in my handkerchiefs, and she had
used so much bluing, they looked as if they had been washed in
heaven, so that it was too outrageous, and I forgot everything
else."

"But do you really hear anything?"

"Yes," said her aunt.  "Ruth declares she hears noises in those
closets that I had nailed up, you know; but that is nothing; of
course she does.  Rats.  What I hear at night is the creaking
of stairs, when I know that nobody ought to be stirring. If you
observe, you will hear it too.  At least, I should think you
would, only that somehow everything always seems to stop, when
it is necessary to prove that I am foolish."

The girls had no especial engagement that evening, and so got
into a great excitement on the stairway over Aunt Jane's
solicitudes. They convinced themselves that they heard all
sorts of things,--footfalls on successive steps, the creak of a
plank, the brushing of an arm against a wall, the jar of some
suspended object that was stirred in passing. Once they heard
something fall on the floor, and roll from step to step; and
yet they themselves stood on the stairway, and nothing passed.
Then for some time there was silence, but they would have
persisted in their observations, had not Philip come in from
Mrs. Meredith's in the midst of it, so that the whole thing
turned into a frolic, and they sat on the stairs and told ghost
stories half the night.



XVII.

DISCOVERY.

THE next evening Kate and Philip went to a ball.  As Hope was
passing through the hall late in the evening, she heard a
sudden, sharp cry somewhere in the upper regions, that sounded,
she thought, like a woman's voice. She stopped to hear, but
there was silence.  It seemed to come from the direction of
Malbone's room, which was in the third story. Again came the
cry, more gently, ending in a sort of sobbing monologue.
Gliding rapidly up stairs in the dark, she paused at Philip's
deserted room, but the door was locked, and there was profound
stillness. She then descended, and pausing at the great
landing, heard other steps descending also.  Retreating to the
end of the hall, she hastily lighted a candle, when the steps
ceased.  With her accustomed nerve, wishing to explore the
thing thoroughly, she put out the light and kept still. As she
expected, the footsteps presently recommenced, descending
stealthily, but drawing no nearer, and seeming rather like
sounds from an adjoining house, heard through a party-wall.
This was impossible, as the house stood alone. Flushed with
excitement, she relighted the hall candles, and, taking one of
them, searched the whole entry and stairway, going down even to
the large, old-fashioned cellar.

Looking about her in this unfamiliar region, her eye fell on a
door that seemed to open into the wall; she had noticed a
similar door on the story above,--one of the closet doors that
had been nailed up by Aunt Jane's order.  As she looked,
however, a chill breath blew in from another direction,
extinguishing her lamp. This air came from the outer door of
the cellar, and she had just time to withdraw into a corner
before a man's steps approached, passing close by her.

Even Hope's strong nerves had begun to yield, and a cold
shudder went through her.  Not daring to move, she pressed
herself against the wall, and her heart seemed to stop as the
unseen stranger passed. Instead of his ascending where she had
come down, as she had expected, she heard him grope his way
toward the door she had seen in the wall.

There he seemed to find a stairway, and when his steps were
thus turned from her, she was seized by a sudden impulse and
followed him, groping her way as she could.  She remembered
that the girls had talked of secret stairways in that house,
though she had no conception whither they could lead, unless to
some of the shut-up closets.

She steadily followed, treading cautiously upon each creaking
step. The stairway was very narrow, and formed a regular spiral
as in a turret. The darkness and the curving motion confused
her brain, and it was impossible to tell how high in the house
she was, except when once she put her hand upon what was
evidently a door, and moreover saw through its cracks the lamp
she had left burning in the upper hall.  This glimpse of
reality reassured her.  She had begun to discover where she
was. The doors which Aunt Jane had closed gave access, not to
mere closets, but to a spiral stairway, which evidently went
from top to bottom of the house, and was known to some one else
beside herself.

Relieved of that slight shudder at the supernatural which
sometimes affects the healthiest nerves, Hope paused to
consider. To alarm the neighborhood was her first thought.  A
slight murmuring from above dispelled it; she must first
reconnoitre a few steps farther. As she ascended a little way,
a gleam shone upon her, and down the damp stairway came a
fragrant odor, as from some perfumed chamber. Then a door was
shut and reopened.  Eager beyond expression, she followed on.
Another step, and she stood at the door of Malbone's apartment.

The room was brilliant with light; the doors and windows were
heavily draped. Fruit and flowers and wine were on the table. 
On the sofa lay Emilia in a gay ball-dress, sunk in one of her
motionless trances, while Malbone, pale with terror, was
deluging her brows with the water he had just brought from the
well below.

Hope stopped a moment and leaned against the door, as her eyes
met Malbone's. Then she made her way to a chair, and leaning on
the back of it, which she fingered convulsively, looked with
bewildered eyes and compressed lips from the one to the other. 
Malbone tried to speak, but failed; tried again, and brought
forth only a whisper that broke into clearer speech as the
words went on.  "No use to explain," he said. "Lambert is in
New York.  Mrs. Meredith is expecting her--to-night after the
ball.  What can we do?"

Hope covered her face as he spoke; she could bear anything
better than to have him say "we," as if no gulf had opened
between them. She sank slowly on her knees behind her chair,
keeping it as a sort of screen between herself and these two
people,--the counterfeits, they seemed, of her lover and her
sister. If the roof in falling to crush them had crushed her
also, she could scarcely have seemed more rigid or more
powerless. It passed, and the next moment she was on her feet
again, capable of action.

"She must be taken," she said very clearly, but in a lower tone
than usual, "to my chamber."  Then pointing to the candles, she
said, more huskily, "We must not be seen.  Put them out." Every
syllable seemed to exhaust her.  But as Philip obeyed her
words, he saw her move suddenly and stand by Emilia's side.

She put out both arms as if to lift the young girl, and carry
her away.

"You cannot," said Philip, putting her gently aside, while she
shrank from his touch.  Then he took Emilia in his arms and
bore her to the door, Hope preceding.

Motioning him to pause a moment, she turned the lock softly,
and looked out into the dark entry.  All was still. She went
out, and he followed with his motionless burden. They walked
stealthily, like guilty things, yet every slight motion seemed
to ring in their ears.  It was chilly, and Hope shivered.
Through the great open window on the stairway a white fog
peered in at them, and the distant fog-whistle came faintly
through; it seemed as if the very atmosphere were condensing
about them, to isolate the house in which such deeds were done.
The clock struck twelve, and it seemed as if it struck a
thousand.

When they reached Hope's door, she turned and put out her arms
for Emilia, as for a child.  Every expression had now gone from
Hope's face but a sort of stony calmness, which put her
infinitely farther from Malbone than had the momentary
struggle. As he gave the girlish form into arms that shook and
trembled beneath its weight, he caught a glimpse in the
pier-glass of their two white faces, and then, looking down,
saw the rose-tints yet lingering on Emilia's cheek.  She, the
source of all this woe, looked the only representative of
innocence between two guilty things.

How white and pure and maidenly looked Hope's little
room,--such a home of peace, he thought, till its door suddenly
opened to admit all this passion and despair! There was a great
sheaf of cardinal flowers on the table, and their petals were
drooping, as if reluctant to look on him. Scheffer's Christus
Consolator was upon the walls, and the benign figure seemed to
spread wider its arms of mercy, to take in a few sad hearts
more.

Hope bore Emilia into the light and purity and warmth, while
Malbone was shut out into the darkness and the chill. The only
two things to which he clung on earth, the two women between
whom his unsteady heart had vibrated, and both whose lives had
been tortured by its vacillation, went away from his sight
together, the one victim bearing the other victim in her arms.
Never any more while he lived would either of them be his
again; and had Dante known it for his last glimpse of things
immortal when the two lovers floated away from him in their sad
embrace, he would have had no such sense of utter banishment as
had Malbone then.



XVIII.

HOPE'S VIGIL.

HAD Emilia chosen out of life's whole armory of weapons the
means of disarming Hope, she could have found nothing so
effectual as nature had supplied in her unconsciousness. 
Helplessness conquers. There was a quality in Emilia which
would have always produced something very like antagonism in
Hope, had she not been her sister. Had the ungoverned girl now
been able to utter one word of reproach, had her eyes flashed
one look of defiance, had her hand made one triumphant or angry
gesture, perhaps all Hope's outraged womanhood would have
coldly nerved itself against her. But it was another thing to
see those soft eyes closed, those delicate hands powerless,
those pleading lips sealed; to see her extended in graceful
helplessness, while all the concentrated drama of emotion
revolved around her unheeded, as around Cordelia dead. In what
realms was that child's mind seeking comfort; through what thin
air of dreams did that restless heart beat its pinions; in what
other sphere did that untamed nature wander, while shame and
sorrow waited for its awakening in this?

Hope knelt upon the floor, still too much strained and
bewildered for tears or even prayer, a little way from Emilia. 
Once having laid down the unconscious form, it seemed for a
moment as if she could no more touch it than she could lay her
hand amid flames. A gap of miles, of centuries, of solar
systems, seemed to separate these two young girls, alone within
the same chamber, with the same stern secret to keep, and so
near that the hem of their garments almost touched each other
on the soft carpet. Hope felt a terrible hardness closing over
her heart. What right had this cruel creature, with her fatal
witcheries, to come between two persons who might have been so
wholly happy? What sorrow would be saved, what shame, perhaps,
be averted, should those sweet beguiling eyes never open, and
that perfidious voice never deceive any more?  Why tend the
life of one who would leave the whole world happier, purer,
freer, if she were dead?

In a tumult of thought, Hope went and sat half-unconsciously by
the window.  There was nothing to be seen except the steady
beacon of the light-house and a pale-green glimmer, like an
earthly star, from an anchored vessel.  The night wind came
softly in, soothing her with a touch like a mother's, in its
grateful coolness. The air seemed full of half-vibrations,
sub-noises, that crowded it as completely as do the insect
sounds of midsummer; yet she could only distinguish the ripple
beneath her feet, and the rote on the distant beach, and the
busy wash of waters against every shore and islet of the bay. 
The mist was thick around her, but she knew that above it hung
the sleepless stars, and the fancy came over her that perhaps
the whole vast interval, from ocean up to sky, might be densely
filled with the disembodied souls of her departed human
kindred, waiting to see how she would endure that path of grief
in which their steps had gone before. "It may be from this
influence," she vaguely mused within herself, "that the ocean
derives its endless song of sorrow.  Perhaps we shall know the
meaning when we understand that of the stars, and of our own
sad lives."

She rose again and went to the bedside.  It all seemed like a
dream, and she was able to look at Emilia's existence and at
her own and at all else, as if it were a great way off; as we
watch the stars and know that no speculations of ours can reach
those who there live or die untouched. Here beside her lay one
who was dead, yet living, in her temporary trance, and to what
would she wake, when it should end?  This young creature had
been sent into the world so fresh, so beautiful, so richly
gifted; everything about her physical organization was so
delicate and lovely; she had seemed like heliotrope, like a
tube-rose in her purity and her passion (who was it said, "No
heart is pure that is not passionate"?); and here was the end! 
Nothing external could have placed her where she was, no
violence, no outrage, no evil of another's doing, could have
reached her real life without her own consent; and now what
kind of existence, what career, what possibility of happiness
remained?  Why could not God in his mercy take her, and give
her to his holiest angels for schooling, ere it was yet too
late?

Hope went and sat by the window once more.  Her thoughts still
clung heavily around one thought, as the white fog clung round
the house.  Where should she see any light? What opening for
extrication, unless, indeed, Emilia should die? There could be
no harm in that thought, for she knew it was not to be, and
that the swoon would not last much longer. Who could devise
anything?  No one.  There was nothing. Almost always in
perplexities there is some thread by resolutely holding to
which one escapes at last.  Here there was none. There could
probably be no concealment, certainly no explanation. In a few
days John Lambert would return, and then the storm must break. 
He was probably a stern, jealous man, whose very dulness, once
aroused, would be more formidable than if he had possessed
keener perceptions.

Still her thoughts did not dwell on Philip.  He was simply a
part of that dull mass of pain that beset her and made her
feel, as she had felt when drowning, that her heart had left
her breast and nothing but will remained.  She felt now, as
then, the capacity to act with more than her accustomed
resolution, though all that was within her seemed boiling up
into her brain. As for Philip, all seemed a mere negation;
there was a vacuum where his place had been.  At most the
thought of him came to her as some strange, vague thrill of
added torture, penetrating her soul and then passing; just as
ever and anon there came the sound of the fog-whistle on
Brenton's Reef, miles away, piercing the dull air with its
shrill and desolate wail, then dying into silence.

What a hopeless cloud lay upon them all forever,--upon Kate,
upon Harry, upon their whole house!  Then there was John
Lambert; how could they keep it from him? how could they tell
him? Who could predict what he would say?  Would he take the
worst and coarsest view of his young wife's mad action or the
mildest? Would he be strong or weak; and what would be
weakness, and what strength, in a position so strange?  Would
he put Emilia from him, send her out in the world desolate, her
soul stained but by one wrong passion, yet with her reputation
blighted as if there were no good in her? Could he be asked to
shield and protect her, or what would become of her? She was
legally a wife, and could only be separated from him through
convicted shame.

Then, if separated, she could only marry Philip.  Hope nerved
herself to think of that, and it cost less effort than she
expected.

There seemed a numbness on that side, instead of pain. But
granting that he loved Emilia ever so deeply, was he a man to
surrender his life and his ease and his fair name, in a
hopeless effort to remove the ban that the world would place on
her. Hope knew he would not; knew that even the simple-hearted
and straightforward Harry would be far more capable of such
heroism than the sentimental Malbone.  Here the pang suddenly
struck her; she was not so numb, after all!

As the leaves beside the window drooped motionless in the dank
air, so her mind drooped into a settled depression.  She pitied
herself,--that lowest ebb of melancholy self-consciousness. She
went back to Emilia, and, seating herself, studied every line
of the girl's face, the soft texture of her hair, the veining
of her eyelids.  They were so lovely, she felt a sort of
physical impulse to kiss them, as if they belonged to some
utter stranger, whom she might be nursing in a hospital. Emilia
looked as innocent as when Hope had tended her in the cradle.
What is there, Hope thought, in sleep, in trance, and in death,
that removes all harsh or disturbing impressions, and leaves
only the most delicate and purest traits?  Does the mind
wander, and does an angel keep its place?  Or is there really
no sin but in thought, and are our sleeping thoughts incapable
of sin?  Perhaps even when we dream of doing wrong, the dream
comes in a shape so lovely and misleading that we never
recognize it for evil, and it makes no stain. Are our lives
ever so pure as our dreams?

This thought somehow smote across her conscience, always so
strong, and stirred it into a kind of spasm of introspection.
"How selfish have I, too, been!" she thought.  "I saw only what
I wished to see, did only what I preferred.  Loving Philip"
(for the sudden self-reproach left her free to think of him),
"I could not see that I was separating him from one whom he
might perhaps have truly loved.  If he made me blind, may he
not easily have bewildered her, and have been himself
bewildered? How I tried to force myself upon him, too! 
Ungenerous, unwomanly! What am I, that I should judge another?"

She threw herself on her knees at the bedside.

Still Emilia slept, but now she stirred her head in the
slightest possible way, so that a single tress of silken hair
slipped from its companions, and lay across her face.  It was a
faint sign that the trance was waning; the slight pressure
disturbed her nerves, and her lips trembled once or twice, as
if to relieve themselves of the soft annoyance.  Hope watched
her in a vague, distant way, took note of the minutest motion,
yet as if some vast weight hung upon her own limbs and made all
interference impossible. Still there was a fascination of
sympathy in dwelling on that atom of discomfort, that tiny
suffering, which she alone could remove. The very vastness of
this tragedy that hung about the house made it an inexpressible
relief to her to turn and concentrate her thoughts for a moment
on this slight distress, so easily ended.

Strange, by what slender threads our lives are knitted to each
other! Here was one who had taken Hope's whole existence in her
hands, crushed it, and thrown it away.  Hope had soberly said
to herself, just before, that death would be better than life
for her young sister. Yet now it moved her beyond endurance to
see that fair form troubled, even while unconscious, by a
feather's weight of pain; and all the lifelong habit of
tenderness resumed in a moment its sway.

She approached her fingers to the offending tress, very slowly,
half withholding them at the very last, as if the touch would
burn her. She was almost surprised that it did not.  She looked
to see if it did not hurt Emilia.  But it now seemed as if the
slumbering girl enjoyed the caressing contact of the smooth
fingers, and turned her head, almost imperceptibly, to meet
them.  This was more than Hope could bear. It was as if that
slight motion were a puncture to relieve her overburdened
heart; a thousand thoughts swept over her,--of their father, of
her sister's childhood, of her years of absent expectation; she
thought how young the girl was, how fascinating, how
passionate, how tempted; all this swept across her in a great
wave of nervous reaction, and when Emilia returned to
consciousness, she was lying in her sister's arms, her face
bathed in Hope's tears.



XIX.

DE PROFUNDIS.

THIS was the history of Emilia's concealed visits to Malbone.

One week after her marriage, in a crisis of agony, Emilia took
up her pen, dipped it in fire, and wrote thus to him:--

"Philip Malbone, why did nobody ever tell me what marriage is
where there is no love?  This man who calls himself my husband
is no worse, I suppose, than other men.  It is only for being
what is called by that name that I abhor him.  Good God! what
am I to do? It was not for money that I married him,--that you
know very well; I cared no more for his money than for himself. 
I thought it was the only way to save Hope.  She has been very
good to me, and perhaps I should love her, if I could love
anybody. Now I have done what will only make more misery, for I
cannot bear it.  Philip, I am alone in this wide world, except
for you. Tell me what to do.  I will haunt you till you die,
unless you tell me. Answer this, or I will write again."

Terrified by this letter, absolutely powerless to guide the
life with which he had so desperately entangled himself, Philip
let one day pass without answering, and that evening he found
Emilia at his door, she having glided unnoticed up the main
stairway. She was so excited, it was equally dangerous to send
her away or to admit her, and he drew her in, darkening the
windows and locking the door.  On the whole, it was not so bad
as he expected; at least, there was less violence and more
despair. She covered her face with her hands, and writhed in
anguish, when she said that she had utterly degraded herself by
this loveless marriage.  She scarcely mentioned her husband.
She made no complaint of him, and even spoke of him as
generous. It seemed as if this made it worse, and as if she
would be happier if she could expend herself in hating him. She
spoke of him rather as a mere witness to some shame for which
she herself was responsible; bearing him no malice, but
tortured by the thought that he should exist.

Then she turned on Malbone.  "Philip, why did you ever
interfere with my life?  I should have been very happy with
Antoine if you had let me marry him, for I never should have
known what it was to love you.  Oh!  I wish he were here now,
even he,--any one who loved me truly, and whom I could love
only a little. I would go away with such a person anywhere, and
never trouble you and Hope any more.  What shall I do?  Philip,
you might tell me what to do. Once you told me always to come
to you."

"What can you do?" he asked gloomily, in return.

"I cannot imagine," she said, with a desolate look, more
pitiable than passion, on her young face.  "I wish to save
Hope, and to save my--to save Mr. Lambert.  Philip, you do not
love me. I do not call it love.  There is no passion in your
veins; it is only a sort of sympathetic selfishness.  Hope is
infinitely better than you are, and I believe she is more
capable of loving. I began by hating her, but if she loves you
as I think she does, she has treated me more generously than
ever one woman treated another. For she could not look at me
and not know that I loved you. I did love you.  O Philip, tell
me what to do!"

Such beauty in anguish, the thrill of the possession of such
love, the possibility of soothing by tenderness the wild mood
which he could not meet by counsel,--it would have taken a
stronger or less sympathetic nature than Malbone's to endure
all this. It swept him away; this revival of passion was
irresistible. When her pent-up feeling was once uttered, she
turned to his love as a fancied salvation.  It was a terrible
remedy. She had never looked more beautiful, and yet she seemed
to have grown old at once; her very caresses appeared to burn.
She lingered and lingered, and still he kept her there; and
when it was no longer possible for her to go without disturbing
the house, he led her to a secret spiral stairway, which went
from attic to cellar of that stately old mansion, and which
opened by one or more doors on each landing, as his keen eye
had found out. Descending this, he went forth with her into the
dark and silent night. The mist hung around the house; the wet
leaves fluttered and fell upon their cheeks; the water lapped
desolately against the pier. Philip found a carriage and sent
her back to Mrs. Meredith's, where she was staying during the
brief absence of John Lambert.

These concealed meetings, once begun, became an absorbing
excitement. She came several times, staying half an hour, an
hour, two hours. They were together long enough for suffering,
never long enough for soothing.  It was a poor substitute for
happiness.  Each time she came, Malbone wished that she might
never go or never return. His warier nature was feverish with
solicitude and with self-reproach; he liked the excitement of
slight risks, but this was far too intense, the vibrations too
extreme.  She, on the other hand, rode triumphant over waves of
passion which cowed him.  He dared not exclude her; he dared
not continue to admit her; he dared not free himself; he could
not be happy.  The privacy of the concealed stairway saved them
from outward dangers, but not from inward fears. Their
interviews were first blissful, then anxious, then sad, then
stormy. It was at the end of such a storm that Emilia had
passed into one of those deathly calms which belonged to her
physical temperament; and it was under these circumstances that
Hope had followed Philip to the door.



XX.

AUNT JANE TO THE RESCUE.

THE thing that saves us from insanity during great grief is
that there is usually something to do, and the mind composes
itself to the mechanical task of adjusting the details. Hope
dared not look forward an inch into the future; that way
madness lay.  Fortunately, it was plain what must come
first,--to keep the whole thing within their own walls, and
therefore to make some explanation to Mrs. Meredith, whose
servants had doubtless been kept up all night awaiting Emilia. 
Profoundly perplexed what to say or not to say to her, Hope
longed with her whole soul for an adviser. Harry and Kate were
both away, and besides, she shrank from darkening their young
lives as hers had been darkened. She resolved to seek counsel
in the one person who most thoroughly distrusted Emilia,--Aunt
Jane.

This lady was in a particularly happy mood that day.  Emilia,
who did all kinds of fine needle-work exquisitely, had just
embroidered for Aunt Jane some pillow-cases. The original
suggestion came from Hope, but it never cost Emilia anything to
keep a secret, and she had presented the gift very sweetly, as
if it were a thought of her own. Aunt Jane, who with all her
penetration as to facts was often very guileless as to motives,
was thoroughly touched by the humility and the embroidery.

"All last night," she said, "I kept waking up, and thinking
about Christian charity and my pillow-cases."

It was, therefore, a very favorable day for Hope's
consultation, though it was nearly noon before her aunt was
visible, perhaps because it took so long to make up her bed
with the new adornments.

Hope said frankly to Aunt Jane that there were some
circumstances about which she should rather not be questioned,
but that Emilia had come there the previous night from the
ball, had been seized with one of her peculiar attacks, and had
stayed all night. Aunt Jane kept her eyes steadily fixed on
Hope's sad face, and, when the tale was ended, drew her down
and kissed her lips.

"Now tell me, dear," she said; "what comes first?"

"The first thing is," said Hope, "to have Emilia's absence
explained to Mrs. Meredith in some such way that she will think
no more of it, and not talk about it."

"Certainly," said Aunt Jane.  "There is but one way to do that.
I will call on her myself."

"You, auntie?" said Hope.

"Yes, I," said her aunt.  "I have owed her a call for five
years. It is the only thing that will excite her so much as to
put all else out of her head."

"O auntie!" said Hope, greatly relieved, "if you only would!
But ought you really to go out?  It is almost raining."

"I shall go," said Aunt Jane, decisively, "if it rains little
boys!"

"But will not Mrs. Meredith wonder--?" began Hope.

"That is one advantage," interrupted her aunt, "of being an
absurd old woman.  Nobody ever wonders at anything I do, or
else it is that they never stop wondering."

She sent Ruth erelong to order the horses.  Hope collected her
various wrappers, and Ruth, returning, got her mistress into a
state of preparation.

"If I might say one thing more," Hope whispered.

"Certainly," said her aunt.  "Ruth, go to my chamber, and get
me a pin."

"What kind of a pin, ma'am?" asked that meek handmaiden, from
the doorway.

"What a question!" said her indignant mistress.  "Any kind. The
common pin of North America.  Now, Hope?" as the door closed.

"I think it better, auntie," said Hope, "that Philip should not
stay here longer at present.  You can truly say that the house
is full, and--"

"I have just had a note from him," said Aunt Jane severely. "He
has gone to lodge at the hotel.  What next?"

"Aunt Jane," said Hope, looking her full in the face, "I have
not the slightest idea what to do next."

("The next thing for me," thought her aunt, "is to have a
little plain speech with that misguided child upstairs.")

"I can see no way out," pursued Hope.

"Darling!" said Aunt Jane, with a voice full of womanly
sweetness, "there is always a way out, or else the world would
have stopped long ago. Perhaps it would have been better if it
had stopped, but you see it has not. All we can do is, to live
on and try our best."

She bade Hope leave Emilia to her, and furthermore stipulated
that Hope should go to her pupils as usual, that afternoon, as
it was their last lesson. The young girl shrank from the
effort, but the elder lady was inflexible. She had her own
purpose in it.  Hope once out of the way, Aunt Jane could deal
with Emilia.

No human being, when met face to face with Aunt Jane, had ever
failed to yield up to her the whole truth she sought.  Emilia
was on that day no exception.  She was prostrate, languid,
humble, denied nothing, was ready to concede every point but
one.  Never, while she lived, would she dwell beneath John
Lambert's roof again.  She had left it impulsively, she
admitted, scarce knowing what she did. But she would never
return there to live.  She would go once more and see that all
was in order for Mr. Lambert, both in the house and on board
the yacht, where they were to have taken up their abode for a
time. There were new servants in the house, a new captain on
the yacht; she would trust Mr. Lambert's comfort to none of
them; she would do her full duty. Duty! the more utterly she
felt herself to be gliding away from him forever, the more
pains she was ready to lavish in doing these nothings well.
About every insignificant article he owned she seemed to feel
the most scrupulous and wife-like responsibility; while she yet
knew that all she had was to him nothing, compared with the
possession of herself; and it was the thought of this last
ownership that drove her to despair.

Sweet and plaintive as the child's face was, it had a glimmer
of wildness and a hunted look, that baffled Aunt Jane a little,
and compelled her to temporize.  She consented that Emilia
should go to her own house, on condition that she would not see
Philip,--which was readily and even eagerly promised,--and that
Hope should spend the night with Emilia, which proposal was
ardently accepted.

It occurred to Aunt Jane that nothing better could happen than
for John Lambert, on returning, to find his wife at home; and
to secure this result, if possible, she telegraphed to him to
come at once.

Meantime Hope gave her inevitable music-lesson, so absorbed in
her own thoughts that it was all as mechanical as the
metronome.  As she came out upon the Avenue for the walk home,
she saw a group of people from a gardener's house, who had
collected beside a muddy crossing, where a team of cart-horses
had refused to stir.  Presently they sprang forward with a
great jerk, and a little Irish child was thrown beneath the
wheel. Hope sprang forward to grasp the child, and the wheel
struck her also; but she escaped with a dress torn and smeared,
while the cart passed over the little girl's arm, breaking it
in two places. She screamed and then grew faint, as Hope lifted
her.  The mother received the burden with a wail of anguish;
the other Irishwomen pressed around her with the dense and
suffocating sympathy of their nation. Hope bade one and another
run for a physician, but nobody stirred. There was no surgical
aid within a mile or more.  Hope looked round in despair, then
glanced at her own disordered garments.

"As sure as you live!" shouted a well-known voice from a
carriage which had stopped behind them.  "If that isn't Hope
what's-her-name, wish I may never! Here's a lark!  Let me come
there!"  And the speaker pushed through the crowd.

"Miss Ingleside," said Hope, decisively, "this child's arm is
broken. There is nobody to go for a physician.  Except for the
condition I am in, I would ask you to take me there at once in
your carriage; but as it is--"

"As it is, I must ask you, hey?" said Blanche, finishing the
sentence. "Of course.  No mistake.  Sans dire.  Jones, junior,
this lady will join us.  Don't look so scared, man.  Are you
anxious about your cushions or your reputation?"

The youth simpered and disclaimed.

"Jump in, then, Miss Maxwell.  Never mind the expense. It's
only the family carriage;--surname and arms of Jones.  Lucky
there are no parents to the fore.  Put my shawl over you, so."

"O Blanche!" said Hope, "what injustice--"

"I've done myself?" said the volatile damsel. "Not a doubt of
it. That's my style, you know.  But I have some sense; I know
who's who.  Now, Jones, junior, make your man handle the
ribbons. I've always had a grudge against that ordinance about
fast driving, and now's our chance."

And the sacred "ordinance," with all other proprieties, was
left in ruins that day.  They tore along the Avenue with
unexplained and most inexplicable speed, Hope being concealed
by riding backward, and by a large shawl, and Blanche and her
admirer receiving the full indignation of every chaste and
venerable eye. Those who had tolerated all this girl's previous
improprieties were obliged to admit that the line must be drawn
somewhere. She at once lost several good invitations and a
matrimonial offer, since Jones, junior, was swept away by his
parents to be wedded without delay to a consumptive heiress who
had long pined for his whiskers; and Count Posen, in his
Souvenirs, was severer on Blanche's one good deed than on the
worst of her follies.

A few years after, when Blanche, then the fearless wife of a
regular-army officer, was helping Hope in the hospitals at
Norfolk, she would stop to shout with delight over the
reminiscence of that stately Jones equipage in mad career, amid
the barking of dogs and the groaning of dowagers. "After all,
Hope," she would say, "the fastest thing I ever did was under
your orders."



XXI.

A STORM.

THE members of the household were all at the window about noon,
next day, watching the rise of a storm.  A murky wing of cloud,
shaped like a hawk's, hung over the low western hills across
the bay. Then the hawk became an eagle, and the eagle a
gigantic phantom, that hovered over half the visible sky. 
Beneath it, a little scud of vapor, moved by some cross-current
of air, raced rapidly against the wind, just above the horizon,
like smoke from a battle-field.

As the cloud ascended, the water grew rapidly blacker, and in
half an hour broke into jets of white foam, all over its
surface, with an angry look. Meantime a white film of fog
spread down the bay from the northward. The wind hauled from
southwest to northwest, so suddenly and strongly that all the
anchored boats seemed to have swung round instantaneously,
without visible process.  The instant the wind shifted, the
rain broke forth, filling the air in a moment with its volume,
and cutting so sharply that it seemed like hail, though no
hailstones reached the ground. At the same time there rose upon
the water a dense white film, which seemed to grow together
from a hundred different directions, and was made partly of
rain, and partly of the blown edges of the spray. There was but
a glimpse of this; for in a few moments it was impossible to
see two rods; but when the first gust was over, the water
showed itself again, the jets of spray all beaten down, and
regular waves, of dull lead-color, breaking higher on the
shore.  All the depth of blackness had left the sky, and there
remained only an obscure and ominous gray, through which the
lightning flashed white, not red. Boats came driving in from
the mouth of the bay with a rag of sail up; the men got them
moored with difficulty, and when they sculled ashore in the
skiffs, a dozen comrades stood ready to grasp and haul them in.
Others launched skiffs in sheltered places, and pulled out
bareheaded to bail out their fishing-boats and keep them from
swamping at their moorings.

The shore was thronged with men in oilskin clothes and by women
with shawls over their heads.  Aunt Jane, who always felt
responsible for whatever went on in the elements, sat in-doors
with one lid closed, wincing at every flash, and watching the
universe with the air of a coachman guiding six wild horses.

Just after the storm had passed its height, two veritable wild
horses were reined up at the door, and Philip burst in, his
usual self-composure gone.

"Emilia is out sailing!" he exclaimed,--"alone with Lambert's
boatman, in this gale.  They say she was bound for
Narragansett."

"Impossible!" cried Hope, turning pale.  "I left her not three
hours ago." Then she remembered that Emilia had spoken of going
on board the yacht, to superintend some arrangements, but had
said no more about it, when she opposed it.

"Harry!" said Aunt Jane, quickly, from her chair by the window,
"see that fisherman.  He has just come ashore and is telling
something. Ask him."

The fisherman had indeed seen Lambert's boat, which was well
known. Something seemed to be the matter with the sail, but
before the storm struck her, it had been hauled down.  They
must have taken in water enough, as it was.  He had himself
been obliged to bail out three times, running in from the reef.

"Was there any landing which they could reach?"  Harry asked.

There was none,--but the light-ship lay right in their track,
and if they had good luck, they might get aboard of her.

"The boatman?" said Philip, anxiously,--"Mr. Lambert's boatman;
is he a good sailor?"

"Don't know," was the reply.  "Stranger here.  Dutchman,
Frenchman, Portegee, or some kind of a foreigner."

"Seems to understand himself in a boat," said another.

"Mr. Malbone knows him," said a third.  "The same that dove
with the young woman under the steamboat paddles."

"Good grit," said the first.

"That's so," was the answer.  "But grit don't teach a man the
channel."

All agreed to this axiom; but as there was so strong a
probability that the voyagers had reached the light-ship, there
seemed less cause for fear.

The next question was, whether it was possible to follow them.
All agreed that it would be foolish for any boat to attempt it,
till the wind had blown itself out, which might be within half
an hour. After that, some predicted a calm, some a fog, some a
renewal of the storm; there was the usual variety of opinions. 
At any rate, there might perhaps be an interval during which
they could go out, if the gentlemen did not mind a wet jacket.

Within the half-hour came indeed an interval of calm, and a
light shone behind the clouds from the west.  It faded soon
into a gray fog, with puffs of wind from the southwest again.
When the young men went out with the boatmen, the water had
grown more quiet, save where angry little gusts ruffled it. But
these gusts made it necessary to carry a double reef, and they
made but little progress against wind and tide.

A dark-gray fog, broken by frequent wind-flaws, makes the
ugliest of all days on the water.  A still, pale fog is
soothing; it lulls nature to a kind of repose.  But a windy fog
with occasional sunbeams and sudden films of metallic blue
breaking the leaden water,--this carries an impression of
something weird and treacherous in the universe, and suggests
caution.

As the boat floated on, every sight and sound appeared strange.
The music from the fort came sudden and startling through the
vaporous eddies.  A tall white schooner rose instantaneously
near them, like a light-house. They could see the steam of the
factory floating low, seeking some outlet between cloud and
water. As they drifted past a wharf, the great black piles of
coal hung high and gloomy; then a stray sunbeam brought out
their peacock colors; then came the fog again, driving
hurriedly by, as if impatient to go somewhere and enraged at
the obstacle.  It seemed to have a vast inorganic life of its
own, a volition and a whim. It drew itself across the horizon
like a curtain; then advanced in trampling armies up the bay;
then marched in masses northward; then suddenly grew thin, and
showed great spaces of sunlight; then drifted across the low
islands, like long tufts of wool; then rolled itself away
toward the horizon; then closed in again, pitiless and gray.

Suddenly something vast towered amid the mist above them. It
was the French war-ship returned to her anchorage once more,
and seeming in that dim atmosphere to be something spectral and
strange that had taken form out of the elements. The muzzles of
great guns rose tier above tier, along her side; great boats
hung one above another, on successive pairs of davits, at her
stern.  So high was her hull, that the topmost boat and the
topmost gun appeared to be suspended in middle air; and yet
this was but the beginning of her altitude. Above these were
the heavy masts, seen dimly through the mist; between these
were spread eight dark lines of sailors' clothes, which, with
the massive yards above, looked like part of some ponderous
framework built to reach the sky. This prolongation of the
whole dark mass toward the heavens had a portentous look to
those who gazed from below; and when the denser fog sometimes
furled itself away from the topgallant masts, hitherto
invisible, and showed them rising loftier yet, and the tricolor
at the mizzen-mast-head looking down as if from the zenith,
then they all seemed to appertain to something of more than
human workmanship; a hundred wild tales of phantom vessels came
up to the imagination, and it was as if that one gigantic
structure were expanding to fill all space from sky to sea.

They were swept past it; the fog closed in; it was necessary to
land near the Fort, and proceed on foot. They walked across the
rough peninsula, while the mist began to disperse again, and
they were buoyant with expectation. As they toiled onward, the
fog suddenly met them at the turn of a lane where it had
awaited them, like an enemy. As they passed into those gray and
impalpable arms, the whole world changed again.

They walked toward the sound of the sea.  As they approached
it, the dull hue that lay upon it resembled that of the leaden
sky. The two elements could hardly be distinguished except as
the white outlines of the successive breakers were lifted
through the fog. The lines of surf appeared constantly to
multiply upon the beach, and yet, on counting them, there were
never any more. Sometimes, in the distance, masses of foam rose
up like a wall where the horizon ought to be; and, as the
coming waves took form out of the unseen, it seemed as if no
phantom were too vast or shapeless to come rolling in upon
their dusky shoulders.

Presently a frail gleam of something like the ghost of dead
sunshine made them look toward the west.  Above the dim roofs
of Castle Hill mansion-house, the sinking sun showed luridly
through two rifts of cloud, and then the swift motion of the
nearer vapor veiled both sun and cloud, and banished them into
almost equal remoteness.

Leaving the beach on their right, and passing the high rocks of
the Pirate's Cave, they presently descended to the water's edge
once more. The cliffs rose to a distorted height in the
dimness; sprays of withered grass nodded along the edge, like
Ossian's spectres.  Light seemed to be vanishing from the
universe, leaving them alone with the sea. And when a solitary
loon uttered his wild cry, and rising, sped away into the
distance, it was as if life were following light into an equal
annihilation.  That sense of vague terror, with which the ocean
sometimes controls the fancy, began to lay its grasp on them.
They remembered that Emilia, in speaking once of her intense
shrinking from death, had said that the sea was the only thing
from which she would not fear to meet it.

Fog exaggerates both for eye and ear; it is always a
sounding-board for the billows; and in this case, as often
happens, the roar did not appear to proceed from the waves
themselves, but from some source in the unseen horizon, as if
the spectators were shut within a beleaguered fortress, and
this thundering noise came from an impetuous enemy outside.
Ever and anon there was a distinct crash of heavier sound, as
if some special barricade had at length been beaten in, and the
garrison must look to their inner defences.

The tide was unusually high, and scarcely receded with the ebb,
though the surf increased; the waves came in with constant rush
and wail, and with an ominous rattle of pebbles on the little
beaches, beneath the powerful suction of the undertow; and
there were more and more of those muffled throbs along the
shore which tell of coming danger as plainly as minute-guns.
With these came mingled that yet more inexplicable humming
which one hears at intervals in such times, like strains of
music caught and tangled in the currents of stormy
air,--strains which were perhaps the filmy thread on which
tales of sirens and mermaids were first strung, and in which,
at this time, they would fain recognize the voice of Emilia.



XXII.

OUT OF THE DEPTHS.

AS the night closed in, the wind rose steadily, still blowing
from the southwest.  In Brenton's kitchen they found a group
round a great fire of driftwood; some of these were fishermen
who had with difficulty made a landing on the beach, and who
confirmed the accounts already given. The boat had been seen
sailing for the Narragansett shore, and when the squall came,
the boatman had lowered and reefed the sail, and stood for the
light-ship. They must be on board of her, if anywhere.

"There are safe there?" asked Philip, eagerly.

"Only place where they would be safe, then," said the
spokesman.

"Unless the light-ship parts," said an old fellow.

"Parts!" said the other.  "Sixty fathom of two-inch chain, and
old Joe talks about parting."

"Foolish, of course," said Philip; "but it's a dangerous
shore."

"That's so," was the answer.  "Never saw so many lines of reef
show outside, neither."

"There's an old saying on this shore," said Joe:--



       "When Price's Neck goes to Brenton's Reef,
       Body and soul will come to grief.
       But when Brenton's Reef comes to Price's Neck,
       Soul and body are both a wreck."



"What does it mean?" asked Harry.

"It only means," said somebody, "that when you see it white all
the way out from the Neck to the Reef, you can't take the
inside passage."

"But what does the last half mean?" persisted Harry.

"Don't know as I know," said the veteran, and relapsed into
silence, in which all joined him, while the wind howled and
whistled outside, and the barred windows shook.

Weary and restless with vain waiting, they looked from the
doorway at the weather.  The door went back with a slam, and
the gust swooped down on them with that special blast that
always seems to linger just outside on such nights, ready for
the first head that shows itself.  They closed the door upon
the flickering fire and the uncouth shadows within, and went
forth into the night. At first the solid blackness seemed to
lay a weight on their foreheads. There was absolutely nothing
to be seen but the two lights of the light-ship, glaring from
the dark sea like a wolf's eyes from a cavern. They looked
nearer and brighter than in ordinary nights, and appeared to
the excited senses of the young men to dance strangely on the
waves, and to be always opposite to them, as they moved along
the shore with the wind almost at their backs.

"What did that old fellow mean?" said Malbone in Harry's ear,
as they came to a protected place and could hear each other,
"by talking of Brenton's Reef coming to Price's Neck."

"Some sailor's doggerel," said Harry, indifferently.  "Here is
Price's Neck before us, and yonder is Brenton's Reef."

"Where?" said Philip, looking round bewildered.

The lights had gone, as if the wolf, weary of watching, had
suddenly closed his eyes, and slumbered in his cave.

Harry trembled and shivered.  In Heaven's name, what could this
disappearance mean?

Suddenly a sheet of lightning came, so white and intense, it
sent its light all the way out to the horizon and exhibited
far-off vessels, that reeled and tossed and looked as if
wandering without a guide. But this was not so startling as
what it showed in the foreground.

There drifted heavily upon the waves, within full view from the
shore, moving parallel to it, yet gradually approaching, an
uncouth shape that seemed a vessel and yet not a vessel; two
stunted masts projected above, and below there could be read,
in dark letters that apparently swayed and trembled in the wan
lightning, as the thing moved on,

      BRENTON'S REEF.

Philip, leaning against a rock, gazed into the darkness where
the apparition had been; even Harry felt a thrill of
half-superstitious wonder, and listened half mechanically to a
rough sailor's voice at his ear:--

"God! old Joe was right.  There's one wreck that is bound to
make many. The light-ship has parted."

"Drifting ashore," said Harry, his accustomed clearness of head
coming back at a flash.  "Where will she strike?"

"Price's Neck," said the sailor.

Harry turned to Philip and spoke to him, shouting in his ear
the explanation. Malbone's lips moved mechanically, but he said
nothing.  Passively, he let Harry take him by the arm, and lead
him on.

Following the sailor, they rounded a projecting point, and
found themselves a little sheltered from the wind.  Not knowing
the region, they stumbled about among the rocks, and scarcely
knew when they neared the surf, except when a wave came
swashing round their very feet. Pausing at the end of a cove,
they stood beside their conductor, and their eyes, now grown
accustomed, could make out vaguely the outlines of the waves.

The throat of the cove was so shoal and narrow, and the mass of
the waves so great, that they reared their heads enormously,
just outside, and spending their strength there, left a lower
level within the cove. Yet sometimes a series of great billows
would come straight on, heading directly for the entrance, and
then the surface of the water within was seen to swell suddenly
upward as if by a terrible inward magic of its own; it rose and
rose, as if it would ingulf everything; then as rapidly sank,
and again presented a mere quiet vestibule before the excluded
waves.

They saw in glimpses, as the lightning flashed, the shingly
beach, covered with a mass of creamy foam, all tremulous and
fluctuating in the wind; and this foam was constantly torn away
by the gale in great shreds, that whirled by them as if the
very fragments of the ocean were fleeing from it in terror, to
take refuge in the less frightful element of air.

Still the wild waves reared their heads, like savage, crested
animals, now white, now black, looking in from the entrance of
the cove. And now there silently drifted upon them something
higher, vaster, darker than themselves,--the doomed vessel.  It
was strange how slowly and steadily she swept in,--for her
broken chain-cable dragged, as it afterwards proved, and kept
her stern-on to the shore,--and they could sometimes hear amid
the tumult a groan that seemed to come from the very heart of
the earth, as she painfully drew her keel over hidden reefs.
Over five of these (as was afterwards found) she had already
drifted, and she rose and fell more than once on the high waves
at the very mouth of the cove, like a wild bird hovering ere it
pounces.

Then there came one of those great confluences of waves
described already, which, lifting her bodily upward, higher and
higher and higher, suddenly rushed with her into the basin,
filling it like an opened dry-dock, crashing and roaring round
the vessel and upon the rocks, then sweeping out again and
leaving her lodged, still stately and steady, at the centre of
the cove.

They could hear from the crew a mingled sound, that came as a
shout of excitement from some and a shriek of despair from
others. The vivid lightning revealed for a moment those on
shipboard to those on shore; and blinding as it was, it lasted
long enough to show figures gesticulating and pointing. The old
sailor, Mitchell, tried to build a fire among the rocks nearest
the vessel, but it was impossible, because of the wind. This
was a disappointment, for the light would have taken away half
the danger, and more than half the terror.  Though the cove was
more quiet than the ocean, yet it was fearful enough, even
there. The vessel might hold together till morning, but who
could tell? It was almost certain that those on board would try
to land, and there was nothing to do but to await the effort.
The men from the farmhouse had meanwhile come down with ropes.

It was simply impossible to judge with any accuracy of the
distance of the ship.  One of these new-comers, who declared
that she was lodged very near, went to a point of rocks, and
shouted to those on board to heave him a rope.  The tempest
suppressed his voice, as it had put out the fire. But perhaps
the lightning had showed him to the dark figures on the stern;
for when the next flash came, they saw a rope flung, which fell
short. The real distance was more than a hundred yards.

Then there was a long interval of darkness.  The moment the
next flash came they saw a figure let down by a rope from the
stern of the vessel, while the hungry waves reared like wolves
to seize it. Everybody crowded down to the nearest rocks,
looking this way and that for a head to appear.  They pressed
eagerly in every direction where a bit of plank or a
barrel-head floated; they fancied faint cries here and there,
and went aimlessly to and fro. A new effort, after half a dozen
failures, sent a blaze mounting up fitfully among the rocks,
startling all with the sudden change its blessed splendor made. 
Then a shrill shout from one of the watchers summoned all to a
cleft in the cove, half shaded from the firelight, where there
came rolling in amidst the surf, more dead than alive, the body
of a man.  He was the young foreigner, John Lambert's boatman.
He bore still around him the rope that was to save the rest.

How pale and eager their faces looked as they bent above him!
But the eagerness was all gone from his, and only the pallor
left. While the fishermen got the tackle rigged, such as it
was, to complete the communication with the vessel, the young
men worked upon the boatman, and soon had him restored to
consciousness. He was able to explain that the ship had been
severely strained, and that all on board believed she would go
to pieces before morning. No one would risk being the first to
take the water, and he had at last volunteered, as being the
best swimmer, on condition that Emilia should be next sent,
when the communication was established.

Two ropes were then hauled on board the vessel, a larger and a
smaller. By the flickering firelight and the rarer flashes of
lightning (the rain now falling in torrents) they saw a hammock
slung to the larger rope; a woman's form was swathed in it; and
the smaller rope being made fast to this, they found by pulling
that she could be drawn towards the shore. Those on board
steadied the hammock as it was lowered from the ship, but the
waves seemed maddened by this effort to escape their might, and
they leaped up at her again and again. The rope dropped beneath
her weight, and all that could be done from shore was to haul
her in as fast as possible, to abbreviate the period of
buffeting and suffocation. As she neared the rocks she could be
kept more safe from the water; faster and faster she was drawn
in; sometimes there came some hitch and stoppage, but by steady
patience it was overcome.

She was so near the rocks that hands were already stretched to
grasp her, when there came one of the great surging waves that
sometimes filled the basin.  It gave a terrible lurch to the
stranded vessel hitherto so erect; the larger rope snapped
instantly; the guiding rope was twitched from the hands that
held it; and the canvas that held Emilia was caught and swept
away like a shred of foam, and lost amid the whiteness of the
seething froth below. Fifteen minutes after, the hammock came
ashore empty, the lashings having parted.

The cold daybreak was just opening, though the wind still blew
keenly, when they found the body of Emilia.  It was swathed in
a roll of sea-weed, lying in the edge of the surf, on a broad,
flat rock near where the young boatman had come ashore. The
face was not disfigured; the clothing was only torn a little,
and tangled closely round her; but the life was gone.

It was Philip who first saw her; and he stood beside her for a
moment motionless, stunned into an aspect of tranquility. 
This, then, was the end. All his ready sympathy, his wooing
tenderness, his winning compliances, his self-indulgent
softness, his perilous amiability, his reluctance to give pain
or to see sorrow,--all had ended in this.  For once, he must
force even his accommodating and evasive nature to meet the
plain, blank truth. Now all his characteristics appeared
changed by the encounter; it was Harry who was ready,
thoughtful, attentive,--while Philip, who usually had all these
traits, was paralyzed among his dreams. Could he have fancied
such a scene beforehand, he would have vowed that no hand but
his should touch the breathless form of Emilia.  As it was, he
instinctively made way for the quick gathering of the others,
as if almost any one else had a better right to be there.

The storm had blown itself out by sunrise; the wind had
shifted, beating down the waves; it seemed as if everything in
nature were exhausted. The very tide had ebbed away.  The
light-ship rested between the rocks, helpless, still at the
mercy of the returning waves, and yet still upright and with
that stately look of unconscious pleading which all shipwrecked
vessels wear.  it is wonderfully like the look I have seen in
the face of some dead soldier, on whom war had done its worst.
Every line of a ship is so built for motion, every part, while
afloat, seems so full of life and so answering to the human
life it bears, that this paralysis of shipwreck touches the
imagination as if the motionless thing had once been animated
by a soul.

And not far from the vessel, in a chamber of the seaside
farm-house, lay the tenderer and fairer wreck of Emilia.  Her
storms and her passions were ended.  The censure of the world,
the anguish of friends, the clinging arms of love, were nothing
now to her. Again the soft shelter of unconsciousness had
clasped her in; but this time the trance was longer and the
faintness was unto death.

From the moment of her drifting ashore, it was the young
boatman who had assumed the right to care for her and to direct
everything. Philip seemed stunned; Harry was his usual
clear-headed and efficient self; but to his honest eyes much
revealed itself in a little while; and when Hope arrived in the
early morning, he said to her, "This boatman, who once saved
your life, is Emilia's Swiss lover, Antoine Marval."

"More than lover," said the young Swiss, overhearing.  "She was
my wife before God, when you took her from me.  In my country,
a betrothal is as sacred as a marriage.  Then came that man, he
filled her heart with illusions, and took her away in my
absence. When my brother was here in the corvette, he found her
for me. Then I came for her; I saved her sister; then I saw the
name on the card and would not give my own.  I became her
servant. She saw me in the yacht, only once; she knew me; she
was afraid. Then she said, 'Perhaps I still love you,--a
little; I do not know; I am in despair; take me from this home
I hate.' We sailed that day in the small boat for
Narragansett,--I know not where.  She hardly looked up or
spoke; but for me, I cared for nothing since she was with me. 
When the storm came, she was frightened, and said, 'It is a
retribution.' I said, 'You shall never go back.'  She never
did.  Here she is. You cannot take her from me."

Once on board the light-ship, she had been assigned the
captain's state-room, while Antoine watched at the door.  She
seemed to shrink from him whenever he went to speak to her, he
owned, but she answered kindly and gently, begging to be left
alone. When at last the vessel parted her moorings, he
persuaded Emilia to come on deck and be lashed to the mast,
where she sat without complaint.

Who can fathom the thoughts of that bewildered child, as she
sat amid the spray and the howling of the blast, while the
doomed vessel drifted on with her to the shore? Did all the
error and sorrow of her life pass distinctly before her? Or did
the roar of the surf lull her into quiet, like the unconscious
kindness of wild creatures that toss and bewilder their prey
into unconsciousness ere they harm it?  None can tell. Death
answers no questions; it only makes them needless.

The morning brought to the scene John Lambert, just arrived by
land from New York.

The passion of John Lambert for his wife was of that kind which
ennobles while it lasts, but which rarely outlasts marriage. A
man of such uncongenial mould will love an enchanting woman
with a mad, absorbing passion, where self-sacrifice is so
mingled with selfishness that the two emotions seem one; he
will hungrily yearn to possess her, to call her by his own
name, to hold her in his arms, to kill any one else who claims
her. But when she is once his wife, and his arms hold a body
without a soul,--no soul at least for him,--then her image is
almost inevitably profaned, and the passion which began too
high for earth ends far too low for heaven.  Let now death
change that form to marble, and instantly it resumes its virgin
holiness; though the presence of life did not sanctify, its
departure does. It is only the true lover to whom the breathing
form is as sacred as the breathless.

That ideality of nature which love had developed in this man,
and which had already drooped a little during his brief period
of marriage, was born again by the side of death. While Philip
wandered off silent and lonely with his grief, John Lambert
knelt by the beautiful remains, talking inarticulately, his
eyes streaming with unchecked tears.  Again was Emilia, in her
marble paleness, the calm centre of a tragedy she herself had
caused.  The wild, ungoverned child was the image of peace; it
was the stolid and prosperous man who was in the storm. It was
not till Hope came that there was any change. Then his
prostrate nature sought hers, as the needle leaps to the iron;
the first touch of her hand, the sight of her kiss upon
Emilia's forehead, made him strong. It was the thorough
subjection of a worldly man to the higher organization of a
noble woman, and thenceforth it never varied. In later years,
after he had foolishly sought, as men will, to win her to a
nearer tie, there was no moment when she had not full control
over his time, his energies, and his wealth.

After it was all ended, Hope told him everything that had
happened; but in that wild moment of his despair she told him
nothing. Only she and Harry knew the story of the young Swiss;
and now that Emilia was gone, her early lover had no wish to
speak of her to any but these two, or to linger long where she
had been doubly lost to him, by marriage and by death. The
world, with all its prying curiosity, usually misses the key to
the very incidents about which it asks most questions; and of
the many who gossiped or mourned concerning Emilia, none knew
the tragic complication which her death alone could have
solved.  The breaking of Hope's engagement to Philip was
attributed to every cause but the true one. And when the storm
of the great Rebellion broke over the land, its vast calamity
absorbed all minor griefs.



XXIII.

REQUIESCAT.

THANK God! it is not within the power of one man's errors to
blight the promise of a life like that of Hope.  It is but a
feeble destiny that is wrecked by passion, when it should be
ennobled. Aunt Jane and Kate watched Hope closely during her
years of probation, for although she fancied herself to be
keeping her own counsel, yet her career lay in broad light for
them. She was like yonder sailboat, which floats conspicuous by
night amid the path of moonbeams, and which yet seems to its
own voyagers to be remote and unseen upon a waste of waves.

Why should I linger over the details of her life, after the
width of ocean lay between her and Malbone, and a manhood of
self-denying usefulness had begun to show that even he could
learn something by life's retributions? We know what she was,
and it is of secondary importance where she went or what she
did.  Kindle the light of the light-house, and it has nothing
to do, except to shine.  There is for it no wrong direction.
There is no need to ask, "How?  Over which especial track of
distant water must my light go forth, to find the wandering
vessel to be guided in?" It simply shines.  Somewhere there is
a ship that needs it, or if not, the light does its duty.  So
did Hope.

We must leave her here.  Yet I cannot bear to think of her as
passing through earthly life without tasting its deepest bliss,
without the last pure ecstasy of human love, without the kisses
of her own children on her lips, their waxen fingers on her
bosom.

And yet again, is this life so long?  May it not be better to
wait until its little day is done, and the summer night of old
age has yielded to a new morning, before attaining that acme of
joy? Are there enough successive grades of bliss for all
eternity, if so much be consummated here?  Must all novels end
with an earthly marriage, and nothing be left for heaven?

Perhaps, for such as Hope, this life is given to show what
happiness might be, and they await some other sphere for its
fulfilment. The greater part of the human race live out their
mortal years without attaining more than a far-off glimpse of
the very highest joy. Were this life all, its very happiness
were sadness.  If, as I doubt not, there be another sphere,
then that which is unfulfilled in this must yet find
completion, nothing omitted, nothing denied. And though a
thousand oracles should pronounce this thought an idle dream,
neither Hope nor I would believe them.

It was a radiant morning of last February when I walked across
the low hills to the scene of the wreck.  Leaving the road
before reaching the Fort, I struck across the wild
moss-country, full of boulders and footpaths and stunted cedars
and sullen ponds. I crossed the height of land, where the
ruined lookout stands like the remains of a Druidical temple,
and then went down toward the ocean. Banks and ridges of snow
lay here and there among the fields, and the white lines of
distant capes seemed but drifts running seaward. The ocean was
gloriously alive,--the blackest blue, with white caps on every
wave; the shore was all snowy, and the gulls were flying back
and forth in crowds; you could not tell whether they were the
white waves coming ashore, or bits of snow going to sea. A
single fragment of ship-timber, black with time and weeds, and
crusty with barnacles, heaved to and fro in the edge of the
surf, and two fishermen's children, a boy and girl, tilted upon
it as it moved, clung with the semblance of terror to each
other, and played at shipwreck.

The rocks were dark with moisture, steaming in the sun. Great
sheets of ice, white masks of departing winter, clung to every
projecting cliff, or slid with crash and shiver into the surge.
Icicles dropped their slow and reverberating tears upon the
rock where Emilia once lay breathless; and it seemed as if
their cold, chaste drops were sent to cleanse from her memory
each scarlet stain, and leave it virginal and pure.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Malbone: An Oldport Romance

