The Project Gutenberg Etext of Njal's Saga by Unknown Icelanders


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Njal's Saga

or

The Story of Burnt Njal

by Unknown Icelanders

July, 1996  [Etext #597]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Njal's Saga by Unknown Icelanders
*****This file should be named njals10.txt or njals10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, njals11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, njals10a.txt.


This electronic edition was produced, edited, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@AOL.COM), July 1995.
Document scanning provided by David Reid and John Servilio.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*






The Story of Burnt Njal
<Njal's Saga>


Originally written in Icelandic, sometime in the 13th Century
A.D.  Author unknown.


This electronic edition was produced, edited, and prepared by
Douglas B. Killings (DeTroyes@AOL.COM), July 1995.  Document
scanning provided by David Reid and John Servilio.





THE STORY OF BURNT NJAL


1. OF FIDDLE MORD

There was a man named Mord whose surname was Fiddle; he was the
son of Sigvat the Red, and he dwelt at the "Vale" in the
Rangrivervales.  He was a mighty chief, and a great taker up of
suits, and so great a lawyer that no judgments were thought
lawful unless he had a hand in them.  He had an only daughter,
named Unna.  She was a fair, courteous, and gifted woman, and
that was thought the best match in all the Rangrivervales.

Now the story turns westward to the Broadfirth dales, where, at
Hauskuldstede, in Laxriverdale, dwelt a man named Hauskuld, who
was Dalakoll's son, and his mother's name was Thorgerda.(1)  He
had a brother named Hrut, who dwelt at Hrutstede; he was of the
same mother as Hauskuld, but his father's name was Heriolf.  Hrut
was handsome, tall and strong, well skilled in arms, and mild of
temper; he was one of the wisest of men -- stern towards his
foes, but a good counsellor on great matters.  It happened once
that Hauskuld bade his friends to a feast, and his brother Hrut
was there, and sat next him.  Hauskuld had a daughter named
Hallgerda, who was playing on the floor with some other girls. 
She was fair of face and tall of growth, and her hair was as soft
as silk; it was so long, too, that it came down to her waist. 
Hauskuld called out to her, "Come hither to me, daughter."  So
she went up to him, and he took her by the chin, and kissed her;
and after that she went away.

Then Hauskuld said to Hrut, "What dost thou think of this maiden?
Is she not fair?"  Hrut held his peace.  Hauskuld said the same
thing to him a second time, and then Hrut answered, "Fair enough
is this maid, and many will smart for it, but this I know not,
whence thief's eyes have come into our race."  Then Hauskuld was
wroth, and for a time the brothers saw little of each other.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thorgerda was daughter of Thorstein the Red who was Olaf the
     White's son, Ingialld's son, Helgi's son.  Ingialld's mother
     was Thora, daughter of Sigurd Snake-i'-the-eye, who was
     Ragnar Hairybreek's son.  And the Deeply-wealthy was
     Thorstein the Red's mother; she was daughter of Kettle
     Flatnose, who was Bjorn Boun's son, Grim's son, Lord of Sogn
     in Norway.



2. HRUT WOOS UNNA

It happened once that those brothers, Hauskuld and Hrut, rode to
the Althing, and there was much people at it.  Then Hauskuld said
to Hrut, "One thing I wish, brother, and that is, that thou
wouldst better thy lot and woo thyself a wife."

Hrut answered, "That has been long on my mind, though there
always seemed to be two sides to the matter; but now I will do as
thou wishest; whither shall we turn our eyes?"

Hauskuld answered, "Here now are many chiefs at the Thing, and
there is plenty of choice, but I have already set my eyes on a
spot where a match lies made to thy hand.  The woman's name is
Unna, and she is a daughter of Fiddle Mord, one of the wisest of
men.  He is here at the Thing and his daughter too, and thou
mayest see her if it pleases thee."

Now the next day, when men were going to the High Court, they saw
some well-dressed women standing outside the booths of the men
from the Rangrivervales.  Then Hauskuld said to Hrut "Yonder now
is Unna, of whom I spoke; what thinkest thou of her?"

"Well," answered Hrut; "but yet I do not know whether we should
get on well together."

After that they went to the High Court, where Fiddle Mord was
laying down the law as was his wont, and after he had done he
went home to his booth.

Then Hauskuld and Hrut rose, and went to Mord's booth.  They went
in and found Mord sitting in the innermost part of the booth, and
they bade him "Good-day."  He rose to meet them, and took
Hauskuld by the hand and made him sit down by his side, and Hrut
sat next to Hauskuld.  So after they had talked much of this and
that, at last Hauskuld said, "I have a bargain to speak to thee
about; Hrut wishes to become thy son-in-law, and buy thy
daughter, and I, for my part, will not be sparing in the matter."

Mord answered, "I know that thou art a great chief, but thy
brother is unknown to me."

"He is a better man than I," answered Hauskuld.

"Thou wilt need to lay down a large sum with him, for she is heir
to all I leave behind me," said Mord.

"There is no need," said Hauskuld, "to wait long before thou
hearest what I give my word lie shall have.  He shall have
Kamness and Hrutstede, up as far as Thrandargil, and a trading-
ship beside, now on her voyage."

Then said Hrut to Mord, "Bear in mind, now, husband, that my
brother has praised me much more than I deserve for love's sake;
but if after what thou hast heard, thou wilt make the match, I am
willing to let thee lay down the terms thyself."

Mord answered, "I have thought over the terms; she shall have
sixty hundreds down, and this sum shall be increased by a third
more in thine house, but if ye two have heirs, ye shall go halves
in the goods."

Then said Hrut, "I agree to these terms, and now let us take
witness."  After that they stood up and shook hands, and Mord
betrothed his daughter Unna to Hrut, and the bridal feast was to
be at Mord's house, half a month after Midsummer.

Now both sides ride home from the Thing, and Hauskuld and Hrut
ride westward by Hallbjorn's beacon.  Then Thiostolf, the son of
Bjorn Gullbera of Reykriverdale, rode to meet them, and told them
how a ship had come out from Norway to the White River, and how
aboard of her was Auzur Hrut's father's brother, and he wished
Hrut to come to him as soon as ever he could.  When Hrut heard
this, he asked Hauskuld to go with him to the ship, so Hauskuld
went with his brother, and when they reached the ship, Hrut gave
his kinsman Auzur a kind and hearty welcome.  Auzur asked them
into his booth to drink, so their horses were unsaddled, and they
went in and drank, and while they were drinking, Hrut said to
Auzur, "Now, kinsman, thou must ride west with me, and stay with
me this winter."

"That cannot be, kinsman, for I have to tell thee the death of
thy brother Eyvind, and he has left thee his heir at the Gula
Thing, and now thy foes will seize thy heritage, unless thou
comest to claim it."

"What's to be done now, brother?" said Hrut to Hauskuld, "for
this seems a hard matter, coming just as I have fixed my bridal
day."

"Thou must ride south," said Hauskuld, "and see Mord, and ask him
to change the bargain which ye two have made, and to let his
daughter sit for thee three winters as thy betrothed, but I will
ride home and bring down thy wares to the ship."

Then said Hrut, "My wish is that thou shouldest take meal and
timber, and whatever else thou needest out of the lading."  So
Hrut had his horses brought out, and he rode south, while
Hauskuld rode home west.  Hrut came east to the Rangrivervales to
Mord, and had a good welcome, and he told Mord all his business,
and asked his advice what he should do.

"How much money is this heritage," asked Mord, and Hrut said it
would come to a hundred marks, if he got it all.

"Well," said Mord, "that is much when set against what I shall
leave behind me, and thou shalt go for it, if thou wilt."

After that they broke their bargain, and Unna was to sit waiting
for Hrut three years as his betrothed.  Now Hrut rides back to
the ship, and stays by her during the summer, till she was ready
to sail, and Hauskuld brought down all Hrut's wares and money to
the ship, and Hrut placed all his other property in Hauskuld's
hands to keep for him while he was away.  Then Hauskuld rode home
to his house, and a little while after they got a fair wind and
sail away to sea.  They were out three weeks, and the first land
they made was Hern, near Bergen, and so sail eastward to the Bay.



3. HRUT AND GUNNHILLDA, KING'S MOTHER

At that time Harold Grayfell reigned in Norway; he was the son of
Eric Bloodaxe, who was the son of Harold Fair-hair; his mother's
name was Gunnhillda, a daughter of Auzur Toti, and they had their
abode east, at the King's Crag.  Now the news was spread, how a
ship had come thither east into the Bay, and as soon as
Gunnhillda heard of it, she asked what men from Iceland were
abroad, and they told her Hrut was the man's name, Auzur's
brother's son.  Then Gunnhillda said, "I see plainly that he
means to claim his heritage, but there is a man named Soti, who
has laid his hands on it."

After that she called her waiting-man, whose name was Augmund,
and said, "I am going to send thee to the Bay to find out Auzur
and Hrut, and tell them that I ask them both to spend this winter
with me.  Say, too, that I will be their friend, and if Hrut will
carry out my counsel, I will see after his suit, and anything
else he takes in hand, and I will speak a good word, too, for him
to the king."

After that he set off and found them; and as soon as they knew
that he was Gunnhillda's servant, they gave him good welcome.  He
took them aside and told them his errand, and after that they
talked over their plans by themselves.  Then Auzur said to Hrut,
"Methinks, kinsman, here is little need for long talk, our plans
are ready made for us; for I know Gunnhillda's temper; as soon as
ever we say we will not go to her she will drive us out of the
land, and take all our goods by force; but if we go to her, then
she will do us such honour as she has promised."

Augmund went home, and when he saw Gunnhillda, he told her how
his errand had ended, and that they would come, and Gunnhillda
said, "It is only what was to be looked for; for Hrut is said to
be a wise and well-bred man; and now do thou keep a sharp look
out, and tell me as soon as ever they come to the town."

Hrut and Auzur went east to the King's Crag, and when they
reached the town, their kinsmen and friends went out to meet and
welcome them.  They asked whether the king were in the town, and
they told them he was.  After that they met Augmund, and he
brought them a greeting from Gunnhillda, saying, that she could
not ask them to her house before they had seen the king, lest men
should say, "I make too much of them."  Still she would do all
she could for them, and she went on, "Tell Hrut to be out-spoken
before the king, and to ask to be made one of his body-guard;" 
"and here," said Augmund, "is a dress of honour which she sends
to thee, Hrut, and in it thou must go in before the king."  After
that he went away.

The next day Hrut said, "Let us go before the king."

"That may well be," answered Auzur.

So they went, twelve of them together, and all of them friends or
kinsmen, and came into the hall where the king sat over his
drink.  Hrut went first and bade the king "Good-day," and the
king, looking steadfastly at the man who was well-dressed, asked
him his name.  So he told his name.

"Art thou an Icelander?" said the king.

He answered, "Yes."

"What drove thee hither to seek us?"

Then Hrut answered, "To see your state, lord; and, besides,
because I have a great matter of inheritance here in the land,
and I shall have need of your help if I am to get my rights."

The king said, "I have given my word that every man shall have
lawful justice here in Norway; but hast thou any other errand in
seeking me?"

"Lord!" said Hrut, "I wish you to let me live in your court, and
become one of your men."

At this the king holds his peace, but Gunnhillda said, "It seems
to me as if this man offered you the greatest honour, for
methinks if there were many such men in the body-guard, it would
be well filled."

"Is he a wise man?" asked the king.

"He is both wise and willing," said she.

"Well," said the king, "methinks my mother wishes that thou
shouldst have the rank for which thou askest, but for the sake of
our honour and the custom of the land, come to me in half a
month's time, and then thou shalt be made one of my body-guard. 
Meantime, my mother will take care of thee, but then come to me."

Then Gunnhillda said to Augmund, "Follow them to my house, and
treat them well."

So Augmund went out, and they went with him, and he brought them
to a hall built of stone, which was hung with the most beautiful
tapestry, and there too was Gunnhillda's high seat.

Then Augmund said to Hrut, "Now will be proved the truth of all
that I said to thee from Gunnhillda.  Here is her high seat, and
in it thou shalt sit, and this seat thou shalt hold, though she
comes herself into the hall."

After that he made them good cheer, and they had sat down but a
little while when Gunnhillda came in.  Hrut wished to jump up and
greet her.

"Keep thy seat!" she says, "and keep it too all the time thou art
my guest."

Then she sat herself down by Hrut, and they fell to drink, and at
even she said, "Thou shalt be in the upper chamber with me
to-night, and we two together."

"You shall have your way," he answers.

After that they went to sleep, and she locked the door inside. 
So they slept that night, and in the morning fell to drinking
again.  Thus they spent their life all that halfmonth, and
Gunnhillda said to the men who were there, "Ye shall lose nothing
except your lives if you say to any one a word of how Hrut and I
are going on."

When the half-month was over Hrut gave her a hundred ells of
household woollen and twelve rough cloaks, and Gunnhillda thanked
him for his gifts.  Then Hrut thanked her and gave her a kiss and
went away.  She bade him "farewell."  And next day he went before
the king with thirty men after him and bade the king "Good-day."
The king said, "Now, Hrut, thou wilt wish me to carry out towards
thee what I promised."

So Hrut was made one of the king's body-guard, and he asked,
"Where shall I sit?"

"My mother shall settle that," said the king.

Then she got him a seat in the highest room, and he spent the
winter with the king in much honour.



4. OF HRUT'S CRUISE

When the spring came he asked about Soti, and found out he had
gone south to Denmark with the inheritance.  Then Hrut went to
Gunnhillda and tells her what Soti had been about.  Gunnhillda
said, "I will give thee two long-ships, full manned, and along
with them the bravest man, Wolf the Unwashed, our overseer of
guests; but still go and see the king before thou settest off."

Hrut did so; and when he came before the king, then he told the
king of Soti's doings, and how he had a mind to hold on after
him.

The king said, "What strength has my mother handed over to thee?"

"Two long-ships and Wolf the Unwashed to lead the men," says
Hrut.

"Well given," says the king.  " Now I will give thee other two
ships, and even then thou'lt need all the strength thou'st got."

After that he went down with Hrut to the ship, and said, "fare
thee well."  Then Hrut sailed away south with his crews.



5. ATLI ARNVID SON'S SLAYING

There was a man named Atli, son of Arnvid, Earl of East Gothland. 
He had kept back the taxes from Hacon Athelstane's foster child,
and both father and son had fled away from Jemtland to Gothland. 
After that, Atli held on with his followers out of the Maelar by
Stock Sound, and so on towards Denmark, and now he lies out in
Oresound.(1)  He is an outlaw both of the Dane-King and of the
Swede-King.  Hrut held on south to the Sound, and when he came
into it he saw a many ships in the Sound.  Then Wolf said,
"What's best to be done now, Icelander?"

"Hold on our course," said Hrut, "for `nothing venture, nothing
have.'  My ship and Auzur's shall go first, but thou shalt lay
thy ship where thou likest."

"Seldom have I had others as a shield before me," says Wolf, and
lays his galley side by side with Hrut's ship; and so they hold
on through the Sound.  Now those who are in the Sound see that
ships are coming up to them, and they tell Atli.

He answered, "Then may be there'll be gain to be got."

After that men took their stand on board each ship; "but my
ship," says Atli, "shall be in the midst of the fleet."

Meantime Hrut's ships ran on, and as soon as either side could
hear the other's hail, Atli stood up and said, "Ye fare unwarily. 
Saw ye not that war-ships were in the Sound.  But what's the name
of your chief?"

Hrut tells his name.

"Whose man art thou," says Atli.

"One of king Harold Grayfell's body-guard."

Atli said.  "'Tis long since any love was lost between us, father
and son, and your Norway kings."

"Worse luck for thee," says Hrut.

"Well," says Atli, "the upshot of our meeting will be, that thou
shalt not be left alive to tell the tale;" and with that he
caught up a spear and hurled it at Hrut's ship, and the man who
stood before it got his death.  After that the battle began, and
they were slow in boarding Hrut's ship.  Wolf, he went well
forward, and with him it was now cut, now thrust.  Atli's
bowman's name was Asolf; he sprung up on Hrut's ship, and was
four men's death before Hrut was aware of him; then he turned
against him, and when they met, Asolf thrust at and through
Hrut's shield, but Hrut cut once at Asolf, and that was his
death-blow.  Wolf the Unwashed saw that stroke, and called out,
"Truth to say, Hrut, thou dealest big blows, but thou'st much to
thank Gunnhillda for."

"Something tells me," says Hrut, "that thou speakest with a `fey'
mouth."

Now Atli sees a bare place for a weapon on Wolf, and shot a spear
through him and now the battle grows hot: Atli leaps up on Hrut's
ship, and clears it fast round about, and now Auzur turns to meet
him, and thrust at him, but fell down full length on his back,
for another man thrust at him.  Now Hrut turns to meet Atli: he
cut at once at Hrut's shield, and clove it all in two, from top
to point; just then Atli got a blow on his hand from a stone, and
down fell his sword.  Hrut caught up the sword, and cut his foot
from under him.  After that he dealt him his death-blow.  There
they took much goods, and brought away with them two ships which
were best, and stayed there only a little while.  But meantime
Soti and his crew had sailed past them, and he held on his course
back to Norway, and made the land at Limgard's side.  There Soti
went on shore, and there he met Augmund, Gunnhillda's page; he
knew him at once, and asks, "How long meanest thou to be here?"

"Three nights," says Soti.

"Whither away, then?" says Augmund.

"West, to England," says Soti, "and never to come back again to
Norway while Gunnhillda's rule is in Norway."

Augmund went away, and goes and finds Gunnhillda, for she was a
little way off, at a feast, and Gudred, her son, with her. 
Augmund told Gunnhillda what Soti meant to do, and she begged
Gudred to take his life.  So Gudred set off at once, and came
unawares on Soti, and made them lead him up the country, and hang
him there.  But the goods he took, and brought them to his
mother, and she got men to carry them all down to the King's
Crag, and after that she went thither herself.

Hrut came back towards autumn, and had gotten great store of
goods.  He went at once to the king, and had a hearty welcome. 
He begged them to take whatever they pleased of his goods, and
the king took a third.  Gunnhillda told Hrut how she had got hold
of the inheritance, and had Soti slain.  He thanked her, and gave
her half of all he had.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Oresound, the gut between Denmark and Sweden, at the
     entrance of the Baltic, commonly called in English, the
     Sound.



6. HRUT SAILS OUT TO ICELAND

Hrut stayed with the king that winter in good cheer, but when
spring came he grew very silent.  Gunnhillda finds that out, and
said to him when they two were alone together, "Art thou sick at
heart?"

"So it is," said Hrut, "as the saying runs -- `Ill goes it with
those who are born on a barren land.'"

"Wilt thou to Iceland?" she asks.

"Yes," he answered.

"Hast thou a wife out there?" she asked; and he answers, "No."

"But I am sure that is true," she says; and so they ceased
talking about the matter.

Shortly after Hrut went before the king and bade him Good-day;
and the king said, "What dost thou want now, Hrut?"

"I am come to ask, lord, that you give me leave to go to
Iceland."

"Will thine honour be greater there than here?" asks the king.

"No, it will not," said Hrut; "but every one must win the work
that is set before him."

"It is pulling a rope against a strong man," said Gunnhillda, "so
give him leave to go as best suits him."

There was a bad harvest that year in the land, yet Gunnhillda
gave Hrut as much meal as he chose to have; and now he busks him
to sail out to Iceland, and Auzur with him; and when they were
"all-boun," Hrut went to find the king and Gunnhillda.  She led
him aside to talk alone, and said to him, "Here is a gold ring
which I will give thee;" and with that she clasped it round his
wrist.

"Many good gifts have I had from thee," said Hrut.

Then she put her hands round his neck and kissed him, and said,
"If I have as much power over thee as I think, I lay this spell
on thee that thou mayst never have any pleasure in living with
that woman on whom thy heart is set in Iceland, but with other
women thou mayst get on well enough, and now it is like to go
well with neither of us; but thou hast not believed what I have
been saying."

Hrut laughed when he heard that, and went away; after that he
came before the king and thanked him; and the king spoke kindly
to him, and bade him "farewell."  Hrut went straight to his ship,
and they had a fair wind all the way until they ran into
Borgarfirth.

As soon as the ship was made fast to the land, Hrut rode west
home, but Auzur stayed by the ship to unload her and lay her up. 
Hrut rode straight to Hauskuldstede, and Hauskuld gave him a
hearty welcome, and Hrut told him all about his travels.  After
that they send men east across the rivers to tell Fiddle Mord to
make ready for the bridal feast; but the two brothers rode to the
ship, and on the way Hauskuld told Hrut how his money-matters
stood, and his goods had gained much since he was away.  Then
Hrut said, "The reward is less worth than it ought to be, but I
will give thee as much meal as thou needst for thy household next
winter."

Then they drew the ship on land on rollers, and made her snug in
her shed, but all the wares on board her they carried away into
the Dales westward.  Hrut stayed at home at Hrutstede till winter
was six weeks off, and then the brothers made ready and Auzur
with them, to ride to Hrut's wedding.  Sixty men ride with them,
and they rode east till they came to Rangriver plains.  There
they found a crowd of guests, and the men took their seats on
benches down the length of the hall, but the women were seated on
the cross-benches on the dais, and the bride was rather downcast. 
So they drank out the feast and it went off well.  Mord pays down
his daughter's portion, and she rides west with her husband and
his train.  So they ride till they reach home.  Hrut gave over
everything into her hands inside the house, and all were pleased
at that; but for all that she and Hrut did not pull well together
as man and wife, and so things went on till spring, and when
spring came Hrut had a journey to make to the Westfirths, to get
in the money for which he had sold his wares; but before he set
off his wife says to him, "Dost thou mean to be back before men
ride to the Thing?"

"Why dost thou ask?" said Hrut.

"I will ride to the Thing," she said, "to meet my father."

"So it sball be," said he, "and I will ride to the Thing along
with thee."

"Well and good," she says.

After that Hrut rode from home west to the Firths, got in all his
money, and laid it out anew, and rode home again.  When he came
home he busked him to ride to the Thing, and made all his
neighbours ride with him.  His brother Hauskuld rode among the
rest.  Then Hrut said to his wife, "If thou hast as much mind now
to go to the Thing as thou saidst a while ago, busk thyself and
ride along with me."

She was not slow in getting herself ready, and then they all
rode to the Thing.  Unna went to her father's booth, and he gave
her a hearty welcome, but she seemed somewhat heavy-hearted, and
when he saw that he said to her, "I have seen thee with a merrier
face.  Hast thou anything on thy mind?"

She began to weep, and answered nothing.  Then he said to her
again.  "Why didst thou ride to the Thing, if thou wilt not tell
me thy secret?  Dost thou dislike living away there in the west?"

Then she answered him, "I would give all I own in the world that
I had never gone thither."

"Well!" said Mord, "I'll soon get to the bottom of this."  Then
be sends men to fetch Hauskuld and Hrut, and they came
straightway; and when they came in to see Mord, he rose up to
meet them and gave them a hearty welcome, and asked them to sit
down.  Then they talked a long time in a friendly way, and at
last Mord said to Hauskuld, "Why does my daughter think so ill of
life in the west yonder?"

"Let her speak out," said Hrut, "if she has anything to lay to my
charge."

But she brought no charge against him.  Then Hrut made them ask
his neighbours and household how he treated her, and all bore him
good witness, saying that she did just as she pleased in the
house.

Then Mord said, "Home thou shalt go, and be content with thy lot;
for all the witness goes better for him than for thee."

After that Hrut rode home from the Thing, and his wife with him,
and all went smoothly between them that summer; but when spring
came it was the old story over again, and things grew worse and
worse as the spring went on.  Hrut had again a journey to make
west to the Firths, and gave out that he would not ride to the
Althing, but Unna his wife said little about it.  So Hrut went
away west to the Firths.



7. UNNA SEPARATES FROM HRUT

Now the time for the Thing was coming on.  Unna spoke to Sigmund,
Auzur's son, and asked if he would ride to the Thing with her; he
said he could not ride if his kinsman Hrut set his face against
it.

"Well!" says she, "I spoke to thee because I have better right to
ask this from thee than from any one else."

He answered, "I will make a bargain with thee: thou must promise
to ride back west with me, and to have no underhand dealings
against Hrut or myself."

So she promised that, and then they rode to the Thing.  Her
father Mord was at the Thing, and was very glad to see her, and
asked her to stay in his booth while the Thing lasted, and she
did so.

"Now," said Mord, "what hast thou to tell me of thy mate, Hrut?"

Then she sung him a song, in which she praised Hrut's liberality,
but said he was not master of himself.  She herself was ashamed
to speak out.

Mord was silent a short time, and then said, "Thou hast now that
on thy mind I see, daughter, which thou dost not wish that any
one should know save myself, and thou wilt trust to me rather
than any one else to help thee out of thy trouble."

Then they went aside to talk, to a place where none could
overhear what they said; and then Mord said to his daughter,
"Now, tell me all that is between you two, and don't make more of
the matter than it is worth."

"So it shall be," she answered, and sang two songs, in which she
revealed the cause of their misunderstanding; and when Mord
pressed her to speak out, she told him how she and Hrut could not
live together, because he was spellbound, and that she wished to
leave him.

"Thou didst right to tell me all this," said Mord., "and now I
will give thee a piece of advice, which will stand thee in good
stead, if thou canst carry it out to the letter.  First of all,
thou must ride home from the Thing, and by that time thy husband
will have come back, and will be glad to see thee; thou must be
blithe and buxom to him, and he will think a good change has come
over thee, and thou must show no signs of coldness or ill-temper,
but when spring comes thou must sham sickness, and take to thy
bed.  Hrut will not lose time in guessing what thy sickness can
be, nor will he scold thee at all, but he will rather beg every
one to take all the care they can of thee.  After that he will
set off west to the Firths, and Sigmund with him, for he will
have to flit all his goods home from the Firths west, and he will
be away till the summer is far spent.  But when men ride to the
Thing, and after all have ridden from the Dales that mean to ride
thither; then thou must rise from thy bed and summon men to go
along with thee to the Thing; and when thou art "all-boun," then
shalt thou go to thy bed, and the men with thee who are to bear
thee company, and thou shalt take witness before thy husband's
bed, and declare thyself separated from him by such a lawful
separation as may hold good according to the judgment of the
Great Thing, and the laws of the land; and at the man's door the
main door of the house, thou shalt take the same witness.  After
that ride away, and ride over Laxriverdale Heath, and so on over
Holtbeacon Heath; for they will look for thee by way of
Hrutfirth.  And so ride on till thou comest to me; then I will
see after the matter.  But into his hands thou shalt never come
more."

Now she rides home from the Thing, and Hrut had come back before
her, and made her hearty welcome.  She answered him kindly, and
was blithe and forbearing towards him.  So they lived happily
together that half-year; but when spring came she fell sick, and
kept her bed.  Hrut set off west to the Firths, and bade them
tend her well before he went.  Now, when the time for the Thing
comes, she busked herself to ride away, and did in every way as
had been laid down for her; and then she rides away to the Thing. 
The country folk looked for her, but could not find her.  Mord
made his daughter welcome, and asked her if she had followed his
advice; and she says, "I have not broken one tittle of it."

Then she went to the Hill of Laws, and declared herself separated
from Hrut; and men thought this strange news.  Unna went home
with her father, and never went west from that day forward.



8. MORD CLAIMS HIS GOODS FROM HRUT

Hrut came home, and knit his brows when he heard his wife was
gone, but yet kept his feelings well in hand, and stayed at home
all that half-year, and spoke to no one on the matter.  Next
summer he rode to the Thing, with his brother Hauskuld, and they
had a great fellowing.  But when he came to the Thing, he asked
whether Fiddle Mord were at the Thing, and they told him he was;
and all thought they would come to words at once about their
matter, but it was not so.  At last, one day when the brothers
and others who were at the Thing went to the Hill of Laws, Mord
took witness and declared that he had a money-suit against Hrut
for his daughter's dower, and reckoned the amount at ninety
hundreds in goods, calling on Hrut at the same time to pay and
hand it over to him, and asking for a fine of three marks.  He
laid the suit in the Quarter Court, into which it would come by
law, and gave lawful notice, so that all who stood on the Hill of
Laws might hear.

But when he had thus spoken, Hrut said, "Thou hast undertaken
this suit, which belongs to thy daughter, rather for the greed of
gain and love of strife than in kindliness and manliness.  But I
shall have something to say against it; for the goods which
belong to me are not yet in thy bands.  Now, what I have to say
is this, and I say it out, so that all who hear me on this hill
may bear witness: I challenge thee to fight on the island; there
on one side shall be laid all thy daughter's dower, and on the
other I will lay down goods worth as much, and whoever wins the
day shall have both dower and goods; but if thou wilt not fight
with me, then thou shalt give up all claim to these goods."

Then Mord held his peace, and took counsel with his friends about
going to fight on the island, and Jorund the priest gave him an
answer.

"There is no need for thee to come to ask us for counsel in this
matter, for thou knowest if thou fightest with Hrut thou wilt
lose both life and goods.  He has a good cause, and is besides
mighty in himself and one of the boldest of men."

Then Mord spoke out, that he would not fight with Hrut, and there
arose a great shout and hooting on the hill, and Mord got the
greatest shame by his suit.

After that men ride home from the Thing, and those brothers
Hauskuld and Hrut ride west to Reykriverdale, and turned in as
guests at Lund, where Thiostolf, Bjorn Gullbera's son, then
dwelt.  There had been much rain that day, and men got wet, so
long-fires were made down the length of the hall.  Thiostolf, the
master of the house, sat between Hauskuld and Hrut, and two boys,
of whom Thiostolf had the rearing, were playing on the floor, and
a girl was playing with them.  They were great chatterboxes, for
they were too young to know better.  So one of them said, "Now I
will be Mord, and summon thee to lose thy wife because thou hast
not been a good husband to her."

Then the other answered, "I will be Hrut, and I call on thee to
give up all claim to thy goods, if thou darest not to fight with
me."

This they said several times, and all the household burst out
laughing.  Then Hauskuld got wroth, and struck the boy who called
himself Mord with a switch, and the blow fell on his face, and
grazed the skin.

"Get out with thee," said Hauskuld to the boy, "and make no game
of us;" but Hrut said, "Come hitherto me," and the boy did so. 
Then Hrut drew a ring from his finger and gave it to him, and
said, "Go away, and try no man's temper henceforth."

Then the boy went away saying, "Thy manliness I will bear in mind
all my life."

From this matter Hrut got great praise, and after that they went
home; and that was the end of Mord's and Hrut's quarrel,



9. THORWALD GETS HALLGERDA TO WIFE

Now, it must be told how Hallgerda, Hauskuld's daughter, grows
up, and is the fairest of women to look on; she was tall of
stature, too, and therefore she was called "Longcoat."  She was
fair-haired, and had so much of it that she could hide herself in
it; but she was layish and hard-hearted.  Her foster-father's
name was Thiostolf: he was a Southislander (1) by stock: he was a
strong man, well skilled in arms, and had slain many men, and
made no atonement in money for one of them.  It was said, too,
that his rearing had not bettered Hallgerda's temper.

There was a man named Thorwald; he was Oswif's son, and dwelt out
on Middlefells strand, under the Fell.  He was rich and well to
do, and owned the islands called Bearisles, which lie out in
Broadfirth, whence he got meal and stock fish.  This Thorwald was
a strong and courteous man, though somewhat hasty in temper. 
Now, it fell out one day that Thorwald and his father were
talking together of Thorwald's marrying, and where he had best
look for a wife, and it soon came out that he thought there
wasn't a match fit for him far or near.

"Well," said Oswif, "wilt thou ask for Hallgerda Longcoat,
Hauskuld's daughter."

"Yes!  I will ask for her," said Thorwald.

"But that is not a match that will suit either of you," Oswif
went on to say, "for she has a will of her own, and thou art
stern-tempered and unyielding."

"For all that I will try my luck there," said Thorwald, "so it's
no good trying to hinder me."

"Ay!" said Oswif, "and the risk is all thine own."

After that they set off on a wooing journey to Hauskuldstede, and
had a hearty welcome.  They were not long in telling Hauskuld
their business, and began to woo; then Hauskuld answered, "As for
you, I know how you both stand in the world, but for my own part
I will use no guile towards you.  My daughter has a hard temper,
but as to her looks and breeding you can both see for
yourselves."

"Lay down the terms of the match," answered Thorwald, "for I will
not let her temper stand in the way of our bargain."

Then they talked over the terms of the bargain, and Hauskuld
never asked his daughter what she thought of it, for his heart
was set on giving her away and so they came to an understanding
as to the terms of the match.  After that Thorwald betrothed
himself to Hallgerda, and rode away home when the matter was
settled.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  That is, he came from what we call the Western Isles or
     Hebrides.  The old appellation still lingers in "Sodor (i.e.
     the South Isles) and Man."



10. HALLGERDA'S WEDDING

Hauskuld told Hallgerda of the bargain he had made, and she said,
"Now that has been put to the proof which I have all along been
afraid of, that thou lovest me not so much as thou art always
saying, when thou hast not thought it worth while to tell me a
word of all this matter.  Besides, I do not think this match so
good a one as thou hast always promised me."

So she went on, and let them know in every way that she thought
she was thrown away.

Then Hauskuld said, "I do not set so much store by thy pride as
to let it stand in the way of my bargains; and my will, not
thine, shall carry the day if we fall out on any point."

"The pride of all you kinsfolk is great," she said, "and so it is
not wonderful if I have some of it."

With that she went away, and found her foster-father Thiostolf,
and told him what was in store for her, and was very heavy-
hearted.  Then Thiostolf said, "Be of good cheer, for thou wilt
be married a second time, and then they will ask thee what thou
thinkest of the match; for I will do in all things as thou
wishest, except in what touches thy father or Hrut."

After that they spoke no more of the matter, and Hauskuld made
ready the bridal feast, and rode off to ask men to it.  So he
came to Hrutstede and called Hrut out to speak with him.  Hrut
went out, and they began to talk, and Hauskuld told him the whole
story of the bargain, and bade him to the feast, saying, "I
should be glad to know that thou dost not feel hurt though I did
not tell thee when the bargain was being made.

"I should be better pleased," said Hrut "to have nothing at all
to do with it; for this match will bring luck neither to him nor
to her; but still I will come to the feast if thou thinkest it
will add any honour to thee."

"Of course I think so," said Hauskuld, and rode off home.

Oswif and Thorwald also asked men to come, so that no fewer than
one hundred guests were asked.

There was a man named Swan, who dwelt in Bearfirth, which lies
north from Steingrimsfirth.  This Swan was a great wizard, and he
was Hallgerda's mother's brother.  He was quarrelsome, and hard
to deal with, but Hallgerda asked him to the feast, and sends
Thiostolf to him; so he went, and it soon got to friendship
between him and Swan.

Now men come to the feast, and Hallgerda sat upon the cross-
bench, and she was a very merry bride.  Thiostolf was always
talking to her, though he sometimes found time to speak to Swan,
and men thought their talking strange.  The feast went off well,
and Hauskuld paid down Hallgerda's portion with the greatest
readiness.  After he had done that, he said to Hrut, "Shall I
bring out any gifts beside?"

"The day will come," answered Hrut, "when thou wilt have to waste
thy goods for Hallgerda's sake, so hold thy hand now."



11. THORWALD'S SLAYING

Throwald rode home from the bridal feast, and his wife with him,
and Thiostolf, who rode by her horse's side, and still talked to
her in a low voice.  Oswif turned to his son and said, "Art thou
pleased with thy match?  and how went it when ye talked
together."

"Well," said he, "she showed all kindness to me.  Thou mightst
see that by the way she laughs at every word I say."

"I don't think her laughter so hearty as thou dost," answered
Oswif, "but this will be put to the proof by and by."

So they ride on till they come home, and at night she took her
seat by her husband's side, and made room for Thiostolf next
herself on the inside.  Thiostolf and Thorwald had little to do
with each other, and few words were thrown away between them that
winter, and so time went on.  Hallgerda was prodigal and
grasping, and there was nothing that any of their neighbours had
that she must not have too, and all that she had, no matter
whether it were her own or belonged to others she wasted.  But
when the spring came there was a scarcity in the house, both of
meal and stock fish, so Hallgerda went up to Thorwald and said,
"Thou must not be sitting in-doors any longer, for we want for
the house both meal and fish.

"Well," said Thorwald, "I did not lay in less for the house this
year than I laid in before, and then it used to last till
summer."

"What care I," said Hallgerda, "if thou and thy father have made
your money by starving yourselves."

Then Thorwald got angry and gave her a blow on the face and drew
blood, and went away and called his men and ran the skiff down to
the shore.  Then six of them jumped into her and rowed out to the
Bear-isles, and began to load her with meal and fish.

Meantime it is said that Hallgerda sat out of doors heavy at
heart.  Thiostolf went up to her and saw the wound on her face,
and said, "Who has been playing thee this sorry trick?"

"My husband, Thorwald," she said, "and thou stoodst aloof, though
thou wouldst not if thou hadst cared at all for me."

"Because I knew nothing about it," said Thiostolf, "but I will
avenge it."

Then he went away down to the shore and ran out a six-oared boat,
and held in his hand a great axe that he had with a haft overlaid
with iron.  He steps into the boat and rows out to the
Bear-isles, and when he got there all the men had rowed away but
Thorwald and his followers, and he stayed by the skiff to load
her, while they brought the goods down to him.  So Thiostolf came
up just then and jumped into the skiff, and began to load with
him, and after a while he said, "Thou canst do but little at this
work, and that little thou dost badly."

"Thinkst thou thou canst do it better," said Thorwald.

"There's one thing to be done which I can do better than thou,"
said Thiostolf, and then he went on, "The woman who is thy wife
has made a bad match, and you shall not live much longer
together."

Then Thorwald snatched up a fishing-knife that lay by him, and
made a stab at Thiostolf; he had lifted his axe to his shoulder
and dashed it down.  It came on Thorwald's arm and crushed the
wrist, but down fell the knife.  Then Thiostolf lifted up his axe
a second time and gave Thorwald a blow on the head, and he fell
dead on the spot.



12. THIOSTOLF'S FLIGHT

While this was going on, Thorwald's men came down with their
load, but Thiostolf was not slow in his plans.  He hewed with
both hands at the gunwale of the skiff and cut it down about two
planks; then he leapt into his boat, but the dark blue sea poured
into the skiff, and down she went with all her freight.  Down too
sank Thorwald's body, so that his men could not see what had been
done to him, but they knew well enough that he was dead. 
Thiostolf rowed away up the firth, but they shouted after him
wishing him ill luck.  He made them no answer, but rowed on till
he got home, and ran the boat up on the beach, and went up to the
house with his axe, all bloody as it was, on his shoulder. 
Hallgerda stood out of doors, and said, "Thine axe is bloody;
what hast thou done?"

"I have done now what will cause thee to be wedded a second
time."

"Thou tellest me then that Thorwald is dead," she said.

"So it is," said he, "and now look out for my safety."

"So I will," she said; "I will send thee north to Bearfirth, to
Swanshol, and Swan, my kinsman, will receive thee with open arms. 
He is so mighty a man that no one will seek thee thither."

So he saddled a horse that she had, and jumped on his back, and
rode off north to Bearfirth, to Swanshol, and Swan received him
with open arms, and said: "That's what I call a man who does not
stick at trifles!  And now I promise thee if they seek thee here,
they shall get nothing but the greatest shame."

Now, the story goes back to Hallgerda, and how she behaved.  She
called on Liot the Black, her kinsman, to go with her, and bade
him saddle their horses, for she said, "I will ride home to my
father."

While he made ready for their journey, she went to her chests and
unlocked them and called all the men of her house about her, and
gave each of them some gift; but they all grieved at her going. 
Now she rides home to her father; and he received her well, for
as yet he had not heard the news.  But Hrut said to Hallgerda,
"Why did not Thorwald come with thee?" and she answered, "He is
dead."

Then said Hauskuld, "That was Thiostolf's doing."

"It was," she said.

"Ah!" said Hauskuld, "Hrut was not far wrong when he told me that
this bargain would draw mickle misfortune after it.  But there's
no good in troubling one's self about a thing that's done and
gone."

Now, the story must go back to Thorwald's mates, how there they
are, and how they begged the loan of a boat to get to the
mainland.  So a boat was lent them at once, and they rowed up the
firth to Reykianess, and found Oswif, and told him these tidings.

He said, "Ill luck is the end of ill redes, and now I see how it
has all gone.  Hallgerda must have sent Thiostolf to Bearfirth,
but she herself must have ridden home to her father.  Let us now
gather folk and follow him up thither north." So they did that,
and went about asking for help, and got together many men.  And
then they all rode off to Steingrims river, and so on to
Liotriverdale and Selriverdale, till they came to Bearfirth.

Now Swan began to speak, and gasped much.  "Now Oswif's fetches
are seeking us out."  Then up sprung Thiostolf, but Swan said,
"Go thou out with me, there won't be need of much."  So they went
out both of them, and Swan took a goatskin and wrapped it about
his own head, and said, "Become mist and fog, become fright and
wonder mickle to all those who seek thee."

Now, it must be told how Oswif, his friends, and his men are
riding along the ridge; then came a great mist against them, and
Oswif said, "This is Swan's doing; 'twere well if nothing worse
followed."  A little after a mighty darkness came before their
eyes, so that they could see nothing, and then they fell off
their horses' backs, and lost their horses, and dropped their
weapons, and went over head and ears into bogs, and some went
astray into the wood, till they were on the brink of bodily harm. 
Then Oswif said, "If I could only find my horse and weapons, then
I'd turn back;" and he hid scarce spoken these words than they
saw somewhat, and found their horses and weapons.  Then many
still egged the others on to look after the chase once more; and
so they did, and at once the same wonders befell them, and so
they fared thrice.  Then Oswif said, "Though the course be not
good, let us still turn back.  Now, we will take counsel a second
time, and what now pleases my mind best, is to go and find
Hauskuld, and ask atonement for my son; for there's no hope of
honour where there's good store of it."

So they rode thence to the Broadfirth dales, and there is nothing
to be told about them till they came to Hauskuldstede, and Hrut
was there before them.  Oswif called out Hauskuld and Hrut, and
they both went out and bade him good day.  After that they began
to talk.  Hauskuld asked Oswif whence he came.  He said he had
set out to search for Thiostolf, but couldn't find him.  Hauskuld
said he must have gone north to Swanshol, "and thither it is not
every man's lot to go to find him."

"Well," says Oswif, "I am come hither for this, to ask atonement
for my son from thee."

Hauskuld answered, "I did not slay thy son, nor did I plot his
death; still it may be forgiven thee to look for atonement
somewhere."

"Nose is next of kin, brother, to eyes," said Hrut, "and it is
needful to stop all evil tongues, and to make him atonement for
his son, and so mend thy daughter's state, for that will only be
the case when this suit is dropped, and the less that is said
about it the better it will be."

Hauskuld said, "Wilt thou undertake the award?"

"That I will," says Hrut, "nor will I shield thee at all in my
award; for if the truth must be told thy daughter planned his
death."

Then Hrut held his peace some little while, and afterwards he
stood up, and said to Oswif, "Take now my hand in handsel as a
token that thou lettest the suit drop."

So Oswif stood up and said, "This is not an atonement on equal
terms when thy brother utters the award, but still thou (speaking
to Hrut) hast behaved so well about it that I trust thee
thoroughly to make it."  Then he stood up and took Hauskuld's
band, and came to an atonement in the matter, on the
understanding that Hrut was to make up his mind and utter the
award before Oswif went away.  After that, Hrut made his award,
and said, "For the slaying of Thorwald I award two hundred in
silver" -- that was then thought a good price for a man -- "and
thou shalt pay it down at once, brother, and pay it too with an
open hand."

Hauskuld did so, and then Hrut said to Oswif, "I will give thee a
good cloak which I brought with me from foreign lands."

He thanked him for his gift, and went home well pleased at the
way in which things had gone.

After that Hauskuld and Hrut came to Oswif to share the goods,
and they and Oswif came to a good agreement about that too, and
they went home with their share of the goods, and Oswif is now
out of our story.  Hallgerda begged Hauskuld to let her come back
home to him, and he gave her leave, and for a long time there was
much talk about Thorwald's slaying.  As for Hallgerda's goods
they went on growing till they were worth a great sum.



13. GLUM'S WOOING

Now three brothers are named in the story.  One was called
Thorarin, the second Ragi, and the third Glum.  They were the
sons of Olof the Halt, and were men of much worth and of great
wealth in goods.  Thorarin's surname was Ragi's brother; he had
the Speakership of the Law after Rafn Heing's son.  He was a very
wise man, and lived at Varmalek, and he and Glum kept house
together.  Glum had been long abroad; he was a tall, strong,
handsome man.  Ragi their brother was a great manslayer.  Those
brothers owned in the south Engey and Laugarness.  One day the
brothers Thorarin and Glum were talking together, and Thorarin
asked Glum whether he meant to go abroad, as was his wont?

He answered, "I was rather thinking now of leaving off trading
voyages."

"What hast thou then in thy mind?  Wilt thou woo thee a wife?"

"That I will," says he, "if I could only get myself well
matched."

Then Thorarin told off all the women who were unwedded in
Borgarfirth, and asked him if he would have any of these, "Say
the word, and I will ride with thee!"

But Glum answered, "I will have none of these."

"Say then the name of her thou wishest to have," says Thorarin.

Glum answered, "If thou must know, her name is Hallgerda, and she
is Hauskuld's daughter away west in the dales."

"Well," says Thorarin, "'tis not with thee as the saw says, `be
warned by another's woe'; for she was wedded to a man, and she
plotted his death."

Glum said, "Maybe such ill-luck will not befall her a second
time, and sure I am she will not plot my death.  But now, if thou
wilt show me any honour, ride along with me to woo her."

Thorarin said, "There's no good striving against it, for what
must be is sure to happen."  Glum often talked the matter over
with Thorarin, but he put it off a long time.  At last it came
about that they gathered men together and rode off ten in
company, west to the dales, and came to Hauskuldstede.  Hauskuld
gave them a hearty welcome, and they stayed there that night. 
But early next morning, Hauskuld sends for Hrut, and he came
thither at once: and Hauskuld was out of doors when he rode into
the "town".  Then Hauskuld told Hrut what men had come thither.

"What may it be they want?" asked Hrut.

"As yet," says Hauskuld, "they have not let out to me that they
have any business."

"Still," says Hrut, "their business must be with thee.  They will
ask the hand of thy daughter, Hallgerda.  If they do, what answer
wilt thou make?"

"What dost thou advise me to say?" says Hauskuld.

"Thou shalt answer well," says Hrut; "but still make a clean
breast of all the good and all the ill thou knowest of the
woman."

But while the brothers were talking thus, out came the guests. 
Hauskuld greeted them well, and Hrut bade both Thorarin and his
brothers good morning.  After that they all began to talk, and
Thorarin said, "I am come hither, Hauskuld, with my brother Glum
on this errand, to ask for Hallgerda thy daughter, at the hand of
my brother Glum.  Thou must know that he is a man of worth."

"I know well," says Hauskuld, "that ye are both of you powerful
and worthy men; but I must tell you right out, that I chose a
husband for her before, and that turned out most unluckily for
us."

Thorarin answered, "We will not let that stand in the way of the
bargain; for one oath shall not become all oaths, and this may
prove to be a good match, though that turned out ill; besides
Thiostolf had most hand in spoiling it."

Then Hrut spoke: "Now I will give you a bit of advice -- this: if
ye will not let all this that has already happened to Hallgerda
stand in the way of the match, mind you do not let Thiostolf go
south with her if the match comes off, and that he is never there
longer than three nights at a time, unless Glum gives him leave,
but fall an outlaw by Glum's hand without atonement if he stay
there longer.  Of course, it shall be in Glum's power to give him
leave; but he will not if he takes my advice.  And now this match
shall not be fulfilled, as the other was, without Hallgerda's
knowledge.  She shall now know the whole course of this bargain,
and see Glum, and herself settle whether she will have him or
not; and then she will not be able to lay the blame on others if
it does not turn out well.  And all this shall be without craft
or guile."

Then Thorarin said, "Now, as always, it will prove best if thy
advice be taken."

Then they sent for Hallgerda, and she came thither, and two women
with her.  She had on a cloak of rich blue woof, and under it a
scarlet kirtle, and a silver girdle round her waist, but her hair
came down on both sides of her bosom, and she had turned the
locks up under her girdle.  She sat down between Hrut and her
father, and she greeted them all with kind words, and spoke well
and boldly, and asked what was the news.  After that she ceased
speaking.

Then Glum said, "There has been some talk between thy father and
my brother Thorarin and myself about a bargain.  It was that I
might get thee, Hallgerda, if it be thy will, as it is theirs;
and now, if thou art a brave woman, thou wilt say right out
whether the match is at all to thy mind; but if thou hast
anything in thy heart against this bargain with us, then we will
not say anything more about it."

Hallgerda said, "I know well that you are men of worth and might,
ye brothers.  I know too that now I shall be much better wedded
than I was before; but what I want to know is, what you have said
already about the match, and how far you have given your words in
the matter.  But so far as I now see of thee, I think I might
love thee well if we can but hit it off as to temper."

So Glum himself told her all about the bargain, and left nothing
out, and then he asked Hauskuld and Hrut whether he had repeated
it right.  Hauskuld said he had; and then Hallgerda said, "Ye
have dealt so well with me in this matter, my father and Hrut,
that I will do what ye advise, and this bargain shall be struck
as ye have settled it."

Then Hrut said, "Methinks it were best that Hauskuld and I should
name witnesses, and that Hallgerda should betroth herself, if the
Lawman thinks that right and lawful.

"Right and lawful it is," says Thorarin.

After that Hallgerda's goods were valued, and Glum was to lay
down as much against them, and they were to go shares, half and
half, in the whole.  Then Glum bound himself to Hallgerda as his
betrothed, and they rode away home south; but Hauskuld was to
keep the wedding-feast at his house.  And now all is quiet till
men ride to the wedding.



14. GLUM'S WEDDING

Those brothers gathered together a great company, and they were
all picked men.  They rode west to the dales and came to
Hauskuldstede, and there they found a great gathering to meet
them.  Hauskuld and Hrut, and their friends, filled one bench,
and the bridegroom the other.  Hallgerda sat upon the cross bench
on the dais, and behaved well.  Thiostolf went about with his axe
raised in air, and no one seemed to know that he was there, and
so the wedding went off well.  But when the feast was over,
Hallgerda went away south with Glum and his brothers.  So when
they came south to Varmalek, Thorarin asked Hallgerda if she
would undertake the housekeeping.  "No, I will not," she said. 
Hallgerda kept her temper down that winter, and they liked her
well enough.  But when the spring came, the brothers talked about
their property, and Thorarin said, "I will give up to you the
house at Varmalek, for that is readiest to your hand, and I will
go down south to Laugarness and live there, but Engey we will
have both of us in common."

Glum was willing enough to do that.  So Thorarin went down to the
south of that district, and Glum and his wife stayed behind
there, and lived in the house at Varmalek.

Now Hallgerda got a household about her; she was prodigal in
giving, and grasping in getting.  In the summer she gave birth to
a girl.  Glum asked her what name it was to have?

"She shall be called after my father's mother, and her name shall
be Thorgerda," for she came down from Sigurd Fafnir's-bane on the
father's side, according to the family pedigree. 

So the maiden was sprinkled with water, and had this name given
her, and there she grew up, and got like her mother in looks and
feature.  Glum and Hallgerda agreed well together, and so it went
on for a while.  About that time these tidings were heard from
the north and Bearfirth, how Swan had rowed out to fish in the
spring, and a great storm came down on him from the east, and how
he was driven ashore at Fishless, and he and his men were there
lost.  But the fishermen who were at Kalback thought they saw
Swan go into the fell at Kalbackshorn, and that he was greeted
well; but some spoke against that story, and said there was
nothing in it.  But this all knew that he was never seen again
either alive or dead.  So when Hallgerda heard that, she thought
she had a great loss in her mother's brother.  Glum begged
Thorarin to change lands with him, but he said he would not;
"but," said he, "if I outlive you, I mean to have Varmalek to
myself."  When Glum told this to Hallgerda, she said, "Thorarin
has indeed a right to expect this from us."



15. THIOSTOLF GOES TO GLUM'S HOUSE

Thiostolf had beaten one of Hauskuld's house-carles, so he drove
him away.  He took his horse and weapons, and said to Hauskuld,
"Now, I will go away and never come back."

"All will be glad at that," says Hauskuld.

Thiostolf rode till he came to Varmalek, and there he got a
hearty welcome from Hallgerda, and not a bad one from Glum.  He
told Hallgerda how her father had driven him away, and begged her
to give him her help and countenance.  She answered him by
telling him she could say nothing about his staying there before
she had seen Glum about it.

"Does it go well between you?" he says.

"Yes," she says, "our love runs smooth enough."

After that she went to speak to Glum, and threw her arms round
his neck and said, "Wilt thou grant me a boon which I wish to ask
of thee?"

"Grant it I will," he says, "if it be right and seemly; but what
is it thou wishest to ask?"

"Well," she said, "Thiostolf has been driven away from the west,
and what I want thee to do is to let him stay here; but I will
not take it crossly if it is not to thy mind."

Glum said, "Now that thou behavest so well, I will grant thee thy
boon; but I tell thee, if he takes to any ill he shall be sent
off at once."

She goes then to Thiostolf and tells him, and he answered, "Now,
thou art still good, as I had hoped."

After that he was there, and kept himself down a little while,
but then it was the old story, he seemed to spoil all the good he
found; for he gave way to no one save to Hallgerda alone, but she
never took his side in his brawls with others.  Thorarin, Glum's
brother, blamed him for letting him be there, and said ill luck
would come of it, and all would happen as had happened before if
he were there.  Glum answered him well and kindly, but still kept
on in his own way.



16. GLUM'S SHEEP HUNT

Now once on a time when autumn came, it happened that men had
hard work to get their flocks home, and many of Glum's wethers
were missing.  Then Glum said to Thiostolf, "Go thou up on the
fell with my house-carles and see if ye cannot find out anything
about the sheep."

"'Tis no business of mine," says Thiostolf, "to hunt up sheep,
and this one thing is quite enough to hinder it.  I won't walk in
thy thralls' footsteps.  But go thyself, and then I'll go with
thee."

About this they had many words.  The weather was good, and
Hallgerda was sitting out of doors.  Glum went up to her and
said, "Now Thiostolf and I have had a quarrel, and we shall not
live much longer together."  And so he told her all that they had
been talking about.

Then Hallgerda spoke up for Thiostolf, and they had many words
about him.  At last Glum gave her a blow with his hand, and said,
"I will strive no longer with thee," and with that he went away.

Now she loved him much, and could not calm herself, but wept out
loud.  Thiostolf went up to her and said, "This is sorry sport
for thee, and so it must not be often again."

"Nay," she said, "but thou shalt not avenge this, nor meddle at
all whatever passes between Glum and me."

He went off with a spiteful grin.



17. GLUM'S SLAYING

Now Glum called men to follow him, and Thiostolf got ready and
went with them.  So they went up South Reykiardale and then up
along by Baugagil and so south to Crossfell.  But some of his
band he sent to the Sulafells, and they all found very many
sheep.  Some of them, too, went by way of Scoradale, and it came
about at last that those twain, Glum and Thiostolf, were left
alone together.  They went south from Crossfell and found there a
flock of wild sheep, and they went from the south towards the
fell, and tried to drive them down; but still the sheep got away
from them up on the fell.  Then each began to scold the other,
and Thiostolf said at last that Glum had no strength save to
tumble about in Hallgerda's arms.

Then Glum said, "`A man's foes are those of his own house.' 
Shall I take upbraiding from thee, runaway thrall as thou art?"

Thiostolf said, "Thou shalt soon have to own that I am no thrall,
for I will not yield an inch to thee."

Then Glum got angry, and cut at him with his hand-axe, but he
threw his axe in the way, and the blow fell on the haft with a
downward stroke and bit into it about the breadth of two fingers. 
Thiostolf cut at him at once with his axe, and smote him on the
shoulder, and the stroke hewed asunder the shoulderbone and
collarbone, and the wound bled inwards.  Glum grasped at
Thiostolf with his left hand so fast, that he fell; but Glum
could not hold him, for death came over him.  Then Thiostolf
covered his body with stones, and took off his gold ring.  Then
he went straight to Varmalek.  Hallgerda was sitting out of
doors, and saw that his axe was bloody.  He said, "I know not
what thou wilt think of it, but I tell thee Glum is slain."

"That must be thy deed," she says.

"So it is," he says.

She laughed and said, "Thou dost not stand for nothing in this
sport."

"What thinkest thou is best to be done now?" he asked.

"Go to Hrut, my father's brother," she said, "and let him see
about thee."

"I do not know," says Thiostolf, "whether this is good advice;
but still I will take thy counsel in this matter."

So he took his horse, and rode west to Hrutstede that night.  He
binds his horse at the back of the house, and then goes round to
the door, and gives a great knock.  After that he walks round the
house, north about.  It happened that Hrut was awake.  He sprang
up at once, and put on his jerkin and pulled on his shoes.  Then
he took up his sword, and wrapped a cloak about his left arm, up
as far as the elbow.  Men woke up just as he went out; there he
saw a tall stout man at the back of the house, and knew it was
Thiostolf.  Hrut asked him what news?

"I tell thee Glum is slain." says Thiostolf.

"Who did the deed?" says Hrut.

"I slew him," says Thiostolf.

"Why rodest thou hither?" says Hrut.

"Hallgerda sent me to thee," says Thiostolf.

"Then she has no hand in this deed," says Hrut, and drew his
sword.  Thiostolf saw that, and would not be behind hand, so he
cuts at Hrut at once.  Hrut got out of the way of the stroke by a
quick turn, and at the same time struck the back of the axe so
smartly with a side-long blow of his left hand, that it flew out
of Thiostolf's grasp.  Then Hrut made a blow with his sword in
his right hand at Thiostolf's leg, just above the knee, and cut
it almost off so that it hung by a little piece, and sprang in
upon him at the same time, and thrust him hard back.  After that
he smote him on the head, and dealt him his death-blow. 
Thiostolf fell down on his back at full length, and then out came
Hrut's men, and saw the tokens of the deed.  Hrut made them take
Thiostolf away, and throw stones over his body, and then he went
to find Hauskuld, and told him of Glum's slaying, and also of
Thiostolf's.  He thought it harm that Glum was dead and gone, but
thanked him for killing Thiostolf.  A little while after,
Thorarin Ragi's brother hears of his brother Glum's death, then
he rides with eleven men behind him west to Hauskuldstede, and
Hauskuld welcomed him with both hands, and he is there the night. 
Hauskuld sent at once for Hrut to come to him, and he went at
once, and next day they spoke much of the slaying of Glum, and
Thorarin said "Wilt thou make me any atonement for my brother,
for I have had a great loss?"

Hauskuld answered, "I did not slay thy brother, nor did my
daughter plot his death; but as soon as ever Hrut knew it he slew
Thiostolf."

Then Thorarin held his peace, and thought the matter had taken a
bad turn.  But Hrut said, "Let us make his journey good; he has
indeed had a heavy loss, and if we do that we shall be well
spoken of.  So let us give him gifts, and then he will be our
friend ever afterwards."

So the end of it was, that those brothers gave him gifts, and he
rode back south.  He and Hallgerda changed homesteads in the
spring, and she went south to Laugarness and he to Varmalek.  And
now Thorarin is out of the story.



18. FIDDLE MORD'S DEATH

Now it must be told how Fiddle Mord took a sickness and breathed
his last; and that was thought great scathe.  His daughter Unna
took all the goods he left behind him.  She was then still
unmarried the second time.  She was very layish, and unthrifty of
her property; so that her goods and ready money wasted away, and
at last she had scarce anything left but land and stock.



19. GUNNAR COMES INTO THE STORY

There was a man whose name was Gunnar.  He was one of Unna's
kinsmen, and his mother's name was Rannveig (1).  Gunnar's father
was named Hamond (2).  Gunnar Hamond's son dwelt at Lithend, in
the Fleetlithe.  He was a tall man in growth, and a strong man --
best skilled in arms of all men.  He could cut or thrust or shoot
if he chose as well with his left as with his right hand, and he
smote so swiftly with his sword, that three seemed to flash
through the air at once.  He was the best shot with the bow of
all men, and never missed his mark.  He could leap more than his
own height, with all his war-gear, and as far backwards as
forwards.  He could swim like a seal, and there was no game in
which it was any good for any one to strive with him; and so it
has been said that no man was his match.  He was handsome of
feature, and fair skinned.  His nose was straight, and a little
turned up at the end.  He was blue-eyed and bright-eyed, and
ruddy-cheeked.  His hair thick, and of good hue, and hanging down
in comely curls.  The most courteous of men was he, of sturdy
frame and strong will, bountiful and gentle, a fast friend, but
hard to please when making them.  He was wealthy in goods.  His
brother's name was Kolskegg; he was a tall strong man, a noble
fellow, and undaunted in everything.  Another brother's name was
Hjort; he was then in his childhood.  Orm Skogarnef was a base-
born brother of Gunnar's; he does not come into this story. 
Arnguda was the name of Gunnar's sister.  Hroar, the priest at
Tongue, had her to wife (3).


ENDNOTES:

(1)  She was the daughter of Sigfuss, the son of Sighvat the Red;
     he was slain at Sandhol Ferry.
(2)  He was the son of Gunnar Baugsson, after whom Gunnar's holt
     is called.  Hamond's mother's name was Hrafnhilda.  She was
     the daughter of Storolf Heing's son.  Storolf was brother to
     Hrafn the Speaker of the Law, the son of Storolf was Orin
     the Strong.
(3)  He was the son of Uni the Unborn, Gardar's son who found
     Iceland.  Arnguda's son was Hamond the Halt, who dwelt at
     Hamondstede.



20. OF NJAL AND HIS CHILDREN

There was a man whose name was Njal.  He was the son of Thorgeir
Gelling, the son of Thorolf.  Njal's mother's name was Asgerda
(1).  Njal dwelt at Bergthorsknoll in the land-isles; he had
another homestead on Thorolfsfell.  Njal was wealthy in goods,
and handsome of face; no beard grew on his chin.  He was so great
a lawyer, that his match was not to be found.  Wise too he was,
and foreknowing and foresighted (2).  Of good counsel, and ready
to give it, and all that he advised men was sure to be the best
for them to do.  Gentle and generous, he unravelled every man's
knotty points who came to see him about them.  Bergthora was his
wife's name; she was Skarphedinn's daughter, a very high-
spirited, brave-hearted woman, but somewhat hard-tempered.  They
had six children, three daughters and three sons, and they all
come afterwards into this story.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  She was the daughter of Lord Ar the Silent.  She had come
     out hither to Iceland from Norway, and taken land to the
     west of Markfleet, between Auldastone and Selialandsmull. 
     Her son was Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorleif Crow, from
     whom the Wood-dwellers are sprung, and of Thorgrim the Tall,
     and Skorargeir.
(2)  This means that Njal was one of those gifted beings who,
     according to the firm belief of that age, had a more than
     human insight into things about to happen.  It answers very
     nearly to the Scottish "second sight."



21. UNNA GOES TO SEE GUNNAR

Now it must be told how Unna had lost all her ready money.  She
made her way to Lithend, and Gunnar greeted his kinswoman well. 
She stayed there that night, and the next morning they sat out of
doors and talked.  The end of their talk was, that she told him
how heavily she was pressed for money.

"This is a bad business," he said.

"What help wilt thou give me out of my distress?" she asked.

He answered, "Take as much money as thou needest from what I have
out at interest."

"Nay," she said, "I will not waste thy goods."

"What then dost thou wish?"

"I wish thee to get back my goods out of Hrut's hands," she
answered.

"That, methinks, is not likely," said he, "when thy father could
not get them back, and yet he was a great lawyer, but I know
little about law."

She answered, "Hrut pushed that matter through rather by boldness
than by law; besides, my father was old, and that was why men
thought it better not to drive things to the uttermost.  And now
there is none of my kinsmen to take this suit up if thou hast not
daring enough.

"I have courage enough," he replied, "to get these goods back;
but I do not know how to take the suit up."

"Well!" she answered, "go and see Njal of Bergthorsknoll, he will
know how to give thee advice.  Besides, he is a great friend of
thine."

"'Tis like enough he will give me good advice, as he gives it to
every one else," says Gunnar.

So the end of their talk was, that Gunnar undertook her cause,
and gave her the money she needed for her housekeeping, and after
that she went home.

Now Gunnar rides to see Njal, and he made him welcome, and they
began to talk at once.

Then Gunnar said, "I am come to seek a bit of good advice from
thee."

Njal replied, "Many of my friends are worthy of this, but still I
think I would take more pains for none than for thee."

Gunnar said, "I wish to let thee know that I have undertaken to
get Unna's goods back from Hrut."

"A very hard suit to undertake," said Njal, "and one very
hazardous how it will go; but still I will get it up for thee in
the way I think likeliest to succeed, and the end will be good if
thou breakest none of the rules I lay down; if thou dost, thy
life is in danger."

"Never fear; I will break none of them," said Gunnar.

Then Njal held his peace for a little while, and after that he
spoke as follows: --



22. NJAL'S ADVICE

I have thought over the suit, and it will do so.  Thou shalt ride
from home with two men at thy back.  Over all thou shalt have a
great rough cloak, and under that, a russet kirtle of cheap
stuff, and under all, thy good clothes.  Thou must take a small
axe in thy hand, and each of you must have two horses, one fat,
the other lean.  Thou shalt carry hardware and smith's work with
thee hence, and ye must ride off early to-morrow morning, and
when ye are come across Whitewater westwards, mind and slouch thy
hat well over thy brows.  Then men will ask who is this tall man,
and thy mates shall say, `Here is Huckster Hedinn the Big, a man
from Eyjafirth, who is going about with smith's work for sale.'
This Hedinn is ill-tempered and a chatterer -- a fellow who
thinks he alone knows everything.  Very often he snatches back
his wares, and flies at men if everything is not done as he
wishes.  So thou shalt ride west to Borgarfirth offering all
sorts of wares for sale, and be sure often to cry off thy
bargains, so that it will be noised abroad that Huckster Hedinn
is the worst of men to deal with, and that no lies have been told
of his bad behaviour.  So thou shalt ride to Northwaterdale, and
to Hrutfirth, and Laxriverdale, till thou comest to
Hauskuldstede.  There thou must stay a night, and sit in the
lowest place, and hang thy head down.  Hauskuld will tell them
all not to meddle nor make with Huckster Hedinn, saying he is a
rude unfriendly fellow.  Next morning thou must be off early and
go to the farm nearest Hrutstede.  There thou must offer thy
goods for sale, praising up all that is worst, and tinkering up
the faults.  The master of the house will pry about and find out
the faults.  Thou must snatch the wares away from him, and speak
ill to him.  He will say, 'twas not to be hoped that thou wouldst
behave well to him, when thou behavest ill to every one else. 
Then thou shalt fly at him, though it is not thy wont, but mind
and spare thy strength, that thou mayest not be found out.  Then
a man will be sent to Hrutstede to tell Hrut he had best come and
part you.  He will come at once and ask thee to his house, and
thou must accept his offer.  Thou shalt greet Hrut and he will
answer well.  A place will be given thee on the lower bench over
against Hrut's high seat.  He will ask if thou art from the
North, and thou shalt answer that thou art a man of Eyjafirth. 
He will go on to ask if there are very many famous men there. 
`Shabby fellows enough and to spare,' thou must answer.  `Dost
thou know Reykiardale and the parts about?' he will ask.  To
which thou must answer, `I know all Iceland by heart.'

"`Are there any stout champions left in Reykiardale?' he will
ask.  `Thieves and scoundrels,' thou shalt answer.  Then Hrut
will smile and think it sport to listen.  You two will go on to
talk of the men in the Eastfirth Quarter, and thou must always
find something to say against them.  At last your talk will come
Rangrivervale, and then thou must say, there is small choice of
men left in those parts since Fiddle Mord died.  At the same time
sing some stave to please Hrut, for I know thou art a skald. 
Hrut will ask what makes thee say there is never a man to come in
Mord's place? and then thou must answer, that he was so wise a
man and so good a taker up of suits, that he never made a false
step in upholding his leadership.  He will ask, `Dost thou know
how matters fared between me and him?'

"`I know all about it,' thou must reply, `he took thy wife from
thee, and thou hadst not a word to say.'"

Then Hrut will ask, `Dost thou not think it was some disgrace to
him when he could not get back his goods, though he set the suit
on foot?'

"`I can answer thee that well enough,' thou must say.  `Thou
challengedst him to single combat; but he was old, and so his
friends advised him not to fight with thee, and then they let the
suit fall to the ground.'

"`True enough,' Hrut will say.  `I said so, and that passed for
law among foolish men; but the suit might have been taken up
again at another Thing if he had the heart.'

"`I know all that,' thou must say.

Then he will ask, `Dost thou know anything about law?'

"`Up in the North I am thought to know something about it,' thou
shalt say.  `But still I should like thee to tell me how this
suit should be taken up.'

"`What suit dost thou mean?' he will ask.

"`A suit,' thou must answer, `which does not concern me.  I want
to know how a man must set to work who wishes to get back Unna's
dower.'

"Then Hrut will say, `In this suit I must be summoned so that I
can hear the summons, or I must be summoned here in my lawful
house.'

"`Recite the summons, then,' thou must say, 'and I will say it
after thee.'

"Then Hrut will summon himself; and mind and pay great heed to
every word he says.  After that Hrut will bid thee repeat the
summons, and thou must do so, and say it all wrong, so that no
more than every other word is right."

Then Hrut will smile and not mistrust thee, but say that scarce a
word is right.  Thou must throw the blame on thy companions, and
say they put thee out, and then thou must ask him to say the
words first, word by word, and to let thee say the words after
him.  He will give thee leave, and summon himself in the suit,
and thou shalt summon after him there and then, and this time say
every word right.  When it is done, ask Hrut if that were rightly
summoned, and he will answer, `There is no flaw to be found in
it.'  Then thou shalt say in a loud voice, so that thy companions
may hear, `I summon thee in the suit which Unna, Mord's daughter,
has made over to me with her plighted hand.'

"But when men are sound asleep, you shall rise and take your
bridles and saddles, and tread softly, and go out of the house,
and put your saddles on your fat horses in the fields, and so
ride off on them, but leave the others behind you.  You must ride
up into the hills away from the home pastures and stay there
three nights, for about so long will they seek you.  After that
ride home south, riding always by night and resting by day.  As
for us, we will then ride this summer to the Thing, and help thee
in thy suit."  So Gunnar thanked Njal, and first of all rode
home.



23. HUCKSTER HEDINN.

Gunnar rode from home two nights afterwards, and two men with
him; they rode along until they got on Bluewoodheath and then men
on horseback met them and asked who that tall man might be of
whom so little was seen.  But his companions said it was Huckster
Hedinn.  Then the others said a worse was not to be looked for
behind, when such a man as he went before.  Hedinn at once made
as though he would have set upon them, but yet each went their
way.  So Gunnar went on doing everything as Njal had laid it down
for him, and when he came to Hauskuldstede he stayed there the
night, and thence he went down the dale till he came to the next
farm to Hrutstede.  There he offered his wares for sale, and
Hedinn fell at once upon the farmer.  This was told to Hrut, and
he sent for Hedinn, and Hedinn went at once to see Hrut, and had
a good welcome.  Hrut seated him over against himself, and their
talk went pretty much as Njal had guessed; but when they came to
talk of Rangrivervale, and Hrut asked about the men there, Gunnar
sung this stave --

     "Men in sooth are slow to find --
     So the people speak by stealth,
     Often this hath reached my ears --
     All through Rangar's rolling vales.
     Still I trow that Fiddle Mord,
     Tried his hand in fight of yore;
     Sure was never gold-bestower,
     Such a man for might and wit."

Then Hrut said, "Thou art a skald, Hedinn.  But hast thou never
heard how things went between me and Mord?"  Then Hedinn sung
another stave --

     "Once I ween I heard the rumour,
     How the Lord of rings (1) bereft thee;
     From thine arms earth's offspring (2) tearing,
     Trickfull he and trustful thou.
     Then the men, the buckler-bearers,
     Begged the mighty gold-begetter,
     Sharp sword oft of old he reddened,
     Not to stand in strife with thee."

So they went on, till Hrut, in answer told him how the suit must
be taken up, and recited the summons.  Hedinn repeated it all
wrong, and Hrut burst out laughing, and had no mistrust.  Then he
said, Hrut must summon once more, and Hrut did so.  Then Hedinn
repeated the summons a second time, and this time right, and
called his companions to witness how he summoned Hrut in a suit
which Unna, Mord's daughter, had made over to him with her
plighted hand.  At night he went to sleep like other men, but as
soon as ever Hrut was sound asleep, they took their clothes and
arms, and went out and came to their horses, and rode off across
the river, and so up along the bank by Hiardarholt till the dale
broke off among the hills, and so there they are upon the fells
between Laxriverdale and Hawkdale, having got to a spot where no
one could find them unless he had fallen on them by chance.

Hauskuld wakes up that night at Hauskuldstede, and roused all his
household.  "I will tell you my dream," he said.  "I thought I
saw a great bear go out of this house, and I knew at once this
beast's match was not to be found; two cubs followed him, wishing
well to the bear, and they all made for Hrutstede and went into
the house there.  After that I woke.  Now I wish to ask if any of
you saw aught about yon tall man."

Then one man answered him, "I saw how a golden fringe and a bit
of scarlet cloth peeped out at his arm, and on his right arm he
had a ring of gold."

Hauskuld said, "This beast is no man's fetch, but Gunnar's of
Lithend, and now methinks I see all about it.  Up!  let us ride
to Hrutstede," And they did so.  Hrut lay in his locked bed, and
asks who have come there?  Hauskuld tells who he is, and asked
what guests might be there in the house?

"Only Huckster Hedinn is here," says Hrut.

"A broader man across the back, it will be, I fear," says
Hauskuld, "I guess here must have been Gunnar of Lithend."

"Then there has been a pretty trial of cunning," says Hrut.

"What has happened?" says Hauskuld.

"I told him how to take up Unna's suit, and I summoned myself and
he summoned after, and now he can use this first step in the
suit, and it is right in law."

"There has, indeed, been a great falling off of wit on one side,"
said Hauskuld, "and Gunnar cannot have planned it all by himself;
Njal must be at the bottom of this plot, for there is not his
match for wit in all the land."

Now they look for Hedinn, but he is already off and away; after
that they gathered folk, and looked for them three days, but
could not find them.  Gunnar rode south from the fell to Hawkdale
and so east of Skard, and north to Holtbeaconheath, and so on
until he got home.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Lord of rings," a periphrasis for a chief, that is, Mord.
(2)  "Earth's offspring," a periphrasis for woman, that is, Unna.



24. GUNNAR AND HRUT STRIVE AT THE THING.

Gunnar rode to the Althing, and Hrut and Hauskuld rode thither
too with a very great company.  Gunnar pursues his suit, and
began by calling on his neighbours to bear witness, but Hrut and
his brother had it in their minds to make an onslaught on him,
but they mistrusted their strength.

Gunnar next went to the court of the men of Broadfirth, and bade
Hrut listen to his oath and declaration of the cause of the suit,
and to all the proofs which he was about to bring forward.  After
that he took his oath, and declared his case.  After that he
brought forward his witnesses of the summons, along with his
witnesses that the suit had been handed over to him.  All this
time Njal was not at the court.  Now Gunnar pursued his suit till
he called on the defendant to reply.  Then Hrut took witness, and
said the suit was naught, and that there was a flaw in the
pleading; he declared that it had broken down because Gunnar had
failed to call those three witnesses which ought to have been
brought before the court.  The first, that which was taken before
the marriage-bed, the second, before the man's door, the third,
at the Hill of Laws.  By this time Njal was come to the court and
said the suit and pleading might still be kept alive if they
chose to strive in that way.

"No," says Gunnar, "I will not have that; I will do the same to
Hrut as he did to Mord my kinsman; or, are those brothers Hrut
and Hauskuld so near that they may hear my voice."

"Hear it we can," says Hrut.  "What dost thou wish?"

Gunnar said, "Now all men here present be ear-witnesses, that I
challenge thee Hrut to single combat, and we shall fight to-day
on the holm, which is here in Oxwater.  But if thou wilt not
fight with me, then pay up all the money this very day."

After that Gunnar sung a stave --

     "Yes, so must it be, this morning --
     Now my mind is full of fire --
     Hrut with me on yonder island
     Raises roar of helm and shield.
     All that bear my words bear witness,
     Warriors grasping Woden's guard,
     Unless the wealthy wight down payeth
     Dower of wife with flowing veil."

After that Gunnar went away from the court with all his
followers.  Hrut and Hauskuld went home too, and the suit was
never pursued nor defended from that day forth.  Hrut said, as
soon as he got inside the booth, "This has never happened to me
before, that any man has offered me combat and I have shunned
it."

"Then thou must mean to fight," says Hauskuld, "but that shall
not be if I have my way; for thou comest no nearer to Gunnar than
Mord would have come to thee, and we had better both of us pay up
the money to Gunnar."

After that the brothers asked the householders of their own
country what they would lay down, and they one and all said they
would lay down as much as Hrut wished.

"Let us go then," says Hauskuld, "to Gunnar's booth, and pay down
the money out of hand."  That was told to Gunnar, and he went out
into the doorway of the booth, and Hauskuld said, "Now it is
thine to take the money."

Gunnar said, "Pay it down, then, for I am ready to take it."

So they paid down the money truly out of hand, and then Hauskuld
said, "Enjoy it now, as thou hast gotten it."  Then Gunnar sang
another stave: --

     "Men who wield the blade of battle
     Hoarded wealth may well enjoy,
     Guileless gotten this at least,
     Golden meed I fearless take;
     But if we for woman's quarrel,
     Warriors born to brandish sword,
     Glut the wolf with manly gore,
     Worse the lot of both would be."

Hrut answered, "III will be thy meed for this."

"Be that as it may," says Gunnar.

Then Hauskuld and his brother went home to their booth, and he
had much upon his mind, and said to Hrut, "Will this unfairness
of Gunnar's never be avenged?"

"Not so," says Hrut; "'twill be avenged on him sure enough, but
we shall have no share nor profit in that vengeance.  And after
all it is most likely that he will turn to our stock to seek for
friends."

After that they left off speaking of the matter.  Gunnar showed
Njal the money, and he said, "The suit has gone off well."

"Ay," says Gunnar, "but it was all thy doing."

Now men rode home from the Thing, and Gunnar got very great
honour from the suit.  Gunnar handed over all the money to Unna,
and would have none of it, but said he thought he ought to look
more for help from her and her kin hereafter than from other men. 
She said, so it should be.



25. UNNA'S SECOND WEDDING

There was a man named Valgard, he kept house at Hof by Rangriver,
he was the son of Jorund the Priest, and his brother was Wolf
Aurpriest (1).  Those brothers, Wolf Aurpriest, and Valgard the
Guileful, set off to woo Unna, and she gave herself away to
Valgard without the advice of any of her kinsfolk.  But Gunnar
and Njal, and many others thought ill of that, for he was a
cross-grained man and had few friends.  They begot between them a
son, whose name was Mord, and he is long in this story.  When he
was grown to man's estate, he worked ill to his kinsfolk but
worst of all to Gunnar.  He was a crafty man in his temper, but
spiteful in his counsels.

Now we will name Njal's sons.  Skarphedinn was the eldest of
them.  He was a tall man in growth, and strong withal; a good
swordsman; he could swim like a seal, the swiftest-looted of men,
and bold and dauntless; he had a great flow of words and quick
utterance; a good skald too; but still for the most part he kept
himself well in hand; his hair was dark brown, with crisp curly
locks; he had good eyes; his features were sharp, and his face
ashen pale, his nose turned up and his front teeth stuck out, and
his mouth was very ugly.  Still he was the most soldierlike of
men.

Grim was the name of Njal's second son.  He was fair of face and
wore his hair long.  His hair was dark, and he was comelier to
look on than Skarphedinn.  A tall strong man.

Helgi was the name of Njal's third son.  He too was fair of face
and had fine hair.  He was a strong man and well-skilled in arms. 
He was a man of sense and knew well how to behave.  They were all
unwedded at that time, Njal's sons.

Hauskuld was the fourth of Njal's sons.  He was baseborn.  His
mother was Rodny, and she was Hauskuld's daughter, the sister of
Ingialld of the Springs.

Njal asked Skarphedinn one day if he would take to himself a
wife.  He bade his father settle the matter.  Then Njal asked for
his hand Thorhilda, the daughter of Ranvir of Thorolfsfell, and
that was why they had another homestead there after that. 
Skarphedinn got Thorhilda, but he stayed still with his father to
the end.  Grim wooed Astrid of Deepback; she was a widow and very
wealthy.  Grim got her to wife, and yet lived on with Njal.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  The son of Ranveig the Silly, the son of Valgard, the son of
     Aefar, the son of Vemund Wordstopper, the son of Thorolf
     Hooknose, the son of Thrand the Old, the son of Harold
     Hilditann, the son of Hraereck Ringscatterer.  The mother of
     Harold Hilditann, was Aud the daughter of Ivar Widefathom,
     the son of Halfdan the Clever.  The brother of Valgard the
     Guileful was Wolf Aurpriest -- from whom the Pointdwellers
     sprung -- Wolf Aurpriest was the father of Swart, the father
     of Lodmund, the father of Sigfus, the father of Saemund the
     Wise.  But from Valgard is sprung Kolbein the Young.



26. OF ASGRIM AND HIS CHILDREN

There was a man named Asgrim (1).  He was Ellidagrim's son.  The
brother of Asgrim Ellidagrim's son was Sigfus (2).  Gauk
Trandil's son was Asgrim's foster-brother, who is said to have
been the fairest man of his day, and best skilled in all things;
but matters went ill with them, for Asgrim slew Gauk.

Asgrim had two sons, and each of them was named Thorhall.  They
were both hopeful men.  Grim was the name of another of Asgrim's
sons, and Thorhalla was his daughter's name.  She was the fairest
of women, and well behaved.

Njal came to talk with his son Helgi, and said, "I have thought
of a match for thee, if thou wilt follow my advice."

"That I will surely," says he, "for I know that thou both meanest
me well, and canst do well for me; but whither hast thou turned
thine eyes."

"We will go and woo Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's daughter, for that
is the best choice we can make."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Ellidagrim was Asgrim's son, Aundot the Crow's son.  His
     mother's name was Jorunn, and she was the daughter of Teit,
     the son of Kettlebjorn the Old of Mossfell.  The mother of
     Teit was Helga, daughter of Thord Skeggi's son, Hrapp's son,
     Bjorn's son the Roughfooted, Grim's son, the Lord of Sogn in
     Norway.  The mother of Jorunn was Olof Harvest-heal,
     daughter of Bodvar, Viking-Kari's son.
(2)  His daughter was Thorgerda, mother of Sigfus, the father of
     Saemund the Learned.



27. HELGI NJAL'S SON'S WOOING

A little after they rode out across Thurso water, and fared till
they came into Tongue.  Asgrim was at home, and gave them a
hearty welcome; and they were there that night.  Next morning
they began to talk, and then Njal raised the question of the
wooing, and asked for Thorhalla for his son Helgi's hand.  Asgrim
answered that well, and said there were no men with whom he would
be more willing to make this bargain than with them.  They fell
a-talking then about terms, and the end of it was that Asgrim
betrothed his daughter to Helgi, and the bridal day was named. 
Gunnar was at that feast, and many other of the bestmen.  After
the feast Njal offered to foster in his house Thorhall, Asgrim's
son, and he was with Njal long after.  He loved Njal more than
his own father.  Njal taught him law, so that he became the
greatest lawyer in Iceland in those days.



28. HALLVARD COMES OUT TO ICELAND

There came a ship out from Norway, and ran into Arnbael's Oyce
(1), and the master of the ship was Hallvard the White, a man
from the Bay (2).  He went to stay at Lithend, and was with
Gunnar that winter, and was always asking him to fare abroad with
him.  Gunnar spoke little about it, but yet said more unlikely
things might happen; and about spring he went over to
Bergthorsknoll to find out from Njal whether he thought it a wise
step in him to go abroad.

"I think it is wise," says Njal; "they will think thee there an
honourable man, as thou art."

"Wilt thou perhaps take my goods into thy keeping while I am
away, for I wish my brother Kolskegg to fare with me; but I would
that thou shouldst see after my household along with my mother."

"I will not throw anything in the way of that," says Njal; "lean
on me in this thing as much as thou likest."

"Good go with thee for thy words," says Gunnar, and he rides
then home.

The Easterling (3) fell again to talk with Gunnar that he should
fare abroad.  Gunnar asked if he had ever sailed to other lands?
He said he had sailed to every one of them that lay between
Norway and Russia, and so, too, I have sailed to Biarmaland (4).

"Wilt thou sail with me eastward ho?" says Gunnar.

"That I will of a surety," says he.

Then Gunnar made up his mind to sail abroad with him.  Njal took
all Gunnar's goods into his keeping.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Oyce," a north country word for the mouth of a river, from
     the Icelandic.
(2)  "The Bay" (comp. ch. ii., and other passages), the name
     given to the great bay in the east of Norway, the entrance
     of which from the North Sea is the Cattegat, and at the end
     of which is the Christiania Firth.  The name also applies to
     the land round the Bay, which thus formed a district, the
     boundary of which, on the one side, was the promontory
     called Lindesnaes, or the Naze, and on the other, the
     Gota-Elf, the river on which the Swedish town of Gottenburg
     stands, and off the mouth of which lies the island of
     Hisingen, mentioned shortly after.
(3)  Easterling, i.e., the Norseman Hallvard.
(4)  Permia, the country one comes to after doubling the North
     Cape.



29. GUNNAR GOES ABROAD

So Gunnar fared abroad, and Kolskegg with him.  They sailed first
to Tonsberg (1), and were there that winter.  There had then been
a shift of rulers in Norway.  Harold Grayfell was then dead, and
so was Gunnhillda.  Earl Hacon the Bad, Sigurd's son, Hacon's
son, Gritgarth's son, then ruled the realm.  The mother of Hacon
was Bergliot, the daughter of Earl Thorir.  Her mother was Olof
Harvest-heal.  She was Harold Fair-hair's daughter.

Hallvard asks Gunnar if he would make up his mind to go to Earl
Hacon?

"No; I will not do that," says Gunnar.  "Hast thou ever a long-
ship?"

"I have two," he says.

"Then I would that we two went on warfare; and let us get men to
go with us."

"I will do that," says Hallvard.

After that they went to the Bay, and took with them two ships,
and fitted them out thence.  They had good choice of men, for
much praise was said of Gunnar.

"Whither wilt thou first fare?" says Gunnar.

"I wish to go south-east to Hisingen, to see my kinsman Oliver,"
says Hallvard.

"What dost thou want of him?" says Gunnar.

He answered, "He is a fine brave fellow, and he will be sure to
get us some more strength for our voyage."

"Then let us go thither," says Gunnar.

So, as soon as they were "boun," they held on east to Hisingen,
and had there a hearty welcome.  Gunnar had only been there a
short time ere Oliver made much of him.  Oliver asks about his
voyage, and Hallvard says that Gunnar wishes to go a-warfaring to
gather goods for himself.

"There's no use thinking of that," says Oliver, "when ye have no
force."

"Well" says Hallvard, "then you may add to it."

"So I do mean to strengthen Gunnar somewhat," says Oliver; "and
though thou reckonest thyself my kith and kin, I think there is
more good in him."

"What force, now, wilt thou add to ours?" he asks.

"Two long-ships, one with twenty, and the other with thirty seats
for rowers."

"Who shall man them?" asks Hallvard.

"I will man one of them with my own house-carles, and the freemen
around shall man the other.  But still I have found out that
strife has come into the river, and I know not whether ye two
will be able to get away; for they are in the river."

"Who?" says Hallvard.

"Brothers twain," says Oliver; "one's name is Vandil, and the
other's Karli, sons of Sjolf the Old, east away out of Gothland."

Hallvard told Gunnar that Oliver had added some ships to theirs,
and Gunnar was glad at that.  They busked them for their voyage
thence, till they were "allboun."  Then Gunnar and Hallvard went
before Oliver, and thanked him; he bade them fare warily for the
sake of those brothers.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  A town at the mouth of the Christiania Firth.  It was a
     great place for traffic in early times, and was long the
     only mart in the south-east of Norway.



30. GUNNAR GOES A-SEA-ROVING

So Gunnar held on out of the river, and he and Kolskegg were both
on board one ship.  But Hallvard was on board another.  Now, they
see the ships before them, and then Gunnar spoke, and said, "Let
us be ready for anything if they turn towards us!  but else let
us have nothing to do with them."

So they did that, and made all ready on board their ships.  The
others parted their ships asunder, and made a fareway between the
ships.  Gunnar fared straight on between the ships, but Vandil
caught up a grappling-iron, and cast it between their ships and
Gunnar's ship, and began at once to drag it towards him.

Oliver had given Gunnar a good sword; Gunnar now drew it, and had
not yet put on his helm.  He leapt at once on the forecastle of
Vandil's ship, and gave one man his death-blow.  Karli ran his
ship alongside the other side of Gunnar's ship, and hurled a
spear athwart the deck, and aimed at him about the waist.  Gunnar
sees this, and turned him about so quickly that no eye could
follow him, and caught the spear with his left hand, and hurled
it back at Karli's ship, and that man got his death who stood
before it.  Kolskegg snatched up a grapnel and cast it at Karli's
ship, and the fluke fell inside the hold, and went out through
one of the planks and in rushed the coal-blue sea, and all the
men sprang on board other ships.

Now Gunnar leapt back to his own ship, and then Hallvard came up,
and now a great battle arose.  They saw now that their leader was
unflinching, and every man did as well as he could.  Sometimes
Gunnar smote with the sword, and sometimes he hurled the spear,
and many a man had his bane at his hand.  Kolskegg backed him
well.  As for Karli, he hastened in a ship to his brother Vandil,
and thence they fought that day.  During the day Kolskegg took a
rest on Gunnar's ship, and Gunnar sees that.  Then he sung a
song --

     "For the eagle ravine-eager,
     Raven of my race, to-day
     Better surely hast thou catered,
     Lord of gold, than for thyself;
     Here the morn come greedy ravens
     Many any a rill of wolf (1) to sup,
     But thee burning thirst down-beareth,
     Prince of battle's Parliament!"

After that Kolskegg took a beaker full of mead, and drank it off,
and went on fighting afterwards; and so it came about that those
brothers sprang up on the ship of Vandil and his brother, and
Kolskegg went on one side, and Gunnar on the other.  Against
Gunnar came Vandil, and smote at once at him with his sword, and
the blow fell on his shield.  Gunnar gave the shield a twist as
the sword pierced it, and broke it short off at the hilt.  Then
Gunnar smote back at Vandil, and three swords seemed to be aloft,
and Vandil could not see how to shun the blow.  Then Gunnar cut
both his legs from under him, and at the same time Kolskegg ran
Karli through with a spear.  After that they took great war
spoil.

Thence they held on south to Denmark, and thence east to Smoland,
(2) and had victory wherever they went.  They did not come back
in autumn.  The next summer they held on to Reval, and fell in
there with sea-rovers, and fought at once, and won the fight. 
After that they steered east to Osel,(3) and lay there somewhile
under a ness.  There they saw a man coming down from the ness
above them; Gunnar went on shore to meet the man, and they had a
talk.  Gunnar asked him his name, and he said it was Tofi. 
Gunnar asked again what he wanted.

"Thee I want to see," says the man.  " Two warships lie on the
other side under the ness, and I will tell thee who command them:
two brothers are the captains -- one's name is Hallgrim, and the
other's Kolskegg.  I know them to be mighty men of war; and I
know too that they have such good weapons that the like are not
to be had.  Hallgrim has a bill which he had made by seething-
spells; and this is what the spells say, that no weapon shall
give him his death-blow save that bill.  That thing follows
it too that it is known at once when a man is to be slain with
that bill, for something sings in it so loudly that it may be
heard along way off -- such a strong nature has that bill in it."

Then Gunnar sang a song --

     "Soon shall I that spearhead seize,
     And the bold sea-rover slay,
     Him whose blows on headpiece ring,
     Heaper up of piles of dead.
     Then on Endil's courser (4) bounding,
     O'er the sea-depths I will ride,
     While the wretch who spells abuseth,
     Life shall lose in Sigar's storm." (5)

"Kolskegg has a short sword; that is also the best of weapons. 
Force, too, they have -- a third more than ye.  They have also
much goods, and have stowed them away on land, and I know clearly
where they are.  But they have sent a spy-ship off the ness, and
they know all about you.  Now they are getting themselves ready
as fast as they can; and as soon as they are `boun,' they mean
to run out against you.  Now you have either to row away at once,
or to busk yourselves as quickly as ye can; but if ye win the day
then I will lead you to all their store of goods."

Gunnar gave him a golden finger-ring, and went afterwards to his
men and told them that war-ships lay on the other side of the
ness, "and they know all about us; so let us take to our arms and
busk us well, for now there is gain to be got."

Then they busked them; and just when they were `boun' they see
ships coming up to them.  And now a fight sprung up between them,
and they fought long, and many men fell.  Gunnar slew many a man. 
Hallgrim and his men leapt on board Gunnar's ship.  Gunnar turns
to meet him, and Hallgrim thrust at him with his bill.  There was
a boom athwart the ship, and Gunnar leapt nimbly back over it. 
Gunnar's shield was just before the boom, and Hallgrim thrust his
bill into it, and through it, and so on into the boom.  Gunnar
cut at Hallgrim's arm hard, and lamed the forearm, but the sword
would not bite.  Then down fell the bill, and Gunnar seized the
bill, and thrust Hallgrim through, and then sang a song --

     "Slain is he who spoiled the people,
     Lashing them with flashing steel;
     Heard have I how Hallgrim's magic
     Helm-rod forged in foreign land;
     All men know, of heart-strings doughty,
     How this bill hath come to me,
     Deft in fight, the wolf's dear feeder,
     Death alone us two shall part."

And that vow Gunnar kept, in that he bore the bill while he
lived.  Those namesakes the two Kolskeggs fought together, and
it was a near thing which would get the better of it.  Then
Gunnar came up, and gave the other Kolskegg his death-blow. 
After that the sea-rovers begged for mercy.  Gunnar let them have
that choice, and he let them also count the slain, and take the
goods which the dead men owned, but he gave the others whom he
spared their arms and their clothing, and bade them be off to the
lands that fostered them.  So they went off, and Gunnar took all
the goods that were left behind.

Tofi came to Gunner after the battle, and offered to lead him to
that store of goods which the sea-rovers had stowed away, and
said that it was both better and larger than that which they had
already got.

Gunnar said he was willing to go, and so he went ashore, and Tofi
before him, to a wood, and Gunnar behind him.  They came to a
place where a great heap of wood was piled together.  Tofi says
the goods were under there, then they tossed off the wood, and
found under it both gold and silver, clothes, and good weapons. 
They bore those goods to the ships, and Gunnar asks Tofi in what
way he wished him to repay him.

Tofi answered, "I am a Dansk man by race, and I wish thou wouldst
bring me to my kinsfolk."

Gunnar asks why he was there away east?

"I was taken by sea-rovers," says Tofi, "and they put me on land
here in Osel, and here I have been ever since."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Rill of wolf -- stream of blood.
(2)  A province of Sweden.
(3)  An island in the Baltic, off the coast of Esthonia.
(4)  "Endil's courser" -- periphrasis for a ship.
(5)  "Sigar's storm" -- periphrasis for a sea-fight.



31. GUNNAR GOES TO KING HAROLD GORM'SSON AND EARL HACON

Gunnar took Tofi on board, and said to Kolskegg and Hallvard,
"Now we will hold our course for the north lands."

They were well pleased at that, and bade him have his way.  So
Gunnar sailed from the east with much goods.  He had ten ships,
and ran in with them to Heidarby in Denmark.  King Harold Gorm's
son was there up the country, and he was told about Gunnar, and
how too that there was no man his match in all Iceland.  He sent
men to him to ask him to come to him, and Gunnar went at once to
see the king, and the king made him a hearty welcome, and sat him
down next to himself.  Gunnar was there half a month.  The king
made himself sport by letting Gunnar prove himself in divers
feats of strength against his men, and there were none that were
his match even in one feat.

Then the king said to Gunnar, "It seems to me as though thy peer
is not to be found far or near," and the king offered to get
Gunnar a wife, and to raise him to great power if he would settle
down there.

Gunnar thanked the king for his offer and said, "I will first of
all sail back to Iceland to see my friends and kinsfolk."

"Then thou wilt never come back to us," says the king.

"Fate will settle that, lord," says Gunnar.

Gunnar gave the king a good long-ship, and much goods besides,
and the king gave him a robe of honour, and golden-seamed gloves,
and a fillet with a knot of gold on it, and a Russian hat.

Then Gunnar fared north to Hisingen.  Oliver welcomed him with
both hands, and he gave back to Oliver his ships, with their
lading, and said that was his share of the spoil.  Oliver took
the goods, and said Gunnar was a good man and true, and bade him
stay with him some while.  Hallvard asked Gunnar if he had a mind
to go to see Earl Hacon.  Gunnar said that was near his heart,
"for now I am somewhat proved, but then I was not tried at all
when thou badest me do this before."

After that they fared north to Drontheim to see Earl Hacon, and
he gave Gunnar a hearty welcome, and bade him stay with him that
winter, and Gunnar took that offer, and every man thought him a
man of great worth.  At Yule the Earl gave him a gold ring.

Gunnar set his heart on Bergliota, the Earl's kinswoman, and it
was often to be seen from the Earl's way, that he would have
given her to him to wife if Gunnar had said anything about that.



32. GUNNAR COMES OUT TO ICELAND

When the spring came, the Earl asks Gunnar what course he meant
to take.  He said he would go to Iceland.  The Earl said that had
been a bad year for grain, "and there will be little sailing out
to Iceland, but still thou shalt have meal and timber both in thy
ship."

Gunnar fitted out his ship as early as he could, and Hallvard
fared out with him and Kolskegg.  They came out early in the
summer, and made Arnbael's Oyce before the Thing met.

Gunnar rode home from the ship, but got men to strip her and lay
her up.  But when they came home all men were glad to see them. 
They were blithe and merry to their household, nor had their
haughtiness grown while they were away.

Gunnar asks if Njal were at home; and he was told that he was at
home; then he let them saddle his horse, and those brothers rode
over to Bergthorsknoll.

Njal was glad at their coming, and begged them to stay there that
night, and Gunnar told him of his voyages.

Njal said he was a man of the greatest mark, "and thou hast been
much proved; but still thou wilt be more tried hereafter; for
many will envy thee." 

"With all men I would wish to stand well," says Gunnar.

"Much bad will happen," said Njal, "and thou wilt always have
some quarrel to ward off."

"So be it, then," says Gunnar, "so that I have a good ground on
my side."

"So will it be too," says NjaI, "if thou hast not to smart for
others."

Njal asked Gunnar if he would ride to the Thing.  Gunnar said he
was going to ride thither, and asks Njal whether he were going to
ride; but he said he would not ride thither, "and if I had my
will thou wouldst do the like."

Gunnar rode home, and gave Njal good gifts, and thanked him for
the care he had taken of his goods.  Kolskegg urged him on much
to ride to the Thing, saying, "There thy honour will grow, for
many will flock to see thee there."

"That has been little to my mind," says Gunnar, "to make a show
of myself; but I think it good and right to meet good and worthy
men."

Hallvard by this time was also come thither, and offered to ride
to the thing with them.



33. GUNNAR'S WOOING

So Gunnar rode, and they all rode.  But when they came to the
Thing they were so well arrayed that none could match them in
bravery; and men came out of every booth to wonder at them. 
Gunnar rode to the booths of the men of Rangriver, and was there
with his kinsmen.  Many men came to see Gunnar, and ask tidings
of him; and he was easy and merry to all men, and told them all
they wished to hear.

It happened one day that Gunnar went away from the Hill of Laws,
and passed by the booths of the men from Mossfell; then he saw a
woman coming to meet him, and she was in goodly attire; but when
they met she spoke to Gunnar at once.  He took her greeting well,
and asks what woman she might be.  She told him her name was
Hallgerda, and said she was Hauskuld's daughter, Dalakoll's son. 
She spoke up boldly to him, and bade him tell her of his voyages;
but he said he would not gainsay her a talk.  Then they sat them
down and talked.  She was so clad that she had on a red kirtle,
and had thrown over her a scarlet cloak trimmed with needlework
down to the waist.  Her hair came down to her bosom, and was both
fair and full.  Gunnar was clad in the scarlet clothes which King
Harold Gorm's son had given him; he had also the gold ring on his
arm which Earl Hacon had given him. 

So they talked long out loud, and at last it came about that he
asked whether she were unmarried.  She said, so it was, "and
there are not many who would run the risk of that."

"Thinkest thou none good enough for thee?"

"Not that," she says, "but I am said to be hard to please in
husbands."

"How wouldst thou answer, were I to ask for thee?"

"That cannot be in thy mind," she says.

"It is though," says he.

"If thou hast any mind that way, go and see my father."

After that they broke off their talk.

Gunnar went straightway to the Dalesmen's booths, and met a man
outside the doorway, and asks whether Hauskuld were inside the
booth?

The man says that he was.  Then Gunnar went in, and Hauskuld and
Hrut made him welcome.  He sat down between them, and no one
could find out from their talk that there had ever been any
misunderstanding between them.  At last Gunnar's speech turned
thither; how these brothers would answer if he asked for
Hallgerda?

"Well," says Hauskuld, "if that is indeed thy mind."

Gunnar says that he is in earnest, "but we so parted last time,
that many would think it unlikely that we should ever be bound
together."

"How thinkest thou, kinsman Hrut?" says Hauskuld.

Hrut answered, "Methinks this is no even match."

"How dost thou make that out?" says Gunnar.

Hrut spoke, "In this wise will I answer thee about this matter,
as is the very truth.  Thou art a brisk brave man well to do, and
unblemished; but she is much mixed up with ill report, and I will
not cheat thee in anything."

"Good go with thee for thy words," says Gunnar, "but still I
shall hold that for true, that the old feud weighs with ye, if ye
will not let me make this match."

"Not so," says Hrut, "'t is more because I see that thou art
unable to help thyself; but though we make no bargain, we would
still be thy friends."

"I have talked to her about it," says Gunnar, "and it is not far
from her mind."

Hrut says, "I know that you have both set your hearts on this
match; and, besides, ye two are those who run the most risk as to
how it turns out."

Hrut told Gunnar unasked all about Hallgerda's temper, and Gunnar
at first thought that there was more than enough that was
wanting; but at last it came about that they struck a bargain.

Then Hallgerda was sent for, and they talked over the business
when she was by, and now, as before, they made her betroth
herself.  The bridal feast was to be at Lithend, and at first
they were to set about it secretly; but the end after all was
that every one knew of it.

Gunnar rode home from the Thing, and came to Bergthorsknoll, and
told Njal of the bargain he had made.  He took it heavily.

Gunnar asks Njal why he thought this so unwise?

"Because from her," says Njal, "will arise all kind of ill if
she comes hither east."

"Never shall she spoil our friendship," says Gunnar.

"Ah!  but yet that may come very near," says Njal; "and, besides,
thou wilt have always to make atonement for her."

Gunnar asked Njal to the wedding, and all those as well whom he
wished should be at it from Njal's house.

Njal promised to go; and after that Gunnar rode home, and then
rode about the district to bid men to his wedding.



34. OF THRAIN SIGFUS' SON

There was a man named Thrain, he was the son of Sigfus, the son
of Sighvat the Red.  He kept house at Gritwater on Fleetlithe. 
He was Gunnar's kinsman, and a man of great mark.  He had to wife
Thorhillda Skaldwife; she had a sharp tongue of her own, and was
given to jeering.  Thrain loved her little.  He and his wife were
bidden to the wedding, and she and Bergthora, Skarphedinn's
daughter, Njal's wife, waited on the guests with meat and drink.

Kettle was the name of the second son of Sigfus; he kept house in
the Mark, east of Markfleet.  He had to wife Thorgerda, Njal's
daughter.  Thorkell was the name of the third son of Sigfus; the
fourth's name was Mord; the fifth's Lambi; the sixth's Sigmund;
the seventh's Sigurd.  These were all Gunnar's kinsmen, and great
champions.  Gunnar bade them all to the wedding.

Gunnar had also bidden Valgard the Guileful, and Wolf Aurpriest,
and their sons Runolf and Mord.

Hauskuld and Hrut came to the wedding with a very great company,
and the sons of Hauskuld, Thorleik, and Olof, were there; the
bride, too, came along with them, and her daughter Thorgerda came
also, and she was one of the fairest of women; she was then
fourteen winters old.  Many other women were with her, and
besides there were Thorkatla Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's daughter,
and Njal's two daughters, Thorgerda and Helga.

Gunnar had already many guests to meet them, and he thus arranged
his men.  He sat on the middle of the bench, and on the inside,
away from him, Thrain Sigfus' son, then Wolf Aurpriest, then
Valgard the Guileful, then Mord and Runolf, then the other sons
of Sigfus, Lambi sat outermost of them.

Next to Gunnar on the outside, away from him, sat Njal, then
Skarphedinn, then Helgi, then Grim, then Hauskuld Njal's son,
then Hafr the Wise, then Ingialld from the Springs, then the sons
of Thorir from Holt away east.  Thorir would sit outermost of the
men of mark, for every one was pleased with the seat he got.

Hauskuld, the bride's father, sat on the middle of the bench over
against Gunnar, but his sons sat on the inside away from him;
Hrut sat on the outside away from Hauskuld, but it is not said
how the others were placed.  The bride sat in the middle of the
cross bench on the dais; but on one hand of her sat her daughter
Thorgerda, and on the other Thorkatla Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's
daughter.

Thorhillda went about waiting on the guests, and Bergthora bore
the meat on the board.

Now Thrain Sigfus' son kept staring at Thorgerda Glum's daughter;
his wife Thorhillda saw this, and she got wroth, and made a
couplet upon him.

"Thrain," she says,

     "Gaping mouths are no wise good,
     Goggle eyne are in thy head."

He rose at once up from the board, and said he would put
Thorhillda away.  "I will not bear her jibes and jeers any
longer;" and he was so quarrelsome about this, that he would not
be at the feast unless she were driven away.  And so it was, that
she went away; and now each man sat in his place, and they drank
and were glad.

Then Thrain began to speak, "I will not whisper about that which
is in my mind.  This I will ask thee, Hauskuld Dalakoll's son,
wilt thou give me to wife Thorgerda, thy kinswoman?"

"I do not know that," says Hauskuld; "methinks thou art ill
parted from the one thou hadst before.  But what kind of man is
he, Gunnar?"

Gunnar answers, "I will not say aught about the man, because he
is near of kin; but say thou about him, Njal," says Gunnar, "for
all men will believe it."

Njal spoke, and said, "That is to be said of this man, that the
man is well to do for wealth, and a proper man in all things.  A
man, too, of the greatest mark; so that ye may well make this
match with him."

Then Hauskuld spoke, "What thinkest thou we ought to do, kinsman
Hrut?"

"Thou mayst make the match, because it is an even one for her,"
says Hrut.

Then they talk about the terms of the bargain, and are soon of
one mind on all points.

Then Gunnar stands up, and Thrain too, and they go to the cross
bench.  Gunnar asked that mother and daughter whether they would
say yes to this bargain.  They said they would find no fault with
it, and Hallgerda betrothed her daughter.  Then the places of the
women were shifted again, and now Thorhalla sate between the
brides.  And now the feast sped on well, and when it was over,
Hauskuld and his company ride west, but the men of Rangriver rode
to their own abode.  Gunnar gave many men gifts, and that made
him much liked.

Hallgerda took the housekeeping under her, and stood up for her
rights in word and deed.  Thorgerda took to housekeeping at
Gritwater, and was a good housewife.



35. THE VISIT TO BERGTHORSKNOLL

Now it was the custom between Gunnar and Njal, that each made the
other a feast, winter and winter about, for friendship's sake;
and it was Gunnar's turn to go to feast at Njal's.  So Gunnar and
Hallgerda set off for Bergthorsknoll, and when they got there
Helgi and his wife were not at home.  Njal gave Gunnar and his
wife a hearty welcome, and when they had been there a little
while, Helgi came home with Thorhalla his wife.  Then Bergthora
went up to the crossbench, and Thorhalla with her, and Bergthora
said to Hallgerda, "Thou shalt give place to this woman."

She answered, "To no one will I give place, for I will not be
driven into the corner for any one."

"I shall rule here," said Bergthora.  After that Thorhalla sat
down, and Bergthora went round the table with water to wash the
guests' hands.  Then Hallgerda took hold of Bergthora's hand, and
said, "There's not much to choose, though, between you two.  Thou
hast hangnails on every finger, and Njal is beardless."

"That's true," says Bergthora, "yet neither of us finds fault
with the other for it; but Thorwald, thy husband, was not
beardless, and yet thou plottedst his death."

Then Hallgerda said, "It stands me in little stead to have the
bravest man in Iceland if thou dost not avenge this, Gunnar!"

He sprang up and strode across away from the board, and said,
"Home I will go, and it were more seemly that thou shouldest
wrangle with those of thine own household, and not under other
men's roofs; but as for NjaI, I am his debtor for much honour,
and never will I be egged on by thee like a fool."

After that they set off home.

"Mind this Bergthora," said Hallgerda, "that we shall meet
again."

Bergthora said she should not be better off for that.  Gunnar
said nothing at all, but went home to Lithend, and was there at
home all the winter.  And now the summer was running on towards
the Great Thing.



36. KOL SLEW SWART

Gunnar rode away to the Thing, but before he rode from home he
said to Hallgerda, "Be good now while I am away, and show none of
thine ill temper in anything with which my friends have to do."

"The trolls take thy friends," says Hallgerda.

So Gunnar rode to the Thing, and saw it was not good to come to
words with her.  Njal rode to the Thing too, and all his sons
with him.

Now it must be told of what tidings happened at home.  Njal and
Gunnar owned a wood in common at Redslip; they had not shared the
wood, but each was wont to hew in it as he needed, and neither
said a word to the other about that.  Hallgerda's grieve's (1)
name was Kol; he had been with her long, and was one of the worst
of men.  There was a man named Swart; he was Njal's and
Bergthora's housecarle; they were very fond of him.  Now
Bergthora told him that he must go up into Redslip and hew wood;
but she said, "I will get men to draw home the wood."

He said he would do the work she set him to win; and so he went
up into Redslip, and was to be there a week.

Some gangrel men came to Lithend from the east across Markfleet,
and said that Swart had been in Redslip, and hewn wood, and done
a deal of work.

"So," says Hallgerda, "Bergthora must mean to rob me in many
things, but I'll take care that he does not hew again."

Rannveig, Gunnar's mother, heard that, and said, "There have been
good housewives before now, though they never set their hearts on
manslaughter."

Now the night wore away, and early next morning Hallgerda came to
speak to Kol, and said, "I have thought of some work for thee;"
and with that she put weapons into his hands, and went on to say
-- "Fare thou to Redslip; there wilt thou find Swart."

"What shall I do to him?" he says.

"Askest thou that, when thou art the worst of men?" she says. 
"Thou shalt kill him."

"I can get that done," he says, "but 'tis more likely that I
shall lose my own life for it."

"Everything grows big in thy eyes," she says, "and thou behavest
ill to say this after I have spoken up for thee in everything.  I
must get another man to do this if thou darest not."

He took the axe, and was very wroth, and takes a horse that
Gunnar owned, and rides now till he comes east of Markfleet. 
There he got off and bided in the wood, till they had carried
down the firewood, and Swart was left alone behind.  Then Kol
sprang on him, and said, "More folk can hew great strokes than
thou alone;" and so he laid the axe on his head, and smote him
his death-blow, and rides home afterwards, and tells Hallgerda of
the slaying.

She said, "I shall take such good care of thee, that no harm
shall come to thee."

"May be so," says he, "but I dreamt all the other way as I slept
ere I did the deed."

Now they come up into the wood, and find Swart slain, and bear
him home.  Hallgerda sent a man to Gunnar at the Thing to tell
him of the slaying.  Gunnar said no hard words at first of
Hallgerda to the messenger, and men knew not at first whether he
thought well or ill of it.  A little after he stood up, and bade
his men go with him: they did so, and fared to Njal's booth. 
Gunnar sent a man to fetch Njal, and begged him to come out. 
Njal went out at once, and he and Gunnar fell a-talking, and
Gunnar said, "I have to tell thee of the slaying of a man, and my
wife and my grieve Kol were those who did it; but Swart, thy
housecarle, fell before them."

Njal held his peace while he told him the whole story.  Then Njal
spoke, "Thou must take heed not to let her have her way in
everything."

Gunnar said, "Thou thyself shalt settle the terms."

Njal spoke again, "'Twill be hard work for thee to atone for all
Hallgerda's mischief; and somewhere else there will be a broader
trail to follow than this which we two now have a share in, and
yet, even here there will be much awanting before all be well;
and herein we shall need to bear in mind the friendly words that
passed between us of old; and something tells me that thou wilt
come well out of it, but still thou wilt be sore tried."

Then Njal took the award into his own hands from Gunnar, and
said, "I will not push this matter to the uttermost; thou shalt
pay twelve ounces of silver; but I will add this to my award,
that if anything happens from our homestead about which thou hast
to utter an award, thou wilt not be less easy in thy terms."

Gunnar paid up the money out of hand, and rode home afterwards. 
Njal, too, came home from the Thing, and his sons.  Bergthora saw
the money, and said, "This is very justly settled; but even as
much money shall be paid for Kol as time goes on."

Gunnar came home from the Thing and blamed Hallgerda.  She said,
better men lay unatoned in many places.  Gunnar said, she might
have her way in beginning a quarrel, "but how the matter is to be
settled rests with me."

Hallgerda was for ever chattering of Swart's slaying, but
Bergthora liked that ill.  Once Njal and her sons went up to
Thorolfsfell to see about the house-keeping there, but that
selfsame day this thing happened when Bergthora was out of doors:
she sees a man ride up to the house on a black horse.  She stayed
there and did not go in, for she did not know the man.  That man
had a spear in his hand, and was girded with a short sword.  She
asked this man his name.

"Atli is my name," says he.

She asked whence he came.

"I am an Eastfirther," he says.

"Whither shalt thou go?" she says.

"I am a homeless man," says he, "and I thought to see Njal and
Skarphedinn, and know if they would take me in."

"What work is handiest to thee?" says she.

"I am a man used to field-work," he says, "and many things else
come very handy to me; but I will not hide from thee that I am a
man of hard temper, and it has been many a man's lot before now
to bind up wounds at my hand."

"I do not blame thee," she says, "though thou art no milksop."

Atli said, "Hast thou any voice in things here?"

"I am Njal's wife," she says, "and I have as much to say to our
housefolk as he."

"Wilt thou take me in then?" says he.

"I will give thee thy choice of that," says she.  "If thou wilt
do all the work that I set before thee, and that, though I wish
to send thee where a man's life is at stake."

"Thou must have so many men at thy beck," says he, "that thou
wilt not need me for such work."

"That I will settle as I please," she says.

"We will strike a bargain on these terms," says he.

Then she took him into the household.  Njal and his sons came
home and asked Bergthora what man that might be?

"He is thy house-carle," she says, "and I took him in."  Then she
went on to say he was no sluggard at work.

"He will be a great worker enough, I daresay," says Njal, "but I
do not know whether he will be such a good worker."

Skarphedinn was good to Atli.

Njal and his sons ride to the Thing in the course of the summer;
Gunnar was also at the Thing.

Njal took out a purse of money.

"What money is that, father?"

"Here is the money that Gunnar paid me for our housecarle last
summer."

"That will come to stand thee in some stead," says Skarphedinn,
and smiled as he spoke.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Grieve, i.e., bailiff, head workman.



37. THE SLAYING OF KOL, WHOM ATLI SLEW

Now we must take up the story and say, that Atli asked Bergthora
what work he should do that day?

"I have thought of some work for thee," she says; "thou shalt go
and look for Kol until thou find him; for now shalt thou slay him
this very day, if thou wilt do my will."

"This work is well fitted," says Atli, "for each of us two are
bad fellows; but still I will so lay myself out for him that one
or other of us shall die."

"Well mayst thou fare," she says, "and thou shalt not do this
deed for nothing."

He took his weapons and his horse, and rode up to Fleetlithe, and
there met men who were coming down from Lithend.  They were at
home east in the Mark.  They asked Atli whither he meant to go?
He said he was riding to look for an old jade.  They said that
was a small errand for such a workman, "but still 'twould be
better to ask those who have been about last night."

"Who are they?" says he.

"Killing-Kol," say they, "Hallgerda's house-carle, fared from the
fold just now, and has been awake all night."

"I do not know whether I dare to meet him," says Atli, "he is
bad-tempered, and may be that I shall let another's wound be my
warning."

"Thou bearest that look beneath the brows as though thou wert no
coward," they said, and showed him where Kol was.

Then he spurred his horse and rides fast, and when he meets Ko1,
Atli said to him, "Go the pack-saddle bands well," says Atli.

"That's no business of thine, worthless fellow, nor of any one
else whence thou comest."

Atli said, "Thou hast something behind that is earnest work, but
that is to die."

After that Atli thrust at him with his spear, and struck him
about his middle.  Kol swept at him with his axe, but missed him,
and fell off his horse, and died at once.

Atli rode till he met some of Hallgerda's workmen, and said, "Go
ye up to the horse yonder, and look to Kol, for he has fallen
off, and is dead."

"Hast thou slain him? " say they.

"Well, 'twill seem to Hallgerda as though he has not fallen by
his own hand."

After that Atli rode home and told Bergthora; she thanked him for
this deed, and for the words which he had spoken about it.

"I do not know," says he, "what Njal will think of this."

"He will take it well upon his hands," she says, "and I will tell
thee one thing as a token of it, that he has carried away with
him to the Thing the price of that thrall which we took last
spring, and that money will now serve for Kol; but though peace
be made thou must still be ware of thyself, for Hallgerda will
keep no peace."

"Wilt thou send at all a man to Njal to tell him of the slaying?"

"I will not," she says, "I should like it better that Kol were
unatoned."

Then they stopped talking about it.

Hallgerda was told of Kol's slaying, and of the words that Atli
had said.  She said Atli should be paid off for them.  She sent a
man to the Thing to tell Gunnar of Kol's slaying; he answered
little or nothing, and sent a man to tell Njal.  He too made no
answer, but Skarphedinn said, "Thralls are men of more mettle
than of yore; they used to fly at each other and fight, and no
one thought much harm of that; but now they will do naught but
kill," and as he said this he smiled.

Njal pulled down the purse of money which hung up in the booth,
and went out: his sons went with him to Gunnar's booth.

Skarphedinn said to a man who was in the doorway of the booth,
"Say thou to Gunnar that my father wants to see him."

He did so, and Gunnar went out at once and gave Njal a hearty
welcome.  After that they began to talk.

"'Tis ill done," says Njal, "that my housewife should have broken
the peace, and let thy house-carle be slain."

"She shall not have blame for that," says Gunnar.

"Settle the award thyself," says Njal.

"So I will do," says Gunnar, "and I value those two men at an
even price, Swart and Kol.  Thou shalt pay me twelve ounces in
silver."

Njal took the purse of money and handed it to Gunnar.  Gunnar
knew the money, and saw it was the same that he had paid Njal. 
Njal went away to his booth, and they were just as good friends
as before.  When Njal came home, he blamed Bergthora; but she
said she would never give way to Hallgerda.  Hallgerda was very
cross with Gunnar, because he had made peace for Kol's slaying. 
Gunnar told her he would never break with Njal or his sons, and
she flew into a great rage; but Gunnar took no heed of that, and
so they sat for that year, and nothing noteworthy happened.



38. THE KILLING OF ATLI THE THRALL

Next spring Njal said to Atli, "I wish that thou wouldst change
thy abode to the east firths, so that Hallgerda may not put an
end to thy life?"

"I am not afraid of that," says Atli, "and I will willingly stay
at home if I have the choice."

"Still that is less wise," says Njal.

"I think it better to lose my life in thy house than to change my
master; but this I will beg of thee, if I am slain, that a
thrall's price shall not be paid for me."

"Thou shalt be atoned for as a free man; but perhaps Bergthora
will make thee a promise which she will fulfil, that revenge, man
for man, shall be taken for thee."

Then he made up his mind to be a hired servant there.

Now it must be told of Hallgerda that she sent a man west to
Bearfirth, to fetch Brynjolf the Unruly, her kinsman.  He was a
base son of Swan, and he was one of the worst of men.  Gunnar
knew nothing about it.  Hallgerda said he was well fitted to be a
grieve.  So Brynjolf came from the west, and Gunnar asked what he
was to do there?  He said he was going to stay there.

"Thou wilt not better our household," says Gunnar, "after what
has been told me of thee, but I will not turn away any of
Hallgerda's kinsmen, whom she wishes to be with her."

Gunnar said little, but was not unkind to him, and so things went
on till the Thing.  Gunnar rides to the Thing and Kolskegg rides
too, and when they came to the Thing they and Njal met, for he
and his sons were at the Thing, and all went well with Gunnar and
them.

Bergthora said to Atli, "Go thou up into Thorolfsfell and work
there a week."

So he went up thither, and was there on the sly, and burnt
charcoal in the wood.

Hallgerda said to Brynjolf, "I have been told Atli is not at
home, and he must be winning work on Thorolfsfell."

"What thinkest thou likeliest that he is working at," says he.

"At something in the wood," she says.

"What shall I do to him?" he asks.

"Thou shalt kill him," says she.

He was rather slow in answering her, and Hallgerda said, "'Twould
grow less in Thiostolf's eyes to kill Atli if he were alive."

"Thou shalt have no need to goad me on much more," he says, and
then he seized his weapons, and takes his horse and mounts, and
rides to Thorolfsfell.  There he saw a great reek of coalsmoke
east of the homestead, so he rides thither, and gets off his
horse and ties him up, but he goes where the smoke was thickest. 
Then he sees where the charcoal pit is, and a man stands by it. 
He saw that he had thrust his spear in the ground by him. 
Brynjolf goes along with the smoke right up to him, but he was
eager at his work, and saw him not.  Brynjolf gave him a stroke
on the head with his axe, and he turned so quick round that
Brynjolf loosed his hold of the axe, and Atli grasped the spear,
and hurled it after him.  Then Brynjolf cast himself down on the
ground, but the spear flew away over him.

"Lucky for thee that I was not ready for thee," says Atli, "but
now Hallgerda will be well pleased, for thou wilt tell her of my
death; but it is a comfort to know that thou wilt have the same
fate soon; but come now take thy axe which has been here."

He answered him never a word, nor did he take the axe before he
was dead.  Then he rode up to the house on Thorolfsfell, and told
of the slaying, and after that rode home and told Hallgerda.  She
sent men to Bergthorsknoll, and let them tell Bergthora that now
Kol's slaying was paid for.

After that Hallgerda sent a man to the Thing to tell Gunnar of
Atli's killing.

Gunnar stood up, and Kolskegg with him, and Kolskegg said,
"Unthrifty will Hallgerda's kinsmen be to thee."

Then they go to see Njal, and Gunnar said, "I have to tell thee
of Atli's killing."  He told him also who slew him, and went on,
"And now I will bid thee atonement for the deed, and thou shalt
make the award thyself."

Njal said, "We two have always meant never to come to strife
about anything; but still I cannot make him out a thrall."

Gunnar said that was all right, and stretched out his hand.

Njal named his witnesses, and they made peace on those terms.

Skarphedinn said, "Hallgerda does not let our housecarles die
of old age."

Gunnar said, "Thy mother will take care that blow goes for blow
between the houses."

"Ay, ay," says Njal, "there will be enough of that work."

After that Njal fixed the price at a hundred in silver, but
Gunnar paid it down at once.  Many who stood by said that the
award was high; Gunnar got wroth, and said that a full atonement
was often paid for those who were no brisker men than Atli.

With that they rode home from the Thing.

Bergthora said to Njal when she saw the money, "Thou thinkest
thou hast fulfilled thy promise, but now my promise is still
behind."

"There is no need that thou shouldst fulfil it," says Njal.

"Nay," says she, "thou hast guessed it would be so; and so it
shall be."

Hallgerda said to Gunnar, "Hast thou paid a hundred in silver for
Atli's slaying, and made him a free man?"

"He was free before," says Gunnar, "and besides, I will not make
Njal's household outlaws who have forfeited their rights."

"There's not a pin to choose between you," she said, "for both of
you are so blate?"

"That's as things prove," says he.

Then Gunnar was for a long time very short with her, till she
gave way to him; and now all was still for the rest of that year;
in the spring Njal did not increase his household, and now men
ride to the Thing about summer.



39. THE SLAYING OF BRYNJOLF THE UNRULY

There was a man named Thord, he was surnamed Freedmanson. 
Sigtrygg was his father's name, and he had been the freedman of
Asgerd, and he was drowned in Markfleet.  That was why Thord was
with Njal afterwards.  He was a tall man and a strong, and he had
fostered all Njal's sons.  He had set his heart on Gudfinna
Thorolf's daughter, Njal's kinswoman; she was housekeeper at home
there, and was then with child.

Now Bergthora came to talk with Thord Freedmanson; she said,
"Thou shalt go to kill Brynjolf, Hallgerda's kinsman."

"I am no man-slayer," he says, "but still I will do whatever thou
wilt."

"This is my will," she says.

After that he went up to Lithend, and made them call Hallgerda
out, and asked where Brynjolf might be.

"What's thy will with him," she says.

"I want him to tell me where he has hidden Atli's body; I have
heard say that he has buried it badly."

She pointed to him and said he was down yonder in Acretongue.

"Take heed," says Thord, "that the same thing does not befall him
as befell Atli."

"Thou art no man-slayer," she says, "and so naught will come of
it even if ye two do meet."

"Never have I seen man's blood, nor do I know how I should feel
if I did," he says, and gallops out of the "town" and down to
Acretongue.

Rannveig, Gunnar's mother, had heard their talk.

"Thou goadest his mind much, Hallgerda," she says, "but I think
him a dauntless man, and that thy kinsman will find."

They met on the beaten way, Thord and Brynjolf; and Thord said,
"Guard thee, Brynjolf, for I will do no dastard's deed by thee."

Brynjolf rode at Thord, and smote at him with his axe.  He smote
at him at the same time with his axe, and hewed in sunder the
haft just above Brynjolf's hands, and then hewed at him at once a
second time, and struck him on the collar-bone, and the blow went
straight into his trunk.  Then he fell from horseback, and was
dead on the spot.

Thord met Hallgerda's herdsman, and gave out the slaying as done
by his hand, and said where he lay, and bade him tell Hallgerda
of the slaying.  After that he rode home to Bergthorsknoll, and
told Bergthora of the slaying, and other people too.

"Good luck go with thy hands," she said.

The herdsman told Hallgerda of the slaying; she was snappish at
it, and said much ill would come of it, if she might have her
way.



40. GUNNAR AND NJAL MAKE PEACE ABOUT BRYNJOLF'S SLAYING

Now these tidings come to the Thing, and Njal made them tell him
the tale thrice, and then he said, "More men now become man-
slayers than I weened."

Skarphedinn spoke, "That man, though, must have been twice fey,"
he says, "who lost his life by our foster-father's hand, who has
never seen man's blood.  And many would think that we brothers
would sooner have done this deed with the turn of temper that we
have."

"Scant space wilt thou have," says Njal, "ere the like befalls
thee; but need will drive thee to it."

Then they went to meet Gunnar, and told him of the slaying. 
Gunnar spoke and said that was little man-scathe, "but yet he was
a free man."

Njal offered to make peace at once, and Gunnar said yes, and he
was to settle the terms himself.  He made his award there and
then, and laid it at one hundred in silver.  Njal paid down the
money on the spot, and they were at peace after that.



41. SIGMUND COMES OUT TO ICELAND

There was a man whose name was Sigmund.  He was the son of Lambi,
the son of Sighvat the Red.  He was a great voyager, and a comely
and a courteous man; tall too, and strong.  He was a man of proud
spirit, and a good skald, and well trained in most feats of
strength.  He was noisy and boisterous, and given to jibes and
mocking.  He made the land east in Homfirth.  Skiolld was the
name of his fellow-traveller; he was a Swedish man, and ill to do
with.  They took horse and rode from the east out of Hornfirth,
and did not draw bridle before they came to Lithend, in the
Fleetlithe.  Gunnar gave them a hearty welcome, for the bonds of
kinship were close between them.  Gunnar begged Sigmund to stay
there that winter, and Sigmund said he would take the offer if
Skiolld his fellow might be there too.

"Well, I have been so told about him," said Gunnar, "that he is
no betterer of thy temper; but as it is, thou rather needest to
have it bettered.  This, too, is a bad house to stay at, and I
would just give both of you a bit of advice, my kinsman, not to
fire up at the egging on of my wife Hallgerda; for she takes much
in hand that is far from my will."

"His hands are clean who warns another," says Sigmund.

"Then mind the advice given thee," says Gunnar, "for thou art
sure to be sore tried; and go along always with me, and lean upon
my counsel."

After that they were in Gunnar's company.  Hallgerda was good to
Sigmund; and it soon came about that things grew so warm that she
loaded him with money, and tended him no worse than her own
husband; and many talked about that, and did not know what lay
under it.

One day Hallgerda said to Gunnar, "It is not good to be content
with that hundred in silver which thou tookest for my kinsman
Brynjolf.  I shall avenue him if I may," she says.

Gunnar said he had no mind to bandy words with her, and went
away.  He met Kolskegg, and said to him, "Go and see Njal; and
tell him that Thord must be ware of himself though peace has been
made for, methinks, there is faithlessness somewhere."

He rode off and told Njal, but Njal told Thord, and Kolskegg rode
home, and Njal thanked them for their faithfulness.

Once on a time they two were out in the "town," Njal and Thord; a
he-goat was wont to go up and down in the "town," and no one was
allowed to drive him away.  Then Thord spoke and said, "Well,
this is a wondrous thing!"

"What is it that thou see'st that seems after a wondrous
fashion?" says Njal.

"Methinks the goat lies here in the hollow, and he is all one
gore of blood."

Njal said that there was no goat there, nor anything else.

"What is it then?" says Thord.

"Thou must be a `fey' man," says Njal, "and thou must have seen
the fetch that follows thee, and now be ware of thyself."

"That will stand me in no stead," says Thord, "if death is doomed
for me."

Then Hallgerda came to talk with Thrain Sigfus' son, and said, "I
would think thee my son-in-law indeed," she says, "if thou
slayest Thord Freedmanson."

"I will not do that," he says, "for then I shall have the wrath
of my kinsman Gunnar; and besides, great things hang on this
deed, for this slaying would soon be avenged."

"Who will avenge it?" she asks; "is it the beardless carle?"

"Not so," says he, "his sons will avenge it."

After that they talked long and low, and no man knew what counsel
they took together.

Once it happened that Gunnar was not at home, but those
companions were.  Thrain had come in from Gritwater, and then he
and they and Hallgerda sat out of doors and talked.  Then
Hallgerda said, "This have ye two brothers in arms, Sigmund and
Skiolld, promised to slay Thord Freedmanson; but Thrain thou hast
promised me that thou wouldst stand by them when they did the
deed."

They all acknowledged that they had given her this promise.

"Now I will counsel you how to do it," she says: "Ye shall ride
east into Homfirth after your goods, and come home about the
beginning of the Thing, but if ye are at home before it begins,
Gunnar will wish that ye should ride to the Thing with him.  Njal
will be at the Thing and his sons and Gunnar, but then ye two
shall slay Thord."

They all agreed that this plan should be carried out.  After that
they busked them east to the Firth, and Gunnar was not aware of
what they were about, and Gunnar rode to the Thing.  Njal sent
Thord Freedmanson away east under Eyjafell, and bade him be away
there one night.  So he went east, but he could not get back from
the east, for the Fleet had risen so high that it could not be
crossed on horseback ever so far up.  Njal waited for him one
night, for he had meant him to have ridden with him; and Njal
said to Bregthora that she must send Thord to the Thing as soon
as ever he came home.  Two nights after, Thord came from the
east, and Bergthora told him that he must ride to the Thing, "But
first thou shalt ride up into Thorolfsfell and see about the farm
there, and do not be there longer than one or two nights."



42. THE SLAYING OF THORD FREEDMANSON

Then Sigmund came from the east and those companions.  Hallgerda
told them that Thord was at home, but that he was to ride
straightway to the Thing after a few nights' space.  "Now ye will
have a fair chance at him," she says, "but if this goes off, ye
will never get nigh him."  Men came to Lithend from Thorolfsfell,
and told Hallgerda that Thord was there.  Hallgerda went to
Thrain Sigfus' son, and his companions, and said to him, "Now is
Thord on Thorolfsfell, and now your best plan is to fall on him
and kill him as he goes home."

"That we will do," says Sigmund.  So they went out, and took
their weapons and horses and rode on the way to meet him. 
Sigmund said to Thrain, "Now thou shalt have nothing to do with
it; for we shall not need all of us."

"Very well, so I will," says he.

Then Thord rode up to them a little while after, and Sigmund said
to him, "Give thyself up," he says, "for now shalt thou die."

"That shall not be," says Thord, "come thou to single combat with
me."

"That shall not be either," says Sigmund; "we will make the most
of our numbers; but it is not strange that Skarphedinn is strong,
for it is said that a fourth of a foster-child's strength comes
from the foster-father.

"Thou wilt feel the force of that," says Thord, "for Skarphedinn
will avenge me."

After that they fall on him, and he breaks a spear of each of
them, so well did he guard himself.  Then Skiolld cut off his
hand, and he still kept them off with his other hand for some
time, till Sigmund thrust him through.  Then he fell dead to
earth.  They drew over him turf and stones; and Thrain said, "We
have won an ill work, and Njal's sons will take this slaying ill
when they hear of it."

They ride home and tell Hallgerda.  She was glad to hear of the
slaying, but Rannveig, Gunnar's mother, said, "It is said `but a
short while is hand fain of blow,' and so it will be here; but
still Gunnar will set thee free from this matter.  But if
Hallgerda makes thee take another fly in thy mouth, then that
will be thy bane."

Hallgerda sent a man to Bergthorsknoll, to tell the slaying, and
another man to the Thing, to tell it to Gunnar.  Bergthora said
she would not fight against Hallgerda with ill words about such a
matter; "That," quoth she, "would be no revenge for so great a
quarrel."



43. NJAL AND GUNNAR MAKE PEACE FOR THE SLAYING OF THORD

But when the messenger came to the Thing to tell Gunnar of the
slaying, then Gunnar said, "This has happened ill, and no tidings
could come to my ears which I should think worse; but yet we will
now go at once and see Njal.  I still hope he may take it well,
though he be sorely tried."

So they went to see Njal, and called him to come out and talk to
them.  He went out at once to meet Gunnar, and they talked, nor
were there any more men by at first than Kolskegg.

"Hard tidings have I to tell thee," says Gunnar; "the slaying of
Thord Freedmanson, and I wish to offer thee selfdoom for the
slaying."

Njal held his peace some while, and then said, "That is well 
offered, and I will take it; but yet it is to be looked for that
I shall have blame from my wife or from my sons for that, for it
will mislike them much; but still I will run the risk, for I know
that I have to deal with a good man and true; nor do I wish that
any breach should arise in our friendship on my part.

"Wilt thou let thy sons be by, pray?" says Gunnar.

"I will not," says Njal, "for they will not break the peace which
I make, but if they stand by while we make it they will not pull
well together with us."

"So it shall be," says Gunnar.  "See thou to it alone."

Then they shook one another by the hand, and made peace well and
quickly.

Then Njal said, "The award that I make is two hundred in silver,
and that thou wilt think much."

"I do not think it too much," says Gunnar, and went home to his
booth.

Njal's sons came home, and Skarphedinn asked whence that great
sum of money came, which his father held in his hand.

Njal said, "I tell you of your foster-father's Thord's slaying,
and we two, Gunnar and I, have now made peace in the matter, and
he has paid an atonement for him as for two men."

"Who slew him?" says Skarphedinn.

"Sigmund and Skiolld, but Thrain was standing near too," says
Njal.

"They thought they had need of much strength," says Skarphedinn,
and sang a song --

     "Bold in deeds of derring-do,
     Burdeners of ocean's steeds,
     Strength enough it seems they needed
     A11 to slay a single man;
     When shall we our hands uplift?
     We who brandish burnished steel --
     Famous men erst reddened weapons,
     When? if now we quiet sit?"

"Yes! when shall the day come when we shall lift our hands?"

"That will not be long off," says Njal, "and then thou shalt not
be baulked; but still, methinks, I set great store on your not
breaking this peace that I have made."

"Then we will not break it," says Skarphedinn, "but if anything
arises between us, then we will bear in mind the old feud."

"Then I will ask you to spare no one," says Njal.



44. SIGMUND MOCKS NJAL AND HIS SONS

Now men ride home from the Thing; and when Gunnar came home, he
said to Sigmund, "Thou art a more unlucky man than I thought, and
turnest thy good gifts to thine own ill.  But still I have made
peace for thee with Njal and his sons; and now, take care that
thou dost not let another fly come into thy mouth.  Thou art not
at all after my mind, thou goest about with jibes and jeers, with
scorn and mocking; but that is not my turn of mind.  That is why
thou gettest on so well with Hallgerda, because ye two have your
minds more alike."

Gunnar scolded him a long time, and he answered him well, and
said he would follow his counsel more for the time to come than
he had followed it hitherto.  Gunnar told him then they might get
on together.  Gunnar and Njal kept up their friendship though the
rest of their people saw little of one another.  It happened once
that some gangrel women came to Lithend from Bergthorsknoll; they
were great gossips and rather spiteful tongued.  Hallgerda had a
bower, and sate often in it, and there sate with her her daughter
Thorgerda, and there too were Thrain and Sigmund, and a crowd of
women.  Gunnar was not there, nor Kolskegg.  These gangrel women
went into the bower, and Hallgerda greeted them, and made room
for them; then she asked them for news, but they had none to
tell.  Hallgerda asked where they had been overnight; they said
at Bergthorsknoll.

"What was Njal doing?" she says.

"He was hard at work sitting still," they said.

"What were Njal's sons doing?" she says; "they think themselves
men at any rate."

"Tall men they are in growth," they say, "but as yet they are all
untried; Skarphedinn whetted an axe, Gim fitted a spearhead to
the shaft, Helgi riveted a hilt on a sword, Hauskuld strengthened
the handle of a shield."

"They must be bent on some great deed," says Hallgerda.

"We do not know that," they say.

"What were Njal's house-carles doing?" she asks.

"We don't know what some of them were doing, but one was carting
dung up the hill-side."

"What good was there in doing that?" she asks.

"He said it made the swathe better there than anywhere else,"
they reply.  "Witless now is Njal," says Hallgerda, "though he
knows how to give counsel on everything."

"How so?" they ask.

"I will only bring forward what is true to prove it," says she;
"why doesn't he make them cart dung over his beard that he may be
like other men?  Let us call him `the Beardless Carle': but his
sons we will call `Dung-beardlings'; and now do pray give some
stave about them, Sigmund, and let us get some good by thy gift
of song."

"I am quite ready to do that," says he, and sang these verses:

     "Lady proud with hawk in hand,
     Prithee why should dungbeard boys,
     Reft of reason, dare to hammer
     Handle fast on battle shield?
     For these lads of loathly feature --
     Lady scattering swanbath's beams (1) --
     Shaft not shun this ditty shameful
     Which I shape upon them now.

     He the beardless carle shall listen
     While I lash him with abuse,
     Loon at whom our stomachs sicken,
     Soon shall bear these words of scorn;
     Far too nice for such base fellows
     Is the name my bounty gives,
     Een my muse her help refuses,
     Making mirth of dungbeard boys.

     Here I find a nickname fitting
     For those noisome dungbeard boys, --
     Loath am I to break my bargain
     Linked with such a noble man --
     Knit we all our taunts together --
     Known to me is mind of man --
     Call we now with outburst common,
     Him, that churl, the beardless carle."

Thou art a jewel indeed," says Hallgerda; " how yielding thou art
to what I ask!"

Just then Gunnar came in.  He had been standing outside the door
of the bower, and heard all the words that had passed.  They were
in a great fright when they saw him come in, and then all held
their peace, but before there had been bursts of laughter.

Gunnar was very wroth, and said to Sigmund, "Thou art a foolish
man, and one that cannot keep to good advice, and thou revilest
Njal's sons, and Njal himself who is most worth of all; and this
thou doest in spite of what thou hast already done.  Mind, this
will be thy death.  But if any man repeats these words that thou
hast spoken, or these verses that thou hast made, that man shall
be sent away at once, and have my wrath beside."

But they were all so sore afraid of him, that no one dared to
repeat those words.  After that he went away, but the gangrel
women talked among themselves, and said that they would get a
reward from Bergthora if they told her all this.

They went then away afterwards down thither, and took Bergthora
aside and told her the whole story of their own free will.

Bergthora spoke and said, when men sate down to the board, "Gifts
have been given to all of you, father and sons, and ye will be no
true men unless ye repay them somehow."

"What gifts are these? " asks Skarphedinn.

"You, my sons," says Bergthora, "have got one gift between you
all.  Ye are nicknamed `Dungbeardlings,' but my husband `the
Beardless Carle.'"

"Ours is no woman's nature," says Skarphedinn, "that we should
fly into a rage at every little thing."

"And yet Gunnar was wroth for your sakes," says she, "and he is
thought to be good-tempered.  But if ye do not take vengeance for
this wrong, ye will avenge no shame."

"The carline, our mother, thinks this fine sport," says
Skarphedinn, and smiled scornfully as he spoke, but still the
sweat burst out upon his brow, and red flecks came over his
checks, but that was not his wont.  Grim was silent and bit his
lip.  Helgi made no sign, and he said never a word.  Hauskuld
went off with Bergthora; she came into the room again, and
fretted and foamed much.

Njal spoke and said, "`Slow and sure,' says the proverb,
mistress!  and so it is with many things, though they try men's
tempers, that there are always two sides to a story, even when
vengeance is taken."

But at even when Njal was come into his bed, he heard that an axe
came against the panel and rang loudly, but there was another
shut bed, and there the shields were hung up, and he sees that
they are away.  He said, "Who have taken down our shields?"

"Thy sons went out with them," says Bergthora.

Njal pulled his shoes on his feet, and went out at once, and
round to the other side of the house, and sees that they were
taking their course right up the slope; he said, "Whither away,
Skarphedinn?"

"To look after thy sheep," he answers.

"You would not then be armed," said Njal, "if you meant that, and
your errand must be something else."

Then Skarphedinn sang a song,

     "Squanderer of hoarded wealth,
     Some there are that own rich treasure,
     Ore of sea that clasps the earth,
     And yet care to count their sheep;
     Those who forge sharp songs of mocking,
     Death songs, scarcely can possess
     Sense of sheep that crop the grass;
     Such as these I seek in fight;"

and said afterwards, "We shall fish for salmon, father."

"'Twould be well then if it turned out so that the prey does not
get away from you."

They went their way, but Njal went to his bed, and he said to
Bergthora, "Thy sons were out of doors all of them, with arms,
and now thou must have egged them on to something."

"I will give them my heartfelt thanks," said Bergthora, "if they
tell me the slaying of Sigmund."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Swanbath's beams" -- periphrasis for gold.



45. THE SLAYING OF SIGMUND AND SKIOLLD

Now they, Njal's sons, fare up to Fleetlithe, and were that night
under the Lithe, and when the day began to break, they came near
to Lithend.  That same morning both Sigmund and Skiolld rose up
and meant to go to the studhorses; they had bits with them, and
caught the horses that were in the "town" and rode away on them. 
They found the stud-horses between two brooks.  Skarphedinn
caught sight of them, for Sigmund was in bright clothing. 
Skarphedinn said, "See you now the red elf yonder, lads?"  They
looked that way, and said they saw him.

Skarphedinn spoke again: "Thou, Hauskuld, shalt have nothing to
do with it, for thou wilt often be sent about alone without due
heed; but I mean Sigmund for myself; methinks that is like a man;
but Grim and Helgi, they shall try to slay Skiolld."

Hauskuld sat him down, but they went until they came up to them. 
Skarphedinn said to Sigmund, "Take thy weapons and defend
thyself; that is more needful now than to make mocking songs on
me and my brothers."

Sigmund took up his weapons, but Skarphedinn waited the while. 
Skiolld turned against Grim and Helgi, and they fell hotly to
fight.  Sigmund had a helm on his head, and a shield at his side,
and was girt with a sword, his spear was in his hand; now he
turns against Skarphedinn, and thrusts at once at him with his
spear, and the thrust came on his shield.  Skarphedinn dashes the
spearhaft in two, and lifts up his axe and hews at Sigmund, and
cleaves his shield down to below the handle.  Sigmund drew his
sword and cut at Skarphedinn, and the sword cuts into his shield,
so that it stuck fast.  Skarphedinn gave the shield such a quick
twist, that Sigmund let go his sword.  Then Skarphedinn hews at
Sigmund with his axe; the "Ogress of war."  Sigmund had on a
corselet, the axe came on his shoulder.  Skarphedinn cleft the
shoulder-blade right through, and at the same time pulled the axe
towards him.  Sigmund fell down on both knees, but sprang up
again at once.

"Thou hast lilted low to me already," says Skarphedinn, "but
still thou shalt fall upon thy mother's bosom ere we two part."

"III is that then," says Sigmund.

Skarphedinn gave him a blow on his helm, and after that dealt
Sigmund his death-blow.

Grim cut off Skiolld's foot at the ankle-joint, but Helgi thrust
him through with his spear, and he got his death there and then.

Skarphedinn saw Hallgerda's shepherd, just as he had hewn off
Sigmund's head; he handed the head to the shepherd, and bade him
bear it to Hallgerda, and said she would know whether that head
had made jeering songs about them, and with that he sang a 
song --

     "Here! this head shalt thou, that heapest
     Hoards from ocean-caverns won, (1)
     Bear to Hallgerd with my greeting,
     Her that hurries men to fight;
     Sure am I, O firewood splitter!
     That yon spendthrift knows it well,
     And will answer if it ever
     Uttered mocking songs on us."

The shepherd casts the head down as soon as ever they parted,
for he dared not do so while their eyes were on him.  They fared
along till they met some men down by Markfleet, and told them the
tidings.  Skarphedinn gave himself out as the slayer of Sigmund
and Grim and Helgi as the slayers of Skiolld; then they fared
home and told Njal the tidings.  He answers them, "Good luck to
your hands I Here no self-doom will come to pass as things
stand."

Now we must take up the story, and say that the shepherd came
home to Lithend.  He told Hallgerda the tidings.

"Skarphedinn put Sigmund's head into my hands," he says, "and
bade me bring it thee; but I dared not do it, for I knew not how
thou wouldst like that."

"'Twas ill that thou didst not do that," she says; "I would have
brought it to Gunnar, and then he would have avenged his kinsman,
or have to bear every man's blame."

After that she went to Gunnar and said, "I tell thee of thy
kinsman Sigmund's slaying: Skarphedinn slew him, and wanted them
to bring me the head."

"Just what might be looked for to befall him," says Gunnar, "for
ill redes bring ill luck, and both you and Skarphedinn have often
done one another spiteful turns."

Then Gunnar went away; he let no steps be taken towards a suit
for manslaughter, and did nothing about it.  Hallgerda often put
him in mind of it, and kept saying that Sigmund had fallen
unatoned.  Gunnar gave no heed to that.

Now three Things passed away, at each of which men thought that
he would follow up the suit; then a knotty point came on Gunnar's
hands, which he knew not how to set about, and then he rode to
find Njal.  He gave Gunnar a hearty welcome.  Gunnar said to
Njal, "I am come to seek a bit of good counsel at thy hands about
a knotty point."

"Thou art worthy of it," says Njal, and gave him counsel what to
do.  Then Gunnar stood up and thanked him.  Njal then spoke, and
said, and took Gunnar by the hand, "Over long hath thy kinsman
Sigmund been unatoned."

"He has been long ago atoned," says Gunnar, "but still I will not
fling back the honour offered me."

Gunnar had never spoken an ill word of Njal's sons.  Njal would
have nothing else than that Gunnar should make his own award in
the matter.  He awarded two hundred in silver, but let Skiolld
fall without a price.  They paid down all the money at once.

Gunnar declared this their atonement at the Thingskala Thing,
when most men were at it, and laid great weight on the way in
which they (Njal and his sons) had behaved; he told too those bad
words which cost Sigmund his life, and no man was to repeat them
or sing the verses, but if any sung them, the man who uttered
them was to fall without atonement.

Both Gunnar and Njal gave each other their words that no such
matters should ever happen that they would not settle among
themselves; and this pledge was well kept ever after, and they
were always friends.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Thou, that heapest boards," etc. -- merely a periphrasis
     for man, and scarcely fitting, except in irony, to a
     splitter of firewood.



46. OF GIZUR THE WHITE AND GEIR THE PRIEST

There was a man named Gizur the White; he was Teit's son;
Kettlebjorn the Old's son, of Mossfell. (1)  Bishop Isleif was
Gizur's son.  Gizur the White kept house at Mossfell, and was a
great chief.  That man is also named in this story whose name was
Geir the Priest; his mother was Thorkatla, another daughter of
Kettlebjorn the Old of Mossfell.  Geir kept house at Lithe.  He
and Gizur backed one another in every matter.  At that time Mord
Valgard's son kept house at Hof on the Rangrivervales; he was
crafty and spiteful.  Valgard his father was then abroad, but his
mother was dead.  He was very envious of Gunnar of Lithend.  He
was wealthy, so far as goods went, but had not many friends.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Teit's mother's name was Helga.  She was a daughter of Thord
     Longbeard, who was the son of Hrapp, who was the son of
     Bjorn the Rough-footed, who was the son of Grim, the Lord of
     Sogn in Norway.  Gizur's mother's name was Olof.  She was a
     daughter of Lord Baudvar, Viking-Kari's son.



47. OF OTKELL IN KIRKBY

There was a man named Otkell; he was the son of Skarf, the son of
Hallkell, who fought with Grim of Grimsness, and felled him on
the holm. (1)  This Hallkell and Kettlebjorn the Old were
brothers.

Otkell kept house at Kirkby; his wife's name was Thorgerda; she
was a daughter of Mar, the son of Runolf, the son of Naddad of
the Faroe Isles.  Otkell was wealthy in goods.  His son's name
was Thorgeir; he was young in years, and a bold dashing man.

Skamkell was the name of another man; he kept house at another
farm called Hof (2); he was well off for money, but he was a
spiteful man and a liar; quarrelsome too, and ill to deal with. 
He was Otkell's friend.  Hallkell was the name of Otkell's
brother; he was a tall strong man, and lived there with Otkell;
their brother's name was Hallbjorn the White; he brought out to
Iceland a thrall, whose name was Malcolm; he was Irish, and had
not many friends.

Hallbjorn went to stay with Otkell, and so did his thrall
Malcolm.  The thrall was always saying that he should think
himself happy if Otkell owned him.  Otkell was kind to him, and
gave him a knife and belt, and a full suit of clothes, but the
thrall turned his hand to any work that Otkell wished.

Otkell wanted to make a bargain with his brother for the thrall;
he said he would give him the thrall, but said, too, that he was
a worse treasure than he thought.  But as soon as Otkell owned
the thrall, then he did less and less work.  Otkell often said
outright to Hallbjorn, that he thought the thrall did little
work; and he told Otkell that there was worse in him yet to
come.

At that time came a great scarcity, so that men fell short both
of meat and hay, and that spread over all parts of Iceland. 
Gunnar shared his hay and meat with many men; and all got them
who came thither, so long as his stores lasted.  At last it came
about that Gunnar himself fell short both of hay and meat.  Then
Gunnar called on Kolskegg to go along with him; he called too on
Thrain Sigfus' son, and Lambi Sigurd's son.  They fared to
Kirkby, and called Otkell out.  He greeted them, and Gunnar said,
"It so happens that I am come to deal with thee for hay and meat,
if there be any left."

Otkell answers, "There is store of both, but I will sell thee
neither."

"Wilt thou give me them then," says Gunnar, "and run the risk of
my paying thee back somehow?"

"I will not do that either," says Otkell.

Skamkell all the while was giving him bad counsel.

Then Thrain Sigfus' son, said, "It would serve him right if we 
take both hay and meat and lay down the worth of them instead."

Skamkell answered, "All the men of Mossfell must be dead and gone
then, if ye, sons of Sigfus, are to come and rob them."

"I will have no hand in any robbery," says Gunnar.

"Wilt thou buy a thrall of me?" says Otkell.

"I'll not spare to do that," says Gunnar.  After that Gunnar
bought the thrall, and fared away as things stood.

Njal hears of this, and said, "Such things are ill done, to
refuse to let Gunnar buy; and it is not a good outlook for others
if such men as he cannot get what they want."

"What's the good of thy talking so much about such a little
matter," says Bergthora; "far more like a man would it be to let
him have both meat and hay, when thou lackest neither of them."

"That is clear as day," says Njal, "and I will of a surety supply
his need somewhat."

Then he fared up to Thorolfsfell, and his sons with him, and they
bound hay on fifteen horses; but on five horses they had meat. 
Njal came to Lithend, and called Gunnar out.  He greeted them
kindly.

"Here is hay and meat," said Njal, "which I will give thee; and
my wish is, that thou shouldst never look to any one else than to
me if thou standest in need of anything."

"Good are thy gifts," says Gunnar, "but methinks thy friendship
is still more worth, and that of thy sons."

After that Njal fared home, and now the spring passes away.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  That is, slew him in a duel.
(2)  Mord Valgard's son lived at the other farm called Hof.



48. HOW HALLGERDA MAKES MALCOLM STEAL FROM KIRKBY

Now Gunnar is about to ride to the Thing, but a great crowd of
men from the Side (1) east turned in as guests at his house.

Gunnar bade them come and be his guests again, as they rode back
from the Thing; and they said they would do so.

Now they ride to the Thing, and Njal and his sons were there. 
That Thing was still and quiet.

Now we must take up the story, and say that Hallgerda comes to
talk with Malcolm the thrall.

"I have thought of an errand to send thee on," she says; "thou
shalt go to Kirkby."

"And what shall I do there?" he says.

"Thou shalt steal from thence food enough to load two horses, and
mind and have butter and cheese; but thou shalt lay fire in the
storehouse, and all will think that it has arisen out of
heedlessness, but no one will think that there has been theft."

"Bad have I been," said the thrall, "but never have I been a
thief."

"Hear a wonder!" says Hallgerda, "thou makest thyself good, thou
that hast been both thief and murderer; but thou shalt not dare
to do aught else than go, else will I let thee be slain."

He thought he knew enough of her to be sure that she would so do
if he went not; so he took at night two horses and laid
packsaddles on them, and went his way to Kirkby.  The house-dog
knew him and did not bark at him, and ran and fawned on him. 
After that he went to the storehouse and loaded the two horses
with food out of it, but the storehouse he burnt, and the dog he
slew.

He went up along by Rangriver, and his shoe-thong snapped; so he
takes his knife and makes the shoe right, but he leaves the knife
and belt lying there behind him.

He fares till he comes to Lithend; then he misses the knife, but
dares not to go back.

Now he brings Hallgerda the food, and she showed herself well
pleased at it.

Next morning when men came out of doors at Kirkby there they saw
great scathe.  Then a man was sent to the Thing to tell Otkell;
he bore the loss well, and said it must have happened because the
kitchen was next to the storehouse; and all thought that that was
how it happened.

Now men ride home from the Thing, and many rode to Lithend. 
Hallgerda set food on the board, and in came cheese and butter. 
Gunnar knew that such food was not to be looked for in his house,
and asked Hallgerda whence it came?

"Thence," she says; "whence thou mightest well eat of it;
besides, it is no man's business to trouble himself with
housekeeping."

Gunner got wroth and said, "Ill indeed is it if I am a partaker
with thieves;" and with that he gave her a slap on the cheek.

She said she would bear that slap in mind and repay it if she
could.

So she went off and he went with her, and then all that was
on the board was cleared away, but flesh-meat was brought in
instead, and all thought that was because the flesh was thought
to have been got in a better way.

Now the men who had been at the Thing fare away.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  That is, from the sea-side or shore, the long narrow strip
     of habitable land between the mountains and the sea in the
     south-east of Iceland.



49. OF SKAMKELL'S EVIL COUNSEL

Now we must tell of Skamkell.  He rides after some sheep up along
Rangriver, and he sees something shining in the path.  He finds a
knife and belt, and thinks he knows both of them.  He fares with
them to Kirkby; Otkell was out of doors when Skamkell came.  He
spoke to him and said, "Knowest thou aught of these pretty
things?"

"Of a surety," says Otkell, "I know them."

"Who owns them?" asks Skamkell.

"Malcolm the thrall," says Otkell.

"Then more shall see and know them than we two," says Skamkell,
"for true will I be to thee in counsel."

They showed them to many men, and all knew them.  Then Skamkell
said, "What counsel wilt thou now take?"

"We shall go and see Mord Valgard's son," answers Otkell, "and
seek counsel of him."

So they went to Hof, and showed the pretty things to Mord, and
asked him if he knew them?

He said he knew them well enough, but what was there in that? 
"Do you think you have a right to look for anything at Lithend?"

"We think it hard for us," says Skamkell, "to know what to do,
when such mighty men have a hand in it."

"That is so, sure enough," says Mord, "but yet I will get to know
those things, out of Gunnar's household, which none of you will
every know."

"We would give thee money," they say, "if thou wouldst search out
this thing."

"That money I shall buy full dear," answered Mord, "but still,
perhaps, it may be that I will look at the matter."

They gave him three marks of silver for lending them his help.

Then he gave them this counsel, that women should go about from
house to house with small ware, and give them to the housewives,
and mark what was given them in return.

"For," he says, "'tis the turn of mind of all men first to give
away what has been stolen, if they have it in their keeping, and
so it will be here also, if this hath-happened by the hand of
man.  Ye shall then come and show me what has been given to each
in each house, and I shall then be free from farther share in
this matter, if the truth comes to light."

To this they agreed, and went home afterwards.

Mord sends women about the country, and they were away half a
month.  Then they came back, and had big bundles.  Mord asked
where they had most given them?

They said that at Lithend most was given them, and Hallgerda had
been most bountiful to them.

He asked what was given them there.

"Cheese," say they.

He begged to see it, and they showed it to him, and it was in
great slices.  These he took and kept.

A little after, Mord fared to see Otkell, and bade that he would
bring Thorgerda's cheese-mould; and when that was done, he laid
the slices down in it, and lo!  they fitted the mould in every
way.

Then they saw, too, that a whole cheese had been given to them.

Then Mord said, "Now may ye see that Hallgerda must have stolen
the cheese;" and they all passed the same judgment; and then Mord
said, that now he thought he was free of this matter.

After that they parted.

Shortly after Kolskegg fell to talking with Gunnar and said, "III
is it to tell, but the story is in every man's mouth, that
Hallgerda must have stolen, and that she was at the bottom of all
that great scathe that befell at Kirkby."

Gunner said that he too thought that must be so.  "But what is to
be done now?"

Kolskegg answered, "Thou wilt think it thy most bounden duty to
make atonement for thy wife's wrong, and methinks it were best
that tbou farest to see Otkell, and makest him a handsome offer."

"This is well spoken," says Gunnar, "and so it shall be."

A little after Gunnar sent after Thrain Sigfus' son and Lambi
Sigurd's son, and they came at once.

Gunnar told them whither he meant to go, and they were well
pleased.  Gunnar rode with eleven men to Kirkby, and called
Otkell out.  Skamkell was there too, and said, "I will go out
with thee, and it will be best now to have the balance of wit on
thy side.  And I would wish to stand closest by thee when thou
needest it most, and now this will be put to the proof.  Methinks
it were best that thou puttest on an air of great weight."

Then they, Otkell and Skamkell, and Hallkell, and Hallbjorn, went
out all of them.

They greeted Gunnar, and he took their greeting well.  Otkell
asks whither he meant to go?

"No farther than here," says Gunnar, "and my errand hither is to
tell thee about that bad mishap, how it arose from the plotting
of my wife and that thrall whom I bought from thee."

"'Tis only what was to be looked for," says Hallbjorn.

"Now I will make thee a good offer," says Gunnar, "and the offer
is this, that the best men here in the country round settle the
matter."

"This is a fair-sounding offer," said Skamkell, "but an unfair
and uneven one.  Thou art a man who has many friends among the
householders, but Otkell has not many friends."

"Well," says Gunnar, "then I will offer thee that I shall make an
award, and utter it here on this spot, and so we will settle the
matter, and my good-will shall follow the settlement.  But I will
make thee an atonement by paying twice the worth of what was
lost."

"This choice shalt thou not take," said Skamkell; "and it is
unworthy to give up to him the right to make his own award, when
thou oughtest to have kept it for thyself."

So Otkell said, "I will not give up to thee, Gunnar, the right to
make thine own award."

"I see plainly," said Gunnar, "the help of men who will be paid
off for it one day, I daresay; but come now, utter an award for
thyself."

Otkell leant toward Skamkell and said, "What shall I answer now?"

"This thou shalt call a good offer, but still put thy suit into
the hands of Gizur the White, and Geir the Priest, and then many
will say this, that thou behavest like Hallkell, thy grandfather,
who was the greatest of champions."

"Well offered is this, Gunnar," said Otkell, "but still my will
is thou wouldst give me time to see Gizur the White."

"Do now whatever thou likest in the matter," said Gunnar; "but
men will say this, that thou couldst not see thine own honour
when thou wouldst have none of the choices I offer thee."

Then Gunnar rode home, and when he had gone away, Hallbjorn said,
"Here I see how much man differs from man.  Gunnar made thee good
offers, but thou wouldst take none of them; or how dost thou
think to strive with Gunnar in a quarrel, when no one is his
match in fight.  But now he is still so kind-hearted a man that
it may be he will let these offers stand, though thou art only
ready to take them afterwards.  Methinks it were best that thou
farest to see Gizur the White and Geir the Priest now this very
hour."

Otkell let them catch his horse, and made ready in every way. 
Otkell was not sharpsighted, and Skamkell walked on the way along
with him, and said to Otkell, "Methought it strange that thy
brother would not take this toil from thee, and now I will make
thee an offer to fare instead of thee, for I know that the
journey is irksome to thee."

"I will take that offer," says Otkell, "but mind and be as
truthful as ever thou canst."

"So it shall be," says Skamkell.

Then Skamkell took his horse and cloak, but Otkell walks home.

Hallbjorn was out of doors, and said to Otkell, "Ill is it to
have a thrall for one's bosom friend, and we shall rue this for
ever that thou hast turned back, and it is an unwise step to send
the greatest liar on an errand, of which one may so speak that
men's lives hang on it."

"Thou wouldst be sore afraid," says Otkell, "if Gunnar had his
bill aloft, when thou art so scared now."

"No one knows who will be most afraid then," said Hallbjorn; "but
this thou wilt have to own, that Gunnar does not lose much time
in brandishing his bill when he is wroth."

"Ah!" said Otkell, "ye are all of you for yielding but Skamkell."

And then they were both wroth.



50. OF SKAMKELL'S LYING

Skamkell came to Mossfell, and repeated all the offers to Gizur.

"It so seems to me," says Gizur, "as though these have been
bravely offered; but why took he not these offers?"

"The chief cause was," answers Skamkell, "that all wished to show
thee honour, and that was why he waited for thy utterance;
besides, that is best for all."

So Skamkell stayed there the night over, but Gizur sent a man to
fetch Geir the Priest; and he came there early.  Then Gizur told
him the story and said, "What course is to be taken now?"

"As thou no doubt hast already made up thy mind -- to make the
best of the business for both sides."

"Now we will let Skamkell tell his tale a second time, and see
how he repeats it."

So they did that, and Gizur said, "Thou must have told this story
right; but still I have seen thee to be the wickedest of men, and
there is no faith in faces if thou turnest out well."

Skamkell fared home, and rides first to Kirkby and calls Otkell
out.  He greets Skamkell well, and Skamkell brought him the
greeting of Gizur and Geir.

"But about this matter of the suit," be says, "there is no need
to speak softly, how that it is the will of both Gizur and Geir
that this suit should not be settled in a friendly way.  They
gave that counsel that a summons should be set on foot, and that
Gunnar should be summoned for having partaken of the goods, but
Hallgerda for stealing them."

"It shall be done," said Otkell, "in everything as they have
given counsel."

"They thought most of this," says Skamkell, "that thou hadst
behaved so proudly; but as for me, I made as great a man of thee
in everything as I could."

Now Otkell tells all this to his brothers, and Hallbjorn said,
"This must be the biggest lie."

Now the time goes on until the last of the summoning days before
the Althing came.

Then Otkell called on his brothers and Skamkell to ride on the
business of the summons to Lithend.

Hallbjorn said he would go, but said also that they would rue
this summoning as time went on.

Now they rode twelve of them together to Lithend, but when they
came into the "town," there was Gunnar out of doors, and knew
naught of their coming till they had ridden right up to the
house.

He did not go in-doors then, and Otkell thundered out the summons
there and then; but when they had made an end of the summoning
Skamkell said, "Is it all right, master?"

"Ye know that best;" says Gunnar, "but I will put thee in mind of
this journey one of these days, and of thy good help."

"That will not harm us," says Skamkell, "if thy bill be not
aloft."

Gunnar was very wroth and went in-doors, and told Kolskegg, and
Kolskegg said, "Ill was it that we were not out of doors; they
should have come here on the most shameful journey, if we had
been by."

"Everything bides its time," says Gunnar; "but this journey will
not turn out to their honour."

A little after Gunnar went and told Njal.

"Let it not worry thee a jot," said Njal, "for this will be the
greatest honour to thee, ere this Thing comes to an end.  As for
us, we will all back thee with counsel and force."

Gunnar thanked him and rode home.

Otkell rides to the Thing, and his brothers with him and
Skamkell.



51. OF GUNNAR

Gunnar rode to the Thing and all the sons of Sigfus; Njal and his
sons too, they all went with Gunnar; and it was said that no band
was so well knit and hardy as theirs.

Gunnar went one day to the booth of the Dalemen; Hrut was by the
booth and Hauskuld, and they greeted Gunnar well.  Now Gunnar
tells them the whole story of the suit up to that time.

"What counsel gives Njal?" asks Hrut.

"He bade me seek you brothers," says Gunnar, "and said he was
sure that he and you would look at the matter in the same light."

"He wishes then," says Hrut, "that I should say what I think
for kinship's sake; and so it shall be.  Thou shalt challenge
Gizur the White to combat on the island, if they do not leave the
whole award to thee; but Kolskegg shall challenge Geir the
Priest.  As for Otkell and his crew, men must be got ready to
fall on them; and now we have such great strength all of us
together, that thou mayst carry out whatever thou wilt."

Gunnar went home to his booth and told Njal.

"Just what I looked for," said Njal.

Wolf Aurpriest got wind of this plan, and told Gizur, and Gizur
said to Otkell, "Who gave thee that counsel that thou shouldst
summon Gunnar?"

"Skamkell told me that was the counsel of both Geir the Priest
and thyself."

"But where is that scoundrel?" says Gizur, "who has thus lied."

"He lies sick up at our booth," says Otkell.

"May he never rise from his bed," says Gizur.  "Now we must all
go to see Gunnar, and offer him the right to make his own award;
but I know not whether he will take that now."

Many men spoke ill of Skamkell, and he lay sick all through the
Thing.

Gizur and his friends went to Gunnar's booth; their coming was
known, and Gunnar was told as he sat in his booth, and then they
all went out and stood in array.

Gizur the White came first, and after a while he spoke and said,
"This is our offer -- that thou, Gunnar, makest thine own award
in this suit."

"Then," says Gunnar, "it was no doubt far from thy counsel that I
was summoned."

"I gave no such counsel," says Gizur, "neither I nor Geir."

"Then thou must clear thyself of this charge by fitting proof."

"What proof dost thou ask?" says Gizur.

"That thou takest an oath," says Gunnar.

"That I will do," says Gizur, "if thou wilt take the award into
thine own hands."

"That was the offer I made a while ago," says Gunnar; "but now,
methinks, I have a greater matter to pass judgment on."

"It will not be right to refuse to make thine own award," said
Njal; "for the greater the matter, the greater the honour in
making it."

"Well," said Gunnar, "I will do this to please my friends, and
utter my award; but I give Otkell this bit of advice, never to
give me cause for quarrel hereafter."

Then Hrut and Hauskuld were sent for, and they came thither, and
then Gizur the White and Gier the Priest took their oaths; but
Gunnar made his award, and spoke with no man about it, and
afterwards he uttered it as follows:

"This is my award," he says; "first, I lay it down that the
storehouse must be paid for, and the food that was therein; but
for the thrall, I will pay thee no fine, for that thou hiddest
his faults; but I award him back to thee; for as the saying is,
`Birds of a feather flock most together.'  Then, on the other
hand, I see that thou hast summoned me in scorn and mockery, and
for that I award to myself no less a sum than what the house that
was burnt and the stores in it were worth; but if ye think it
better that we be not set at one again, then I will let you have
your choice of that, but if so I have already made up my mind
what I shall do, and then I will fulfil my purpose."

"What we ask," said Gizur, "is that thou shouldst not be hard on
Otkell, but we beg this of thee, on the other hand, that thou
wouldst be his friend."

"That shall never be," said Gunnar, "so long as I live; but he
shall have Skamkell's friendship; on that he has long leant."

"Well," answers Gizur, "we will close with thee in this matter,
though thou alone layest down the terms."

Then all this atonement was made and hands were shaken on it, and
Gunnar said to Otkell, "It were wiser to go away to thy kinsfolk;
but if thou wilt be here in this country, mind that thou givest
me no cause of quarrel."

"That is wholesome counsel," said Gizur; "and so he shall do."

So Gunnar had the greatest honour from that suit, and afterwards
men rode home from the Thing.

Now Gunnar sits in his house at home, and so things are quiet for
a while.



52. OF RUNOLF, THE SON OF WOLF AURPRIEST

There was a man named Runolf, the son of Wolf Aurpriest, he kept
house at the Dale, east of Markfleet.  He was Otkell's guest once
when he rode from the Thing.  Otkell gave him an ox, all black,
without a spot of white, nine winters old.  Runolf thanked him
for the gift, and bade him come and see him at home whenever he
chose to go; and this bidding stood over for some while, so that
he had not paid the visit.  Runolf often sent men to him and put
him in mind that he ought to come; and he always said he would
come, but never went.

Now Otkell had two horses, dun coloured, with a black stripe down
the back; they were the best steeds to ride in all the country
round, and so fond of each other that whenever one went before
the other ran after him.

There was an Easterling staying with Otkell, whose name was
Audulf; he had set his heart on Signy, Otkell's daughter.  Audulf
was a tall man in growth, and strong.



53. HOW OTKELL RODE OVER GUNNAR

It happened next spring that Otkell said that they would ride
east to the Dale, to pay Runolf a visit, and all showed
themselves well pleased at that.  Skamkell and his two brothers,
and Audulf and three men more, went along with Otkell.  Otkell
rode one of the dun horses, but the other ran loose by his side. 
They shaped their course east towards Markfleet; and now Otkell
gallops ahead, and now the horses race against each other, and
they break away from the path up towards the Fleetlithe.

Now, Otkell goes faster than he wished, and it happened that
Gunnar had gone away from home out of his house all alone; and he
had a corn-sieve in one hand, but in the other a hand-axe.  He
goes down to his seed field and sows his corn there, and had laid
his cloak of fine stuff and his axe down by his side, and so he
sows the corn a while.

Now, it must be told how Otkell rides faster than he would.  He
had spurs on his feet, and so he gallops down over the ploughed
field, and neither of them sees the other; and just as Gunnar
stands upright, Otkell rides down upon him and drives one of the
spurs into Gunnar's ear, and gives him a great gash, and it
bleeds at once much.

Just then Otkell's companions rode up.

"Ye may see, all of you," says Gunnar, "that thou hast drawn my
blood, and it is unworthy to go on so.  First thou hast summoned
me, but now thou treadest me under foot, and ridest over me."

Skamkell said, "Well it was no worse, master, but thou wast not
one whit less wroth at the Thing, when thou tookest the selfdoom
and clutchedst thy bill."

Gunnar said, "When we two next meet thou shalt see the bill." 
After that they part thus, and Skamkell shouted out and said, "Ye
ride hard, lads!"

Gunnar went home, and said never a word to any one about what had
happened, and no one thought that this wound could have come by
man's doing.

It happened, though, one day, that he told it to his brother
Kolskegg, and Kolskegg said, "This thou shalt tell to more men,
so that it may not be said that thou layest blame on dead men;
for it will be gainsaid if witnesses do not know beforehand what
has passed between you."

Then Gunnar told it to his neighbours, and there was little talk
about it at first.

Otkell comes east to the Dale, and they get a hearty welcome
there, and sit there a week.

Skamkell told Runolf all about their meeting with Gunnar, and how
it had gone off; and one man happened to ask how Gunnar behaved.

"Why," said Skamkell, "if it were a low-born man it would have
been said that he had wept."

"Such things are ill spoken," says Runolf, "and when ye two next
meet, thou wilt have to own that there is no voice of weeping in
his frame of mind; and it will be well if better men have not to
pay for thy spite.  Now it seems to me best when ye wish to go
home that I should go with you, for Gunnar will do me no harm."

"I will not have that," says Otkell; "but I will ride across the
Fleet lower down."

Runolf gave Otkell good gifts, and said they should not see one
another again.

Otkell bade him then to bear his sons in mind if things turned
out so.



54. THE FIGHT AT RANGRIVER

Now we must take up the story, and say that Gunnar was out of
doors at Lithend, and sees his shepherd galloping up to the yard. 
The shepherd rode straight into the "town; and Gunnar said, "Why
ridest thou so hard?"

"I would be faithful to thee," said the man; "I saw men riding
down along Markfleet, eight of them together, and four of them
were in coloured clothes."

Gunnar said, "That must be Otkell."

The lad said, "I have often heard many temper-trying words of
Skamkell's; for Skamkell spoke away there east at Dale, and said
that thou sheddest tears when they rode over thee; but I tell it
thee because I cannot bear to listen to such speeches of
worthless men."

"We must not be word-sick," says Gunnar, "but from this day forth
thou shall do no other work than what thou choosest for thyself."

"Shall I say aught of this to Kolskegg thy brother?" asked the
shepherd.

"Go thou and sleep," says Gunnar; "I will tell Kolskegg."

The lad laid him down and fell asleep at once, but Gunnar took
the shepherd's horse and laid his saddle on him; he took his
shield, and girded him with his sword, Oliver's gift; he sets his
helm on his head; takes his bill, and something sung loud in it,
and his mother, Rannveig, heard it.  She went up to him and said
"Wrathful art thou now, my son, and never saw I thee thus
before."

Gunnar goes out, and drives the butt of his spear into the earth,
and throws himself into the saddle, and rides away,

His mother, Rannveig, went into the sitting-room, where there was
a great noise of talking.

"Ye speak loud," she says, "but yet the bill gave a louder sound
when Gunnar went out."

Kolskegg heard what she said, and spoke, "This betokens no small
tidings.

"That is well," says Hallgerda, "now they will soon prove whether
he goes away from them weeping."

Kolskegg takes his weapons and seeks him a horse, and rides after
Gunnar as fast as he could.

Gunnar rides across Acretongue, and so to Geilastofna and thence
to Rangriver, and down the stream to the ford at Hof.  There were
some women at the milking-post there.  Gunnar jumped off his
horse and tied him up.  By this time the others were riding up
towards him; there were flat stones covered with mud in the path
that led down to the ford.

Gunnar called out to them and said, "Now is the time to guard
yourselves; here now is the bill, and here now ye will put it to
the proof whether I shed one tear for all of you."

Then they all of them sprang off their horses' backs and made
towards Gunnar.  Hallbjorn was the foremost.

"Do not thou come on," says Gunnar; "thee last of all would I
harm; but I will spare no one if I have to fight for my life."

"That I cannot do," says Hallbjorn; "thou wilt strive to kill my
brother for all that, and it is a shame if I sit idly by."  And
as he said this he thrust at Gunnar with a great spear which he
held in both hands.

Gunnar threw his shield before the blow, but Hallbjorn pierced
the shield through.  Gunnar thrust the shield down so hard that
it stood fast in the earth (1), but he brandished his sword so
quickly that no eye could follow it, and he made a blow with the
sword, and it fell on Hallbjorn's arm above the writs, so that it
cut it off.

Skamkell ran behind Gunnar's back and makes a blow at him with a
great axe.  Gunnar turned short round upon him and parries the
blow with the bill, and caught the axe under one of its horns
with such a wrench that it flew out of Skamkell's hand away into
the river.

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Once thou askedst, foolish fellow,
     Of this man, this seahorse racer,
     When as fast as feet could foot it
     Forth ye fled from farm of mine,
     Whether that were rightly summoned?
     Now with gore the spear we redden,
     Battle-eager, and avenge us
     Thus on thee, vile source of strife."

Gunnar gives another thrust with his bill, and through Skamkell,
and lifts him up and casts him down in the muddy path on his
head.

Audulf the Easterling snatches up a spear and launches it at
Gunnar.  Gunnar caught the spear with his hand in the air, and
hurled it back at once, and it flew through the shield and the
Easterling too, and so down into the earth.

Otkell smites at Gunnar with his sword, and aims at his leg just
below the knee, but Gunnar leapt up into the air and he misses
him.  Then Gunnar thrusts at him the bill and the blow goes
through him.

Then Kolskegg comes up, and rushes at once at Hallkell and dealt
him his death-blow with his short sword.  There and then they
slay eight men.

A woman who saw all this, ran home and told Mord, and besought
him to part them.

"They alone will be there," he says, "of whom I care not though
they slay one another."

"Thou canst not mean to say that," she says, "for thy kinsman
Gunnar, and thy friend Otkell will be there."

"Baggage, that thou art," he says, "thou art always chattering,"
and so he lay still in-doors while they fought.

Gunnar and Kolskegg rode home after this work, and they rode hard
up along the river bank, and Gunnar leapt off his horse and came
down on his feet.

Then Kolskegg said, "Hard now thou ridest, brother!"

"Ay," said Gunnar, "that was what Skamkell said when he uttered
those very words when they rode over me."

"Well, thou hast avenged that now," says Kolskegg.

"I would like to know," says Gunnar, "whether I am by so much the
less brisk and bold than other men, because I think more of
killing men than they?"


ENDNOTES:

(1)  This shews that the shields were oblong, running down to a
     point.



55. NJAL'S ADVICE TO GUNNAR

Now those tidings are heard far and wide, and many said that they
thought they had not happened before it was likely.  Gunnar rode
to Bergthorsknoll and told Njal of these deeds.

Njal said, "Thou hast done great things, but thou hast been
sorely tried."

"How will it now go henceforth?" says Gunnar.

"Wilt thou that I tell thee what hath not yet come to pass?" asks
Njal.  "Thou wilt ride to the Thing, and thou wilt abide by my
counsel and get the greatest honour from this matter.  This will
be the beginning of thy manslayings."

"But give me some cunning counsel," says Gunnar.

"I will do that," says Njal, "never slay more than one man in the
same stock, and never break the peace which good men and true
make between thee and others, and least of all in such a matter
as this."

Gunnar said, "I should have thought there was more risk of that
with others than with me."

"Like enough," says Njal, "but still thou shalt so think of thy
quarrels, that if that should come to pass of which I have warned
thee, then thou wilt have but a little while to live; but
otherwise, thou wilt come to be an old man."

Gunnar said, "Dost thou know what will be thine own death?"

"I know it," says Njal.

"What?" asks Gunnar.

"That," says Njal, "which all would be the last to think."

After that Gunnar rode home.

A man was sent to Gizur the White and Geir the Priest, for they
had the blood-feud after Otkell.  Then they had a meeting, and
had a talk about what was to be done; and they were of one mind
that the quarrel should be followed up at law.  Then some one was
sought who would take the suit up, but no one was ready to do
that.

"It seems to me," says Gizur, "that now there are only two
courses, that one of us two undertakes the suit, and then we
shall have to draw lots who it shall be, or else the man will be
unatoned.  We may make up our minds, too, that this will be a
heavy suit to touch; Gunnar has many kinsmen and is much beloved;
but that one of us who does not draw the lot, shall ride to the
Thing and never leave it until the suit comes to an end."

After that they drew lots, and Geir the Priest drew the lot to
take up the suit.

A little after, they rode from the west over the river, and came
to the spot where the meeting had been by Rangriver, and dug up
the bodies, and took witness to the wounds.  After that they gave
lawful notice and summoned nine neighbours to bear witness in the
suit.

They were told that Gunnar was at home with about thirty men;
then Geir the Priest asked whether Gizur would ride against him
with one hundred men.

"I will not do that," says he, "though the balance of force is
great on our side."

After that they rode back home.  The news that the suit was set
on foot was spread all over the country, and the saying ran that
the Thing would be very noisy and stormy.



56. GUNNAR AND GEIR THE PRIEST STRIVE AT THE THING

There was a man named Skapti.  He was the son of Thorod (1). 
That father and son were great chiefs, and very well skilled in
law.  Thorod was thought to be rather crafty and guileful.  They
stood by Gizur the White in every quarrel.

As for the Lithemen and the dwellers by Rangriver, they came in a
great body to the Thing.  Gunnar was so beloved that all said
with one voice that they would back him.

Now they all come to the Thing and fit up their booths.  In
company with Gizur the White were these chiefs: Skapti Thorod's
son, Asgrim Ellidagrim's son, Oddi of Kidberg, and Halldor
Ornolf's son.

Now one day men went to the Hill of Laws, and then Geir the
Priest stood up and gave notice that he had a suit of
manslaughter against Gunnar for the slaying of Otkell.  Another
suit of manslaughter he brought against Gunnar for the slaying of
Halljborn the White; then, too, he went on in the same way as to
the slaying of Audulf, and so, too, as to the slaying of
Skamkell.  Then, too, he laid a suit of manslaughter against
Kolskegg for the slaying of Hallkell.

And when he had given due notice of all his suits of manslaughter
it was said that he spoke well.  He asked, too, in what Quarter
court the suits lay, and in what house in the district the
defendants dwelt.  After that men went away from the Hill of
Laws, and so the Thing goes on till the day when the courts were
to be set to try suits.  Then either side gathered their men
together in great strength.

Geir the Priest and Gizur the White stood at the court of the men
of Rangriver looking north, and Gunnar and Njal stood looking
south towards the court.

Geir the Priest bade Gunnar to listen to his oath, and then he
took the oath, and afterwards declared his suit.

Then he let men bear witness of the notice given by the suit;
then he called upon the neighbours who were to form the inquest
to take their seats; then he called on Gunnar to challenge the
inquest; and then he called on the inquest to utter their
finding.  Then the neighbours who were summoned on the inquest
went to the court and took witness, and said that there was a bar
to their finding in the suit as to Audulf's slaying, because the
next of kin who ought to follow it up was in Norway, and so they
had nothing to do with that suit.

After that they uttered their finding in the suit as to Otkell,
and brought in Gunnar as truly guilty of killing him.

Then Geir the Priest called on Gunnar for his defence, and took
witness of all the steps in the suit which had been proved.

Then Gunnar, in his turn, called on Geir the Priest to listen to
his oath, and to the defence which he was about to bring forward
in the suit.  Then he took the oath and said, "This defence I
make to this suit, that I took witness and outlawed Otkell before
my neighbours for that bloody wound which I got when Otkell gave
me a hurt with his spur; but thee, Geir the Priest, I forbid by a
lawful protest made before a priest, to pursue this suit, and so,
too, I forbid the judges to hear it; and with this I make all the
steps hitherto taken in this suit void and of none-effect.  I
forbid thee by a lawful protest, a full, fair, and binding
protest, as I have a right to forbid thee by the common custom of
the Thing and by the law of the land.

"Besides, I will tell thee something else which I mean to do,"
says Gunnar.

"What!" says Geir, "wilt thou challenge me to the island as thou
art wont, and not bear the law?"

"Not that," says Gunnar; "I shall summon thee at the Hill of Laws
for that thou calledst those men on the inquest who had no right
to deal with Audulf's slaying, and I will declare thee for that
guilty of outlawry."

Then Njal said, "Things must not take this turn, for the only end
of it will be that this strife will be carried to the uttermost. 
Each of you, as it seems to me, has much on his side.  There are
some of these manslaughters, Gunnar, about which thou canst say
nothing to hinder the court from finding thee guilty; but thou
hast set on foot a suit against Geir, in which he, too, must be
found guilty.  Thou too, Geir the Priest, shalt know that this
suit of outlawry which hangs over thee shall not fall to the
ground if thou wilt not listen to my words."

Thorod the Priest said, "It seems to us as though the most
peaceful way would be that a settlement and atonement were come
to in the suit.  But why sayest thou so little, Gizur the White?"

"It seems to me," says Gizur, "as though we shall need to have
strong props for our suit; we may see, too, that Gunnar's friends
stand near him, and so the best turn for us that things can take
will be that good men and true should utter an award on the suit,
if Gunnar so wills it."

"I have ever been willing to make matters up," says Gunnar; "and
besides, ye have much wrong to follow up, but still I think I was
hard driven to do as I did."

And now the end of those suits was, by the counsel of the wisest
men, that all the suits were put to arbitration; six men were to
make this award, and it was uttered there and then at the Thing.

The award was that Skamkell should be unatoned.  The blood money
for Otkell's death was to be set off against the hurt Gunnar got
from the spur; and as for the rest of the manslaughters, they
were paid for after the worth of the men, and Gunnar's kinsmen
gave money so that all the fines might be paid up at the Thing.

Then Geir the Priest and Gizur the White went up and gave Gunnar
pledges that they would keep the peace in good faith.

Gunnar rode home from the Thing, and thanked men for their help,
and gave gifts to many, and got the greatest honour from the
suit.

Now Gunnar sits at home in his honour.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thorod's mother was Thorvor, she was daughter of Thormod
     Skapti's son, son of Oleif the Broad, son of Oliver
     Barncarle.



57. OF STARKAD AND HIS SONS

There was a man named Starkad; he was a son of Bork the Waxy-
toothed-blade, the son of Thorkell Clubfoot, who took the land
round about Threecorner as the first settler.  His wife's name
was Hallbera (1).  The sons of Starkad and Hallbera were these:
Thorgeir and Bork and Thorkell.  Hildigunna the Leech was their
sister.

They were very proud men in temper, hard-hearted and unkind. 
They treated men wrongfully.

There was a man named Egil; he was a son of Kol, who took land as
a settler between Storlek and Reydwater.  The brother of Egil was
Aunund of Witchwood, father of Hall the Strong, who was at the
slaying of Holt-Thorir with the sons of Kettle the Smooth-
tongued.

Egil kept house at Sandgil; his sons were these: Kol, and Ottar,
and Hauk.  Their mother's name was Steinvor; she was Starkad's
sister.

Egil's sons were tall and strifeful; they were most unfair men. 
They were always on one side with Starkad's sons.  Their sister
was Gudruna Nightsun, and she was the bestbred of women.

Egil had taken into his house two Easterlings; the one's name was
Thorir and the other's Thorgrim.  They were not long come out
hither for the first time, and were wealthy and beloved by their
friends; they were well skilled in arms, too, and dauntless in
everything.

Starkad had a good horse of chesnut hue, and it was thought that
no horse was his match in fight.  Once it happened that these
brothers from Sandgil were away under the Threecorner.  They had
much gossip about all the householders in the Fleetlithe, and
they fell at last to asking whether there was any one that would
fight a horse against them.

But there were some men there who spoke so as to flatter and
honour them, that not only was there no one who would dare do
that, but that there was no one that had such a horse

Then Hildigunna answered, "I know that man who will dare to fight
horses with you."

"Name him," they say.

"Gunnar has a brown horse," she says, "and he will dare to fight
his horse against you, and against any one else."

"As for you women," they say, "you think no one can be Gunnar's
match; but though Geir the Priest or Gizur the White have come
off with shame from before him, still it is not settled that we
shall fare in the same way."

"Ye will fare much worse," she says: and so there arose out of
this the greatest strife between them.  Then Starkad said, "My
will is that ye try your hands on Gunnar last of all; for ye will
find it hard work to go against his good luck."

"Thou wilt give us leave, though, to offer him a horsefight?"

"I will give you leave, if ye play him no trick."

They said they would be sure to do what their father said.

Now they rode to Lithend; Gunnar was at home, and went out, and
Kolskegg and Hjort went with him, and they gave them a hearty
welcome, and asked whither they meant to go?

"No farther than hither," they say. "We are told that thou hast a
good horse, and we wish to challenge thee to a horse-fight."

"Small stories can go about my horse," says Gunnar; "he is young
and untried in every way."

"But still thou wilt be good enough to have the fight, for
Hildigunna guessed that thou wouldest be easy in matching thy
horse."

"How came ye to talk about that?" says Gunnar.

"There were some men," say they, "who were sure that no one would
dare to fight his horse with ours."

"I would dare to fight him," says Gunnar; "but I think that was
spitefully said."

"Shall we look upon the match as made, then?" they asked.

"Well, your journey will seem to you better if ye have your way
in this; but still I will beg this of you, that we so fight our
horses that we make sport for each other, but that no quarrel may
arise from it, and that ye put no shame upon me; but if ye do to
me as ye do to others, then there will be no help for it but that
I shall give you such a buffet as it will seem hard to you to put
up with.  In a word, I shall do then just as ye do first."

Then they ride home.  Starkad asked how their journey had gone
off; they said that Gunnar had made their going good.

"He gave his word to fight his horse, and we settled when and
where the horse-fight should be; but it was plain in everything
that he thought he fell short of us, and he begged and prayed to
get off."

"It will often be found," says Hildigunna, "that Gunnar is slow
to be drawn into quarrels, but a hard hitter if he cannot avoid
them."

Gunnar rode to see Njal, and told him of the horse-fight, and
what words had passed between them, "But how dost thou think the
horse-fight will turn out?"

"Thou wilt be uppermost," says Njal, "but yet many a man's bane
will arise out of this fight."

"Will my bane perhaps come out of it?" asks Gunnar.

"Not out of this," says Njal; "but still they will bear in mind
both the old and the new feud who fare against thee, and thou
wilt have naught left for it but to yield."

Then Gunnar rode home.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  She was daughter of Hroald the Red and Hildigunna Thorstein
     Titling's daughter.  The mother of Hildigunna was Aud Eyvind
     Karf's daughter, the sister of Modolf the Wise of Mosfell,
     from whom the Modylfings are sprung.



58. HOW GUNNAR'S HORSE FOUGHT

Just then Gunnar heard of the death of his father-in-law
Hauskuld; a few nights after, Thorgerda, Thrain's wife, was
delivered at Gritwater, and gave birth to a boy child.  Then she
sent a man to her mother, and bade her choose whether it should
be called Glum or Hauskuld.  She bade call it Hauskuld.  So that
name was given to the boy.

Gunnar and Hallgerda had two sons, the one's name was Hogni and
the other's Grani.  Hogni was a brave man of few words,
distrustful and slow to believe, but truthful.

Now men ride to the horse-fight, and a very great crowd is
gathered together there.  Gunnar was there and his brothers, and
the sons of Sigfus.  Njal and all his sons.  There too was come
Starkad and his sons, and Egil and his sons, and they said to
Gunnar that now they would lead the horses together.

Gunnar said, "That was well."

Skarphedinn said, "Wilt thou that I drive thy horse, kinsman
Gunnar?"

"I will not have that," says Gunnar.

"It wouldn't be amiss though," says Skarphedinn; "we are hot-
headed on both sides."

"Ye would say or do little," says Gunnar, "before a quarrel would
spring up; but with me it will take longer, though it will be all
the same in the end."

After that the horses were led together; Gunnar busked him to
drive his horse, but Skarphedinn led him out.  Gunnar was in a
red kirtle, and had about his loins a broad belt, and a great
riding-rod in his hand.

Then the horses ran at one another, and bit each other long, so
that there was no need for any one to touch them, and that was
the greatest sport.

Then Thorgeir and Kol made up their minds that they would push
their horse forward just as the horses rushed together, and see
if Gunnar would fall before him.

Now the horses ran at one another again, and both Thorgeir and
Kol ran alongside their horses' flank.

Gunnar pushes his horse against them, and what happened in a
trice was this, that Thorgeir and his brother fall down flat on
their backs, and their horse a-top of them.

Then they spring up and rush at Gunnar.  Gunnar swings himself
free and seizes Kol, casts him down on the field, so that he lies
senseless.  Thorgeir Starkad's son smote Gunnar's horse such a
blow that one of his eyes started out.  Gunnar smote Thorgeir
with his riding-rod, and down falls Thorgeir senseless; but
Gunnar goes to his horse, and said to Kolskegg, "Cut off the
horse's head; he shall not live a maimed and blemished beast."

So Kolskegg cut the head off the horse.

Then Thorgeir got on his feet and took his weapons, and wanted to
fly at Gunnar, but that was stopped, and there was a great throng
and crush.

Skarphedinn said, "This crowd wearies me, and it is far more
manly that men should fight it out with weapons; and so he sang a
song:

     "At the Thing there is a throng;
     Past all bounds the crowding comes;
     Hard 'twill be to patch up peace
     'Twixt the men.  This wearies me;
     Worthier is it far for men
     Weapons red with gore to stain;
     I for one would sooner tame
     Hunger huge of cub of wolf."

Gunnar was still, so that one man held him, and spoke no ill
words.

Njal tried to bring about a settlement, or to get pledges of
peace; but Thorgeir said he would neither give nor take peace;
far rather, he said, would he see Gunnar dead for the blow.

Kolskegg said, "Gunnar has before now stood too fast, than that
he should have fallen for words alone, and so it will be again."

Now men ride away from the horse-field, every one to his home. 
They make no attack on Gunnar, and so that halfyear passed away. 
At the Thing, the summer after, Gunnar met Olaf the peacock, his
cousin, and he asked him to come and see him, but yet bade him be
ware of himself; "For," says he, "they will do us all the harm
they can, and mind and fare always with many men at thy back."

He gave him much good counsel beside, and they agreed that there
should be the greatest friendship between them.



59. OF ASGRIM AND WOLF UGGIS' SON

Asgrim Ellidagrim's son had a suit to follow up at the Thing
against Wolf Uggis' son.  It was a matter of inheritance.  Asgrim
took it up in such a way as was seldom his wont; for there was a
bar to his suit, and the bar was this, that he had summoned five
neighbours to bear witness, when he ought to have summoned nine. 
And now they have this as their bar.

Then Gunnar spoke and said,"I will challenge thee to single
combat on the island, Wolf Uggis' son, if men are not to get
their rights by law; and Njal and my friend Helgi would like that
I should take some share in defending thy cause, Asgrim, if they
were not here themselves."

"But," says Wolf, "this quarrel is not one between thee and me."

"Still it shall be as good as though it were," says Gunnar.

And the end of the suit was, that Wolf had to pay down all the
money.

Then Asgrim said to Gunnar, "I will ask thee to come and see me
this summer, and I will ever be with thee in lawsuits, and never
against thee."

Gunnar rides home from the Thing, and a little while after he and
Njal met.  Njal besought Gunnar to be ware of himself, and said
he had been told that those away under the Threecorner meant to
fall on him, and bade him never go about with a small company,
and always to have his weapons with him.  Gunnar said so it
should be, and told him that Asgrim had asked him to pay him a
visit, "and I mean to go now this harvest."

"Let no men know before thou farest how long thou wilt be away,"
said Njal; "but, besides, I beg thee to let my sons ride with
thee, and then no attack will be made on thee."

So they settled that among themselves.

Now the summer wears away till it was eight weeks to winter, and
then Gunnar says to Kolskegg, "Make thee ready to ride, for we
shall ride to a feast at Tongue."

"Shall we say anything about it to Njal's sons?" said Kolskegg.

"No," says Gunnar; "they shall fall into no quarrels for me."



60. AN ATTACK AGAINST GUNNAR AGREED ON

They rode three together, Gunnar and his brothers.  Gunnar had
the bill and his sword, Oliver's gift; but Kolskegg had his short
sword; Hjort, too, had proper weapons.

Now they rode to Tongue, and Asgrim gave them a hearty welcome,
and they were there some while.  At last they gave it out that
they meant to go home there and then.  Asgrim gave them good
gifts, and offered to ride east with them, but Gunnar said there
was no need of any such thing; and so he did not go.

Sigurd Swinehead was the name of a man who dwelt by Thurso water. 
He came to the farm under the Threecorner, for he had given his
word to keep watch on Gunnar's doings, and so he went and told
them of his journey home; "and," quoth he, "there could never be
a finer chance than just now, when he has only two men with him."

"How many men shall we need to have to lie in wait for him?" says
Starkad.

"Weak men shall be as nothing before him," he says; "and it is
not safe to have fewer than thirty men."

"Where shall we lie in wait?"

"By Knafaholes," he says; "there he will not see us before he
comes on us."

"Go thou to Sandgil and tell Egil that fifteen of them must busk
themselves thence, and now other fifteen will go hence to
Knafaholes."

Thorgeir said to Hildigunna, "This hand shall show thee Gunnar
dead this very night."

"Nay, but I guess," says she, "that thou wilt hang thy head after
ye two meet."

So those four, father and sons, fare away from the Threecorner,
and eleven men besides, and they fared to Knafaholes, and lay in
wait there.

Sigurd Swinehead came to Sandgil and said, "Hither am I sent by
Starkad and his sons to tell thee, Egil, that ye, father and
sons, must fare to Knafaholes to lie in wait for Gunnar."

"How many shall we fare in all?" says Egil.

"Fifteen, reckoning me," he says.

Kol said, "Now I mean to try my hand on Kolskegg."

"Then I think thou meanest to have a good deal on thy hands,"
says Sigurd.

Egil begged his Easterlings to fare with him.  They said they had
no quarrel with Gunnar; "and besides," says Thorir, "ye seem to
need much help here, when a crowd of men shall go against three
men."

Then Egil went away and was wroth.

Then the mistress of the house said to the Easterling, "In an
evil hour hath my daughter Gudruna humbled herself, and broken
the point of her maidenly pride, and lain by thy side as thy
wife, when thou wilt not dare to follow thy father-in-law, and
thou must be a coward," she says.

"I will go," he says, "with thy husband, and neither of us two
shall come back."

After that he went to Thorgrim his messmate, and said, "Take thou
now the keys of my chests; for I shall never unlock them again. 
I bid thee take for thine own whatever of our goods thou wilt;
but sail away from Iceland, and do not think of revenge for me. 
But if thou dost not leave the land, it will be thy death."

So the Easterling joined himself to their band.



61. GUNNAR'S DREAM

Now we must go back and say that Gunnar rides east over Thurso
water, but when he had gone a little way from the river, he grew
very drowsy, and bade them lie down and rest there.

They did so.  He fell fast asleep, and struggled much as he
slumbered.

Then Kolskegg said, "Gunnar dreams now."  But Hjort said, "I
would like to wake him."

"That shall not be," said Kolskegg, "but he shall dream his
dream out."

Gunnar lay, a very long while, and threw off his shield from him,
and he grew very warm.  Kolskegg said, "What hast thou dreamt,
kinsman?"

"That have I dreamt," says Gunnar, "which if I had dreamt it
there, I would never have ridden with so few men from Tongue."

"Tell us thy dream," says Kolskegg.

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Chief, that chargest foes in fight!
     Now I fear that I have ridden
     Short of men from Tongue, this harvest;
     Raven's fast I sure shall break.
     Lord, that scatters Ocean's fire! (1)
     This, at least, I long to say,
     Kite with wolf shall fight for marrow
     Ill I dreamt with wandering thought."

"I dreamt, methought, that I was riding on by Knafaholes, and
there I thought I saw many wolves, and they all made at me; but I
turned away from them straight towards Rangriver, and then
methought they pressed hard on me on all sides, but I kept them
at bay, and shot all those that were foremost, till they came so
close to me that I could not use my bow against them.  Then I
took my sword, and I smote with it with one hand, but thrust at
them with my bill with the other.  Shield myself then I did not,
and methought then I knew not what shielded me.  Then I slew many
wolves, and thou, too, Kolskegg; but Hjort methought they pulled
down, and tore open his breast, and one methought had his heart
in his maw; but I grew so wroth that I hewed that wolf asunder
just below the brisket, and after that methought the wolves
turned and fled.  Now my counsel is, brother Hjort, that thou
ridest back west to Tongue."

"I will not do that," says Hjort; "though I know my death is
sure, I will stand by thee still."

Then they rode and came east by Knafaholes, and Kolskegg said,
"Seest thou, kinsman!  Many spears stand up by the holes, and men
with weapons."

"It does not take me unawares," says Gunnar, "that my dream comes
true."

"What is best to be done now?" says Kolskegg; "I guess thou wilt
not run away from them."

"They shall not have that to jeer about," says Gunnar, "but we
will ride on down to the ness by Rangriver; there is some vantage
ground there."

Now they rode on to the ness, and made them ready there, and as
they rode on past them, Kol called out and said, "Whither art
thou running to now, Gunnar?"

But Kolskegg said, "Say the same thing farther on when this day
has come to an end."


ENDNOTES:

1.   "Ocean's fire," a periphrasis for "gold."  The whole line is
     a periphrasis for "bountiful chief."



62. THE SLAYING OF HJORT AND FOURTEEN MEN

After that Starkad egged on his men, and then they turn down upon
them into the ness.  Sigurd Swinehead came first and had a red
targe, but in his other hand he held a cutlass.  Gunnar sees him
and shoots an arrow at him from his bow; he held the shield up
aloft when he saw the arrow flying high, and the shaft passes
through the shield and into his eye, and so came out at the nape
of his neck, and that was the first man slain.

A second arrow Gunnar shot at Ulfhedinn, one of Starkad's men,
and that struck him about the middle and he fell at the feet of a
yeoman, and the yeoman over him.  Kolskegg cast a stone and
struck the yeoman on the head, and that was his deathblow.

Then Starkad said, "'Twill never answer our end that he should
use his bow, but let us come on well and stoutly."  Then each man
egged on the other, and Gunnar guarded himself with his bow and
arrows as long as he could; after that he throws them down, and
then he takes his bill and sword and fights with both hands. 
There is long the hardest fight, but still Gunnar and Kolskegg
slew man after man.

Then Thorgeir, Starkad's son, said, "I vowed to bring Hildigunna
thy head, Gunnar."

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Thou, that battle-sleet down bringeth,
     Scarce I trow thou speakest truth;
     She, the girl with golden armlets,
     Cannot care for such a gift;
     But, O serpent's hoard despoiler!
     If the maid must have my head --
     Maid whose wrist Rhine's fire (1) wreatheth,
     Closer come to crash of spear."

"She will not think that so much worth having," says Gunnar; "but
still to get it thou wilt have to come nearer!"

Thorgeir said to his brothers, "Let us run all of us upon him at
once; he has no shield and we shall have his life in our hands."

So Bork and Thorkel both ran forward and were quicker than
Thorgeir.  Bork made a blow at Gunnar, and Gunnar threw his bill
so hard in the way, that the sword flew out of Bork's hand; then
he sees Thorkel standing on his other hand within stroke of
sword.  Gunnar was standing with his body swayed a little on one
side, and he makes a sweep with his sword, and caught Thorkel on
the neck, and off flew his head.

Kol Egil's son, said, "Let me get at Kolskegg," and turning to
Kolskegg he said, "This I have often said, that we two would be
just about an even match in fight."

"That we can soon prove," says Kolskegg.

Kol thrust at him with his spear; Kolskegg had just slain a man
and had his hands full, and so he could not throw his shield
before the blow, and the thrust came upon his thigh, on the
outside of the limb and went through it.

Kolskegg turned sharp round, and strode towards him, and smote
him with his short sword on the thigh, and cut off his leg, and
said, "Did it touch thee or not?"

"Now," says Kol, "I pay for being bare of my shield."

So he stood a while on his other leg and looked at the stump.

"Thou needest not to look at it," said Kolskegg; "'tis even as
thou seest, the leg is off."

Then Kol fell down dead.

But when Egil sees this, he runs at Gunnar and makes a cut at
him; Gunnar thrusts at him with the bill and struck him in the
middle, and Gunnar hoists him up on the bill and hurls him out
into Rangriver.

Then Starkad said, "Wretch that thou art indeed," Thorir
Easterling, "when thou sittest by; but thy host, and father-in-
law Egil, is slain."

Then the Easterling sprung up and was very wroth.  Hjort had been
the death of two men, and the Easterling leapt on him and smote
him full on the breast.  Then Hjort fell down dead on the spot.

Gunnar sees this and was swift to smite at the Easterling, and
cuts him asunder at the waist.

A little while after Gunnar hurls the bill at Bork, and struck
him in the middle, and the bill went through him and stuck in the
ground.

Then Kolskegg cut off Hauk Egil's son's head, and Gunnar smites
off Otter's hand at the elbow-joint.  Then Starkad said, "Let us
fly now.  We have not to do with men!"

Gunnar said, "Ye two will think it a sad story if there is naught
on you to show that ye have both been in the battle."

Then Gunnar ran after Starkad and Thorgeir, and gave them each a
wound.  After that they parted; and Gunnar and his brothers had
then wounded many men who got away from the field, but fourteen
lost their lives, and Hjort the fifteenth.

Gunnar brought Hjort home, laid out on his shield, and he was
buried in a cairn there.  Many men grieved for him, for he had
many dear friends.

Starkad came home, too, and Hildigunna dressed his wounds and
Thorgeir's, and said, "Ye would have given a great deal not to
have fallen out with Gunnar."

"So we would," says Starkad.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Rhine's fire," a periphrasis for gold.



63. NJAL'S COUNSEL TO GUNNAR

Steinvor, at Sandgil, besought Thorgrim the Easterling to take in
hand the care of her goods, and not to sail away from Iceland,
and so to keep in mind the death of his messmate and kinsman.

"My messmate Thorir," said he, "foretold that I should fall by
Gunnar's hand if I stayed here in the land, and he must have
foreseen that when he foreknew his own death."

"I will give thee," she says, "Gudruna my daughter to wife, and
all my goods into the bargain."

"I knew not," he said, "that thou wouldest pay such a long
price."

After that they struck the bargain that he shall have her, and
the wedding feast was to be the next summer.

Now Gunnar rides to Bergthorsknoll, and Kolskegg with him.  Njal
was out of doors and his sons, and they went to meet Gunnar and
gave them a hearty welcome.  After that they fell a-talking, and
Gunnar said, "Hither am I come to seek good counsel and help at
thy hand."

"That is thy due," said Njal.

"I have fallen into a great strait," says Gunnar, "and slain many
men, and I wish to know what thou wilt make of the matter?"

"Many will say this," said Njal, "that thou hast been driven into
it much against thy will; but now thou shalt give me time to take
counsel with myself."

Then Njal went away all by himself, and thought over a plan, and
came back and said, "Now have I thought over the matter somewhat,
and it seems to me as though this must be carried through -- if
it be carried through at all -- with hardihood and daring. 
Thorgeir has got my kinswoman Thorfinna with child, and I will
hand over to thee the suit for seduction.  Another suit of
outlawry against Starkad I hand over also to thee, for having
hewn trees in my wood on the Threecorner ridge.  Both these suits
shalt thou take up.  Thou shalt fare too, to the spot where ye
fought, and dig up the dead, and name witnesses to the wounds,
and make all the dead outlaws, for that they came against thee
with that mind to give thee and thy brothers wounds or swift
death.  But if this be tried at the Thing, and it be brought up
against thee that thou first gave Thorgeir a blow, and so mayst
neither plead thine own cause nor that of others, then I will
answer in that matter, and say that I gave thee back thy rights
at the Thingskala-Thing, so that thou shouldest be able to plead
thine own suit as well as that of others, and then there will be
an answer to that point.  Thou shalt also go to see Tyrfing of
Berianess, and he must hand over to thee a suit against Aunund of
Witchwood, who has the blood feud after his brother Egil."

Then first of all Gunnar rode home; but a few nights after Njal's
sons and Gunnar rode thither where the bodies were, and dug them
up that were buried there.  Then Gunnar summoned them all as
outlaws for assault and treachery, and rode home after that.



64.  OF VALGARD AND MORD

That same harvest Valgard the Guileful came out to Iceland, and
fared home to Hof.  Then Thorgeir went to see Valgard and Mord,
and told them what a strait they were in if Gunnar were to be
allowed to make all those men outlaws whom he had slain.

Valgard said that must be Njal's counsel, and yet everything had
not come out yet which he was likely to have taught him.

Then Thorgeir begged those kinsmen for help and backing, but they
held out a long while, and at last asked for, and got a large sum
of money.

That, too, was part of their plan, that Mord should ask for
Thorkatla, Gizur the White's daughter, and Thorgeir was to ride
at once west across the river with Valgard and Mord.

So the day after they rode twelve of them together and came to
Mossfell.  There they were heartily welcomed, and they put the
question to Gizur about the wooing, and the end of it was that
the match should be made, and the wedding feast was to be in half
a month's space at Mossfell.

They ride home, and after that they ride to the wedding and there
was a crowd of guests to meet them, and it went off well. 
Thorkatla went home with Mord and took the housekeeping in hand,
but Valgard went abroad again the next summer.

Now Mord eggs on Thorgeir to set his suit on foot against Gunnar,
and Thorgeir went to find Aunund; he bids him now to begin a suit
for manslaughter for his brother Egil and his sons; "but I will
begin one for the manslaughter of my brothers, and for the wounds
of myself and my father."

He said he was quite ready to do that, and then they set out, and
give notice of the manslaughter, and summon nine neighbours who
dwelt nearest to the spot where the deed was done.  This
beginning of the suit was heard of at Lithend; and then Gunnar
rides to see Njal, and told him, and asked what he wished them to
do next.

"Now," says Njal, "thou shalt summon those who dwell next to the
spot, and thy neighbours; and call men to witness before the
neighbours, and choose out Kol as the slayer in the manslaughter
of Hjort thy brother: for that is lawful and right; then thou
shalt give notice of the suit for manslaughter at Kol's hand,
though he be dead.  Then shalt thou call men to witness, and
summon the neighbours to ride to the Allthing to bear witness of
the fact, whether they, Kol and his companions, were on the spot,
and in onslaught when Hjort was slain.  Thou shalt also summon
Thorgeir for the suit of seduction, and Aunund at the suit of
Tyrfing."

Gunnar now did in everything as Njal gave him counsel.  This men
thought a strange beginning of suits, and now these matters come
before the Thing.  Gunnar rides to the Thing, and Njal's sons and
the sons of Sigfus.  Gunnar had sent messengers to his cousins
and kinsmen, that they should ride to the Thing, and come with as
many men as they could, and told them that this matter would lead
to much strife.  So they gathered together in a great band from
the west.

Mord rode to the Thing and Runolf of the DaIe, and those under
the Threecorner, and Aunund of Witchwood.  But when they come to
the Thing, they join them in one company with Gizur the White and
Geir the Priest.



65. OF FINES AND ATONEMENTS

Gunnar, and the sons of Sigfus, and Njal's sons, went altogether
in one band, and they marched so swiftly and closely that men who
came in their way had to take heed lest they should get a fall;
and nothing was so often spoken about over the whole Thing as
these great lawsuits.

Gunnar went to meet his cousins, and Olaf and his men greeted him
well.  They asked Gunnar about the fight, but he told them all
about it, and was just in all he said; he told them, too, what
steps he had taken since.

Then Olaf said,"'Tis worth much to see how close Njal stands by
thee in all counsel."

Gunnar said he should never be able to repay that, but then he
begged them for help; and they said that was his due.

Now the suits on both sides came before the court, and each
pleads his cause.

Mord asked, "How it was that a man could have the right to set a
suit on foot who, like Gunnar, had already made himself an outlaw
by striking Thorgeir a blow?"

"Wast thou," answered Njal, "at Thingskala-Thing last autumn?"

"Surely I was," says Mord.

"Heardest thou," asks Njal, "how Gunnar offered him full
atonement?  Then I gave back Gunnar his right to do all lawful
deeds."

"That is right and good law," says Mord, "but how does the matter
stand if Gunnar has laid the slaying of Hjort at Kol's door, when
it was the Easterling that slew him?"

"That was right and lawful," says Njal, "when he chose him as the
slayer before witnesses."

"That was lawful and right, no doubt," says Mord; "but for what
did Gunnar summon them all as outlaws?"

"Thou needest not to ask about that," says Njal, "when they went
out to deal wounds and manslaughter."

"Yes," says Mord, "but neither befell Gunnar."

"Gunnar's brothers," said Njal, "Kolskegg and Hjort, were there,
and one of them got his death and the other a flesh wound."

"Thou speakest nothing but what is law," says Mord, "though it is
hard to abide by it."

Then Hiallti Skeggi's son of Thursodale, stood forth and said. "I
have had no share in any of your lawsuits; but I wish to know
whether thou wilt do something, Gunnar, for the sake of my words
and friendship."

"What askest thou?" says Gunnar.

"This," he says, "that ye lay down the whole suit to the award
and judgment of good men and true."

"If I do so," said Gunnar, "then thou shalt never be against me,
whatever men I may have to deal with."

"I will give my word to that," says Hjallti.

After that he tried his best with Gunnar's adversaries, and
brought it about that they were all set at one again.  And after
that each side gave the other pledges of peace; but for
Thorgeir's wound came the suit for seduction, and for the hewing
in the wood, Starkad's wound.  Thorgeir's brothers were atoned
for by half fines, but half fell away for the onslaught on
Gunnar.  Egil's slaying and Tyrfing's lawsuit were set off
against each other.  For Hjort's slaying, the slaying of Kol and
of the Easterling were to come, and as for all the rest, they
were atoned for with half fines.

Njal was in this award, and Asgrim Ellidagrim's son, and Hjallti
Skeggi's son.

Njal had much money out at interest with Starkad, and at Sandgil
too, and he gave it all to Gunnar to make up these fines.

So many friends had Gunnar at the Thing, that he not only paid up
there and then all the fines on the spot, but gave besides gifts
to many chiefs who had lent him help; and he had the greatest
honour from the suit; and all were agreed in this, that no man
was his match in all the South Quarter.

So Gunnar rides home from the Thing and sits there in peace, but
still his adversaries envied him much for his honour.



66. OF THORGEIR OTKELL'S SON

Now we must tell of Thorgeir Otkell's son; he grew up to be a
tall strong man, true-hearted and guileless, but rather too ready
to listen to fair words.  He had many friends among the best men,
and was much beloved by his kinsmen.

Once on a time Thorgeir Starkad's son had been to see his kinsman
Mord.

"I can ill brook," he says, "that settlement of matters which we
and Gunnar had, but I have bought thy help so long as we two are
above ground; I wish thou wouldest think out some plan and lay it
deep; this is why I say it right out, because I know that thou
art Gunnar's greatest foe, and he too thine.  I will much
increase thine honour if thou takest pains in this matter."

"It will always seem as though I were greedy of gain, but so it
must be.  Yet it will be hard to take care that thou mayest not
seem to be a truce-breaker, or peace-breaker, and yet carry out
thy point.  But now I have been told that Kolskegg means to try a
suit, and regain a fourth part of Moeidsknoll, which was paid to
thy father as an atonement for his son.  He has taken up this
suit for his mother, but this too is Gunnar's counsel, to pay in
goods and not to let the land go.  We must wait till this comes
about, and then declare that he has broken the settlement made
with you.  He has also taken a cornfield from Thorgeir Otkell's
son, and so broken the settlement with him too.  Thou shalt go to
see Thorgeir Otkell's son, and bring him into the matter with
thee, and then fall on Gunnar; but if ye fail in aught of this,
and cannot get him hunted down, still ye shall set on him over
and over again.  I must tell thee that Njal has "spaed" his
fortune, and foretold about his life, if he slays more than once
in the same stock, that it would lead him to his death, if it so
fell out that he broke the settlement made after the deed. 
Therefore shalt thou bring Thorgeir into the suit, because he has
already slain his father; and now, if ye two are together in an
affray, thou shalt shield thyself; but he will go boldly on, and
then Gunnar will slay him.  Then he has slain twice in the same
stock, but thou shalt fly from the fight.  And if this is to drag
him to his death he will break the settlement afterwards, and so
we may wait till then."

After that Thorgeir goes home and tells his father secretly. 
Then they agreed among themselves that they should work out this
plot by stealth.



67. OF THORGEIR STARKAD'S SON

Sometime after Thorgeir Starkad's son fared to Kirkby to see his
namesake, and they went aside to speak, and talked secretly all
day; but at the end Thorgeir Starkad's son gave his namesake a
spear inlaid with gold, and rode home afterwards; they made the
greatest friendship the one with the other.

At the Thingskala-Thing in the autumn, Kolskegg laid claim to the
land at Moeidsknoll, but Gunnar took witness, and offered ready
money, or another piece of land at a lawful price to those under
the Threecorner.

Thorgeir took witness also, that Gunnar was breaking the
settlement made between them.

After that the Thing was broken up, and so the next year wore
away.

Those namesakes were always meeting, and there was the greatest
friendship between them.  Kolskegg spoke to Gunnar and said, "I
am told that there is great friendship between those namesakes,
and it is the talk of many men that they will prove untrue, and I
would that thou wouldst be ware of thyself."

"Death will come to me when it will come," says Gunnar, "wherever
I may be, if that is my fate."

Then they left off talking about it.

About autumn, Gunnar gave out that they would work one week there
at home, and the next down in the isles, and so make an end of
their hay-making.  At the same time, he let it be known that
every man would have to leave the house, save himself and the
women.

Thorgeir under Threecorner goes to see his namesake, but as soon
as they met they began to talk after their wont, and Thorgeir
Starkad's son, said, "I would that we could harden our hearts
and fall on Gunnar."

"Well," says Thorgeir Otkell's son, "every struggle with Gunnar
has had but one end, that few have gained the day; besides,
methinks it sounds ill to be called a peace-breaker."

"They have broken the peace, not we," says Thorgeir Starkad's
son.  "Gunnar took away from thee thy cornfield; and he has taken
Moeidsknoll from my father and me."

And so they settle it between them to fall on Gunnar; and then
Thorgeir said that Gunnar would be all alone at home in a few
nights' space, "and then thou shalt come to meet me with eleven
men, but I will have as many."

After that Thorgeir rode home.



68. OF NJAL AND THOSE NAMESAKES

Now when Kolskegg and the house-carles had been three nights in
the isles, Thorgeir Starkad's son had news of that, and sends
word to his namesake that he should come to meet him on
Threecorner ridge.

After that Thorgeir of the Threecorner busked him with eleven
men; he rides up on the ridge and there waits for his namesake.

And now Gunnar is at home in his house, and those namesakes ride
into a wood hard by.  There such a drowsiness came over them that
they could do naught else but sleep.  So they hung their shields
up in the boughs, and tethered their horses, and laid their
weapons by their sides.

Njal was that night up in Thorolfsfell, and could not sleep at
all, but went out and in by turns.

Thorhilda asked Njal why he could not sleep?

"Many things now flit before my eyes," said he; "I see many
fetches of Gunnar's bitter foes, and what is very strange is
this, they seem to be mad with rage, and yet they fare without
plan or purpose."

A little after, a man rode up to the door and got off his horse's
back and went in, and there was come the shepherd of Thorhilda
and her husband.

"Didst thou find the sheep?" she asked.

"I found what might be more worth," said he.

"What was that?" asked Njal. 

"I found twenty-four men up in the wood yonder; they had tethered
their horses, but slept themselves.  Their shields they had hung
up in the boughs."

But so closely had he looked at them that he told of all their
weapons and wargear and clothes, and then Njal knew plainly who
each of them must have been, and said to him, "'Twere good
hiring if there were many such shepherds; and this shall ever
stand to thy good; but still I will send thee on an errand."

He said at once he would go.

"Thou shalt go," says Njal, "to Lithend and tell Gunnar that he
must fare to Gritwater, and then send after men; but I will go to
meet with those who are in the wood and scare them away.  This
thing hath well come to pass, so that they shall gain nothing by
this journey, but lose much."

The shepherd set off and told Gunnar as plainly as he could the
whole story.  Then Gunnar rode to Gritwater and summoned men to
him.

Now it is to be told of Njal how he rides to meet these
namesakes.

"Unwarily ye lie here," he says, "or for what end shall this
journey have been made?  And Gunnar is not a man to be trifled
with.  But if the truth must be told then, this is the greatest
treason.  Ye shall also know this, that Gunnar is gathering
force, and he will come here in the twinkling of an eye, and slay
you all, unless ye ride away home."

They bestirred them at once, for they were in great fear, and
took their weapons, and mounted their horses and galloped home
under the Threecorner.

Njal fared to meet Gunnar and bade him not to break up his
company.

"But I will go and seek for an atonement; now they will be finely
frightened; but for this treason no less a sum shall be paid when
one has to deal with all of them, than shall be paid for the
slaying of one or other of those namesakes, though such a thing
should come to pass.  This money I will take into my keeping, and
so lay it out that it may be ready to thy hand when thou hast
need of it."



69. OLAF THE PEACOCK'S GIFTS TO GUNNAR

Gunnar thanked Njal for his aid, and Njal rode away under the
Threecorner, and told those namesakes that Gunnar would not break
up his band of men before he had fought it out with them.

They began to offer terms for themselves, and were full of dread,
and bade Njal to come between them with an offer of atonement.

Njal said that could only be if there were no guile behind.  Then
they begged him to have a share in the award, and said they would
hold to what he awarded.

Njal said he would make no award unless it were at the Thing, and
unless the best men were by; and they agreed to that.

Then NjaI came between them, so that they gave each other pledges
of peace and atonement.

Njal was to utter the award, and to name as his fellows those
whom he chose.

A little while after those namesakes met Mord Valgard's son, and
Mord blamed them much for having laid the matter in Njal's hands,
when he was Gunnar's great friend.  He said that would turn out
ill for them.

Now men ride to the Althing after their wont, and now both sides
are at the Thing.

Njal begged for a hearing, and asked all the best men who were
come thither, what right at law they thought Gunnar had against
those namesakes for their treason.  They said they thought such a
man had great right on his side.

Njal went on to ask, whether he had a right of action against all
of them, or whether the leaders had to answer for them all in the
suit?

They say that most of the blame would fall on the leaders, but a
great deal still on them all.

"Many will say this," said Mord, "that it was not without a cause
when Gunnar broke the settlement made with those namesakes."

"That is no breach of settlement," says Njal, "that any man
should take the law against another; for with law shall our land
be built up and settled, and with lawlessness wasted and
spoiled."

Then Njal tells them that Gunnar had offered land for
Moeidsknoll, or other goods.

Then those namesakes thought they had been beguiled by Mord, and
scolded him much, and said that this fine was all his doing.

Njal named twelve men as judges in the suit, and then every man
paid a hundred in silver who had gone out, but each of those
namesakes two hundred.

Njal took this money into his keeping but either side gave the
other pledges of peace, and Njal gave out the terms.

Then Gunnar rode from the Thing west to the Dales, till he came
to Hjardarholt, and Olaf the Peacock gave him a hearty welcome. 
There he sat half a month, and rode far and wide about the Dales,
and all welcomed him with joyful hands.  But at their parting
Olaf said, "I will give thee three things of price, a gold ring,
and a cloak which Moorkjartan the Erse king owned, and a hound
that was given me in Ireland; he is big, and no worse follower
than a sturdy man.  Besides, it is part of his nature that he has
man's wit, and he will bay at every man whom he knows is thy foe,
but never at thy friends; he can see, too, in any man's face,
whether he means thee well or ill, and he will lay down his life
to be true to thee.  This hound's name is Sam."

After that he spoke to the hound, "Now shalt thou follow Gunnar,
and do him all the service thou canst."

The hound went at once to Gunnar and laid himself down at his
feet.

Olaf bade Gunnar to be ware of himself, and said he had many
enviers, "For now thou art thought to be a famous man throughout
all the land."

Gunnar thanked him for his gifts and good counsel, and rode home.

Now Gunnar sits at home for sometime, and all is quiet.



70. MORD'S COUNSEL

A little after, those namesakes and Mord met, and they were not
at all of one mind.  They thought they had lost much goods for
Mord's sake, but had got nothing in return; and they bade him set
on foot some other plot which might do Gunnar harm.

Mord said so it should be.  "But now this is my counsel, that
thou, Thorgeir Otkell's son shouldest beguile Ormilda, Gunnar's
kinswoman; but Gunnar will let his displeasure grow against thee
at that, and then I will spread that story abroad that Gunnar
will not suffer thee to do such things.  Then ye two shall some
time after make an attack on Gunnar, but still ye must not seek
him at home, for there is no thinking of that while the hound is
alive."

So they settled this plan among them that it should be brought
about.

Thorgeir began to turn his steps towards Ormilda, and Gunnar
thought that ill, and great dislike arose between them.

So the winter wore away.  Now comes the summer, and their secret
meetings went on oftener than before.

As for Thorgeir of the Threecorner and Mord, they were always
meeting; and they plan an onslaught on Gunnar when he rides down
to the isles to see after the work done by his house-caries.

One day Mord was ware of it when Gunnar rode down to the isles,
and sent a man off under the Threecorner to tell Thorgeir that
then would be the likeliest time to try to fall on Gunnar.

They bestirred them at once, and fare thence twelve together, but
when they came to Kirkby there they found thirteen men waiting
for them.

Then they made up their minds to ride down to Rangriver and lie
in wait there for Gunnar.

But when Gunnar rode up from the isles, Kolskegg rode with him. 
Gunnar had his bow and his arrows and his bill.  Kolskegg had his
short sword and weapons to match.



71. THE SLAYING OF THORGEIR OTKELL'S SON

That token happened as Gunnar and his brother rode up towards
Rangriver, that much blood burst out on the bill.

Kolskegg asked what that might mean.

Gunnar says, "If such tokens took place in other lands, it was
called `wound-drops,' and Master Oliver told me also that this
only happened before great fights."

So they rode on till they saw men sitting by the river on the
other side, and they had tethered their horses.

Gunnar said, "Now we have an ambush."

Kolskegg answered, "Long have they been faithless; but what is
best to be done now?"

"We will gallop up alongside them to the ford," says Gunnar, "and
there make ready for them."

The others saw that and turned at once towards them.

Gunnar strings his bow, and takes his arrows and throws them on
the ground before him, and shoots as soon as ever they come
within shot; by that Gunnar wounded many men, but some he slew.

Then Thorgeir Otkell's son spoke and said, "This is no use; let
us make for him as hard as we can."

They did so, and first went Aunund the Fair, Thorgeir's kinsman. 
Gunnar hurled the bill at him, and it fell on his shield and
clove it in twain, but the bill rushed through Aunund.  Augmund
Shockhead rushed at Gunnar behind his back.  Kolskegg saw that
and cut off at once both Augmund's legs from under him, and
hurled him out into Rangriver, and he was drowned there and then.

Then a hard battle arose; Gunnar cut with one hand and thrust
with the other.  Kolskegg slew some men and wounded many.

Thorgeir Starkad's son called out to his namesake, "It looks very
little as though thou hadst a father to avenge."

"True it is," he answers, "that I do not make much way, but yet
thou hast not followed in my footsteps; still I will not bear thy
reproaches."

With that he rushes at Gunnar in great wrath, and thrust his
spear through his shield, and so on through his arm.

Gunnar gave the shield such a sharp twist that the spearhead
broke short off at the socket.  Gunnar sees that another man was
come within reach of his sword, and he smites at him and deals
him his death-blow.  After that, he clutches his bill with both
hands; just then, Thorgeir Otkell's son had come near him with a
drawn sword, and Gunnar turns on him in great wrath, and drives
the bill through him, and lifts him up aloft, and casts him out
into Rangriver, and he drifts down towards the ford, and stuck
fast there on a stone; and the name of that ford has since been
Thorgeir's ford.

Then Thorgeir Starkad's son said, "Let us fly now; no victory
will be fated to us this time."

So they all turned and fled from the field.

"Let us follow them up now," says Kolskegg "and take thou thy bow
and arrows, and thou wilt come within bowshot of Thorgeir
Starkad's son."

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Reaver of rich river-treasure,
     Plundered will our purses be,
     Though to-day we wound no other
     Warriors wight in play of spears
     Aye, if I for all these sailors
     Lowly lying, fines must pay --
     This is why I hold my hand,
     Hearken, brother dear, to me."_

"Our purses will be emptied," says Gunnar, "by the time that
these are atoned for who now lie here dead."

"Thou wilt never lack money," says Kolskegg; "but Thorgeir will
never leave off before he compasses thy death."

Gunnar sang another song:

     "Lord of water-skates (1) that skim
     Sea-king's fields, more good as he,
     Shedding wounds' red stream, must stand
     In my way ere I shall wince.
     I, the golden armlets' warder,
     Snakelike twined around my wrist,
     Ne'er shall shun a foeman's faulchion
     Flashing bright in din of fight."

"He, and a few more as good as he," says Gunnar, "must stand in
my path ere I am afraid of them."

After that they ride home and tell the tidings.  Hallgerda was
well pleased to hear them, and praised the deed much.

Rannveig said, "May be the deed is good; but somehow," she says,
"I feel too downcast about it to think that good can come of it."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Water-skates," a periphrasis for ships.



72. OF THE SUITS FOR MANSLAUGHTER AT THE THING

These tidings were spread far and wide, and Thorgeir's death was
a great grief to many a man.  Gizur the White and his men rode to
the spot and gave notice of the manslaughter, and called the
neighbours on the inquest to the Thing.  Then they rode home
west.

Njal and Gunnar met and talked about the battle.  Then Njal said
to Gunnar, "Now be ware of thyself.  Now hast thou slain twice in
the same stock; and so now take heed to thy behaviour, and think
that it is as much as thy life is worth, if thou dost not hold to
the settlement that is made."

"Nor do I mean to break it in any way," says Gunnar, "but still I
shall need thy help at the Thing."

"I will hold to my faithfulness to thee," said Njal, "till my
death day."

Then Gunnar rides home.  Now the Thing draws near; and each side
gather a great company; and it is a matter of much talk at the
Thing how these suits will end.

Those two, Gizur the White, and Geir the Priest, talked with each
other as to who should give notice of the suit of manslaughter
after Thorgeir, and the end of it was that Gizur took the suit on
his hand, and gave notice of it at the Hill of Laws, and spoke in
these words: --

"I gave notice of a suit for assault laid down by law against
Gunnar Hamond's son; for that he rushed with an onslaught laid
down by law on Thorgeir Otkell's son, and wounded him with a body
wound, which proved a death wound, so that Thorgeir got his
death.

"I say on this charge he ought to become a convicted outlaw, not
to be fed, not to be forwarded, not to be helped or harboured in
any need.

"I say that his goods are forfeited, half to me and half to the
men of the Quarter, whose right it is by law to seize the goods
of outlaws.

"I give notice of this charge in the Quarter Court, into which
this suit ought by law to come.

"I give this lawful notice in the hearing of all men at the Hill
of Laws.

"I give notice now of this suit, and of full forfeiture and
outlawry against Gunnar Hamond's son."

A second time Gizur took witness, and gave notice of a suit
against Gunnar Hamond's son, for that he had wounded Thorgeir
Otkell's son with a body wound which was a death wound, and from
which Thorgeir got his death, on such and such a spot when Gunnar
first sprang on Thorgeir with an onslaught, laid down by law.

After that he gave notice of this declaration as he had done of
the first.  Then he asked in what Quarter Court the suit lay, and
in what house in the district the defendant dwelt.

When that was over, men left the Hill of Laws, and all said that
he spoke well.

Gunnar kept himself well in hand and said little or nothing.

Now the Thing wears away till the day when the courts were to be
set.

Then Gunnar stood looking south by the court of the men of
Rangriver, and his men with him.

Gizur stood looking north, and calls his witnesses, and bade
Gunnar to listen to his oath, and to his declaration of the suit,
and to all the steps and proofs which he meant to bring forward. 
After that he took his oath, and then he brought forward the suit
in the same shape before the court, as he had given notice of it
before.  Then he made them bring forward witness of the notice,
then he bade the neighbours on the inquest to take their seats,
and called upon Gunnar to challenge the inquest.



73. OF THE ATONEMENT

Then Njal spoke and said, "Now I can no longer sit still and take
no part.  Let us go to where the neighbours sit on the inquest."

They went thither and challenged four neighbours out of the
inquest, but they called on the five that were left to answer the
following question in Gunnar's favour, "Whether those namesakes
had gone out with that mind to the place of meeting to do Gunnar
a mischief if they could?"

But all bore witness at once that so it was.

Then Njal called this a lawful defence to the suit, and said he
would bring forward proof of it unless they gave over the suit to
arbitration.

Then many chiefs joined in praying for an atonement, and so it
was brought about that twelve men should utter an award in the
matter.

Then either side went and handselled this settlement to the
other.  Afterwards the award was made, and the sum to be paid
settled, and it was all to be paid down then and there at the
Thing.

But besides, Gunnar was to go abroad and Kolskegg with him, and
they were to be away three winters; but if Gunnar did not go
abroad when he had a chance of a passage, then he was to be slain
by the kinsmen of those whom he had killed.

Gunnar made no sign, as though he thought the terms of atonement
were not good.  He asked Njal for that money which he had handed
over to him to keep.  Njal had laid the money out at interest and
paid it down all at once, and it just came to what Gunnar had to
pay for himself.

Now they ride home.  Gunnar and Njal rode both together from the
Thing, and then Njal said to Gunnar, "Take good care, messmate,
that thou keepest to this atonement, and bear in mind what we
have spoken about; for though thy former journey abroad brought
thee to great honour, this will be a far greater honour to thee. 
Thou wilt come back with great glory, and live to be an old man,
and no man here will then tread on thy heel; but if thou dost not
fare away, and so breakest thy atonement, then thou wilt be slain
here in the land, and that is ill knowing for those who are thy
friends."

Gunnar said he had no mind to break the atonement, and he rides
home and told them of the settlement.

Rannveig said it was well that he fared abroad, for then they
must find some one else to quarrel with.



74. KOLSKEGG GOES ABROAD

Thrain Sigfus' son said to his wife that he meant to fare abroad
that summer.  She said that was well.  So he took his passage
with Hogni the White.

Gunnar took his passage with Arnfin of the Bay; and Kolskegg was
to go with him.

Grim and Helgi, Njal's sons, asked their father's leave to go
abroad too, and Njal said, "This foreign voyage ye will find hard
work, so hard that it will be doubtful whether ye keep your
lives; but still ye two will get some honour and glory, but it is
not unlikely that a quarrel will arise out of your journey when
ye come back."

Still they kept on asking their father to let them go, and the
end of it was that he bade them go if they chose.

Then they got them a passage with Bard the Black, and Olof
Kettle's son of Elda; and it is the talk of the whole country
that all the better men in that district were leaving it.

By this time Gunnar's sons, Hogni and Grani, were grown up; they
were men of very different turn of mind.  Grani had much of his
mother's temper, but Hogni was kind and good.

Gunnar made men bear down the wares of his brother and himself to
the ship, and when all Gunnar's baggage had come down, and the
ship was all but "boun," then Gunnar rides to Bergthorsknoll, and
to other homesteads to see men, and thanked them all for the help
they had given him.

The day after he gets ready early for his journey to the ship,
and told all his people that he would ride away for good and all,
and men took that much to heart, but still they said that they
looked to his coming back afterwards.

Gunnar threw his arms round each of the household when he was
"boun," and every one of them went out of doors with him; he
leans on the butt of his spear and leaps into the saddle, and he
and Kolskegg ride away.

They ride down along Markfleet, and just then Gunnar's horse
tripped and threw him off.  He turned with his face up towards
the Lithe and the homestead at Lithend, and said, "Fair is the
Lithe; so fair that it has never seemed to me so fair; the corn
fields are white to harvest and the home mead is mown; and now I
will ride back home, and not fare abroad at all."

"Do not this joy to thy foes," says Kolskegg, "by breaking thy
atonement, for no man could think thou wouldst do thus, and thou
mayst be sure that all will happen as Njal has said."

"I will not go away any whither," said Gunnar, "and so I would
thou shouldest do too."

"That shall not be," says Kolskegg; "I will never do a base thing
in this, nor in any thing else which is left to my good faith;
and this is that one thing that could tear us asunder; but tell
this to my kinsman and to my mother that I never mean to see
Iceland again, for I shall soon learn that thou art dead,
brother, and then there will be nothing left to bring me back."

So they parted there and then.  Gunnar rides home to Lithend, but
Kolskegg rides to the ship, and goes abroad.

Hallgerda was glad to see Gunnar when he came home, but his
mother said little or nothing.

How Gunnar sits at home that fall and winter, and had not many
men with him.

Now the winter leaves the farmyard.  Olaf the Peacock asked
Gunnar and Hallgerda to come and stay with him; but as for the
farm, to put it into the hands of his mother and his son Hogni.

Gunnar thought that a good thing at first, and agreed to it, but
when it came to the point he would not do it.

But at the Thing next summer, Gizur the White, and Geir the
Priest, gave notice of Gunnar's outlawry at the Hill of Laws; and
before the Thing broke up Gizur summoned all Gunnar's foes to
meet in the "Great Rift." (1)  He summoned Starkad under the
Threecorner, and Thorgeir his son; Mord and Valgard the Guileful;
Geir the Priest and Hjalti Skeggi's son; Thorbrand and Asbrand,
Thorleik's sons; Eyjulf, and Aunund his son.  Aunund of Witchwood
and Thorgrim the Easterling of Sandgil.

The Gizur spoke and said, "I will make you all this offer, that
we go out against Gunnar this summer and slay him."

"I gave my word to Gunnar," said Hjalti, "here at the Thing,
when he showed himself most willing to yield to my prayer, that I
would never be in any attack upon him; and so it shall be."

Then Hjalti went away, but those who were left behind made up
their minds to make an onslaught on Gunnar, and shook hands on
the bargain, and laid a fine on any one that left the
undertaking.

Mord was to keep watch and spy out when there was the best chance
of falling on him, and they were forty men in this league, and
they thought it would be a light thing for them to hunt down
Gunnar, now that Kolskegg was away, and Thrain and many other of
Gunnar's friends.

Men ride from the Thing, and Njal went to see Gunnar, and told
him of his outlawry, and how an onslaught was planned against
him.

"Methinks thou art the best of friends," says Gunnar; "thou
makest me aware of what is meant."

"Now," says Njal, "I would that Skarphedinn should come to thy
house, and my son Hauskuld; they will lay down their lives for
thy life."

"I will not," says Gunnar, "that thy sons should be slain for my
sake, and thou hast a right to look for other things from me."

"All thy care will come to nothing," says Njal; "quarrels will
turn thitherward where my sons are as soon as thou art dead and
gone."

"That is not unlikely," says Gunnar, "but still it would mislike
me that they fell into them for me; but this one thing I will ask
of thee, that ye see after my son Hogni, but I say naught of
Grani, for he does not behave himself much after my mind."

Njal rode home, and gave his word to do that.

It is said that Gunnar rode to all meetings of men, and to all
lawful Things, and his foes never dared to fall on him.

And so some time went on that he went about as a free and
guiltless man.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Great Rift," Almannagja -- The great volcanic rift, or
     "geo," as it would be called in Orkney and Shetland, which
     bounds the plain of the Allthing on one side.



75. THE RIDING TO LITHEND

Next autumn Mord Valgard's son sent word that Gunnar would be all
alone at home, but all his people would be down in the isles to
make an end of their haymaking.  Then Gizur the White and Geir
the Priest rode east over the rivers as soon as ever they heard
that, and so east across the sands to Hof.  Then they sent word
to Starkad under the Threecorner, and there they all met who were
to fall on Gunnar, and took counsel how they might best bring it
about.

Mord said that they could not come on Gunnar unawares, unless
they seized the farmer who dwelt at the next homestead, whose
name was Thorkell, and made him go against his will with them to
lay hands on the hound Sam, and unless he went before them to the
homestead to do this.

Then they set out east for Lithend, but sent to fetch Thorkell. 
They seized him and bound him, and gave him two choices -- one
that they would slay him, or else he must lay hands on the hound;
but he chooses rather to save his life, and went with them.

There was a beaten sunk road, between fences, above the farm yard
at Lithend, and there they halted with their band.  Master
Thorkell went up to the homestead, and the tyke lay on the top of
the house, and he entices the dog away with him into a deep
hollow in the path.  Just then the hound sees that there are men
before them, and he leaps on Thorkell and tears his belly open.

Aunund of Witchwood smote the hound on the head with his axe, so
that the blade sunk into the brain.  The hound gave such a great
howl that they thought it passing strange, and he fell down dead.



76. GUNNAR'S SLAYING

Gunnar woke up in his hall and said, "Thou hast been sorely
treated, Sam, my fosterling, and this warning is so meant that
our two deaths will not be far apart."

Gunnar's hall was made all of wood, and roofed with beams above,
and there were window-slits under the beams that carried the
roof, and they were fitted with shutters.

Gunnar slept in a loft above the hall, and so did Hallgerda and
his mother.

Now when they were come near to the house they knew not whether
Gunnar were at home, and bade that some one would go straight up
to the house and see if he could find out.  But the rest sat them
down on the ground.

Thorgrim the Easterling went and began to climb up on the hall;
Gunnar sees that a red kirtle passed before the windowslit, and
thrusts out the bill, and smote him on the middle.  Thorgrim's
feet slipped from under him, and he dropped his shield, and down
he toppled from the roof.

Then he goes to Gizur and his band as they sat on the ground.

Gizur looked at him and said, "Well, is Gunnar at home?

"Find that out for yourselves," said Thorgrim; "but this I am
sure of, that his bill is at home," and with that he fell down
dead.

Then they made for the buildings.  Gunnar shot out arrows at
them, and made a stout defence, and they could get nothing done. 
Then some of them got into the out houses and tried to attack him
thence, but Gunnar found them out with his arrows there also, and
still they could get nothing done.

So it went on for a while, then they took a rest, and made a
second onslaught.  Gunnar still shot out at them, and they could
do nothing, and fell off the second time.  Then Gizur the White
said, "Let us press on harder; nothing comes of our onslaught."

Then they made a third bout of it, and were long at it, and then
they fell off again.

Gunnar said, "There lies an arrow outside on the wall, and it is
one of their shafts; I will shoot at them with it, and it will be
a shame to them if they get a hurt from their own weapons."

His mother said, "Do not so, my son; nor rouse them again when
they have already fallen off from the attack."

But Gunnar caught up the arrow and shot it after them, and struck
Eylif Aunund's son, and he got a great wound; he was standing all
by himself, and they knew not that he was wounded.

"Out came an arm yonder," says Gizur, "and there was a gold ring
on it, and took an arrow from the roof, and they would not look
outside for shafts if there were enough in doors; and now ye
shall made a fresh onslaught."

"Let us burn him house and all," said Mord.

"That shall never be," says Gizur, "though I knew that my life
lay on it; but it is easy for thee to find out some plan, such a
cunning man as thou art said to be."

Some ropes lay there on the ground, and they were often used to
strengthen the roof.  Then Mord said, "Let us take the ropes and
throw one end over the end of the carrying beams, but let us
fasten the other end to these rocks and twist them tight with
levers, and so pull the roof off the hall."

So they took the ropes and all lent a hand to carry this out, and
before Gunnar was aware of it, they had pulled the whole roof off
the hall.

Then Gunnar still shoots with his bow so that they could never
come nigh him.  Then Mord said again that they must burn the
house over Gunnar's head.  But Gizur said, "I know not why thou
wilt speak of that which no one else wishes, and that shall never
be."

Just then Thorbrand Thorleik's son, sprang up on the roof, and
cuts asunder Gunnar's bowstring.  Gunnar clutches the bill with
both hands, and turns on him quickly and drives it through him,
and hurls him down on the ground.

Then up sprung Asbrand his brother.  Gunnar thrusts at him with
his bill, and he threw his shield before the blow, but the bill
passed clean through the shield and broke both his arms, and down
he fell from the wall.

Gunnar had already wounded eight men and slain those twain (1). 
By that time Gunnar had got two wounds, and all men said that he
never once winced either at wounds or death.

Then Gunnar said to Hallgerda, "Give me two locks of thy hair,
and ye two, my mother and thou, twist them together into a
bowstring for me."

"Does aught lie on it?" she says.

"My life lies on it;" he said; "for they will never come to close
quarters with me if I can keep them off with my bow."

"Well!" she says, "now I will call to thy mind that slap on the
face which thou gavest me; and I care never a whit whether thou
holdest out a long while or a short."

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Each who hurts the gory javelin
     Hath some honour of his own,
     Now my helpmeet wimple-hooded
     Hurries all my fame to earth.
     No one owner of a war-ship
     Often asks for little things,
     Woman, fond of Frodi's flour (2),
     Wends her hand as she is wont."

"Every one has something to boast of," says Gunnar, "and I will
ask thee no more for this."

"Thou behavest ill," said Rannveig, "andthis shame shall long be
had in mind."

Gunnar made a stout and bold defence, and now wounds other eight
men with such sore wounds that many lay at death's door.  Gunnar
keeps them all off until he fell worn out with toil.  Then they
wounded him with many and great wounds, but still he got away out
of their hands, and held his own against them a while longer, but
at last it came about that they slew him.

Of this defence of his, Thorkell the Skald of Gota-Elf sang in
the verses which follow --

     "We have heard how south in Iceland
     Gunnar guarded well himself,
     Boldly battle's thunder wielding,
     Fiercest foeman on the wave;
     Hero of the golden collar,
     Sixteen with the sword he wounded;
     In the shock that Odin loveth,
     Two before him tasted death."

But this is what Thormod Olaf's son sang --

     "None that scattered sea's bright sunbeams (3),
     Won more glorious fame than Gunnar,
     So runs fame of old in Iceland,
     Fitting fame of heathen men;
     Lord of fight when helms were crashing,
     Lives of foeman twain he took,
     Wielding bitter steel he sorely
     Wounded twelve, and four besides."

Then Gizur spoke and said, "We have now laid low to earth a
mighty chief, and hard work has it been, and the fame of this
defence of his shall last as long as men live in this land."

After that he went to see Rannveig and said, "Wilt thou grant us
earth here for two of our men who are dead, that they may lie in
a cairn here?"

"All the more willingly for two," she says, "because I wish with
all my heart I had to grant it to all of you."

"It must be forgiven thee," he says, "to speak thus, for thou
hast had a great loss."

Then he gave orders that no man should spoil or rob anything
there.

After that they went away.

Then Thorgeir Starkad's son said, "We may not be in our house at
home for the sons of Sigfus, unless thou Gizur or thou Geir be
here south some little while."

"This shall be so," says Gizur, and they cast lots, and the lot
fell on Geir to stay behind.

After that he came to the Point, and set up his house there; he
had a son whose name was Hroald; he was base born, and his
mother's name was Biartey (4); he boasted that he had given
Gunnar his death blow.  Hroald was at the Point with his father.

Thorgeir Starkad's son boasted of another wound which he had
given to Gunnar.

Gizur sat at home at Mossfell.  Gunnar's slaying was heard of,
and ill spoken of throughout the whole country, and his death was
a great grief to many a man.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thorgrim Easterling and Thorbrand.
(2)  "Frodi's flour," a periphrasis for "gold."
(3)  "Sea's bright sunbeams," a periphrasis for "gold."
(4)  She was a sister of Thorwald the Scurvy, who was slain at
     Horsebeck in Grimsness.




77. GUNNAR SINGS A SONG DEAD

Njal could ill brook Gunnar's death, nor could the sons of Sigfus
brook it either.

They asked whether Njal thought they had any right to give notice
of a suit of manslaughter for Gunnar, or to set the suit on foot.

He said that could not be done, as the man had been outlawed; but
said it would be better worth trying to do something to wound
their glory, by slaying some men in vengeance after him.

They cast a cairn over Gunnar, and made him sit upright in the
cairn.  Rannveig would not hear of his bill being buried in the
cairn, but said he alone should have it as his own, who was ready
to avenge Gunnar.  So no one took the bill.

She was so hard on Hallgerda, that she was on the point of
killing her; and she said that she had been the cause of her
son's slaying.

Then Hallgerda fled away to Gritwater, and her son Grani with
her, and they shared the goods between them; Hogni was to have
the land at Lithend and the homestead on it, but Grani was to
have the land let out on lease.

Now this token happened at Lithend, that the neat-herd and the
serving-maid were driving cattle by Gunnar's cairn.  They thought
that he was merry, and that he was singing inside the cairn. 
They went home and told Rannveig, Gunnar's mother, of this token,
but she bade them go and tell Njal.

Then they went over to Bergthorsknoll and told Njal, but he made
them tell it three times over.

After that, he had a long talk all alone with Skarphedinn; and
Skarphedinn took his weapons and goes with them to Lithend.

Rannveig and Hogni gave him a hearty welcome, and were very glad
to see him.  Rannveig asked him to stay there some time, and he
said he would.

He and Hogni were always together, at home and abroad.  Hogni was
a brisk, brave man, well-bred and well-trained in mind and body,
but distrustful and slow to believe what he was told, and that
was why they dared not tell him of the token.

Now those two, Skarphedinn and Hogni, were out of doors one
evening by Gunnar's cairn on the south side.  The moon and stars
were shining clear and bright, but every now and then the clouds
drove over them.  Then all at once they thought they saw the
cairn standing open, and lo!  Gunnar had turned himself in the
cairn and looked at the moon.  They thought they saw four lights
burning in the cairn, and none of them threw a shadow.  They saw
that Gunnar was merry, and he wore a joyful face.  He sang a
song, and so loud, that it might have been heard though they had
been further off.

     "He that lavished rings in largesse,
     When the fights' red rain-drips fell,
     Bright of face, with heart-strings hardy,
     Hogni's father met his fate;
     Then his brow with helmet shrouding,
     Bearing battle-shield, he spake,
     `I will die the prop of battle,
     Sooner die than yield an inch,
     Yes, sooner die than yield an inch."

After that the cairn was shut up again.

"Wouldst thou believe these tokens if Njal or I told them to
thee?" says Skarphedinn.

"I would believe them," he says, "if Njal told them, for it is
said he never lies."

"Such tokens as these mean much," says Skarphedinn, "when he
shows himself to us, he who would sooner die than yield to his
foes; and see how he has taught us what we ought to do."

"I shall be able to bring nothing to pass," says Hogni, "unless
thou wilt stand by me."

"Now," says Skarphedinn, "will I bear in mind how Gunnar behaved
after the slaying of your kinsman Sigmund; now I will yield you
such help as I may.  My father gave his word to Gunnar to do that
whenever thou or thy mother had need of it."

After that they go home to Lithend.



78. GUNNAR OF LITHEND AVENGED

"Now we shall set off at once," says Skarphedinn, "this very
night; for if they learn that I am here, they will be more wary
of themselves."

"I will fulfil thy counsel," says Hogni.

After that they took their weapons when all men were in their
beds.  Hogni takes down the bill, and it gave a sharp ringing
sound.

Rannveig sprang up in great wrath and said, "Who touches the
bill, when I forbade every one to lay hand on it?"

"I mean," says Hogni, "to bring it to my father, that he may bear
it with him to Valhalla, and have it with him when the warriors
meet."

"Rather shalt thou now bear it," she answered, "and avenge thy
father; for the bill has spoken of one man's death or more."

Then Hogni went out, and told Skarphedinn all the words that his
grandmother had spoken.

After that they fare to the Point, and two ravens flew along with
them all the way.  They came to the Point while it was still
night.  Then they drove the flock before them up to the house,
and then Hroald and Tjorfi ran out and drove the flock up the
hollow path, and had their weapons with them.

Skarphedinn sprang up and said, "Thou needest not to stand and
think if it be really as it seems.  Men are here."

Then Skarphedinn smites Tjorfi his deathblow.  Hroald had a spear
in his hand, and Hogni rushes at him; Hroald thrusts at him, but
Hogni hewed asunder the spear-shaft with his bill, and drives the
bill through him.

After that they left them there dead, and turn away thence under
the Threecorner.

Skarphedinn jumps up on the house and plucks the grass, and those
who were inside the house thought it was cattle that had come on
the roof.  Starkad and Thorgeir took their weapons and upper
clothing, and went out and round about the fence of the yard. 
But when Starkad sees Skarphedinn he was afraid, and wanted to
turn back.

Skarphedinn cut him down by the fence.  Then Hogni comes against
Thorgeir and slays him with the bill.

Thence they went to Hof, and Mord was outside in the field, and
begged for mercy, and offered them full atonement.

Skarphedinn told Mord the slaying of those four men, and sang a
song:

     "Four who wielded warlike weapons
     We have slain, all men of worth,
     Them at once, gold-greedy fellow,
     Thou shalt follow on the spot;
     Let us press this pinch-purse so,
     Pouring fear into his heart;
     Wretch! reach out to Gunnar's son
     Right to settle all disputes."

"And the like journey," says Skarphedinn, "shalt thou also fare,
or hand over to Hogni the right to make his own award, if he will
take these terms."

Hogni said his mind had been made up not to come to any terms
with the slayers of his father; but still at last he took the
right to make his own award from Mord.



79. HOGNI TAKES AN ATONEMENT FOR GUNNAR'S DEATH

Njal took a share in bringing those who had the blood-feud after
Starkad and Thorgeir to take an atonement, and a district meeting
was called together, and men were chosen to make the award, and
every matter was taken into account, even the attack on Gunnar,
though he was an outlaw; but such a fine as was awarded, all that
Mord paid; for they did not close their award against him before
the other matter was already settled, and then they set off one
award against the other.

Then they were all set at one again, but at the Thing there was
great talk, and the end of it was, that Geir the Priest and Hogni
were set at one again, and that atonement they held to ever
afterwards.

Geir the Priest dwelt in the Lithe till his deathday, and he is
out of the story.

Njal asked as a wife for Hogni Alfeida the daughter of Weatherlid
the Skald, and she was given away to him.  Their son was Ari, who
sailed for Shetland, and took him a wife there; from him is come
Einar the Shetlander, one of the briskest and boldest of men.

Hogni kept up his friendship with Njal, and he is now out of the
story.



80. OF KOLSKEGG: HOW HE WAS BAPTIZED

Now it is to be told of Kolskegg how he comes to Norway, and is
in the Bay east that winter.  But the summer after he fares east
to Denmark, and bound himself to Sweyn Forkbeard the Dane-king,
and there he had great honour.

One night he dreamt that a man came to him; he was bright and
glistening, and he thought he woke him up.  He spoke, and said to
him, "Stand up and come with me."

"What wilt thou with me?" he asks.

"I will get thee a bride, and thou shalt be my knight."

He thought he said yea to that, and after that he woke up.

Then he went to a wizard and told him the dream, but he read it
so that he should fare to southern lands and become God's knight.

Kolskegg was baptized in Denmark, but still he could not rest
there, but fared east to Russia, and was there one winter.  Then
he fared thence out to Micklegarth (1), and there took service
with the Emperor.  The last that was heard of him was, that he
wedded a wife there, and was captain over the Varangians, and
stayed there till his deathday; and he, too, is out of this
story.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Constantinople.



81. OF THRAIN: HOW HE SLEW KOL

Now we must take up the story, and say how Thrain Sigfus' son
came to Norway.  They made the land north in Helgeland, and held
on south to Drontheim, and so to Hlada (1).  But as soon as Earl
Hacon heard of that, he sent men to them, and would know what men
were in the ship.  They came back and told him who the men were. 
Then the earl sent for Thrain Sigfus' son, and he went to see
him.  The earl asked of what stock he might be.  He said that he
was Gunnar of Lithend's near kinsman.  The earl said, "That shall
stand thee in good stead; for I have seen many men from Iceland,
but none his match."

"Lord," said Thrain, "is it your will that I should be with you
this winter?"

The earl took to him, and Thrain was there that winter, and was
thought much of.

There was a man named Kol, he was a great sea-rover.  He was the
son of Asmund Ashside, east out of Smoland.  He lay east in the
Gota-Elf, and had five ships, and much force.

Thence Kol steered his course out of the river to Norway and
landed at Fold (2), in the bight of the "Bay," and came on
Hallvard Soti unawares, and found him in a loft.  He kept them
off bravely till they set fire to the house, then he gave himself
up; but they slew him, and took there much goods, and sailed
thence to Lodese (3).

Earl Hacon heard these tidings, and made them make Kol an outlaw
over all his realm, and set a price upon his head.

Once on a time it so happened that the earl began to speak thus,
"Too far off from us now is Gunnar of Lithend.  He would slay my
outlaw if he were here; but now the Icelanders will slay him, and
it is ill that he hath not fared to us."

Then Thrain Sigfus' son answered, "I am not Gunnar, but still I
am near akin to him, and I will undertake this voyage."

The earl said, "I should be glad of that, and thou shalt be very
well fitted out for the journey."

After that his son Eric began to speak, and said, "Your word,
father, is good to many men, but fulfilling it is quite another
thing.  This is the hardest undertaking; for this sea-rover is
tough and ill to deal with, wherefore thou wilt need to take
great pains, both as to men and ships for this voyage."

Thrain said, "I will set out on this voyage, though it looks
ugly."

After that the earl gave him five ships, and all well trimmed
and manned.  Along with Thrain was Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi
Sigurd's son.  Gunnar was Thrain's brother's son, and had come to
him young, and each loved the other much.

Eric, the earl's son, went heartily along with them, and looked
after strength for them, both in men and weapons and made such
changes in them as he thought were needful.  After they were
"boun," Eric got them a pilot.  Then they sailed south along the
land; but wherever they came to land, the earl allowed them to
deal with whatever they needed as their own.

So they held on east to Lodese, and then they heard that Kol was
gone to Denmark.  Then they shaped their course south thither;
but when they came south to Helsingborg, they met men in a boat
who said that Kol was there just before them, and would be
staying there for a while.

One day when the weather was good, Kol saw the ships as they
sailed up towards him, and said he had dreamt of Earl Hacon the
night before, and told his people he was sure these must be his
men, and bade them all to take their weapons.

After that they busked them, and a fight arose; and they fought
long, so that neither side had the mastery.

Then Kol sprang up on Thrain's ship, and cleared the gangways
fast, and slays many men.  He had a gilded helm.

Now Thrain sees that this is no good, and now he eggs on his men
to go along with him, but he himself goes first and meets Kol.

Kol hews at him, and the blow fell on Thrain's shield, and cleft
it down from top to bottom.  Then Kol got a blow on the arm, from
a stone and then down fell his sword.

Thrain hews at Kol, and the stroke came on his leg so that it cut
it off.  After that they slew Kol, and Thrain cut off his head,
and they threw the trunk overboard, but kept his head.

They took much spoil, and then they held on north to Drontheim,
and go to see the earl.

The earl gave Thrain a hearty welcome, and he shewed the earl
Kol's head, but the earl thanked him for that deed.

Eric said it was worth more than words alone, and the earl said
so it was, and bade them come along with him.

They went thither, where the earl had made them make a good ship
that was not made like a common long-ship.  It had a vulture's
head, and was much carved and painted.

"Thou art a great man for show, Thrain," said the earl, "and so
have both of you, kinsmen, been, Gunnar and thou; and now I will
give thee this ship, but it is called the Vulture.  Along with it
shall go my friendship; and my will is that thou stayest with me
as long as thou wilt."

He thanked him for his goodness, and said he had no longing to go
to Iceland just yet.

The earl had a journey to make to the marches of the land to meet
the Swede-king.  Thrain went with him that summer, and was a
shipmaster and steered the Vulture, and sailed so fast that few
could keep up with him, and he was much envied.  But it always
came out that the earl laid great store on Gunnar, for he set
down sternly all who tried Thrain's temper.

So Thrain was all that winter with the earl, but next spring the
earl asked Thrain whether he would stay there or fare to Iceland;
but Thrain said he had not yet made up his mind, and said that he
wished first to know tidings from Iceland.

The earl said that so it should be as he thought it suited him
best; and Thrain was with the earl.

Then those tidings were heard from Iceland, which many thought
great news, the death of Gunnar of Lithend.  Then the earl would
not that Thrain should fare out of Iceland, and so there he
stayed with him.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Hlada or Lada, and sometimes in the plural Ladir, was the
     old capital of Drontheim, before Nidaros -- the present
     Drontheim -- was founded.  Drontheim was originally the name
     of the country round the firth of the same name, and is not
     used in the old sagas for a town.
(2)  The country round the Christiania Firth, at the top of "the
     Bay."
(3)  A town in Sweden on the Gota-Elf.



82. NJAL'S SONS SAIL ABROAD

Now it must be told how Njal's sons, Grim and Helgi, left Iceland
the same summer that Thrain and his fellows went away; and in the
ship with them were Olaf Kettle's son of Elda, and Bard the
Black.  They got so strong a wind from the north that they were
driven south into the main; and so thick a mist came over them
that they could not tell whither they were driving, and they were
out a long while.  At last they came to where was a great ground
sea, and thought then they must be near land.  So then Njal's
sons asked Bard if he could tell at all to what land they were
likely to be nearest.

"Many lands there are," said he, "which we might hit with the
weather we have had -- the Orkneys, or Scotland, or Ireland."

Two nights after, they saw land on both boards, and a great
surf running up in the firth.  They cast anchor outside the
breakers, and the wind began to fall; and next morning it was
calm.  Then they see thirteen ships coming out to them.

Then Bard spoke and said, "What counsel shall we take now, for
these men are going to make an onslaught on us?"

So they took counsel whether they should defend themselves or
yield, but before they could make up their minds, the Vikings
were upon them.  Then each side asked the other their names, and
what their leaders were called.  So the leaders of the chapmen
told their names, and asked back who led that host.  One called
himself Gritgard, and the other Snowcolf, sons of Moldan of
Duncansby in Scotland, kinsmen of Malcolm the Scot king.

"And now," says Gritgard, "we have laid down two choices, one
that ye go on shore, and we will take your goods; the other is,
that we fall on you and slay every man that we can catch."

"The will of the chapmen," answers Helgi, "is to defend
themselves."

But the chapmen called out, "Wretch that thou art to speak thus! 
What defence can we make?  Lading is less than life."

But Grim, he fell upon a plan to shout out to the Vikings, and
would not let them hear the bad choice of the chapmen.

Then Bard and Olaf said, "Think ye not that these Icelanders will
make game of you sluggards; take rather your weapons and guard
your goods."

So they all seized their weapons, and bound themselves, one with
another, never to give up so long as they had strength to fight.



83. OF KARI SOLMUND'S SON

Then the Vikings shot at them and the fight began, and the
chapmen guard themselves well.  Snowcolf sprang aboard and at
Olaf, and thrust his spear through his body, but Grim thrust at
Snowcolf with his spear, and so stoutly, that he fell overboard. 
Then Helgi turned to meet Grim, and they two drove down all the
Vikings as they tried to board, and Njal's sons were ever where
there was most need.  Then the Vikings called out to the chapmen
and bade them give up, but they said they would never yield. 
Just then some one looked seaward, and there they see ships
coming from the south round the Ness, and they were not fewer
than ten, and they row hard and steer thitherwards.  Along their
sides were shield on shield, but on that ship that came first
stood a man by the mast, who was clad in a silken kirtle, and had
a gilded helm, and his hair was both fair and thick; that man had
a spear inlaid with gold in his hand.

He asked, "Who have here such an uneven game?"

Helgi tells his name, and said that against them are Gritgard and
Snowcolf.

"But who are your captains?" he asks.

Helgi answered, "Bard the Black, who lives, but the other, who
is dead and gone, was called Olaf."

"Are ye men from Iceland?" says he.

"Sure enough we are," Helgi answers.

He asked whose sons they were, and they told him, then he knew
them and said, "Well known names have ye all, father and sons
both.

"Who art thou?" asks Helgi.

"My name is Kari, and I am Solmund's son."

"Whence comest thou?" says Helgi.

"From the Southern Isles."

"Then thou art welcome," says Helgi, "if thou wilt give us a
little help."

"I'll give ye all the help ye need," says Kari; "but what do
ye ask?"

"To fall on them," says Helgi.

Kari says that so it shall be.  So they pulled up to them, and
then the battle began the second time; but when they had fought a
little while, Kari springs up on Snowcolf's ship; he turns to
meet him and smites at him with his sword.  Kari leaps nimbly
backwards over a beam that lay athwart the ship, and Snowcolf
smote the beam so that both edges of the sword were hidden.  Then
Kari smites at him, and the sword fell on his shoulder, and the
stroke was so mighty that he cleft in twain shoulder, arm, and
all, and Snowcolf got his death there and then.  Gritgard hurled
a spear at Kari, but Kari saw it and sprang up aloft, and the
spear missed him.  Just then Helgi and Grim came up both to meet
Kari, and Helgi springs on Gritgard and thrusts his spear through
him, and that was his death blow; after that they went round the
whole ship on both boards, and then men begged for mercy.  So
they gave them all peace, but took all their goods.  After that
they ran all the ships out under the islands.



84. OF EARL SIGURD

Sigurd was the name of an earl who ruled over the Orkneys; he was
the son of Hlodver, the son of Thorfinn the skullsplitter, the
son of Turf-Einar, the son of Rognvald, Earl of Moeren, the son
of Eystein the Noisy.  Kari was one of Earl Sigurd's body-guard,
and had just been gathering scatts in the Southern Isles from
Earl Gilli.  Now Kari asks them to go to Hrossey (1), and said
the earl would take to them well.  They agreed to that, and went
with Kari and came to Hrossey.  Kari led them to see the earl,
and said what men they were.

"How came they," says the earl, "to fall upon thee?"

"I found them," says Kari, "in Scotland's firths, and they were
fighting with the sons of Earl Moldan, and held their own so well
that they threw themselves about between the bulwarks, from side
to side, and were always there where the trial was greatest, and
now I ask you to give them quarters among your body-guard."

"It shall be as thou choosest," says the earl, "thou hast already
taken them so much by the hand."

Then they were there with the earl that winter, and were worthily
treated, but Helgi was silent as the winter wore on.  The earl
could not tell what was at the bottom of that, and asked why he
was so silent, and what was on his mind.  "Thinkest thou it not
good to be here?"

"Good, methinks, it is here," he says.

"Then what art thou thinking about?" asks the earl.

"Hast thou any realm to guard in Scotland?" asks Helgi.

"So we think," says the earl, "but what makes thee think about
that, or what is the matter with it?"

"The Scots," says Helgi, "must have taken your steward's life,
and stopped all the messengers, that none should cross the
Pentland Firth."

"Hast thou the second sight?" said the earl.

"That has been little proved," answers Helgi.

"Well," says the earl, "I will increase thy honour if this be so,
otherwise thou shalt smart for it."

"Nay," says Kari, "Helgi is not that kind of man, and like enough
his words are sooth, for his father has the second sight."

After that the earl sent men south to Straumey (2) to Arnljot,
his steward there, and after that Arnljot sent them across the
Pentland Firth, and they spied out and learnt that Earl Hundi and
Earl Melsnati had taken the life of Havard in Thraswick, Earl
Sigurd's brother-in-law.  So Arnljot sent word to Earl Sigurd to
come south with a great host and drive those earls out of his
realm, and as soon as the earl heard that, he gathered together a
mighty host from all the isles.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  The mainland of Orkney, now Pomona.
(2)  Now Stroma, in the Pentland Firth.



85. THE BATTLE WITH THE EARLS

After that the earl set out south with his host, and Kari went
with him, and Njal's sons too.  They came south to Caithness. 
The earl had these realms in Scotland, Ross and Moray,
Sutherland, and the Dales.  There came to meet them men from
those realms, and said that the earls were a short way off with a
great host.  Then Earl Sigurd turns his host thither, and the
name of that place is Duncansness above which they met, and it
came to a great battle between them.  Now the Scots had let some
of their host go free from the main battle, and these took the
earl's men in flank, and many men fell there till Njal's sons
turned against the foe, and fought with them and put them to
flight; but still it was a hard fight, and then Njal's sons
turned back to the front by the earl's standard, and fought well. 
Now Kari turns to meet Earl Melsnati, and Melsnati hurled a spear
at him, but Kari caught the spear and threw it back and through
the earl.  Then Earl Hundi fled, but they chased the fleers until
they learnt that Malcolm was gathering a host at Duncansby.  Then
the earl took counsel with his men, and it seemed to all the best
plan to turn back, and not to fight with such a mighty land
force; so they turned back.  But when the earl came to Staumey
they shared the battle-spoil.  After that he went north to
Hrossey, and Njal's sons and Kari followed him.  Then the earl
made a great feast, and at that feast he gave Kari a good sword,
and a spear inlaid with gold; but he gave Helgi a gold ring and a
mantle, and Grim a shield and sword.  After that he took Helgi
and Grim into his body-guard, and thanked them for their good
help.  They were with the earl that winter and the summer after,
till Kari went sea-roving; then they went with him, and harried
far and wide that summer, and everywhere won the victory.  They
fought against Godred, King of Man, and conquered him; and after
that they fared back, and had gotten much goods.  Next winter
they were still with the earl, and when the spring came Njal's
sons asked leave to go to Norway.  The earl said they should go
or not as they pleased, and he gave them a good ship and smart
men.  As for Kari, he said he must come that summer to Norway
with Earl Hacon's scatts, and then they would meet; and so it
fell out that they gave each other their word to meet.  After
that Njal's sons put out to sea and sailed for Norway, and made
the land north near Drontheim.



86. HRAPP'S VOYAGE FROM ICELAND

There was a man named Kolbein, and his surname was Arnljot's son;
he was a man from Drontheim; he sailed out to Iceland that same
summer in which Kolskegg and Njal's sons went abroad.  He was
that winter east in Broaddale; but the spring after, he made his
ship ready for sea in Gautawick; and when men were almost "boun,"
a man rowed up to them in a boat, and made the boat fast to the
ship, and afterwards he went on board the ship to see Kolbein.

Kolbein asked that man for his name.

"My name is Hrapp," says he.

"What wilt thou with me?" says Kolbein.

"I wish to ask thee to put me across the Iceland main."

"Whose son art thou?" asks Kolbein.

"I am a son of Aurgunleid, the son of Geirolf the Fighter."

"What need lies on thee," asked Kolbein, "to drive thee abroad?"

"I have slain a man," says Hrapp.

"What manslaughter was that," says Kolbein, "and what men have
the blood-feud?"

"The men of Weaponfirth," says Hrapp, "but the man I slew was
Aurlyg, the son of Aurlyg, the son of Roger the White."

"I guess this," says Kolbein, "that he will have the worst of it
who bears thee abroad."

"I am the friend of my friend," said Hrapp, "but when ill is done
to me I repay it.  Nor am I short of money to lay down for my
passage."

Then Kolbein took Hrapp on board, and a little while after a fair
breeze sprung up, and they sailed away on the sea.

Hrapp ran short of food at sea and then he sate him down at the
mess of those who were nearest to him.  They sprang up with ill
words, and so it was that they came to blows, and Hrapp, in a
trice, has two men under him.

Then Kolbein was told, and he bade Hrapp to come and share his
mess, and he accepted that.

Now they come off the sea, and lie outside off Agdirness.

Then Kolbein asked where that money was which he had offered to
pay for his fare?

"It is out in Iceland," answers Hrapp.

"Thou wilt beguile more men than me, I fear," says Kolbein; "but
now I will forgive thee all the fare."

Hrapp bade him have thanks for that.  "But what counsel dost thou
give as to what I ought to do?"

"That first of all," he says, "that thou goest from the ship as
soon as ever thou canst, for all Easterlings will bear thee bad
witness; but there is yet another bit of good counsel which I
will give thee, and that is, never to cheat thy master."

Then Hrapp went on shore with his weapons, and he had a great axe
with an iron-bound haft in his hand.

He fares on and on till he comes to Gudbrand of the Dale.  He was
the greatest friend of Earl Hacon.  They two had a shrine between
them, and it was never opened but when the earl came thither. 
That was the second greatest shrine in Norway, but the other was
at Hlada.

Thrand was the name of Gudbrand's son, but his daughter's name
was Gudruna.

Hrapp went in before Gudbrand, and hailed him well.

He asked whence he came and what was his name.  Hrapp told him
about himself, and how he had sailed abroad from Iceland.

After that he asks Gudbrand to take him into his household as a
guest.

"It does not seem," said Gudbrand, "to look on thee, as thou wert
a man to bring good luck."

"Methinks, then," says Hrapp, "that all I have heard about thee
has been great lies; for it is said that thou takest every one
into thy house that asks thee; and that no man is thy match for
goodness and kindness, far or near; but now I shall have to speak
against that saying, if thou dost not take me in."

"Well, thou shalt stay here," said Gudbrand.

"To what seat wilt thou shew me?" says Hrapp.

"To one on the lower bench, over against my high seat."

Then Hrapp went and took his seat.  He was able to tell of many
things, and so it was at first that Gudbrand and many thought it
sport to listen to him; but still it came about that most men
thought him too much given to mocking, and the end of it was that
he took to talking alone with Gudruna, so that many said that he
meant to beguile her.

But when Gudbrand was aware of that, he scolded her much for
daring to talk alone with him, and bade her beware of speaking
aught to him if the whole household did not hear it.  She gave
her word to be good at first, but still it was soon the old story
over again as to their talk.  Then Gudbrand got Asvard, his
overseer, to go about with her, out of doors and in, and to be
with her wherever she went.  One day it happened that she begged
for leave to go into the nutwood for a pastime, and Asvard went
along with her.  Hrapp goes to seek for them and found them, and
took her by the hand, and led her away alone.

Then Asvard went to look for her, and found them both together
stretched on the grass in a thicket.

He rushes at them, axe in air, and smote at Hrapp's leg, but
Hrapp gave himself a sudden turn, and he missed him.  Hrapp
springs on his feet as quick as he can, and caught up his axe. 
Then Asvard wished to turn and get away, but Hrapp hewed asunder
his back-bone.

Then Gudruna said, "Now hast thou done that deed which will
hinder thy stay any longer with my father; but still there is
something behind which he will like still less, for I go with
child."

"He shall not learn this from others," says Hrapp, "but I will go
home and tell him both these tidings."

"Then," she says, "thou wilt not come away with thy life."

"I will run the risk of that," he says.

After that he sees her back to the other women, but he went home. 
Gudbrand sat in his high seat, and there were few men in the
room.

Hrapp went in before him, and bore his axe high.

"Why is thine axe bloody?" asks Gudbrand.

"I made it so by doing a piece of work on thy overseer Asvard's
back," says Hrapp.

"That can be no good work," says Gudbrand; "thou must have slain
him."

"So it is, be sure," says Hrapp.

"What did ye fall out about?" asks Gudbrand.

"Oh!" says Hrapp, "what you would think small cause enough.  He
wanted to hew off my leg."

"What hadst thou done first?" asked Gudbrand.

"What he had no right to meddle with," says Hrapp.

"Still thou wilt tell me what it was."

"Well!" said Hrapp, "if thou must know, I lay by thy daughter's
side, and he thought that bad."

"Up men!" cried Gudbrand, "and take him.  He shall be slain out
of hand."

"Very little good wilt thou let me reap of my son-in-lawship,"
says Hrapp, "but thou hast not so many men at thy back as to do
that speedily."

Up they rose, but he sprang out of doors.  They run after him,
but he got away to the wood, and they could not lay hold of him.

Then Gudbrand gathers people, and lets the wood be searched; but
they find him not, for the wood was great and thick.

Hrapp fares through the wood till he came to a clearing; there he
found a house, and saw a man outside cleaving wood.

He asked that man for his name, and he said his name was Tofi.

Tofi asked him for his name in turn, and Hrapp told him his true
name.

Hrapp asked why the householder had set up his abode so far from
other men?

"For that here," he says, "I think I am less likely to have
brawls with other men."

"It is strange how we beat about the bush in our talk," says
Hrapp, "but I will first tell thee who I am.  I have been with
Gudbrand of the Dale, but I ran away thence because I slew his
overseer; but now I know that we are both of us bad men; for thou
wouldst not have come hither away from other men unless thou wert
some man's outlaw.  And now I give thee two choices, either that
I will tell where thou art, or that we two have between us, share
and share alike, all that is here."

"This is even as thou savest," said the householder; "I seized
and carried off this woman who is here with me, and many men have
sought for me."

Then he led Hrapp in with him; there was a small house there, but
well built.

The master of the house told his mistress that he had taken Hrapp
into his company.

"Most men will get ill luck from this man," she says; "but thou
wilt have thy way."

So Hrapp was there after that.  He was a great wanderer, and was
never at home.  He still brings about meetings with Gudruna; her
father and brother, Thrand and Gudbrand, lay in wait for him, but
they could never get nigh him, and so all that year passed away.

Gudbrand sent and told Earl Hacon what trouble he had had with
Hrapp, and the earl let him be made an outlaw, and laid a price
upon his head.  He said, too, that he would go himself to look
after him; but that passed off, and the earl thought it easy
enough for them to catch him when he went about so unwarily.



87. THRAIN TOOK TO HRAPP

That same summer Njal's sons fared to Norway from the Orkneys, as
was before written, and they were there at the fair during the
summer.  Then Thrain Sigfus' son busked his ship for Iceland, and
was all but "boun."  At that time Earl Hacon went to a feast at
Gudbrand's house.  That night Killing-Hrapp came to the shrine of
Earl Hacon and Gudbrand, and he went inside the house, and there
he saw Thorgerda Shrinebride sitting, and she was as tall as a
fullgrown man.  She had a great gold ring on her arm, and a
wimple on her head; he strips her of her wimple, and takes the
gold ring from off her.  Then he sees Thor's car, and takes from
him a second gold ring; a third he took from Irpa; and then
dragged them all out, and spoiled them of all their gear.

After that he laid fire to the shrine, and burnt it down, and
then he goes away just as it began to dawn.  He walks across a
ploughed field, and there six men sprang up with weapons, and
fall upon him at once; but he made a stout defence, and the end
of the business was that he slays three men, but wounds Thrand to
the death, and drives two to the woods, so that they could bear
no news to the earl.  He then went up to Thrand and said, "It is
now in my power to slay thee if I will, but I will not do that;
and now I will set more store by the ties that are between us
than ye have shown to me."

Now Hrapp means to turn back to the wood, but now he sees that
men have come between him and the wood, so he dares not venture
to turn thither, but lays him down in a thicket, and so lies
there a while.

Earl Hacon and Gudbrand went that morning early to the shrine and
found it burnt down; but the three gods were outside, stripped of
all their bravery.

Then Gudbrand began to speak, and said, "Much might is given to
our gods, when here they have walked of themselves out of the
fire!"

"The gods can have naught to do with it," says the earl; "a man
must have burnt the shrine, and borne the gods out; but the gods
do not avenge everything on the spot.  That man who has done this
will no doubt be driven away out of Valhalla, and never come in
thither."

Just then up ran four of the earl's men, and told them ill
tidings for they said they had found three men slain in the
field, and Thrand wounded to the death.

"Who can have done this?" says the earl.

"Killing-Hrapp," they say.

"Then he must have burnt down the shrine," says the earl.

They said they thought he was like enough to have done it.

"And where may he be now?" says the earl.

They said that Thrand had told them that he had lain down in a
thicket.

The earl goes thither to look for him, but Hrapp was off and
away.  Then the earl set his men to search for him, but still
they could not find him.  So the earl was in the hue and cry
himself, but first he bade them rest a while.

Then the earl went aside by himself, away from other men, and
bade that no man should follow him, and so he stays a while.  He
fell down on both his knees, and held his hands before his eyes;
after that he went back to them, and then he said to them, "Come
with me."

So they went along with him.  He turns short away from the path
on which they had walked before, and they came to a dell.  There
up sprang Hrapp before them, and there it was that he had hidden
himself at first.

The earl urges on his men to run after him, but Hrapp was so
swift-footed that they never came near him.  Hrapp made for
Hlada.  There both Thrain and Njal's sons lay "boun" for sea at
the same time.  Hrapp runs to where Njal's sons are.

"Help me, like good men and true," he said, "for the earl will
slay me."

Helgi looked at him, and said, "Thou lookest like an unlucky man,
and the man who will not take thee in will have the best of it."

"Would that the worst might befall you from me," says Hrapp.

"I am the man," says Helgi, "to avenge me on thee for this as
time rolls on."

Then Hrapp turned to Thrain Sigfus' son, and bade him shelter
him.

"What hast thou on thy hand?" says Thrain.

"I have burnt a shrine under the earl's eyes, and slain some men,
and now he will be here speedily, for he has joined in the hue
and cry himself."

"It hardly beseems me to do this," says Thrain, "when the earl
has done me so much good."

Then he shewed Thrain the precious things which he had borne out
of the shrine, and offered to give him the goods, but Thrain said
he could not take them unless he gave him other goods of the same
worth for them.

"Then," said Hrapp, "here will I take my stand, and here shall
I be slain before thine eyes, and then thou wilt have to abide by
every man's blame."

Then they see the earl and his band of men coming, and then
Thrain took Hrapp under his safeguard, and let them shove off the
boat, and put out to his ship.

Then Thrain said, "Now this will be thy best hiding place, to
knock out the bottoms of two casks, and then thou shalt get into
them."

So it was done, and he got into the casks, and then they were
lashed together, and lowered overboard.

Then comes the earl with his band to Njal's sons, and asked if
Hrapp had come there.

They said that he had come.

The earl asked whither he had gone thence?

They said they had not kept eyes on him, and could not say.

"He," said the earl, "should have great honour from me who would
tell me where Hrapp was."

Then Grim said softly to Helgi, "Why should we not say, What know
I whether Thrain will repay us with any good?"

"We should not tell a whit more for that," says Helgi, "when his
life lies at stake."

"May be," said Grim, "the earl will turn his vengeance on us,
for he is so wroth that some one will have to fall before him."

"That must not move us," says Helgi, "but still we will pull our
ship out, and so away to sea as soon as ever we get a wind."

So they rowed out under an isle that lay there, and wait there
for a fair breeze.

The earl went about among the sailors, and tried them all, but
they, one and all, denied that they knew aught of Hrapp.

Then the earl said, "Now we will go to Thrain, my brother in
arms, and he will give Hrapp up, if he knows anything of him."

After that they took a long-ship and went off to the merchant
ship.

Thrain sees the earl coming, and stands up and greets him kindly. 
The earl took his greeting well and spoke thus, -- "We are
seeking for a man whose name is Hrapp, and he is an Icelander. 
He has done us all kind of ill; and now we will ask you to be
good enough to give him up, or to tell us where he is."

"Ye know, lord," said Thrain, "that I slew your outlaw, and
then put my fife in peril, and for that I had of you great
honour."

"More honour shalt thou now have," says the earl.

Now Thrain thought within himself, and could not make up his mind
how the earl would take it, so he denies that Hrapp is here, and
bade the earl to look for him.  He spent little time on that, and
went on land alone, away from other men, and was then very wroth,
so that no man dared to speak to him.

"Shew me to Njal's sons," said the earl, "and I will force them
to tell me the truth."

Then he was told that they had put out of the harbour.

"Then there is no help for it," says the earl, "but still there
were two water-casks alongside of Thrain's ship, and in them a
man may well have been hid, and if Thrain has bidden him, there
he must be; and now we will go a second time to see Thrain."

Thrain sees that the earl means to put off again and said,
"However wroth the earl was last time, now he will be half as
wroth again, and now the life of every man on board the ship lies
at stake."

They all gave their words to hide the matter, for they were all
sore afraid.  Then they took some sacks out of the lading, and
put Hrapp down into the hold in their stead, and other sacks that
were light were laid over him.

Now comes the earl, just as they were done stowing Hrapp away. 
Thrain greeted the earl well.  The earl was rather slow to return
it, and they saw that the earl was very wroth.

Then said the earl to Thrain, "Give thou up Hrapp, for I am quite
sure that thou hast hidden him."

"Where shall I have hidden him, Lord?" says Thrain.

"That thou knowest best," says the earl; "but if I must guess,
then I think that thou hiddest him in the water-casks a while
ago."

"Well!" says Thrain, "I would rather not be taken for a liar, far
sooner would I that ye should search the ship."

Then the earl went on board the ship and hunted and hunted, but
found him not.

"Dost thou speak me free now?" says Thrain.

"Far from it," says the earl, "and yet I cannot tell why we
cannot find him, but methinks I see through it all when I come on
shore, but when I come here, I can see nothing."

With that he made them row him ashore.  He was so wroth that
there was no speaking to him.  His son Sweyn was there with him,
and he said, "A strange turn of mind this to let guiltless men
smart for one's wrath!"

Then the earl went away alone aside from other men, and after
that he went back to them at once, and said, "Let us row out to
them again," and they did so.

"Where can he have been hidden?" says Sweyn.

"There's not much good in knowing that," says the earl, "for now
he will be away thence; two sacks lay there by the rest of the
lading, and Hrapp must have come into the lading in their place."

Then Thrain began to speak, and said, "They are running off the
ship again, and they must mean to pay us another visit.  Now we
will take him out of the lading, and stow other things in his
stead, but let the sacks still lie loose.  They did so, and then
Thrain spoke: "Now let us fold Hrapp in the sail."

It was then brailed up to the yard, and they did so.

Then the earl comes to Thrain and his men, and he was very wroth,
and said, "Wilt thou now give up the man, Thrain?" and he is
worse now than before.

"I would have given him up long ago," answers Thrain, "if he had
been in my keeping, or where can he have been?"

"In the lading," says the earl.

"Then why did ye not seek him there?" says Thrain.

"That never came into our mind," says the earl.

After that they sought him over all the ship, and found him not. 

"Will you now hold me free?" says Thrain.

"Surely not," says the earl, "for I know that thou hast hidden
away the man, though I find him not; but I would rather that thou
shouldst be a dastard to me than I to thee," says the earl, and
then they went on shore.

"Now," says the earl, "I seem to see that Thrain has hidden away
Hrapp in the sail."

Just then, up sprung a fair breeze, and Thrain and his men sailed
out to sea.  He then spoke these words which have long been held
in mind since --

     "Let us make the Vulture fly,
     Nothing now gars Thrain flinch."

But when the earl heard of Thrain's words, then he said, "'Tis
not my want of foresight which caused this, but rather their
ill-fellowship, which will drag them both to death."

Thrain was a short time out on the sea, and so came to Iceland,
and fared home to his house.  Hrapp went along with Thrain, and
was with him that year; but the spring after, Thrain got him a
homestead at Hrappstede, and he dwelt there; but yet he spent
most of his time at Gritwater.  He was thought to spoil
everything there, and some men even said that he was too good
friends with Hallgerda, and that he led her astray, but some
spoke against that.

Thrain gave the Vulture to his kinsman, Mord the Reckless; that
Mord slew Oddi Haldor's son, east in Gautawick by Berufirth.

All Thrain's kinsmen looked on him as a chief.



88. EARL HACON FIGHTS WITH NJAL'S SONS.

Now we must take up the story, and say how, when Earl Hacon
missed Thrain, he spoke to Sweyn his son, and said, "Let us take
four long-ships, and let us fare against Njal's sons and slay
them, for they must have known all about it with Thrain."

"'Tis not good counsel," says Sweyn, "to throw the blame on
guiltless men, but to let him escape who is guilty."

"I shall have my way in this," says the earl.

Now they hold on after Njal's sons, and seek for them, and find
them under an island.

Grim first saw the earl's ships and said to Helgi, "Here are war
ships sailing up, and I see that here is the earl, and he can
mean to offer us no peace."

"It is said," said Helgi, "that he is the boldest man who holds
his own against all comers, and so we will defend ourselves."

They all bade him take the course he thought best, and then they
took to their arms.

Now the earl comes up and called out to them, and bade them give
themselves up.

Helgi said that they would defend themselves so long as they
could.

Then the earl offered peace and quarter to all who would neither
defend themselves nor Helgi; but Helgi was so much beloved that
all said they would rather die with him.

Then the earl and his men fall on them, but they defended
themselves well, and Njal's sons were ever where there was most
need.  The earl often offered peace, but they all made the same
answer, and said they would never yield.

Then Aslak of Longisle pressed them hard and came on board their
ship thrice.  Then Grim said, "Thou pressest on hard, and 'twere
well that thou gettest what thou seekest;" and with that he
snatched up a spear and hurled it at him, and hit him under the
chin, and Aslak got his death wound there and then.

A little after, Helgi slew Egil the earl's banner-bearer.

Then Sweyn, Earl Hacon's son, fell on them, and made men hem them
in and bear them down with shields, and so they were taken
captive.

The earl was for letting them all be slain at once, but Sweyn
said that should not be, and said too that it was night.

Then the earl said, "Well, then, slay them to-morrow, but bind
them fast to-night."

"So, I ween, it must be," says Sweyn; "but never yet have I met
brisker men than these, and I call it the greatest manscathe to
take their lives."

"They have slain two of our briskest men," said the earl, "and
for that they shall be slain."

"Because they were brisker men themselves," says Sweyn; "but
still in this it must be done as thou willest."

So they were bound and fettered.

After that the earl fell asleep; but when all men slept, Grim
spoke to Helgi, and said, "Away would I get if I could."

"Let us try some trick then," says Helgi.

Grim sees that there lies an axe edge up, so Grim crawled
thither, and gets the bowstring which bound him cut asunder
against the axe, but still he got great wounds on his arms.

Then he set Helgi loose, and after that they crawled over the
ship's side, and got on shore, so that neither Hacon nor his men
were ware of them.  Then they broke off their fetters, and walked
away to the other side of the island.  By that time it began to
dawn.  There they found a ship, and knew that there was come Kari
Solmund's son.  They went at once to meet him, and told him of
their wrongs and hardships, and showed him their wounds, and said
the earl would be then asleep.

"Ill is it," said Kari, "that ye should suffer such wrongs for
wicked men; but what now would be most to your minds?"

"To fall on the earl," they say, "and slay, him."

"This will not be fated," says Kari; "but still ye do not lack
heart, but we will first know whether he is there now."

After that they fared thither, and then the earl was up and away.

Then Kari sailed in to Hlada to meet the earl, and brought him
the Orkney scatts, so the earl said, "Hast thou taken Njal's sons
into thy keeping?"

"So it is, sure enough," says Kari.

"Wilt thou hand Njal's sons over to me?" asks the earl.

"No, I will not," said Kari.

"Wilt thou swear this," says the earl, "that thou wilt not fall
on me with Njal's sons?"

Then Eric, the earl's son, spoke and said, "Such things ought
not to be asked.  Kari has always been our friend, and things
should not have gone as they have, had I been by.  Njal's sons
should have been set free from all blame, but they should have
had chastisement who had wrought for it.  Methinks now it would
be more seemly to give Njal's sons good gifts for the hardships
and wrongs which have been put upon them, and the wounds they
have got."

"So it ought to be, sure enough," says the earl, "but I know not
whether they will take an atonement."

Then the earl said that Kari should try the feeling of Njal's
sons as to an atonement.

After that Kari spoke to Helgi, and asked whether he would take
any amends from the earl or not.

"I will take them," said Helgi, "from his son Eric, but I will
have nothing to do with the earl."

Then Kari told Eric their answer.

"So it shall be." says Eric.  "He shall take the amends from me
if he thinks it better; and tell them this too, that I bid them
to my house, and my father shall do them no harm."

This bidding they took, and went to Eric's house, and were with
him till Kari was ready to sail west across the sea to meet Earl
Sigurd.

Then Eric made a feast for Kari, and gave him gifts, and Njal's
sons gifts too.  After that Kari fared west across the sea, and
met Earl Sigurd, and he greeted them very well, and they were
with the earl that winter.

But when the spring came, Kari asked Njal's sons to go on warfare
with him, but Grim said they would only do so if he would fare
with them afterwards out to Iceland.  Kari gave his word to do
that, and then they fared with him a-searoving.  They harried
south about Anglesea and all the Southern isles.  Thence they
held on to Cantyre, and landed there, and fought with the
landsmen, and got thence much goods, and so fared to their ships. 
Thence they fared south to Wales, and harried there.  Then
they held on for Alan, and there they met Godred, and fought with
him, and got the victory, and slew Dungal the king's son.  There
they took great spoil.  Thence they held on north to Coll, and
found Earl Gilli there, and he greeted them well and there they
stayed with him a while.  The earl fared with them to the Orkneys
to meet Earl Sigurd, but next spring Earl Sigurd gave away his
sister Nereida to Earl Gilli, and then he fared back to the
Southern isles.



89. NJAL'S SONS AND KARI COME OUT TO ICELAND

That summer Kari and Njal's sons busked them for Iceland, and
when they were "all-boun" they went to see the earl.  The earl
gave them good gifts, and they parted with great friendship.

Now they put to sea and have a short passage, and they got a fine
fair breeze, and made the land at Eyrar.  Then they got them
horses and ride from the ship to Bergthorsknoll, but when they
came home all men were glad to see them.  They flitted home their
goods and laid up the ship, and Kari was there that winter with
Njal.

But the spring after, Kari asked for Njal's daughter, Helga, to
wife, and Helgi and Grim backed his suit; and so the end of it
was that she was betrothed to Kari and the day for the wedding-
feast was fixed, and the feast was held half a month before
mid-summer, and they were that winter with Njal.

Then Kari bought him land at Dyrholms, east away by Mydale, and
set up a farm there; they put in there a grieve and housekeeper
to see after the farm, but they themselves were ever with Njal.



90. THE QUARREL OF NJAL'S SONS WITH THRAIN SIGFUS' SON

Hrapp owned a farm at Hrappstede, but for all that he was always
at Gritwater, and he was thought to spoil everything there. 
Thrain was good to him.

Once on a time it happened that Kettle of the Mark was at
Bergthorsknoll; then Njal's sons told him of their wrongs and
hardships, and said they had much to lay at Thrain Sigfus son's
door, whenever they chose to speak about it.

NjaI said it would be best that Kettle should talk with his
brother Thrain about it, and he gave his word to do so.

So they gave Kettle breathing-time to talk to Thrain.

A little after they spoke of the matter again to Kettle, but he
said that be would repeat few of the words that had passed
between them, "For it was pretty plain that Thrain thought I set
too great store on being your brother-in-law."

Then they dropped talking about it, and thought they saw that
things looked ugly, and so they asked their father for his
counsel as to what was to be done, but they told him they would
not let things rest as they then stood.

"Such things," said Njal, "are not so strange.  It will be
thought that they are slain without a cause, if they are slain
now, and my counsel is, that as many men as may be should be
brought to talk with them about these things, and thus as many as
we can find may be ear-witnesses if they answer ill as to these
things.  Then Kari shall talk about them too, for he is just the
man with the right turn of mind for this; then the dislike
between you will grow and grow, for they will heap bad words on
bad words when men bring the matter forward, for they are foolish
men.  It may also well be that it may be said that my sons are
slow to take up a quarrel, but ye shall bear that for the sake of
gaining time, for there are two sides to everything that is done,
and ye can always pick a quarrel; but still ye shall let so much
of your purpose out, as to say that if any wrong be put upon you
that ye do mean something.  But if ye had taken counsel from me
at first, then these things should never have been spoken about
at all, and then ye would have gotten no disgrace from them; but
now ye have the greatest risk of it, and so it will go on ever
growing and growing with your disgrace, that ye will never get
rid of it until ye bring yourselves into a strait, and have to
fight your way out with weapons; but in that there is a long and
weary night in which ye will have to grope your way."

After that they ceased speaking about it; but the matter became
the daily talk of many men.

One day it happened that those brothers spoke to Kari and bade
him go to Gritwater.  Kari said he thought he might go
elsewhither on a better journey, but still he would go if that
were Njal's counsel.  So after that Kari fares to meet Thrain,
and then they talk over the matter, and they did not each look at
it in the same way.

Kari comes home, and Njal's sons ask how things had gone between
Thrain and him.  Kari said he would rather not repeat the words
that had passed, "But," he went on, "it is to be looked for that
the like words will be spoken when ye yourselves can hear them."

Thrain had fifteen house-carles trained to arms in his house, and
eight of them rode with him whithersoever he went.  Thrain was
very fond of show and dress, and always rode in a blue cloak, and
had on a gilded helm, and the spear -- the earl's gift -- in his
band, and a fair shield, and a sword at his belt.  Along with him
always went Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi Sigurd's son, and Grani
Gunnar of Lithend's son.  But nearest of all to him went Killing-
Hrapp.  Lodinn was the name of his serving-man, he too went with
Thrain when he journeyed; Tjorvi was the name of Lodinn's
brother, and he too was one of Thrain's band.  The worst of all,
in their words against Njal's sons, were Hrapp and Grani; and it
was mostly their doing that no atonement was offered to them.

Njal's sons often spoke to Kari that he should ride with them;
and it came to that at last, for he said it would be well that
they heard Thrain's answer.

Then they busked them, four of Njal's sons, and Kari the fifth,
and so they fare to Gritwater.

There was a wide porch in the homestead there, so that many men
might stand in it side by side.  There was a woman out of doors,
and she saw their coming, and told Thrain of it; he bade them to
go out into the porch, and take their arms, and they did so.

Thrain stood in mid-door, but Killing-Hrapp and Grani Gunnar's
son stood on either hand of him; then next stood Gunnar Lambi's
son, then Lodinn and Tjorvi, then Lambi Sigurd's son; then each
of the others took his place right and left; for the house-carles
were all at home.

Skarphedinn and his men walk up from below, and he went first,
then Kari, then Hauskuld, then Grim, then Helgi.  But when they
had come up to the door, then not a word of welcome passed the
lips of those who stood before them.

"May we all be welcome here?" said Skarphedinn.

Hallgerda stood in the porch, and had been talking low to Hrapp,
then she spoke out loud: "None of those who are here will say
that ye are welcome."

Then Skarphedinn sang a song:

     "Prop of sea-waves' fire (1), thy fretting
     Cannot cast a weight on us,
     Warriors wight; yes, wolf and eagle
     Willingly I feed to-day;
     Carline thrust into the ingle,
     Or a tramping whore, art thou;
     Lord of skates that skim the sea-belt (2),
     Odin's mocking cup (3) I mix"

"Thy words," said Skarphedinn, "will not be worth much, for thou
art either a hag, only fit to sit in the ingle, or a harlot."

"These words of thine thou shalt pay for," she says, "ere thou
farest home."

"Thee am I come to see, Thrain," said Helgi, "and to know if thou
wilt make me any amends for those wrongs and hardships which
befell me for thy sake in Norway."

"I never knew," said Thrain, "that ye two brothers were wont to
measure your manhood by money; or, how long shall such a claim
for amends stand over?"

"Many will say," says Helgi, "that thou oughtest to offer us
atonement, since thy life was at stake."

Then Hrapp said, "'Twas just luck that swayed the balance, when
he got stripes who ought to bear them; and she dragged you under
disgrace and hardships, but us away from them."

"Little good luck was there in that," says Helgi, "to break faith
with the earl, and to take to thee instead."

"Thinkest thou not that thou hast some amends to seek from me,"
says Hrapp.  "I will atone thee in a way that, methinks, were
fitting."

"The only dealings we shall have," says Helgi, "will be those
which will not stand thee in good stead."

"Don't bandy words with Hrapp," said Skarphedinn, "but give him a
red skin for a grey." (4)

"Hold thy tongue, Skarphedinn," said Hrapp, "or I will not spare
to bring my axe on thy head."

"'Twill be proved soon enough, I dare say," says Skarphedinn,
"which of us is to scatter gravel over the other's head."

"Away with you home, ye `Dungbeardlings!'" says Hallgerda, "and
so we will call you always from this day forth; but your father
we will call `the Beardless Carle.'"

They did not fare home before all who were there had made
themselves guilty of uttering those words, save Thrain; he
forbade men to utter them.

Then Njal's sons went away, and fared till they came home, then
they told their father.

"Did ye call any men to witness of those words?" says Njal.

"We called none," says Skarphedinn; "we do not mean to follow
that suit up except on the battle-field."

"No one will now think," says Bergthora, "that ye have the heart
to lift your weapons."

"Spare thy tongue, mistress!" says Kari, "in egging on thy sons,
for they will be quite eager enough."

After that they all talk long in secret, Njal and his sons, and
Kari Solmund's son, their brother-in-law.


ENDNOTES:

(l)  "Prop of sea-waves' fire," a periphrasis for woman that
     bears gold on her arm.
(2)  "Skates that skim." etc.. a periphrasis for ships.
(3)  "Odin's mocking cup," mocking songs.
(4)  An allusion to the Beast Epic, where the cunning fox laughs
     at the flayed condition of his stupid foes, the wolf and
     bear.  We should say, "Don't stop to speak with him, but
     rather beat him black and blue."



91. THRAIN SIGFUS' SON'S SLAYING

Now there was great talk about this quarrel of theirs, and all
seemed to know that it would not settle down peacefully.

Runolf, the son of Wolf Aurpriest, east in the Dale, was a great
friend of Thrain's, and had asked Thrain to come and see him, and
it was settled that he should come east when about three weeks or
a month were wanting to winter.

Thrain bade Hrapp, and Grani, and Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi
Sigurd's son, and Lodinn, and Tjorvi, eight of them in all, to go
on this journey with him.  Hallgerda and Thorgerda were to go
too.  At the same time Thrain gave it out that he meant to stay
in the Mark with his brother Kettle, and said how many nights he
meant to be away from home.

They all of them had full arms.  So they rode east across
Markfleet, and found there some gangrel women, and they begged
them to put them across the Fleet west on their horses, and they
did so.

Then they rode into the Dale, and had a hearty welcome; there
Kettle of the Mark met them, and there they sate two nights.

Both Runolf and Kettle besought Thrain that he would make up his
quarrel with Njal's sons; but he said he would never pay any
money, and answered crossly, for he said he thought himself quite
a match for Njal's sons wherever they met.

"So it may be," says Runolf; "but so far as I can see, no man has
been their match since Gunnar of Lithend died and it is likelier
that ye will both drag one another down to death."

Thrain said that was not to be dreaded.

Then Thrain fared up into the Mark, and was there two nights
more; after that he rode down into the Dale, and was sent away
from both houses with fitting gifts.

Now the Markfleet was then flowing between sheets of ice on both
sides, and there were tongues of ice bridging it across every
here and there.

Thrain said that he meant to ride home that evening, but Runolf
said that he ought not to ride home; he said, too, that it would
be more wary not to fare back as he had said he would before he
left home.

"That is fear, and I will none of it," answers Thrain.

Now those gangrel women whom they had put across the Fleet came
to Bergthorsknoll, and Bergthora asked whence they came, but they
answered, "Away east under Eyjafell."

"Then, who put you across Markfleet?" said Bergthora.

"Those," said they, "who were the most boastful and bravest clad
of men."

"Who?" asked Bergthora.

"Thrain Sigfus' son," said they, "and his company, but we thought
it best to tell thee that they were so full-tonged towards this
house, against thy husband and his sons."

"Listeners do not often hear good of themselves," says Bergthora. 
After that they went their way, and Bergthora gave them gifts on
their going, and asked them when Thrain might be coming home.

They said that he would be from home four or five nights.

After that Bergthora told her sons and her son-in-law Kari, and
they talked long and low about the matter.

But that same morning when Thrain and his men rode from the east,
Njal woke up early and heard how Skarphedinn's axe came against
the panel.

Then Njal rises up, and goes out, and sees that his sons are all
there with their weapons, and Kari, his son-in-law too. 
Skarphedinn was foremost.  He was in a blue cape, and had a
targe, and his axe aloft on his shoulder.  Next to him went
Helgi; he was in a red kirtle, had a helm on his head, and a red
shield, on which a hart was marked.  Next to him went Kari; he
had on a silken jerkin, a gilded helm and shield, and on it was
drawn a lion.  They were all in bright holiday clothes.

Njal called out to Skarphedinn, "Whither art thou going,
kinsman?"

"On a sheep hunt," he said.

"So it was once before," said Njal, "but then ye hunted men."

Skarphedinn laughed at that, and said, "Hear ye what the old man
says?  He is not without his doubts."

"When was it that thou spokest thus before," asks Kari.

"When I slew Sigmund the White," says Skarphedinn, "Gunnar of
Lithend's kinsman."

"For what?" asks Kari.

"He had slain Thord Freedmanson, my foster-father."

Njal went home, but they fared up into the Redslips, and bided
there; thence they could see the others as soon as ever they rode
from the east out of the Dale.

There was sunshine that day and bright weather.

Now Thrain and his men ride down out of the Dale along the river
bank.

Lambi Sigurd's son said, "Shields gleam away yonder in the
Redslips when the sun shines on them, and there must be some men
lying in wait there."

"Then," says Thrain, "we will turn our way lower down the Fleet,
and then they will come to meet us if they have any business with
us."

So they turn down the Fleet.  "Now they have caughtsight of us,"
said Skarphedinn, "for lo! they turn their path elsewhither, and
now we have no other choice than to run down and meet them."

"Many men," said Kari, "would rather not lie in wait if the
balance of force were not more on their side than it is on ours;
they are eight, but we are five."

Now they turn down along the Fleet, and see a tongue of ice
bridging the stream lower down and mean to cross there.

Thrain and his men take their stand upon the ice away from the
tongue, and Thrain said, "What can these men want?  They are
five, and we are eight."

"I guess," said Lambi Sigurd's son, "that they would still run
the risk though more men stood against them."

Thrain throws off his cloak, and takes off his helm.

Now it happened to Skarphedinn, as they ran down along the Fleet,
that his shoe-string snapped asunder, and he stayed behind.

"Why so slow, Skarphedinn?" quoth Grim.

"I am tying my shoe," he says.

"Let us get on ahead," says Kari; "methinks he will not be slower
than we."

So they turn off to the tongue, and run as fast as they can.
Skarphedinn sprang up as soon as he was ready, and had lifted his
axe, "the ogress of war," aloft, and runs right down to the
Fleet.  But the Fleet was so deep that there was no fording it
for a long way up or down.

A great sheet of ice had been thrown up by the flood on the other
side of the Fleet as smooth and slippery as glass, and there
Thrain and his men stood in the midst of the sheet.

Skarphedinn takes a spring into the air, and leaps over the
stream between the icebanks, and does not check his course, but
rushes still onwards with a slide.  The sheet of ice was very
slippery, and so he went as fast as a bird flies.  Thrain was
just about to put his helm on his head; and now Skarphedinn bore
down on them, and hews at Thrain with his axe, "the ogress of
war," and smote him on the head, and clove him down to the teeth,
so that his jaw-teeth fell out on the ice.  This feat was done
with such a quick sleight that no one could get a blow at him; he
glided away from them at once at full speed.  Tjorvi, indeed,
threw his shield before him on the ice, but he leapt over it, and
still kept his feet, and slid quite to the end of the sheet of
ice.

There Kari and his brothers came to meet him.

"This was done like a man," says Kari.

"Your share is still left," says Skarphedinn, and sang a song:

     "To the strife of swords not slower,
     After all, I came than you,
     For with ready stroke the sturdy
     Squanderer of wealth I felled;
     But since Grim's and Helgi's sea-stag (1)
     Norway's Earl erst took and stripped,
     Now 'tis time for sea-fire bearers (2)
     Such dishonour to avenge."

And this other song he sang:

     "Swiftly down I dashed my weapon,
     Gashing giant, byrnie-breacher (3),
     She, the noisy ogre's namesake (4),
     Soon with flesh the ravens glutted;
     Now your words to Hrapp remember,
     On broad ice now rouse the storm,
     With dull crash war's eager ogress
     Battle's earliest note hath sung."

"That befits us well, and we will do it well," says Helgi.

Then they turn up towards them.  Both Grim and Helgi see where
Hrapp is, and they turned on him at once.  Hrapp hews at Grim
there and then with his axe; Helgi sees this and cuts at Hrapp's
arm, and cut it off, and down fell the axe.

"In this," says Hrapp, "thou hast done a most needful work, for
this hand hath wrought harm and death to many a man."

"And so here an end shall be put to it," says Grim; and with
that he ran him through with a spear, and then Hrapp fell down
dead.

Tjorvi turns against Kari and hurls a spear at him.  Kari leapt
up in the air, and the spear flew below his feet.  Then Kari
rushes at him, and hews at him on the breast with his sword, and
the blow passed at once into his chest, and he got his death
there and then.

Then Skarphedinn seizes both Gunnar Lambi's son, and Grani
Gunnar's son, and said, "Here have I caught two whelps!  but what
shall we do with them?

"It is in thy power," says Helgi, "to slay both or either of
them, if you wish them dead."

"I cannot find it in my heart to do both -- help Hogni and slay
his brother," says Skarphedinn.

"Then the day will once come," says Helgi, "when thou wilt wish
that thou hadst slain him, for never will he be true to thee, nor
will any one of the others who are now here."

"I shall not fear them," answers Skarphedinn.

After that they gave peace to Grani Gunnar's son, and Gunnar
Lambi's son, and Lambi Sigurd's son, and Lodinn.

After that they went down to the Fleet where Skarphedinn had
leapt over it, and Kari and the others measured the length of the
leap with their spear-shafts, and it was twelve ells (5).

Then they turned homewards, and Njal asked what tidings.  They
told him all just as it had happened, and Njal said, "These are
great tidings, and it is more likely that hence will come the
death of one of my sons, if not more evil."

Gunnar Lambi's son bore the body of Thrain with him to Gritwater,
and he was laid in a cairn there.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Sea-stag," periphrasis for ship.
(2)  "Sea-fire bearers," the bearers of gold, men, that is, Helgi
     and Grim.
(3)  "Byrnie-breacher," piercer of coats of mail.
(4)  "Noisy ogre's namesake," an allusion to the name of Skarp
     hedinn's axe, "the ogress of war."
(5)  Twelve ells, about twenty-four feet (the Norse ell being
     something more than two feet), a good jump, but not beyond
     the power of man.  Comp.  "Orkn. Saga", ch. 113, new ed.,
     vol. i., 457, where Earl Harold leaps nine ells over a dike.



92. KETTLE TAKES HAUSKULD AS HIS FOSTER-SON

Kettle of the Mark had to wife Thorgerda Njal's daughter, but he
was Thrain's brother, and he thought he was come into a strait,
so he rode to Njal's house, and asked whether he were willing to
atone in any way for Thrain's slaying?

"I will atone for it handsomely," answered Njal; "and my wish is
that thou shouldst look after the matter with thy brothers who
have to take the price of the atonement, that they may be ready
to join in it."

Kettle said he would do so with all his heart, and Kettle rode
home first; a little after, he summoned all his brothers to
Lithend, and then he had a talk with them; and Hogni was on his
side all through the talk; and so it came about that men were
chosen to utter the award; and a meeting was agreed on, and the
fair price of a man was awarded for Thrain's slaying, and they
all had a share in the blood-money who had a lawful right to it. 
After that pledges of peace and good faith were agreed to, and
they were settled in the most sure and binding way.

Njal paid down all the money out of hand well and bravely; and so
things were quiet for a while.

One day Njal rode up into the Mark, and he and Kettle talked
together the whole day; Njal rode home at even, and no man knew
of what they had taken counsel.

A little after Kettle fares to Gritwater, and he said to
Thorgerda, "Long have I loved my brother Thrain much, and now I
will shew it, for I will ask Hauskuld Thrain's son to be my
foster-child."

"Thou shalt have thy choice of this," she says; "and thou shalt
give this lad all the help in thy power when he is grown up, and
avenge him if he is slain with weapons, and bestow money on him
for his wife's dower; and besides, thou shalt swear to do all
this."

Now Hauskuld fares home with Kettle, and is with him some time.



93.  NJAL TAKES HAUSKULD TO FOSTER

Once on a time Njal rides up into the Mark, and he had a hearty
welcome.  He was there that night, and in the evening Njal called
out to the lad Hauskuld, and he went up to him at once.

Njal had a ring of gold on his hand, and showed it to the lad. 
He took hold of the gold, and looked at it, and put it on his
finger.

"Wilt thou take the gold as a gift?" said Njal.

"That I will," said the lad.

"Knowest thou," says Njal, "what brought thy father to his
death?"

"I know," answers the lad, "that Skarphedinn slew him; but we
need not keep that in mind, when an atonement has been made for
it, and a full price paid for him."

"Better answered than asked," said Njal; "and thou wilt live to
be a good man and true," he adds.

"Methinks thy forecasting," says Hauskuld, "is worth having, for
I know that thou art foresighted and unlying."

"Now will I offer to foster thee," said Njal, "if thou wilt take
the offer."

He said he would be willing to take both that honour and any
other good offer which he might make.  So the end of the matter
was, that Hauskuld fared home with Njal as his foster-son.

He suffered no harm to come nigh the lad, and loved him much. 
Njal's sons took him about with them, and did him honour in every
way.  And so things go on till Hauskuld is full grown.  He was
both tall and strong; the fairest of men to look on, and well
haired; blithe of speech, bountiful, well behaved; as well
trained to arms as the best; fairspoken to all men, and much
beloved.

Njal's sons and Hauskuld were never apart, either in word or
deed.



94. OF FLOSI THORD'S SON

There was a man named Flosi, he was the son of Thord Freyspriest
(1).  Flosi had to wife Steinvora, daughter of Hall of the Side. 
She was base born, and her mother's name was Solvora, daughter of
Herjolf the White.  Flosi dwelt at Swinefell, and was a mighty
chief.  He was tall of stature, and strong, withal, the most
forward and boldest of men.  His brother's name was Starkad (2);
he was not by the same mother as Flosi.

The other brothers of Flosi were Thorgeir and Stein, Kolbein and
Egil.  Hildigunna was the name of the daughter of Starkad Flosi's
brother.  She was a proud, high-spirited maiden, and one of the
fairest of women.  She was so skilful with her hands, that few
women were equally skilful.  She was the grimmest and hardest-
hearted of all women; but still a woman of open hand and heart
when any fitting call was made upon her.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thord was the son of Auzur, the son of Asbjorn Eyjangr the
     son of Bjorn, the son of Helgi, the son of Bjorn the
     Roughfooted, the son of Grim, the Lord of Sogn.  The mother
     of Flosi was Ingunna, daughter of Thorir of Espihole, the
     son of Hamond Hellskin, the son of Hjor, the son of Half,
     who ruled over the men of Half, the son of Hjorfeif, the
     lover of women.  The mother of Thorir was Ingunna, daughter
     of Helgi the Lean, who took the land round Eyjafirth, as the
     first settler.
(2)  The mother of Starkad was Thraslauga, daughter of Thorstein
     titling the son of Gerleif; but the mother of Thraslauga was
     Aud; she was a daughter of Eyvind Karf, one of the first
     settlers, and sister of Modolf the Wise.



95. OF HALL OF THE SIDE

Hall was the name of a man who was called Hall of the Side.  He
was the son of Thorstein Baudvar's son (1).  Hall had to wife
Joreida, daughter of Thidrandi (2) the Wise.  Thorstein was the
name of Hall's brother, and he was nick-named Broad-paunch.  His
son was Kol, whom Kari slays in Wales.  The sons of Hall of the
Side were Thorstein and Egil, Thorwald and Ljot, and Thidrandi,
whom, it is said, the goddesses slew.

There was a man named Thorir, whose surname was Holt-Thorir; his
sons were these: -- Thorgeir Craggeir, and Thorleif Crow, from
whom the Wood-dwellers are come, and Thorgrim the Big.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Hall's mother's name was Thordisa, and she was a daughter of
     Auzur, the son of Hrodlaug, the son of Earl Rognvald of
     Maeren, the son of Eystein the Noisy.
(2)  Thidrandi was the son of Kettle Rumble, the son of Thorir,
     the son of Thidrandi of Verudale.  The brothers of Thidrandi
     were Kettle Rumble, in Njordwick, and Thorwald, the father
     of Helgi Droplaug's son.  Hallkatla was the sister of
     Joreida.  She was the mother of Thorkel Geiti's son, and
     Thidrandi.



96. OF THE CHANGE OF FAITH

There had been a change of rulers in Norway, Earl Hacon was dead
and gone, but in his stead was come Olaf Tryggvi's son.  That was
the end of Earl Hacon, that Kark the thrall cut his throat at
Rimul in Gaulardale.

Along with that was heard that there had been a change of faith
in Norway; they had cast off the old faith, but King Olaf had
christened the western lands, Shetland, and the Orkneys, and the
Faroe Isles.

Then many men spoke so that Njal heard it, that it was a strange
and wicked thing to throw off the old faith.

Then Njal spoke and said, "It seems to me as though this new
faith must be much better, and he will be happy who follows this
rather than the other; and if those men come out hither who
preach this faith, then I will back them well."

He went often alone away from other men and muttered to himself.

That same harvest a ship came out into the firths east to
Berufirth, at a spot called Gautawick.  The captain's name was
Thangbrand.  He was a son of Willibald, a count of Saxony. 
Thangbrand was sent out hither by King Olaf Tryggvi's son, to
preach the faith.  Along with him came that man of Iceland whose
name was Gudleif (1).  Gudleif was a great man-slayer, and one of
the strongest of men, and hardy and forward in everything.

Two brothers dwelt at Beruness; the name of the one was Thorleif,
but the other was Kettle.  They were sons of Holmstein, the son
of Auzur of Broaddale.  These brothers held a meeting and forbade
men to have any dealings with them.  This Hall of the Side heard. 
He dwelt at Thvattwater in Alftafirth; he rode to the ship with
twenty-nine men, and he fares at once to find Thangbrand, and
spoke to him and asked him, "Trade is rather dull, is it not?"

He answered that so it was.

"Now will I say my errand," says Hall; "it is, that I wish to ask
you all to my house, and run the risk of my being able to get rid
of your wares for you."

Thangbrand thanked him, and fared to Thvattwater that harvest.

It so happened one morning that Thangbrand was out early and made
them pitch a tent on land, and sang mass in it, and took much
pains with it, for it was a great high day.

Hall spoke to Thangbrand and asked, "In memory of whom keepest
thou this day?"

"In memory of Michael the archangel," says Thangbrand.

"What follows that angel?" asks Hall.

"Much good," says Thangbrand. "He will weigh all the good that
thou doest, and he is so merciful, that whenever any one pleases
him, he makes his good deeds weigh more."

"I would like to have him for my friend," says Hall.

"That thou mayest well have," says Thangbrand, "only give thyself
over to him by God's help this very day."

"I only make this condition," says Hall, "that thou givest thy
word for him that he will then become my guardian angel."

"That I will promise," says Thangbrand.

Then Hall was baptized, and all his household.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  He was the son of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli, the
     son of Wolf Squinteye, the son of Hogni the White, the son
     of Otryg, the son of Oblaud, the son of Hjorleif the lover
     of women, King of Hordaland.



97. OF THANGBRAND'S JOURNEYS

The spring after Thangbrand set out to preach Christianity, and
Hall went with him.  But when they came west across Lonsheath to
Staffell, there they found a man dwelling named Thorkell.  He
spoke most against the faith, and challenged Thangbrand to single
combat.  Then Thangbrand bore a rood-cross (1) before his shield,
and the end of their combat was that Thangbrand won the day and
slew Thorkell.

Thence they fared to Hornfirth and turned in as guests at
Borgarhaven, west of Heinabergs sand.  There Hilldir the Old
dwelt (2), and then Hilldir and all his household took upon them
the new faith.

Thence they fared to Fellcombe, and went in as guests to
Calffell.  There dwelt Kol Thorstein's son, Hall's kinsman, and
he took upon him the faith and all his house.

Thence they fared to Swinefell, and Flosi only took the sign of
the cross, but gave his word to back them at the Thing.

Thence they fared west to Woodcombe, and went in as guests at
Kirkby.  There dwelt Surt Asbjorn's son, the son of Thorstein,
the son of Kettle the Foolish.  These had all of them been
Christians from father to son.

After that they fared out of Woodcombe on to Headbrink.  By that
time the story of their journey was spread far and wide.  There
was a man named Sorcerer-Hedinn who dwelt in Carlinedale.  There
heathen men made a bargain with him that he should put Thangbrand
to death with all his company.  He fared upon Arnstacksheath, and
there made a great sacrifice when Thangbrand was riding from the
east.  Then the earth burst asunder under his horse, but he
sprang off his horse and saved himself on the brink of the gulf,
but the earth swallowed up the horse and all his harness, and
they never saw him more.

Then Thangbrand praised God.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Rood-cross, a crucifix.
(2)  His son was Glum who fared to the burning with Flosi.



98. OF THANGBRAND AND GUDLEIF

Gudleif now searches for Sorcerer-Hedinn and finds him on the
heath, and chases him down into Carlinedale, and got within
spearshot of him, and shoots a spear at him and through him.

Thence they fared to Dyrholms and held a meeting there, and
preached the faith there, and there Ingialld, the son of
Thorsteinn Highbankawk, became a Christian.

Thence they fared to the Fleetlithe and preached the faith there. 
There Weatherlid the Skald, and Ari his son, spoke most against
the faith, and for that they slew Weatherlid, and then this song
was sung about it --

     "He who proved his blade on bucklers,
     South went through the land to whet
     Brand that oft hath felled his foeman,
     'Gainst the forge which foams with song (1);
     Mighty wielder of war's sickle
     Made his sword's avenging edge
     Hard on hero's helm-prop rattle (2),
     Skull of Weatherlid the Skald."

Thence Thangbrand fared to Bergthorsknoll, and Njal took the
faith and all his house, but Mord and Valgard went much against
it, and thence they fared out across the rivers; so they went on
into Hawkdale and there they baptized Hall (3), and he was then
three winters old.

Thence Thangbrand fared to Grimsness, there Thorwald the Scurvy
gathered a band against him, and sent word to Wolf Uggi's son
that he must fare against Thangbrand and slay him, and made this
song on him --

     "To the wolf in Woden's harness,
     Uggi's worthy warlike son,
     I, steel's swinger dearly loving,
     This my dimple bidding send;
     That the wolf of Gods (4) he chaseth --
     Man who snaps at chink of gold --
     Wolf who base our Gods blasphemeth,
     I the other wolf (5) will crush."

Wolf sang another song in return:

     "Swarthy skarf from mouth that skimmeth
     Of the man who speaks in song
     Never will I catch, though surely
     Wealthy warrior it hath sent;
     Tender of the sea-horse snorting,
     E'en though ill deeds are on foot,
     Still to risk mine eyes are open;
     Harmful 'tis to snap at flies (6)."

"And," says he, "I don't mean to be made a catspaw by him, but
let him take heed lest his tongue twists a noose for his own
neck."

And after that the messenger fared back to Thorwald the Scurvy
and told him Wolf's words.  Thorwald had many men about him, and
gave it out that he would lie in wait for them on Bluewood-heath.

Now those two, Thangbrand and Gudleif, ride out of Hawkdale, and
there they came upon a man who rode to meet them.  That man asked
for Gudleif, and when he found him he said, "Thou shalt gain by
being the brother of Thorgil of Reykiahole, for I will let thee
know that they have set many ambushes, and this too, that
Thorwald the Scurvy is now with his band at Hestbeck on
Grimsness."

"We shall not the less for all that ride to meet him," says
Gudleif, and then they turned down to Hestbeck.  Thorwald was
then come across the brook, and Gudleif said to Thangbrand, "Here
is now Thorwald; let us rush on him now."

Thangbrand shot a spear through Thorwald, but Gudleif smote him
on the shoulder and hewed his arm off, and that was his death.

After that they ride up to the Thing, and it was a near thing
that the kinsmen of Thorwald had fallen on Thangbrand, but Njal
and the eastfirthers stood by Thangbrand.

Then Hjallti Skeggi's son sang this rhyme at the Hill of Laws:

     "Ever will I Gods blaspheme
     Freyja methinks a dog does seem,
     Freyja a dog?  Aye!  let them be
     Both dogs together Odin and she (7)."

Hjallti fared abroad that summer and Gizur the White with him,
but Thangbrand's ship was wrecked away east at Bulandsness, and
the ship's name was Bison.

Thangbrand and his messmate fared right through the west country,
and Steinvora, the mother of Ref the Skald, came against him; she
preached the heathen faith to Thangbrand and made him a long
speech.  Thangbrand held his peace while she spoke, but made a
long speech after her, and turned all that she had said the wrong
way against her.

"Hast thou heard," she said, "how Thor challenged Christ to
single combat, and how he did not dare to fight with Thor?"

"I have heard tell," says Thangbrand, "that Thor was naught but
dust and ashes, if God had not willed that he should live."

"Knowest thou," she says, "who it was that shattered thy ship?"

"What hast thou to say about that?" he asks.

"That I will tell thee," she says:

     "He that giant's offspring (8) slayeth
     Broke the mew-field's bison stout (9),
     Thus the Gods, bell's warder (10) grieving,
     Crushed the falcon of the strand (11);
     To the courser of the causeway (12)
     Little good was Christ I ween,
     When Thor shattered ships to pieces
     Gylfi's hart (13) no God could help."

And again she sung another song:

     "Thangbrand's vessel from her moorings,
     Sea-king's steed, Thor wrathful tore,
     Shook and shattered all her timbers,
     Hurled her broadside on the beach;
     Ne'er again shall Viking's snow-shoe (14),
     On the briny billows glide,
     For a storm by Thor awakened,
     Dashed the bark to splinters small."

After that Thangbrand and Steinvora parted, and they fared west
to Bardastrand.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Forge which foams with song," the poet's head, in which
     songs are forged, and gush forth like foaming mead.
(2)  "Hero's helm-prop," the hero's, man's, head which supports
     his helm.
(3)  It is needless to say that this Hall was not Hall of the
     Side.
(4)  "Wolf of Gods," the "caput lupinum," the outlaw of heaven,
     the outcast from Valhalla, Thangbrand.
(5)  "The other wolf," Gudleif.
(6)  "Swarthy skarf," the skarf, or "pelecanus carbo", the
     cormorant.  He compares the message of Thorwald to the
     cormorant skimming over the waves, and says he will never
     take it.  "Snap at flies," a very common Icelandic metaphor
     from fish rising to a fly.
(7)  Maurer thinks the allusion is here to some mythological
     legend on Odin's adventures which has not come down to us.
(8)  "He that giant's," etc., Thor.
(9)  "Mew-field's bison," the sea-going ship, which sails over
     the plain of the sea-mew.
(10) "Bell's warder," the Christian priest whose bell-ringing
     formed part of the rites of the new faith.
(11) "Falcon of the strand," ship.
(12) "Courser of the causeway," ship.
(13) "Gylfi's hart," ship.
(14) "Viking's snow-shoe," sea-king's ship.



99. OF GEST ODDLEIF'S SON

Gest Oddleit's son dwelt at Hagi on Bardastrand.  He was one of
the wisest of men, so that he foresaw the fates and fortunes of
men.  He made a feast for Thangbrand and his men.  They fared to
Hagi with sixty men.  Then it was said that there were two
hundred heathen men to meet them, and that a Baresark was looked
for to come thither, whose name was Otrygg, and all were afraid
of him.  Of him such great things as these were said, that he
feared neither fire nor sword, and the heathen men were sore
afraid at his coming.  Then Thangbrand asked if men were willing
to take the faith, but all the heathen met spoke against it.

"Well," says Thangbrand, "I will give you the means whereby ye
shall prove whether my faith is better.  We will hallow two
fires.  The heathen men shall hallow one and I the other, but a
third shall be unhallowed; and if the Baresark is afraid of the
one that I hallow, but treads both the others, then ye shall take
the faith."

"That is well spoken," says Gest, "and I will agree to this for
myself and my household."

And when Gest had so spoken, then many more agreed to it.

Then it was said that the Baresark was coming up to the
homestead, and then the fires were made and burnt strong.  Then
men took their arms and sprang up on the benches, and so
waited.

The Baresark rushed in with his weapons.  He comes into the room,
and treads at once the fire which the heathen men had hallowed,
and so comes to the fire that Thangbrand had hallowed, and dares
not to tread it, but said that he was on fire all over.  He hews
with his sword at the bench, but strikes a crossbeam as he
brandished the weapon aloft.  Thangbrand smote the arm of the
Baresark with his crucifix, and so mighty a token followed that
the sword fell from the Baresark's hand.

Then Thangbrand thrusts a sword into his breast, and Gudleif
smote him on the arm and hewed it off.  Then many went up and
slew the Baresark.

After that Thangbrand asked if they would take the faith now?

Gest said he had only spoken what he meant to keep to.

Then Thangbrand baptized Gest and all his house and many others. 
Then Thangbrand took counsel with Gest whether he should go any
further west among the firths, but Gest set his face against
that, and said they were a hard race of men there, and ill to
deal with, "but if it be foredoomed that this faith shall make
its way, then it will be taken as law at the Althing, and then
all the chiefs out of the districts will be there."

"I did all that I could at the Thing," says Thangbrand, "and it
was very uphill work."

"Still thou hast done most of the work," says Gest, "though it
may be fated that others shall make Christianity law; but it is
here as the saying runs, `No tree falls at the first stroke.'"

After that Gest gave Thangbrand good gifts, and he fared back
south.  Thangbrand fared to the Southlander's Quarter, and so to
the Eastfirths.  He turned in as a guest at Bergthorsknoll, and
Njal gave him good gifts.  Thence he rode east to Alftafirth to
meet Hall of the Side.  He caused his ship to be mended, and
heathen men called it "Iron-basket."  On board that ship
Thangbrand fared abroad, and Gudleif with him.



100. OF GIZUR THE WHITE AND HJALLTI

That same summer Hjallti Skeggi's son was outlawed at the Thing
for blasphemy against the Gods.

Thangbrand told King Olaf of all the mischief that the Icelanders
had done to him, and said that they were such sorcerers there
that the earth burst asunder under his horse and swallowed up the
horse.

Then King Olaf was so wroth that he made them seize all the men
from Iceland and set them in dungeons, and meant to slay them.

Then they, Gizur the White and Hjallti, came up and offered to
lay themselves in pledge for those men, and fare out to Iceland
and preach the faith.  The king took this well, and they got them
all set free again.

Then Gizur and Hjallti busked their ship for Iceland, and were
soon "boun."  They made the land at Eyrar when ten weeks of
summer had passed; they got them horses at once, but left other
men to strip their ship.  Then they ride with thirty men to the
Thing, and sent word to the Christian men that they must be ready
to stand by them.

Hjallti stayed behind at Reydarmull, for he had heard that he had
been made an outlaw for blasphemy, but when they came to the
"Boiling Kettle" (1) down below the brink of the Rift (2), there
came Hjallti after them, and said he would not let the heathen
men see that he was afraid of them.

Then many Christian men rode to meet them, and they ride in
battle array to the Thing.  The heathen men had drawn up their
men in array to meet them, and it was a near thing that the whole
body of the Thing had come to blows, but still it did not go so
far.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Boiling kettle." This was a hyer, or hot spring.
(2)  This was the "Raven's Rift," opposite to the "Great Rift" on
     the other side of Thingfield.



101. OF THORGEIR OF LIGHTWATER

There was a man named Thorgeir who dwelt at Lightwater; he was
the son of Tjorfi, the son of Thorkel the Long, the son of Kettle
Longneck.  His mother's name was Thoruna, and she was the
daughter of Thorstein, the son of Sigmund, the son of Bard of the
Nip.  Gudrida was the name of his wife; she was a daughter of
Thorkel the Black of Hleidrargarth.  His brother was Worm Wallet-
back, the father of Hlenni the Old of Saurby (1).

The Christian men set up their booths, and Gizur the White and
Hjallti were in the booths of the men from Mossfell.  The day
after both sides went to the Hill of Laws, and each, the
Christian men as well as the heathen, took witness, and declared
themselves out of the other's laws, and then there was such an
uproar on the Hill of Laws that no man could hear the other's
voice.

After that men went away, and all thought things looked like the
greatest entanglement.  The Christian men chose as their Speaker
Hall of the Side, but Hall went to Thorgeir, the priest of
Lightwater, who was the old Speaker of the law, and gave him
three marks of silver (2) to utter what the law should be, but
still that was most hazardous counsel, since he was an heathen.

Thorgeir lay all that day on the ground, and spread a cloak over
his head, so that no man spoke with him; but the day after men
went to the Hill of Laws, and then Thorgeir bade them be silent
and listen, and spoke thus: "It seems to me as though our matters
were come to a dead lock, if we are not all to have one and the
same law; for if there be a sundering of the laws, then there
will be a sundering of the peace, and we shall never be able to
live in the land.  Now, I will ask both Christian men and heathen
whether they will hold to those laws which I utter?"

They all said they would.

He said he wished to take an oath of them, and pledges that they
would hold to them, and they all said "yea" to that, and so he
took pledges from them.

"This is the beginning of our laws," he said, "that all men shall
be Christian here in the land, and believe in one God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but leave off all idol-
worship, not expose children to perish, and not eat horseflesh. 
It shall be outlawry if such things are proved openly against any
man; but if these things are done by stealth, then it shall be
blameless."

But all this heathendom was all done away with within a few
years' space, so that those things were not allowed to be done
either by stealth or openly.

Thorgeir then uttered the law as to keeping the Lord's day and
fast days, Yuletide and Easter, and all the greatest highdays and
holidays.

The heathen men thought they had been greatly cheated; but still
the true faith was brought into the law, and so all men became
Christian here in the land.

After that men fare home from the Thing.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Kettle and Thorkel were both sons of Thorir Tag, the son of
     Kettle the Seal, the son of Ornolf, the son of Bjornolf, the
     son of Grim Hairycheek, the son of Kettle Haeing, the son of
     Hallbjorn Halftroll of Ravensfood.
(2)  This was no bribe, but his lawful fee.



102. THE WEDDING OF HAUSKULD, THE PRIEST OF WHITENESS

Now we must take up the story, and say that Njal spoke thus to
Hauskuld, his foster-son, and said, "I would seek thee a match."

Hauskuld bade him settle the matter as he pleased, and asked
whether he was most likely to turn his eyes.

"There is a woman called Hildigunna," answers Njal, "and she is
the daughter of Starkad, the son of Thord Freyspriest.  She is
the best match I know of."

"See thou to it, foster-father," said Hauskuld; "that shall be my
choice which thou choosest."

"Then we will look thitherward," says Njal.

A little while after, Njal called on men to go along with him. 
Then the sons of Sigfus, and Njal's sons, and Kari Solmund's son,
all of them fared with him and they rode east to Swinefell.

There they got a hearty welcome.

The day after, Njal and Flosi went to talk alone, and the speech
of Njal ended thus, that he said, "This is my errand here, that
we have set out on a wooing-journey, to ask for thy kinswoman
Hildigunna."

"At whose hand?" says Flosi.

"At the hand of Hauskuld, my foster-son," says Njal.

"Such things are well meant," says Flosi, "but still ye run each
of you great risk, the one from the other; but what hast thou to
say of Hauskuld?"

"Good I am able to say of him," says Njal; "and besides, I will
lay down as much money as will seem fitting to thy niece and
thyself, if thou wilt think of making this match.

"We will call her hither," says Flosi, "and know how she looks on
the man."

Then Hildigunna was called, and she came thither.

Flosi told her of the wooing, but she said she was a proudhearted
woman.

"And I know not how things will turn out between me and men of
like spirit; but this, too, is not the least of my dislike, that
this man has no priesthood or leadership over men, but thou hast
always said that thou wouldest not wed me to a man who had not
the priesthood."

"This is quite enough," says Flosi, "if thou wilt not be wedded
to Hauskuld, to make me take no more pains about the match."

"Nay! " she says, "I do not say that I will not be wedded to
Hauskuld if they can get him a priesthood or a leadership over
men; but otherwise I will have nothing to say to the match."

"Then," said Njal, "I will beg thee to let this match stand over
for three winters, that I may see what I can do."

Flosi said that so it should be.

"I will only bargain for this one thing," says Hildigunna, "if
this match comes to pass, that we shall stay here away east."

Njal said he would rather leave that to Hauskuld, but Hauskuld
said that he put faith in many men, but in none so much as his
foster-father.

Now they ride from the east.

Njal sought to get a priesthood and leadership for Hauskuld, but
no one was willing to sell his priesthood, and now the summer
passes away till the Althing.

There were great quarrels at the Thing that summer, and many a
man then did as was their wont, in faring to see Njal; but he
gave such counsel in men's lawsuits as was not thought at all
likely, so that both the pleadings and the defence came to
naught, and out of that great strife arose, when the lawsuits
could not be brought to an end, and men rode home from the Thing
unatoned.

Now things go on till another Thing comes.  Njal rode to the
Thing, and at first all is quiet until Njal says that it is high
time for men to give notice of their suits.

Then many said that they thought that came to little, when no man
could get his suit settled, even though the witnesses were
summoned to the Althing, "and so," say they, "we would rather
seek our rights with point and edge."

"So it must not be," says Njal, "for it will never do to have no
law in the land.  But yet ye have much to say on your side in
this matter, and it behoves us who know the law, and who are
bound to guide the law, to set men at one again, and to ensue
peace.  'Twere good counsel, then, methinks, that we call
together all the chiefs and talk the matter over."

Then they go to the Court of Laws, and Njal spoke and said,
"Thee, Skapti Thorod's son and you other chiefs, I call on, and
say, that methinks our lawsuits have come into a dead lock, if we
have to follow up our suits in the Quarter Courts, and they get
so entangled that they can neither be pleaded nor ended. 
Methinks, it were wiser if we had a Fifth Court, and there
pleaded those suits which cannot be brought to an end in the
Quarter Courts."

"How," said Skapti, "wilt thou name a Fifth Court, when the
Quarter Court is named for the old priesthoods, three twelves in
each quarter?"

"I can see help for that," says Njal, "by setting up new
priesthoods, and filling them with the men who are best fitted in
each Quarter, and then let those men who are willing to agree to
it, declare themselves ready to join the new priest's Thing."

"Well," says Skapti, "we will take this choice; but what weighty
suits shall come before the court?"

"These matters shall come before it," says Njal, -- "all matters
of contempt of the Thing, such as if men bear false witness, or
utter a false finding; hither, too, shall come all those suits in
which the judges are divided in opinion in the Quarter Court;
then they shall be summoned to the Fifth Court; so, too, if men
offer bribes, or take them, for their help in suits.  In this
court all the oaths shall be of the strongest kind, and two men
shall follow every oath, who shall support on their words of
honour what the others swear.  So it shall be also, if the
pleadings on one side are right in form, and the other wrong,
that the judgment shall be given for those that are right in
form.  Every suit in this court shall be pleaded just as is now
done in the Quarter Court, save and except that when four twelves
are named in the Fifth Court, then the plaintiff shall name and
set aside six men out of the court, and the defendant other six;
but if he will not set them aside, then the plaintiff shall name
them and set them aside as he has done with his own six; but if
the plaintiff does not set them aside, then the suit comes to
naught, for three twelves shall utter judgment on all suits.  We
shall also have this arrangement in the Court of Laws, that those
only shall have the right to make or change laws who sit on the
middle bench, and to this bench those only shall be chosen who
are wisest and best.  There, too, shall the Fifth Court sit; but
if those who sit in the Court of Laws are not agreed as to what
they shall allow or bring in as law, then they shall clear the
court for a division, and the majority shall bind the rest; but
if any man who has a seat in the Court be outside the Court of
Laws and cannot get inside it, or thinks himself overborne in the
suit, then he shall forbid them by a protest, so that they can
hear it in the Court, and then he has made all their grants and
all their decisions void and of none effect, and stopped them by
his protest."

After that, Skapti Thorod's son brought the Fifth Court into the
law, and all that was spoken of before.  Then men went to the
Hill of Laws, and men set up new priesthoods: In the
Northlanders' Quarter were these new priesthoods.  The priesthood
of the Melmen in Midfirth, and the Laufesingers' priesthood in
the Eyjafirth.

Then Njal begged for a hearing, and spoke thus: "It is known to
many men what passed between my sons and the men of Gritwater
when they slew Thrain Sigfus' son.  But for all that we settled
the matter; and now I have taken Hauskuld into my house, and
planned a marriage for him if he can get a priesthood anywhere;
but no man will sell his priesthood, and so I will beg you to
give me leave to set up a new priesthood at Whiteness for
Hauskuld."

He got this leave from all, and after that he set up the new
priesthood for Hauskuld; and he was afterwards called Hauskuld,
the Priest of Whiteness.

After that, men ride home from the Thing, and Njal stayed but a
short time at home ere he rides east to Swinefell, and his sons
with him, and again stirs in the matter of the marriage with
Flosi; but Flosi said he was ready to keep faith with them in
everything.

Then Hildigunna was betrothed to Hauskuld, and the day for the
wedding feast was fixed, and so the matter ended.  They then ride
home, but they rode again shortly to the bridal, and Flosi paid
down all her goods and money after the wedding, and all went off
well.

They fared home to Bergthorsknoll, and were there the next year,
and all went well between Hildigunna and Bergthom.  But the next
spring Njal bought land in Ossaby, and hands it over to Hauskuld,
and thither he fares to his own abode.  Njal got him all his
household, and there was such love between them all, that none of
them thought anything that he said or did any worth unless the
others had a share in it.

Hauskuld dwelt long at Ossaby, and each backed the other's
honour, and Njal's sons were always in Hauskuld's company.  Their
friendship was so warm, that each house bade the other to a feast
every harvest, and gave each other great gifts; and so it goes on
for a long while.



103. THE SLAYING OF HAUSKULD NJAL'S SON

There was a man named Lyting; he dwelt at Samstede, and he had to
wife a woman named Steinvora; she was a daughter of Sigfus, and
Thrain's sister.  Lyting was tall of growth and a strong man,
wealthy in goods and ill to deal with.

It happened once that Lyting had a feast in his house at
Samstede, and he had bidden thither Hauskuld and the sons of
Sigfus, and they all came.  There, too, was Grani Gunnar's son,
and Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi Sigurd's son.

Hauskuld Njal's son and his mother had a farm at Holt, and he was
always riding to his farm from Bergthorsknoll, and his path lay
by the homestead at Samstede.  Hauskuld had a son called Amund;
he had been born blind, but for all that he was tall and strong. 
Lytina had two brothers -- the one's name was Hallstein, and the
other's Hallgrim.  They were the most unruly of men, and they
were ever with their brother, for other men could not bear their
temper.

Lyting was out of doors most of that day, but every now and then
he went inside his house.  At last he had gone to his seat, when
in came a woman who had been out of doors, and she said, "You
were too far off to see outside how that proud fellow rode by the
farm-yard!"

"What proud fellow was that," says Lyting "of whom thou
speakest?"

"Hauskuld Njal's son rode here by the yard," she says.

"He rides often here by the farm-yard," said Lyting, "and I can't
say that it does not try my temper; and now I will make thee an
offer, Hauskuld, to go along with thee if thou wilt avenge thy
father and slay Hauskuld Njal's son."

"That I will not do," says Hauskuld, "for then I should repay
Njal, my foster-father, evil for good, and mayst thou and thy
feasts never thrive henceforth."

With that he sprang up away from the board, and made them catch
his horses, and rode home.

Then Lyting said to Grani Gunnar's son, "Thou wert by when Thrain
was slain, and that will still be in thy mind; and thou, too,
Gunnar Lambi's son, and thou, Lambi Sigurd's son.  Now, my will
is that we ride to meet him this evening, and slay him."

"No," says Grani, "I will not fall on Njal's son, and so break
the atonement which good men and true have made."

With like words spoke each man of them, and so, too, spoke all
the sons of Sigfus; and they took that counsel to ride away.

Then Lyting said, when they had gone away, "All men know that I
have taken no atonement for my brother-in-law Thrain, and I shall
never be content that no vengeance -- man for man -- shall be
taken for him."

After that he called on his two brothers to go with him, and
three house-carles as well.  They went on the way to meet
Hauskuld as he came back, and lay in wait for him north of the
farm-yard in a pit; and there they bided till it was about
mideven (1).  Then Hauskuld rode up to them.  They jump up all of
them with their arms, and fall on him.  Hauskuld guarded himself
well, so that for a long while they could not get the better of
him; but the end of it was at last that he wounded Lyting on the
arm, and slew two of his serving-men, and then fell himself. 
They gave Hauskuld sixteen wounds, but they hewed not off the
head from his body.  They fared away into the wood east of
Rangriver, and hid themselves there.

That same evening, Rodny's shepherd found Hauskuld dead, and went
home and told Rodny of her son's slaying.

"Was he surely dead?" she asks; "was his head off?"

"It was not," he says.

"I shall know if I see," she says; "so take thou my horse and
driving gear."

He did so, and got all things ready, and then they went thither
where Hauskuld lay.

She looked at the wounds, and said, "'Tis even as I thought, that
he could not be quite dead, and Njal no doubt can cure greater
wounds."

After that they took the body and laid it on the sledge and drove
to Bergthorsknoll, and drew it into the sheepcote, and made him
sit upright against the wall.

Then they went both of them and knocked at the door, and a house-
carle went to the door.  She steals in by him at once, and goes
till she comes to Njal's bed.

She asked whether Njal were awake?  He said he had slept up to
that time, but was then awake.

"But why art thou come hither so early?"

"Rise thou up," said Rodny, "from thy bed by my rival's side, and
come out, and she too, and thy sons, to see thy son Hauskuld."

They rose and went out.

"Let us take our weapons," said Skarphedinn, "and have them
with us."

Njal said naught at that, and they ran in and came out again
armed.

She goes first till they come to the sheepcote; she goes in and
bade them follow her.  Then she lit a torch, and held it up and
said, "Here, Njal, is thy son Hauskuld, and he hath gotten many
wounds upon him, and now he will need leechcraft."

"I see death marks on him," said Njal, "but no signs of life; but
why hast thou not closed his eyes and nostrils?  see, his
nostrils are still open!"

"That duty I meant for Skarphedinn," she says.

Then Skarphedinn went to close his eyes and nostrils, and said to
his father, "Who, sayest thou, hath slain him?"

"Lyting of Samstede and his brothers must have slain him," says
Njal.

Then Rodny said, "Into thy hands, Skarphedinn, I leave it to take
vengeance for thy brother, and I ween that thou wilt take it
well, though he be not lawfully begotten, and that thou wilt not
be slow to take it."

"Wonderfully do ye men behave," said Bergthora, "when ye slay men
for small cause, but talk and tarry over such as this until no
vengeance at all is taken; and now of this will soon come to
Hauskuld, the Priest of Whiteness, and he will be offering you
atonement, and you will grant him that, but now is the time to
set about it, if ye seek for vengeance."

"Our mother eggs us on now with a just goading," said
Skarphedinn, and sang a song.

     "Well we know the warrior's temper (2),
     One and all, well, father thine,
     But atonement to the mother,
     Snake-land's stem (3) and thee were base;
     He that hoardeth ocean's fire (4)
     Hearing this will leave his home;
     Wound of weapon us hath smitten,
     Worse the lot of those that wait!"

After that they all ran out of the sheepcote, but Rodny went
indoors with Njal, and was there the rest of the night.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Mideven, six o'clock p.m.
(2)  "Warrior's temper," the temper of Hauskuld of Whiteness.
(3)  "Snake-land's stem," a periphrasis for woman, Rodny.
(4)  "He that hoardeth ocean's fire," a periphrasis for man,
     Hauskuld of Whiteness.



104. THE SLAYING OF LYTING'S BROTHERS

Now we must speak of Skarphedinn and his brothers, how they bend
their course up to Rangriver.  Then Skarphedinn said, "Stand we
here and listen, and let us go stilly, for I hear the voices of
men up along the river's bank.  But will ye, Helgi and Grim, deal
with Lyting single-handed, or with both his brothers?"

They said they would sooner deal with Lyting alone.

"Still," says Skarphedinn, "there is more game in him, and
methinks it were ill if he gets away, but I trust myself best for
not letting him escape."

"We will take such steps," says Helgi, "if we get a chance at
him, that he shall not slip through our fingers."

Then they went thitherward, where they heard the voices of men,
and see where Lyting and his brothers are by a stream.

Skarphedinn leaps over the stream at once, and alights on the
sandy brink on the other side.  There upon it stands Hallgrim and
his brother.  Skarphedinn smites at Hallgrim's thigh, so that he
cut the leg clean off, but he grasps Hallstein with his left
hand.  Lyting thrust at Skarphedinn, but Helgi came up then and
threw his shield before the spear, and caught the blow on it. 
Lyting took up a stone and hurled it at Skarphedinn, and he lost
his hold on Hallstein.  Hallstein sprang up the sandy bank, but
could get up it in no other way than by crawling on his hands and
knees.  Skarphedinn made a side blow at him with his axe, "the
ogress of war," and hews asunder his backbone.  Now Lyting turns
and flies, but Helgi and Grim both went after him, and each gave
him a wound, but still Lyting got across the river away from
them, and so to the horses, and gallops till he comes to Ossaby.

Hauskuld was at home, and meets him at once.  Lyting told him of
these deeds.

"Such things were to be looked for by thee," says Hauskuld. 
"Thou hast behaved like a madman, and here the truth of the old
saw will be proved; `but a short while is hand fain of blow.'
Methinks what thou hast got to look to now is whether thou wilt
be able to save thy life or not."

"Sure enough," says Lyting, "I had hard work to get away, but
still I wish now that thou wouldest get me atoned with Njal and
his sons, so that I might keep my farm."

"So it shall be," says Hauskuld.

After that Hauskuld made them saddle his horse, and rode to
Bergthorsknoll with five men.  Njal's sons were then come home
and had laid them down to sleep.

Hauskuld went at once to see Njal, and they began to talk.

"Hither am I come," said Hauskuld to Njal, "to beg a boon on
behalf of Lyting, my uncle.  He has done great wickedness against
you and yours, broken his atonement and slain thy son."

"Lyting will perhaps think," said Njal, "that he has already paid
a heavy fine in the loss of his brothers, but if I grant him any
terms, I shall let him reap the good of my love for thee, and I
will tell thee before I utter the award of atonement, that
Lyting's brothers shall fall as outlaws.  Nor shall Lyting have
any atonement for his wounds, but on the other hand, he shall pay
the full blood-fine for Hauskuld."

"My wish," said Hauskuld, "is, that thou shouldest make thine own
terms."

"Well," says Njal, "then I will utter the award at once if thou
wilt."

"Wilt thou," says Hauskuld, "that thy sons should be by?"

"Then we should be no nearer an atonement than we were before,"
says Njal, "but they will keep to the atonement which I utter."

Then Hauskuld said, "Let us close the matter then, and handsel
him peace on behalf of thy sons."

"So it shall be," says Njal.  "My will then is, that he pays two
hundred in silver for the slaying of Hauskuld, but he may still
dwell at Samstede; and yet I think it were wiser if he sold his
land and changed his abode; but not for this quarrel; neither I
nor my sons will break our pledges of peace to him; but methinks
it may be that some one may rise up in this country against whom
he may have to be on his guard.  Yet, lest it should seem that I
make a man an outcast from his native place, I allow him to be
here in this neighbourhood, but in that case he alone is
answerable for what may happen."

After that Hauskuld fared home, and Njal's sons woke up as he
went and asked their father who had come, but he told them that
his foster-son Hauskuld had been there.

"He must have come to ask a boon for Lyting then," said
Skarphedinn.

"So it was," says Njal.

"Ill was it then," says Grim.

"Hauskuld could not have thrown his shield before him," says
Njal, "if thou hadst slain him, as it was meant thou shouldst."

"Let us throw no blame on our father," says Skarphedinn.

Now it is to be said that this atonement was kept between them
afterwards.



105. OF AMUND THE BLIND

That event happened three winters after at the Thingskala-Thing
that Amund the Blind was at the Thing; he was the son of Hauskuld
Njal's son.  He made men lead him about among the booths, and so
he came to the booth inside which was Lyting of Samstede.  He
made them lead him into the booth till he came before Lyting.

"Is Lyting of Samstede here?" he asked.

"What dost thou want?" says Lyting.

"I want to know," says Amund, "what atonement thou wilt pay me
for my father.  I am base-born, and I have touched no fine."

"I have atoned for the slaying of thy father," says Lyting, "with
a full price, and thy father's father and thy father's brothers
took the money; but my brothers fell without a price as outlaws;
and so it was that I had both done an ill deed, and paid dear for
it."

"I ask not," says Amund, "as to thy having paid an atonement to
them.  I know that ye two are now friends, but I ask this, what
atonement thou wilt pay to me?"

"None at all," says Lyting.

"I cannot see," says Amund, "how thou canst have right before
God, when thou hast stricken me so near the heart; but all I can
say is, that if I were blessed with the sight of both my eyes, I
would have either a money fine for my father, or revenge man for
man, and so may God judge between us."

After that he went out; but when he came to the door of the
booth, he turned short round towards the inside.  Then his eyes
were opened, and he said, "Praised be the Lord!  Now I see what
his will is."

With that he ran straight into the booth until he comes before
Lyting, and smites him with an axe on the head, so that it sunk
in up to the hammer, and gives the axe a pull towards him.

Lyting fell forwards and was dead at once.

Amund goes out to the door of the booth, and when he got to the
very same spot on which he had stood when his eyes were opened,
lo! they were shut again, and he was blind all his life after.

Then he made them lead him to Njal and his sons, and he told them
of Lyting's slaying.

"Thou mayest not be blamed for this," says Njal, "for such things
are settled by a higher power; but it is worth while to take
warning from such events, lest we cut any short who have such
near claims as Amund had."

After that Njal offered an atonement to Lyting's kinsmen. 
Hauskuld the Priest of Whiteness had a share in bringing Lyting's
kinsmen to take the fine, and then the matter was put to an
award, and half the fines fell away for the sake of the claim
which he seemed to have on Lyting.

After that men came forward with pledges of peace and good faith,
and Lyting's kinsmen granted pledges to Amund.  Men rode home
from the Thing; and now all is quiet for a long while.



106. OF VALGARD THE GUILEFUL

Valgard the Guileful came back to Iceland that summer; he was
then still heathen.  He fared to Hof to his son Mord's house, and
was there the winter over.  He said to Mord, "Here I have ridden
far and wide all over the neighbourhood, and methinks I do not
know it for the same.  I came to Whiteness, and there I saw many
tofts of booths and much ground levelled for building.  I came to
Thingskala-Thing, and there I saw all our booths broken down. 
What is the meaning of such strange things?

"New priesthoods," answers Mord, "have been set up here, and a
law for a Fifth Court, and men have declared themselves out of my
Thing, and have gone over to Hauskuld's Thing."

"Ill hast thou repaid me," said Valgard, "for giving up to thee
my priesthood, when thou hast handled it so little like a man,
and now my wish is that thou shouldst pay them off by something
that will drag them all down to death; and this thou canst do by
setting them by the ears by talebearing, so that Njal's sons may
slay Hauskuld; but there are many who will have the blood-feud
after him, and so Njal's sons will be slain in that quarrel."

"I shall never be able to get that done," says Mord.

"I will give thee a plan," says Valgard; "thou shalt ask Njal's
sons to thy house, and send them away with gifts, but thou shalt
keep thy tale-bearing in the background until great friendship
has sprung up between you, and they trust thee no worse than
their own selves.  So wilt thou be able to avenge thyself on
Skarphedinn for that he took thy money from thee after Gunnar's
death; and in this wise, further on, thou wilt be able to seize
the leadership when they are all dead and gone."

This plan they settled between them should be brought to pass;
and Mord said, "I would, father, that thou wouldst take on thee
the new faith.  Thou art an old man.

"I will not do that," says Valgard.  "I would rather that thou
shouldst cast off the faith, and see what follows then."

Mord said he would not do that.  Valgard broke crosses before
Mord's face, and all holy tokens.  A little after Valgard took a
sickness and breathed his last, and he was laid in a cairn by
Hof.



107. OF MORD AND NJAL'S SONS

Some while after Mord rode to Bergthorsknoll and saw Skarphedinn
there; he fell into very fair words with them, and so he talked
the whole day, and said he wished to be good friends with them,
and to see much of them.

Skarphedinn took it all well, but said he had never sought for
anything of the kind before.  So it came about that he got
himself into such great friendship with them, that neither side
thought they had taken any good counsel unless the other had a
share in it.

Njal always disliked his coming thither, and it often happened
that he was angry with him.

It happened one day that Mord came to Bergthorsknoll, and Mord
said to Njal's sons, "I have made up my mind to give a feast
yonder, and I mean to drink in my heirship after my father, but
to that feast I wish to bid you, Njal's sons, and Kari; and at
the same time I give you my word that ye shall not fare away
giftless."

They promised to go, and now he fares home and makes ready the
feast.  He bade to it many householders, and that feast was very
crowded.

Thither came Njal's sons and Kari.  Mord gave Skarphedinn a
brooch of gold, and a silver belt to Kari, and good gifts to Grim
and Helgi.

They come home and boast of these gifts, and show them to Njal. 
He said they would be bought full dear, "and take heed that ye do
not repay the giver in the coin which he no doubt wishes to get."



108. OF THE SLANDER OF MORD VALGARD'S SON.

A little after Njal's sons and Hauskuld were to have their yearly
feasts, and they were the first to bid Hauskuld to come to them.

Skarphedinn had a brown horse four winters old, both tall and
sightly.  He was a stallion, and had never yet been matched in
fight.  That horse Skarphedinn gave to Hauskuld, and along with
him two mares.  They all gave Hauskuld gifts, and assured him of
their friendship.

After that Hauskuld bade them to his house at Ossaby, and had
many guests to meet them, and a great crowd.

It happened that he had just then taken down his hall, but he had
built three outhouses, and there the beds were made.

So all that were bidden came, and the feast went off very well. 
But when men were to go home Hauskuld picked out good gifts for
them, and went a part of the way with Njal's sons.

The sons of Sigfus followed him and all the crowd, and both sides
said that nothing should ever come between them to spoil their
friendship.

A little while after Mord came to Ossaby and called Hauskuld out
to talk with him, and they went aside and spoke.

"What a difference in manliness there is," said Mord, "between
thee and Njal's sons!  Thou gavest them good gifts, but they gave
thee gifts with great mockery."

"How makest thou that out?" says Hauskuld.

"They gave thee a horse which they called a `dark horse,' and
that they did out of mockery to thee, because they thought thee
too untried.  I can tell thee also that they envy thee the
priesthood.  Skarphedinn took it up as his own at the Thing when
thou camest not to the Thing at the summoning of the Fifth Court,
and Skarphedinn never means to let it go."

"That is not true," says Hauskuld, "for I got it back at the
Folkmote last harvest."

"Then that was Njal's doing," says Mord.  "They broke, too, the
atonement about Lyting."

"I do not mean to lay that at their door," says Hauskuld.

"Well," says Mord, "thou canst not deny that when ye two,
Skarphedinn and thou, were going east towards Markfleet, an axe
fell out from under his belt, and he meant to have slain thee
then and there."

"It was his woodman's axe," says Hauskuld, "and I saw how he put
it under his belt; and now, Mord, I will just tell thee this
right out, that thou canst never say so much ill of Njal's sons
as to make me believe it; but though there were aught in it, and
it were true as thou sayest, that either I must slay them or they
me, then would I far rather suffer death at their hands than work
them any harm.  But as for thee, thou art all the worse a man for
having spoken this."

After that Mord fares home.  A little after Mord goes to see
Njal's sons, and he talks much with those brothers and Kari.

"I have been told," says Mord, "that Hauskuld has said that thou,
Skarphedinn, hast broken the atonement made with Lyting; but I
was made aware also that he thought that thou hadst meant some
treachery against him when ye two fared to Markfleet.  But still,
methinks that was no less treachery when he bade you to a feast
at his house, and stowed you away in an outhouse that was
farthest from the house, and wood was then heaped round the
outhouse all night, and he meant to burn you all inside; but it
so happened that Hogni Gunnar's son came that night, and naught
came of their onslaught, for they were afraid of him.  After that
he followed you on your way and great band of men with him, then
he meant to make another onslaught on you, and set Grani Gunnar's
son, and Gunnar Lambi's son to kill thee; but their hearts failed
them, and they dared not to fall on thee."

But when he had spoken thus, first of all they spoke against it,
but the end of it was that they believed him, and from that day
forth a coldness sprung up on their part towards Hauskuld, and
they scarcely ever spoke to him when they met; but Hauskuld
showed them little deference, and so things went on for a while.

Next harvest Hauskuld fared east to Swinefell to a feast, and
Flosi gave him a hearty welcome.  Hildigunna was there too.  Then
Flosi spoke to Hauskuld and said, "Hildigunna tells me that there
is great coldness with you and Njal's sons, and methinks that is
ill, and I will beg thee not to ride west, but I will get thee a
homestead in Skaptarfell, and I will send my brother, Thorgeir,
to dwell at Ossaby."

"Then some will say," says Hauskuld, "that I am flying thence for
fear's sake, and that I will not have said."

"Then it is more likely that great trouble will arise," says
Flosi.

"Ill is that then," says Hauskuld, "for I would rather fall
unatoned, than that many should reap ill for my sake."

Hauskuld busked him to ride home a few nights after, but Flosi
gave him a scarlet cloak, and it was embroidered with needlework
down to the waist.

Hauskuld rode home to Ossaby, and now all is quiet for a while.

Hauskuld was so much beloved that few men were his foes, but the
same ill-will went on between him and Njal's sons the whole
winter through.

Njal had taken as his foster-child, Thord, the son of Kari.  He
had also fostered Thorhall, the son of Asgrim Ellidagrim's son. 
Thorhall was a strong man, and hardy both in body and mind, he
had learnt so much law that he was the third greatest lawyer in
Iceland.

Next spring was an early spring, and men are busy sowing their
corn.



109. OF MORD AND NJAL'S SONS

It happened one day that Mord came to Berathorsknoll.  He and
Kari and Njal's sons fell a-talking at once, and Mord slanders
Hauskuld after his wont, and has now many new tales to tell, and
does naught but egg Skarphedinn and them on to slay Hauskuld, and
said he would be beforehand with them if they did not fall on him
at once.

"I will let thee have thy way in this," says Skarphedinn, "if
thou wilt fare with us, and have some hand in it."

"That I am ready to do," says Mord, and so they bound that fast
with promises, and he was to come there that evening.

Bergthora asked Njal, "What are they talking about out of doors?"

"I am not in their counsels," says Njal, "but I was seldom left
out of them when their plans were good."

Skarphedinn did not lie down to rest that evening, nor his
brothers, nor Kari.

That same night, when it was well-nigh spent, came Mord Valgard's
son, and Njal's sons and Kari took their weapons and rode away. 
They fared till they came to Ossaby, and bided there by a fence. 
The weather was good, and the sun just risen.



110. THE SLAYING OF HAUSKULD, THE PRIEST OFWHITENESS

About that time Hauskuld, the Priest of Whiteness, awoke; he put
on his clothes, and threw over him his cloak, Flosi's gift.  He
took his corn-sieve, and had his sword in his other hand, and
walks towards the fence, and sows the corn as he goes.

Skarphedinn and his band had agreed that they would all give
him a wound.  Skarphedinn sprang up from behind the fence, but
when Hauskuld saw him he wanted to turn away, then Skarphedinn
ran up to him and said, "Don't try to turn on thy heel, Whiteness
priest," and hews at him, and the blow came on his head, and he
fell on his knees.  Hauskuld said these words when he fell, "God
help me, and forgive you!"

Then they all ran up to him and gave him wounds.

After that Mord said, "A plan comes into my mind."

"What is that?" says Skarphedinn.

"That I shall fare home as soon as I can, but after that I will
fare up to Gritwater, and tell them the tidings, and say 'tis an
ill deed; but I know surely that Thorgerda will ask me to give
notice of the slaying, and I will do that, for that will be the
surest way to spoil their suit.  I will also send a man to Ossaby
and know how soon they take any counsel in the matter, and that
man will learn all these tidings thence, and I will make believe
that I have heard them from him."

"Do so by all means," says Skarphedinn.

Those brothers fared home, and Kari with them, and when they came
home they told Njal the tidings.

"Sorrowful tidings are these," says Njal, "and such are ill to
hear, for sooth to say this grief touches me so nearly, that
methinks it were better to have lost two of my sons and that
Hauskuld lived."

"It is some excuse for thee," says Skarphedinn, "that thou art
an old man, and it is to be looked for that this touches thee
nearly."

"But this," says Njal, "no less than old age, is why I grieve,
that I know better than thou what will come after."

"What will come after?" says Skarphedinn.

"My death," says Njal, "and the death of my wife and of all my
sons."

"What dost thou foretell for me?" says Kari.

"They will have hard work to go against thy good fortune, for
thou wilt be more than a match for all of them."

This one thing touched Njal so nearly that he could never speak
of it without shedding tears.



111. OF HILDIGNNA AND MORD VALGARD'S SON

Hildigunna woke up and found that Hauskuld was away out of his
bed.

"Hard have been my dreams," she said, "and not good; but go and
search for him, Hauskuld."

So they searched for him about the homestead and found him not.

By that time she had dressed herself; then she goes and two men
with her, to the fence, and there they find Hauskuld slain.

Just then, too, came up Mord Valgard's son's shepherd, and told
her that Njal's sons had gone down thence, "and," he said,
"Skarphedinn called out to me and gave notice of the slaying as
done by him."

"It were a manly deed," she says, "if one man had been at it."

She took the cloak and wiped off all the blood with it, and
wrapped the gouts of gore up in it, and so folded it together and
laid it up in her chest.

Now she sent a man up to Gritwater to tell the tidings thither,
but Mord was there before him, and had already told the tidings. 
There, too, was come Kettle of the Mark.

Thorgerda said to Kettle, "Now is Hauskuld dead as we know, and
now bear in mind what thou promisedst to do when thou tookest him
for thy fosterchild."

"It may well be," says Kettle, "that I promised very many things
then, for I thought not that these days would ever befall us that
have now come to pass; but yet I am come into a strait, for `nose
is next of kin to eyes,' since I have Njal's daughter to wife."

"Art thou willing, then," says Thorgerda, "that Mord should give
notice of the suit for the slaying?"

"I know not that," says Kettle, "for me ill comes from him more
often than good."

But as soon as ever Mord began to speak to Kettle he fared the
same as others, in that he thought as though Mord would be true
to him, and so the end of their counsel was that Mord should give
notice of the slaying, and get ready the suit in every way before
the Thing.

Then Mord fared down to Ossaby, and thither came nine neighbours
who dwelt nearest the spot.

Mord had ten men with him.  He shows the neighbours Hauskuld's
wounds, and takes witness to the hurts, and names a man as the
dealer of every wound save one; that he made as though he knew
not who had dealt it, but that wound he had dealt himself.  But
the slaying he gave notice of at Skarphedinn's hand, and the
wounds at his brothers' and Kari's.

After that he called on nine neighbours who dwelt nearest the
spot to ride away from home to the Althing on the inquest.

After that he rode home.  He scarce ever met Njal's sons, and
when he did meet them, he was cross, and that was part of their
plan.

The slaying of Hauskuld was heard over all the land, and was
ill-spoken of.  Njal's sons went to see Asgrim Ellidagrim's son,
and asked him for aid.

"Ye very well know that ye may look that I shall help you in all
great suits, but still my heart is heavy about this suit, for
there are many who have the blood feud, and this slaying is ill-
spoken of over all the land."

Now Njal's sons fare home.



112. THE PEDIGREE OF GUDMUND THE POWERFUL

There was a man named Gudmund the Powerful, who dwelt at
Modruvale in Eyjafirth.  He was the son of Eyjolf the son of
Einar (1).  Gudmund was a mighty chief, wealthy in goods; he had
in his house a hundred hired servants.  He overbore in rank and
weight all the chiefs in the north country, so that some left
their homesteads, but some he put to death, and some gave up
their priesthoods for his sake, and from him are come the
greatest part of all the picked and famous families in the land,
such as "the Pointdwellers" and the "Sturlungs" and the
"Hvamdwellers," and the "Fleetmen," and Kettle the Bishop, and
many of the greatest men.

Gudmund was a friend of Asgrim Ellidagrim's son, and so he hoped
to get his help.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Einar was the son of Audun the Bald, the son of Thorolf
     Butter, the son of Thorstein the Unstable, the son of Grim
     with the Tuft.  The mother of Gudmund was Hallberg, the
     daughter of Thorodd Helm, but the mother of Hallbera was
     Reginleifa, daughter of Saemund the South-islander; after
     him is named Saemundslithe in Skagafirth.  The mother of
     Eyjolf, Gudmund's father, was Valgerda Runolf's daughter;
     the mother of Valgerda was Valbjorg, her mother was Joruna
     the Disowned, a daughter of King Oswald the Saint.  The
     mother of Einar, the father of Eyjolf, was Helga, a daughter
     of Helgi the Lean, who took Eyjafirth as the first settler. 
     Helgi was the son of Eyvind the Easterling.  The mother of
     Helgi was Raforta, the daughter of Kjarval, the Erse King. 
     The mother of Helga Helgi's daughter, was Thoruna the
     Horned, daughter of Kettle Flatnose, the son of Bjorn the
     Rough-footed, the son of Grim, Lord of Sogn.  The mother of
     Grim was Hervora, but the mother of Hervora was Thorgerda,
     daughter of King Haleyg of Helgeland.  Thorlauga was the
     name of Gudmund the Powerful's wife, she was a daughter of
     Atli the Strong, the son of Eilif the Eagle.  the son of
     Bard, the son of Jalkettle, the son of Ref, the son of Skidi
     the Old.  Herdisa was the name of Thorlauga's mother, a
     daughter of Thord of the Head, the son of Bjorn Butter-
     carrier, the son of Hroald the son of Hrodlaug the Sad, the
     son of Bjorn Ironside, the son of Ragnar Hairybreeks, the
     son of Sigurd Ring, the son of Randver, the son of Radbard. 
     The mother of Herdisa Thord's daughter was Thorgerda Skidi's
     daughter, her mother was Fridgerda, a daughter of Kjarval,
     the Erse King.



113. OF SNORRI THE PRIEST, AND HIS STOCK

There was a man named Snorri, who was surnamed the Priest.  He
dwelt at Helgafell before Gudruna Oswif's daughter bought the
land of him, and dwelt there till she died of old age; but Snorri
then went and dwelt at Hvamsfirth on Saelingdale's tongue. 
Thorgrim was the name of Snorri's father, and he was a son of
Thorstein codcatcher (1).  Snorri was a great friend of Asgrim
Ellidagrim's son, and he looked for help there also.  Snorri was
the wisest and shrewdest of all these men in Iceland who had not
the gift of foresight.  He was good to his friends, but grim to
his foes.

At that time there was a great riding to the Thing out of all the
Quarters, and men had many suits set on foot.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thorstein Codcatcher was the son of Thorolf Mostrarskegg,
     the son of Ornolf Fish-driver, but Ari the Wise ways he was
     the son of Thorgil Reydarside.  Thorolf Mostrarskegg had to
     wife Oska, the daughter of Thorstein the Red.  The mother of
     Thorgrim was named Thora, a daughter of Oleif the Shy, the
     son of Thorstein the Red, the son of Oleif the White, the
     son of Ingialld, the son of Helgi; but the mother of
     Ingialld was Thora, a daughter of Sigurd Snake-eye, son of
     Ragnar Hairybreeks; but the mother of Snorri the Priest was
     Thordisa, the daughter of Sur, and the sister of Gisli.



114. OF FLOSI THORD'S SON

Flosi hears of Hauskuld's slaying, and that brings him much grief
and wrath, but still he kept his feelings well in hand.  He was
told how the suit had been set on foot, as has been said, for
Hauskuld's slaying, and he said little about it.  He sent word to
Hall of the Side, his father-in-law, and to Ljot his son, that
they must gather in a great company at the Thing.  Ljot was
thought the most hopeful man for a chief away there east.  It had
been foretold that if he could ride three summers running to the
Thing, and come safe and sound home, that then he would be the
greatest chief in all his family, and the oldest man.  He had
then ridden one summer to the Thing, and now he meant to ride the
second time.

Flosi sent word to Kol Thorstein's son, and Glum the son of
Hilldir the Old, the son of Gerleif, the son of Aunund Wallet-
back, and to Modolf Kettle's son, and they all rode to meet
Flosi.

Hall gave his word, too, to gather a great company, and Flosi
rode till he came to Kirkby, to Surt Asbjorn's son.  Then Flosi
sent after Kolbein Egil's son, his brother's son, and he came to
him there.  Thence he rode to Headbrink.  There dwelt Thorgrim
the Showy, the son of Thorkel the Fair.  Flosi begged him to ride
to the Althing with him, and he said yea to the journey, and
spoke thus to Flosi, "Often hast thou been more glad, master,
than thou art now, but thou hast some right to be so."

"Of a truth," said Flosi, "that hath now come on my hands, which
I would give all my goods that it had never happened.  Ill seed
has been sown, and so an ill crop will spring from it."

Thence he rode over Amstacksheath, and so to Solheim that
evening.  There dwelt Lodmund Wolf's son, but he was a great
friend of Flosi, and there he stayed that night, and next morning
Lodmund rode with him into the Dale.

There dwelt RunoIf, the son of Wolf Aurpriest.

Flosi said to Runolf, "Here we shall have true stories as to the
slaying of Hauskuld, the Priest of Whiteness.  Thou art a
truthful man, and hast got at the truth by asking, and I will
trust to all that thou tellest me as to what was the cause of
quarrel between them."

"There is no good in mincing the matter," said Runolf, "but we
must say outright that he has been slain for less than no cause;
and his death is a great grief to all men.  No one thinks it so
much a loss as Njal, his foster-father."

"Then they will be ill off for help from men," says Flosi; "and
they will find no one to speak up for them."

"So it will be," says Runolf, "unless it be otherwise
foredoomed."

"What has been done in the suit?" says Flosi.

"Now the neighbours have been summoned on the inquest," says
Runolf, "and due notice given of the suit for manslaughter."

"Who took that step?" asks Flosi.

"Mord Valgard's son," says Runolf.

"How far is that to be trusted?" says Flosi.

"He is of my kin," says Runolf; "but still if I tell the truth of
him, I must say that more men reap ill than good from him.  But
this one thing I will ask of thee, Flosi, that thou givest rest
to thy wrath, and takest the matter up in such a way as may lead
to the least trouble.  For Njal will make a good offer, and so
will others of the best men."

"Ride thou then to the Thing, Runolf," said Flosi, "and thy words
shall have much weight with me, unless things turn out worse than
they should."

After that they cease speaking about it, and Runolf promised to
go to the Thing.

Runolf sent word to Hafr the Wise, his kinsman, and he rode
thither at once.

Thence Flosi rode to Ossaby.



115. OF FLOSI AND HILDIGUNNA

Hildigunna was out of doors, and said, "Now shall all the men of
my household be out of doors when Flosi rides into the yard; but
the women shall sweep the house and deck it with hangings, and
make ready the high seat for Flosi."

Then Flosi rode into the town, and Hildigunna turned to him and
said, "Come in safe and sound and happy kinsman, and my heart is
fain at thy coming hither."

"Here," says Flosi, "we will break our fast, and then we will
ride on."

Then their horses were tethered, and Flosi went into the sitting-
room and sat him down, and spurned the high seat away from him on
the dais, and said, "I am neither king nor earl, and there is no
need to make a high seat for me to sit on, nor is there any need
to make a mock of me."

Hildigunna was standing close by, and said, "It is ill if it
mislikes thee, for this we did with a whole heart."

"If thy heart is whole towards me, then what I do will praise
itself if it be well done, but it will blame itself if it be ill
done."

Hildigunna laughed a cold laugh, and said, "There is nothing new
in that, we will go nearer yet ere we have done."

She sat her down by Flosi, and they talked long and low.

After that the board was laid, and Flosi and his band washed
their hands.  Flosi looked hard at the towel and saw that it was
all in rags, and had one end torn off.  He threw it down on the
bench and would not wipe himself with it, but tore off a piece of
the tablecloth, and wiped himself with that, and then threw it to
his men.

After that Flosi sat down to the board and bade men eat.

Then Hildigunna came into the room and went before Flosi, and
threw her hair off her eyes and wept.

"Heavy-hearted art thou now, kinswoman," said Flosi, "when thou
weepest, but still it is well that thou shouldst weep for a good
husband."

"What vengeance or help shall I have of thee?" she says.

"I will follow up thy suit," said Flosi, "to the utmost limit of
the law, or strive for that atonement which good men and true
shall say that we ought to have as full amends."

"Hauskuld would avenge thee," she said, "if he had the blood-feud
after thee."

"Thou lackest not grimness," answered Flosi, "and what thou
wantest is plain."

"Arnor Ornolf's son, of Forswaterwood," said Hildigunna, "had
done less wrong towards Thord Frey's priest thy father; and yet
thy brothers Kolbein and Egil slew him at Skaptarfells-Thing."

Then Hildigunna went back into the hall and unlocked her chest,
and then she took out the cloak, Flosi's gift, and in it Hauskuld
had been slain, and there she had kept it, blood and all.  Then
she went back into the sitting-room with the Cloak; she went up
silently to Flosi.  Flosi had just then eaten his full, and the
board was cleared.  Hildigunna threw the cloak over Flosi, and
the gore rattled down all over him.

Then she spoke and said, "This cloak, Flosi, thou gavest to
Hauskuld, and now I will give it back to thee; he was slain in
it, and I call God and all good men to witness, that I abjure
thee, by all the might of thy Christ, and by thy manhood and
bravery, to take vengeance for all those wounds which he had on
his dead body, or else to be called every man's dastard."

Flosi threw the cloak off him and hurled it into her lap, and
said, "Thou art the greatest hell-hag, and thou wishest that we
should take that course which will be the worst for all of us. 
But `women's counsel is ever cruel.'"

Flosi was so stirred at this, that sometimes he was bloodred in
the face, and sometimes ashy pale as withered grass, and
sometimes blue as death.

Flosi and his men rode away; he rode to Holtford, and there waits
for the sons of Sigfus and other of his men.

Ingialld dwelt at the Springs; he was the brother of Rodny,
Hauskuld Njal's son's mother (1).  Ingialld had to wife
Thraslauga, the daughter of Egil, the son of Thord Frey's priest
(2).  Flosi sent word to Ingialld to come to him, and Ingialld
went at once, with fourteen men.  They were all of his household. 
Ingialld was a tall man and a strong, and slow to meddle with
other men's business, one of the bravest of men, and very
bountiful to his friends.

Flosi greeted him well, and said to him, "Great trouble hath now
come on me and my brothers-in-law, and it is hard to see our way
out of it; I beseech thee not to part from my suit until this
trouble is past and gone."

"I am come into a strait myself," said Ingialld, "for the sake of
the ties that there are between me and Njal and his sons, and
other great matters which stand in the way."

"I thought," said Flosi, "when I gave away my brother's daughter
to thee, that thou gavest me thy word to stand by me in every
suit."

"It is most likely," says Ingialld, "that I shall do so, but
still I will now, first of all, ride home, and thence to the
Thing."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  They were children of Hauskuld the White, the son of
     Ingialld the Strong, the son of Gerfinn the Red, the son of
     Solvi, the son of Tborstein Baresarks-bane.
(2)  The mother of Egil was Thraslauga, the daughter of Thorstein
     Titling; the mother of Thraslauga was Unna, the daughter of
     Eyvind Karf.



116. OF FLOSI AND MORD AND THE SONS OF SIGFUS

The sons of Sigfus heard how Flosi was at Holtford, and they rode
thither to meet him, and there were Kettle of the Mark, and Lambi
his brother, Thorkell and Mord, the sons of Sigfus, Sigmund their
brother, and Lambi Sigurd's son, and Gunnar Lambi's son, and
Grani Gunnar's son, and Vebrand Hamond's son.

Flosi stood up to meet them, and greeted them gladly.  So they
went down the river.  Flosi had the whole story from them about
the slaying, and there was no difference between them and Kettle
of the Mark's story.

Flosi spoke to Kettle of the Mark, and said, "This now I ask of
thee; how tightly are your hearts knit as to this suit, thou and
the other sons of Sigfus?"

"My wish is," said Kettle, "that there should be peace between
us, but yet I have sworn an oath not to part from this suit till
it has been brought somehow to an end; and to lay my life on it."

"Thou art a good man and true," said Flosi, "and it is well to
have such men with one."

Then Grani Gunnar's son and Lambi Sigurd's son both spoke
together, and said, "We wish for outlawry and death."

"It is not given us," said Flosi, "both to share and choose, we
must take what we can get."

"I have had it in my heart," says Grani, "ever since they slew
Thrain by Markfleet, and after that his son Hauskuld, never to be
atoned with them by a lasting peace, for I would willingly stand
by when they were all slain, every man of them."

"Thou hast stood so near to them," said Flosi, "that thou
mightest have avenged these things hadst thou had the heart and
manhood.  Methinks thou and many others now ask for what ye would
give much money hereafter never to have had a share in.  I see
this clearly, that though we slay Njal or his sons, still they
are men of so great worth, and of such good family, that there
will be such a blood feud and hue and cry after them, that we
shall have to fall on our knees before many a man, and beg for
help, ere we get an atonement and find our way out of this
strait.  Ye may make up your minds, then, that many will become
poor who before had great goods, but some of vou will lose both
goods and life."

Mord Valgard's son rode to meet Flosi, and said he would ride to
the Thing with him with all his men.  Flosi took that well, and
raised a matter of a wedding with him, that he should give away
Rannveiga his daughter to Starkad Flosi's brother's son, who
dwelt at Staffell.  Flosi did this because he thouoht he would so
make sure both of his faithfulness and force.

Mord took the wedding kindly, but handed the matter over to Gizur
the White, and bade him talk about it at the Thing.

Mord had to wife Thorkatla, Gizur the White's daughter.

They two, Mord and Flosi, rode both together to the Thing, and
talked the whole day, and no man knew aught of their counsel.



117. NJAL AND SKARPHEDINN TALK TOGETHER

Now, we must say how Njal said to Skarphedinn.

"What plan have ye laid down for yourselves, thou and thy
brothers and Kari?"

"Little reck we of dreams in most matters," said Skarphedinn;
"but if thou must know, we shall ride to Tongue to Asgrim
Ellidagrim's son, and thence to the Thing; but, what meanest thou
to do about thine own journey, father?"

"I shall ride to the Thing," says Njal, "for it belongs to my
honour not to be severed from your suit so long as I live.  I
ween that many men will have good words to say of me, and so I
shall stand you in good stead, and do you no harm."

There, too, was Thorhall Asgrim's son, and Njal's fosterson.  The
sons of Njal laughed at him because he was clad in a coat of
russet, and asked how long he meant to wear that?

"I shall have thrown it off," he said, "when I have to follow up
the blood-feud for my foster-father."

"There will ever be most good in thee," said Njal, "when there
is most need of it."

So they all busked them to ride away from home, and were nigh
thirty men in all, and rode till they came to Thursowater.  Then
came after them Njal's kinsmen, Thorleif Crow, and Thorgrim the
Big; they were Holt-Thorir's sons, and offered their help and
following to Njal's sons, and they took that gladly.

So they rode altogether across Thursowater, until they came on
Laxwater bank, and took a rest and baited their horses there, and
there Hjallti Skeggi's son came to meet them, and Njal's sons
fell to talking with him, and they talked long and low.

"Now, I will show," said Hjallti, "that I am not blackhearted;
Njal has asked me for help, and I have agreed to it, and given my
word to aid him; he has often given me and many others the worth
of it in cunning counsel."

Hjallti tells Njal all about Flosi's doings.  They sent Thorhall
on to Tongue to tell Asgrim that they would be there that
evening; and Asgrim made ready at once, and was out of doors to
meet them when Njal rode into the town."

Njal was clad in a blue cape, and had a felt hat on his head, and
a small axe in his hand.  Asgrim helped Njal off his horse, and
led him and sate him down in his own seat.  After that they all
went in, Njal's sons and Kari.  Then Asgrim went out.

Hjallti wished to turn away, and thought there were too many
there; but Asgrim caught hold of his reins, and said he should
never have his way in riding off, and made men unsaddle their
horses, and led Hjallti in and sate him down by Njal's side; but
Thorleif and his brother sat on the other bench and their men
with them.

Asgrim sate him down on a stool before Njal, and asked, "What
says thy heart about our matter?"

"It speaks rather heavily," says Njal, "for I am afraid that we
shall have no lucky men with us in the suit; but I would, friend,
that thou shouldest send after all the men who belong to thy
Thing, and ride to the Althing with me."

"I have always meant to do that," says Asgrim; "and this I will
promise thee at the same time, that I will never leave thy cause
while I can get any men to follow me."

But all those who were in the house thanked him, and said that
was bravely spoken.  They were there that night, but the day
after all Asgrim's band came thither.

And after that they all rode together till they come up on the
Thing-field, and fit up their booths.



118. ASGRIM AND NJAL'S SONS PRAY MEN FOR HELP

By that time Flosi had come to the Thing, and filled all his
booths.  Runolf filled the Dale-dwellers' booths, and Mord the
booths of the men from Rangriver.  Hall of the Side had long
since come from the east, but scarce any of the other men; but
still Hall of the Side had come with a great band, and joined
this at once to Flosi's company, and begged him to take an
atonement and to make peace.

Hall was a wise man and good-hearted.  Flosi answered him well in
everything, but gave way in nothing.

Hall asked what men had promised him help?  Flosi named Mord
Valgard's son, and said he had asked for his daughter at the hand
of his kinsman Starkad.

Hall said she was a good match, but it was ill dealing with Mord,
"And that thou wilt put to the proof ere this Thing be over."

After that they ceased talking.

One day Njal and Asgrim had a long talk in secret.

Then all at once Asgrim sprang up and said to Njal's sons, "We
must set about seeking friends, that we may not be overborne by
force; for this suit will be followed up boldly."

Then Asgrim went out, and Helgi Njal's son next; then Kari
Solmund's son; then Grim Njal's son; then Skarphedinn; then
Thorhall; then Thorgrim the Big; then Thorleif Crow.

They went to the booth of Gizur the White and inside it.  Gizur
stood up to meet them, and bade them sit down and drink.

"Not thitherward," says Asgrim, "tends our way, and we will speak
our errand out loud, and not mutter and mouth about it.  What
help shall I have from thee, as thou art my kinsman?"

"Jorunn, my sister," said Gizur, "would wish that I should not
shrink from standing by thee; and so it shall be now and
hereafter, that we will both of us have the same fate."

Asgrim thanked him, and went away afterwards. 

Then Skarphedinn asked, "Whither shall we go now?"

"To the booths of the men of Olfus," says Asgrim.

So they went thither, and Asgrim asked whether Skapti Thorod's
son were in the booth?  He was told that he was.  Then they went
inside the booth.

Skapti sate on the cross-bench, and greeted Asgrim, and he took
the greeting well.

Skapti offered Asgrim a seat by his side, but Asgrim said he
should only stay there a little while, "But still we have an
errand to thee."

"Let me hear it?" says Skapti.

"I wish to beg thee for thy help, that thou wilt stand by us in
our suit."

"One thing I had hoped," says Skapti, "and that is, that neither
you nor your troubles would ever come into my dwelling."

"Such things are ill-spoken," says Asgrim, "when a man is the
last to help others, when most lies on his aid."

"Who is yon man," says Skapti, "before whom four men walk, a big
burly man, and pale-faced, unlucky-looking, well-knit, and
troll-like?"

"My name is Skarphedinn," he answers, "and thou hast often seen
me at the Thing; but in this I am wiser than you, that I have no
need to ask what thy name is.  Thy name is Skapti Thorod's son,
but before thou calledst thyself `Bristlepoll,' after thou hadst
slain Kettle of Elda; then thou shavedst thy poll, and puttedst
pitch on thy head, and then thou hiredst thralls to cut up a sod
of turf, and thou creptest underneath it to spend the night. 
After that thou wentest to Thorolf Lopt's son of Eyrar, and he
took thee on board, and bore thee out here in his meal sacks."

After that Asgrim and his band went out, and Skarphedinn asked,
"Whither shall we go now?"

"To Snorri the Priest's booth," says Asgrim.

Then they went to Snorri's booth.  There was a man outside before
the booth, and Asgrim asked whether Snorri were in the booth.

The man said he was.

Asgrim went into the booth, and all the others.  Snorri was
sitting on the cross-bench, and Asgrim went and stood before him,
and hailed him well.

Snorri took his greeting blithely, and bade him sit down.

Asgrim said he should be only a short time there, "But we have
an errand with thee."

Snorri bade him tell it.

"I would," said Asgrim, "that thou wouldst come with me to the
court, and stand by me with thy help, for thou art a wise man,
and a great man of business."

"Suits fall heavy on us now," says Snorri the Priest, "and now
many men push forward against us, and so we are slow to take up
the troublesome suits of other men from other quarters."

"Thou mayest stand excused," says Asgrim "for thou art not in our
debt for any service."

"I know," says Snorri, "that thou art a good man and true, and
I will promise thee this, that I will not be against thee, and
not yield help to thy foes."

Asgrim thanked him, and Snorri the Priest asked, "Who is that man
before whom four go, pale-faced, and sharp-featured, and who
shows his front teeth, and has his axe aloft on his shoulder."

"My name is Hedinn," he says, "but some men call me Skarphedinn
by my full name; but what more hast thou to say to me."

"This," said Snorri the Priest, "that methinks thou art a well-
knit, ready-handed man, but yet I guess that the best part of thy
good fortune is past, and I ween thou hast now not long to live."

"That is well," says Skarphedinn, "for that is a debt we all have
to pay, but still it were more needful to avenge thy father than
to foretell my fate in this way."

"Many have said that before," says Snorri, "and I will not be
angry at such words."

After that they went out, and got no help there.  Then they fared
to the booths of the men of Skagafirth.  There Hafr (1) the
Wealthy had his booth.  The mother of Hafr was named Thoruna, she
was a daughter of Asbjorn Baldpate of Myrka, the son of
Hrosbjorn.

Asgrim and his band went into the booth, and Hafr sate in the
midst of it, and was talking to a man.

Asgrim went up to him, and bailed him well; he took it kindly,
and bade him sit down.

"This I would ask of thee," said Asgrim, "that thou wouldst
grant me and my sons-in-law help.

Hafr answered sharp and quick, and said he would have nothing to
do with their troubles.

"But still I must ask who that pale-faced man is before whom
four men go, so ill-looking, as though he had come out of the
sea-crags."

"Never mind, milksop that thou art!" said Skarphedinn, "who I
am, for I will dare to go forward wherever thou standest before
me, and little would I fear though such striplings were in my
path.  'Twere rather thy duty, too, to get back thy sister
Swanlauga, whom Eydis Ironsword and his messmate Stediakoll took
away out of thy house, but thou didst not dare to do aught
against them."

"Let us go out," said Asgrim, "there is no hope of help here."

Then they went out to the booths of men of Modruvale, and asked
whether Gudmund the Powerful were in the booth, but they were
told he was.

Then they went into the booth.  There was a high seat in the
midst of it, and there sate Gudmund the Powerful.

Asgrim went and stood before him, and hailed him.

Gudmund took his greeting well, and asked him to sit down.

"I will not sit," said Asgrim, "but I wish to pray thee for help,
for thou art a bold man and a mighty chief."

"I will not be against thee," said Gudmund, "but if I see fit to
yield thee help, we may well talk of that afterwards," and so he
treated them well and kindly in every way.

Asgrim thanked him for his words, and Gudmund said, "There is one
man in your band at whom I have gazed for a while, and he seems
to me more terrible than most men that I have seen."

"Which is he?" says Asgrim.

"Four go before him," says Gudmund; "dark brown is his hair, and
pale is his face; tall of growth and sturdy.  So quick and shifty
in his manliness that I would rather have his following than that
of ten other men; but yet the man is unlucky-looking."

"I know," said Skarphedinn, "that thou speakest at me, but it
does not go in the same way as to luck with me and thee.  I have
blame, indeed, from the slaying of Hauskuld, the Whiteness
Priest, as is fair and right; but both Thorkel Foulmouth and
Thorir Helgi's son spread abroad bad stories about thee, and that
has tried thy temper very much."

Then they went out, and Skarphedinn said, "Whither shall we go
now?"

"To the booths of the men of Lightwater," said Asgrim.

There Thorkel Foulmouth (2) had set up his booth.

Thorkel Foulmouth had been abroad and worked his way to fame in
other lands.  He had slain a robber east in Jemtland's wood, and
then he fared on east into Sweden, and was a messmate of Saurkvir
the Churl, and they harried eastward ho; but to the east of
Baltic side (3) Thorkel had to fetch water for them one evening;
then he met a wild man of the woods (4), and struggled against
him long; but the end of it was that he slew the wild man. 
Thence he fared east into Adalsyssla, and there he slew a flying
fire-drake.  After that he fared back to Sweden, and thence to
Norway, and so out to Iceland, and let these deeds of derring do
be carved over his shut bed, and on the stool before his high
seat.  He fought, too, on Lightwater way with his brothers
against Gudmund the Powerful, and the men of Lightwater won the
day.  He and Thorir Helgi's son spread abroad bad stories about
Gudmund.  Thorkel said there was no man in Iceland with whom he
would not fight in single combat, or yield an inch to, if need
were.  He was called Thorkel Foulmouth, because he spared no one
with whom he had to do either in word or deed.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Hafr was the son of Thorkel, the son of Eric of Gooddale,
     the son of Geirmund, the son of Hroald, the son of Eric
     Frizzlebeard who felled Gritgarth in Soknardale in Norway.
(2)  Thorkel was the son of Thorgeir the Priest, the son of
     Tjorfi, the son of Thorkel the Long; but the mother of
     Thorgeir was Thoruna, the daughter of Thorstein, the son of
     Sigmund, son of Bard of the Nip.  The mother of Thorkel
     Foulmouth was named Gudrida; she was a daughter of Thorkel
     the B1ack of Hleidrargarth, the son of Thorir Tag, the son
     of Kettle the Seal, the son of Ornolf, the son of Bjornolf,
     the son of Grim Hairy-cheek, the son of Kettle Haeing, the
     son of Hallbjorn Halftroll.
(3)  "Baltic side."  This probably means a part of the Finnish
     coast in the Gulf of Bothnia.  See "Fornm. Sogur", xii.
     264-5.
(4)  "Wild man of the woods."  In the original Finngalkn, a
     fabulous monster, half man and half beast.



119. OF SKARPHEDINN AND THORKEL FOULMOUTH

Asgrim and his fellows went to Thorkel Foulmouth's booth, and
Asgrim said then to his companions, "This booth Thorkel Foulmouth
owns, a great champion, and it were worth much to us to get
his-help.  We must here take heed in everything, for he is self-
willed and bad tempered; and now I will beg thee, Skarphedinn,
not to let thyself be led into our talk."

Skarphedinn smiled at that.  He was so clad, he had on a blue
kirtle and grey breeks, and black shoes on his feet, coming high
up his leg; he had a silver belt about him, and that same axe in
his hand with which he slew Thrain, and which he called the
"ogress of war," a round buckler, and a silken band round his
brow, and his hair brushed back behind his ears.  He was the most
soldier-like of men, and by that all men knew him.  He went in
his appointed place, and neither before nor behind.

Now they went into the booth and into its inner chamber.  Thorkel
sate in the middle of the cross-bench, and his men away from him
on all sides.  Asgrim hailed him, and Thorkel took the greeting
well, and Asgrim said to him, "For this have we come hither, to
ask help of thee, and that thou wouldst come to the Court with
us."

"What need can ye have of my help," said Thorkel, "when ye have
already gone to Gudmund; he must surely have promised thee his
help?"

"We could not get his help," says Asgrim.

"Then Gudmund thought the suit likely to make him foes," said
Thorkel; "and so no doubt it will be, for such deeds are the
worst that have ever been done; nor do I know what can have
driven you to come hither to me, and to think that I should be
easier to undertake your suit than Gudmund, or that I would back
a wrongful quarrel."

Then Asgrim held his peace, and thought it would be hard work to
win him over.

Then Thorkel went on and said, "Who is that big and ugly fellow,
before whom four men go, pale-faced and sharp featured, and
unlucky-looking, and cross-grained?"

"My name is Skarphedinn," said Skarphedinn, "and thou hast no
right to pick me out, a guiltless man, for thy railing.  It never
has befallen me to make my father bow down before me, or to have
fought against him, as thou didst with thy father.  Thou hast
ridden little to the Althing, or toiled in quarrels at it, and no
doubt it is handier for thee to mind thy milking pails at home
than to be here at Axewater in idleness.  But stay, it were as
well if thou pickedst out from thy teeth that steak of mare's
rump which thou atest ere thou rodest to the Thing while thy
shepherd looked on all the while, and wondered that thou couldst
work such filthiness!"

Then Thorkel sprang up in mickle wrath, and clutched his short
sword and said, "This sword I got in Sweden when I slew the
greatest champion, but since then I have slain many a man with
it, and as soon as ever I reach thee I will drive it through
thee, and thou shalt take that for thy bitter words."

Skarphedinn stood with his axe aloft, and smiled scornfully and
said, "This axe I had in my hand when I leapt twelve ells across
Markfleet and slew Thrain Sigfus' son, and eight of them stood
before me, and none of them could touch me.  Never have I aimed
weapon at man that I have not smitten him."

And with that he tore himself from his brothers, and Kari his
brother-in-law, and strode forward to Thorkel.

Then Skarphedinn said, "Now, Thorkel Foulmouth, do one of these
two things: sheathe thy sword and sit thee down, or I drive the
axe into thy head and cleave thee down to the chine."

Then Thorkel sate him down and sheathed the sword, and such a
thing never happened to him either before or since.

Then Asgrim and his band go out, and Skarphedinn said, "Whither
shall we now go?"

"Home to our booths," answered Asgrim.

"Then we fare back to our booths wearied of begging," says
Skarphedinn.

"In many places," said Asgrim, "hast thou been rather sharp-
tongued, but here now, in what Thorkel had a share methinks thou
hast only treated him as is fitting,"

Then they went home to their booths, and told Njal, word for
word, all that had been done.

"Things," he said, "draw on to what must be."

Now Gudmund the Powerful heard what has passed between Thorkel
and Skarphedinn, and said, "Ye all know how things fared between
us and the men of Lightwater, but I have never suffered such
scorn and mocking at their hands as has befallen Thorkel from
Skarphedinn, and this is just as it should be."

Then he said to Einar of Thvera, his brother, "Thou shalt go with
all my band, and stand by Njal's sons when the courts go out to
try suits; but if they need help next summer, then I myself will
yield them help."

Einar agreed to that, and sent and told Asgrim, and Asgrim said,
"There is no man like Gudmund for nobleness of mind," and then
he told it to Njal.



120. OF THE PLEADING OF THE SUIT

The next day Asgrim, and Gizur the White, and Hjallti Skeggi's
son, and Einar of Thvera, met together.  There, too, was Mord
Valgard's son; he had then let the suit fall from his hand, and
given it over to the sons of Sigfus.

Then Asgrim spoke.

"Thee first I speak to about this matter, Gizur the White and
thee Hjallti, and thee Einar, that I may tell you how the suit
stands.  It will be known to all of you that Mord took up the
suit, but the truth of the matter is, that Mord was at Hauskuld's
slaying, and wounded him with that wound, for giving which no man
was named.  It seems to me, then, that this suit must come to
naught by reason of a lawful flaw."

"Then we will plead it at once," says Hjallti.

"It is not good counsel," said Thorhall Asgrim's son, "that this
should not be hidden until the courts are set."

"How so?" asks Hjallti.

"If," said Thorhall, "they knew now at once that the suit has
been wrongly set on foot, then they may still save the suit by
sending a man home from the Thing, and summoning the neighbours
from home over again, and calling on them to ride to the Thing,
and then the suit will be lawfully set on foot."

"Thou art a wise man, Thorhall," say they, "and we will take
thy counsel."

After that each man went to his booth.

The sons of Sigfus gave notice of their suits at the Hill of
Laws, and asked in what Quarter Courts they lay, and in what
house in the district the defendants dwelt.  But on the Friday
night the courts were to go out to try suits, and so the Thing
was quiet up to that day.

Many sought to bring about an atonement between them, but Flosi
was steadfast; but others were still more wordy, and things
looked ill.

Now the time comes when the courts were to go out, on the Friday
evening.  Then the whole body of men at the Thing went to the
courts.  Flosi stood south at the court of the men of Rangriver,
and his band with him.  There with him was Hall of the Side, and
Runolf of the Dale, Wolf Aurpriest's son, and those other men who
had promised Flosi help.

But north of the court of the men of Rangriver stood Asgrim
Ellidagrim's son, and Gizur the White, Hjallti Skeggi's son, and
Einar of Thvera.  But Njal's sons were at home at their booth,
and Kari and Thorleif Crow, and Thorgeir Craggeir, and Thorgrim
the Big.  They sate all with their weapons, and their band looked
safe from onslaught.

Njal had already prayed the judges to go into the court, and now
the sons of Sigfus plead their suit.  They took witness and bade
Njal's sons to listen to their oath; after that they took their
oath, and then they declared their suit; then they brought
forward witness of the notice, then they bade the neighbours on
the inquest to take their seats, then they called on Njal's sons
to challenge the inquest.

Then up stood Thorhall Asgrim's son, and took witness, and
forbade the inquest by a protest to utter their finding; and his
ground was, that he who had given notice of the suit was truly
under the ban of the law, and was himself an outlaw.

"Of whom speakest thou this?" says Flosi.

"Mord Valgard's son," said Thorhall, "fared to Hauskuld's slaying
with Njal's sons, and wounded him with that wound for which no
man was named when witness was taken to the death-wounds; and ye
can say nothing against this, and so the suit comes to naught."



121. OF THE AWARD OF ATONEMENT BETWEEN FLOSI AND NJAL

Then Njal stood up and said, "This I pray, Hall of the Side, and
Flosi, and all the sons of Sigfus, and all our men, too, that ye
will not go away but listen to my words."

They did so, and then he spoke thus: "It seems to me as though
this suit were come to naught, and it is likely it should, for it
hath sprung from an ill root.  I will let you all know that I
loved Hauskuld more than my own sons, and when I heard that he
was slain, methought the sweetest light of my eyes was quenched,
and I would rather have lost all my sons, and that he were alive. 
Now I ask thee, Hall of the Side, and thee Runolf of the Dale,
and thee Hjallti Skeggi's son, and thee Einar of Thvera, and thee
Hafr the Wise, that I may be allowed to make an atonement for the
slaying of Hauskuld on my son's behalf; and I wish that those men
who are best fitted to do so shall utter the award."

Gizur, and Hafr, and Einar, spoke each on their own part, and
prayed Flosi to take an atonement, and promised him their
friendship in return.

Flosi answered them well in all things, but still did not give
his word.

Then Hall of the Side said to Flosi, "Wilt thou now keep thy
word, and grant me my boon which thou hast already promised me,
when I put beyond sea Thorgrim, the son of Kettle the Fat, thy
kinsman, when he had slain Halli the Red."

"I will grant it thee, father-in-law," said Flosi, "for that
alone wilt thou ask which will make my honour greater than it
erewhile was."

"Then," said Hall, "my wish is that thou shouldst be quickly
atoned, and lettest good men and true make an award, and so buy
the friendship of good and worthy men."

"I will let you all know," said Flosi, "that I will do according
to the word of Hall, my father-in-law, and other of the worthiest
men, that he and others of the best men on each side, lawfully
named, shall make this award.  Methinks Njal is worthy that I
should grant him this."

Njal thanked him and all of them, and others who were by thanked
them too, and said that Flosi had behaved well.

Then Flosi said, "Now will I name my daysmen (1): First, I name
Hall, my father-in-law; Auzur from Broadwater; Surt Asbjorn's son
of Kirkby; Modolf Kettle's son," -- he dwelt then at Asar --
"Hafr the Wise; and Runoff of the Dale; and it is scarce worth
while to say that these are the fittest men out of all my
company."

Now he bade Njal to name his daysmen, and then Njal stood up, and
said, "First of these I name, Asgrim Ellidagrim's son; and
Hjallti Skeggi's son; Gizur the White; Einar of Thvera; Snorri
the Priest; and Gudmund the Powerful."

After that Njal and Flosi, and the sons of Sigfus shook hands,
and Njal pledged his hand on behalf of all his sons, and of Kari,
his son-in-law, that they would hold to what those twelve men
doomed; and one might say that the whole body of men at the Thing
was glad at that.

Then men were sent after Snorri and Gudmund, for they were in
their booths.

Then it was given out that the judges in this award would sit in
the Court of Laws, but all the others were to go away.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  The true English word for "arbitrator," or " umpire."  See
     "Job" ix. 33 -- "Neither is there any daysman betwixt us,
     that might lay his hand upon us both."  See also Holland's
     "Translations of Livy", Page 137 -- "A more shameful
     precedent for the time to come: namely, that umpires and
     dates-men should convert the thing in suit unto their own
     and proper vantage."



122. OF THE JUDGES

Then Snorri the Priest spoke thus, "Now are we here twelve
judges to whom these suits are handed over, now I will beg you
all that we may have no stumbling blocks in these suits, so that
they may not be atoned."

"Will ye," said Gudmund, "award either the lesser or the greater
outlawry?  Shall they be banished from the district, or from the
whole land?"

"Neither of them," says Snorri, "for those banishments are often
ill fulfilled, and men have been slain for that sake, and
atonements broken, but I will award so great a money fine that no
man shall have had a higher price here in the land than
Hauskuld."

They all spoke well of his words.

Then they talked over the matter, and could not agree which
should first utter how great he thought the fine ought to be, and
so the end of it was that they cast lots, and the lot fell on
Snorri to utter it.

Then Snorri said, "I will not sit long over this, I will now tell
you what my utterance is, I will let Hauskuld be atoned for with
triple manfines, but that is six hundred in silver.  Now ye shall
change it, if ye think it too much or too little."

They said that they would change it in nothing.

"This too shall be added," he said, "that all the money shall be
paid down here at the Thing."

Then Gizur the White spoke and said, "Methinks that can hardly
be, for they will not have enough money to pay their fines."

"I know what Snorri wishes," said Gudmund the Powerful, "he wants
that all we daysmen should give such a sum as our bounty will
bestow, and then many will do as we do."

Hall of the Side thanked him, and said he would willingly give as
much as any one else gave, and then all the other daysmen agreed
to that.

After that they went away, and settled between them that Hall
should utter the award at the Hill of Laws.

So the bell was rung, and all men went to the Hill of Laws, and
Hall of the Side stood up and spoke, "In this suit, in which we
have come to an award, we have been all well agreed, and we have
awarded six hundred in silver, and half this sum we the daysmen
will pay, but it must all be paid up here at the Thing.  But it
is my prayer to all the people that each man will give something
for God's sake."

All answered well to that, and then Hall took witness to the
award, that no one should be able to break it.

Njal thanked them for their award, but Skarphedinn stood by, and
held his peace, and smiled scornfully.

Then men went from the Hill of Laws and to their booths, but the
daysmen gathered together in the freemen's churchyard the money
which they had promised to give.

Njal's sons handed over that money which they had by them, and
Kari did the same, and that came to a hundred in silver.

Njal took out that money which he had with him, and that was
another hundred in silver.

So this money was all brought before the Hill of Laws, and then
men gave so much, that not a penny was wanting.

Then Njal took a silken scarf and a pair of boots and laid them
on the top of the heap.

After that, Hall said to Njal, that he should go to fetch his
sons, "But I will go for Flosi, and now each must give the other
pledges of peace."

Then Njal went home to his booth, and spoke to his sons and said,
"Now are our suits come into a fair way of settlement, now are
we men atoned, for all the money has been brought together in one
place; and now either side is to go and grant the other peace and
pledges of good faith.  I will therefore ask you this, my sons,
not to spoil these things in any way."

Skarphedinn stroked his brow, and smiled scornfully.  So they all
go to the Court of Laws.

Hall went to meet Flosi and said, "Go thou now to the Court of
Laws, for now all the money has been bravely paid down, and it
has been brought together in one place."

Then Flosi bade the sons of Sigfus to go up with him, and they
all went out of their booths.  They came from the east, but Njal
went from the west to the Court of Laws, and his sons with him.

Skarphedinn went to the middle bench and stood there.

Flosi went into the Court of Laws to look closely at the money,
and said, "This money is both great and good, and well paid
down, as was to be looked for."

After that he took up the scarf, and waved it, and asked, "Who
may have given this?"

But no man answered him.

A second time he waved the scarf, and asked, "Who may have given
this?" and laughed, but no man answered him.

Then Flosi said, "How is it that none of you knows who has owned
this gear, or is it that none dares to tell me?"

"Who?" said Skarphedinn, "dost thou think, has given it?"

"If thou must know," said Flosi, "then I will tell thee; I think
that thy father the `Beardless Carle' must have given it, for
many know not who look at him whether he is more a man than a
woman."

"Such words are ill-spoken," said Skarphedinn, "to make game of
him, an old man, and no man of any worth has ever done so before. 
Ye may know, too, that he is a man, for he has had sons by his
wife, and few of our kinsfolk have fallen unatoned by our house,
so that we have not had vengeance for them."

Then Skarphedinn took to himself the silken scarf, but threw a
pair of blue breeks to Flosi, and said he would need them more.

"Why," said Flosi, "should I need these more?"

"Because," said Skarphedinn, "thou art the sweetheart of the
Swinefell's goblin, if, as men say, he does indeed turn thee into
a woman every ninth night."

Then Flosi spurned the money, and said he would not touch a penny
of it, and then he said he would only have one of two things:
either that Hauskuld should fall unatoned, or they would have
vengeance for him.

Then Flosi would neither give nor take peace, and he said to the
sons of Sigfus, "Go we now home; one fate shall befall us all."

Then they went home to their booth, and Hall said, "Here most
unlucky men have a share in this suit."

Njal and his sons went home to their booth, and Njal said, "Now
comes to pass what my heart told me long ago, that this suit
would fall heavy on us."

"Not so," says Skarphedinn; "they can never pursue us by the laws
of the land."

"Then that will happen," says Njal, "which will be worse for all
of us."

Those men who had given the money spoke about it, and said that
they should take it back; but Gudmund the Powerful said, "That
shame I will never choose for myself, to take back what I have
given away, either here or elsewhere."

"That is well spoken," they said; and then no one would take it
back.

Then Snorri the Priest said, "My counsel is, that Gizur the White
and Hjallti Skeggi's son keep the money till the next Althing; my
heart tells me that no long time will pass ere there may be need
to touch this money."

Hjallti took half the money and kept it safe, but Gizur took the
rest.

Then men went home to their booths.



123. AN ATTACK PLANNED ON NJAL AND HIS SONS

Flosi summoned all his men up to the "Great Rift," and went
thither himself.

So when all his men were come, there were one hundred and twenty
of them.

Then Flosi spake thus to the sons of Sigfus, "In what way shall
I stand by you in this quarrel, which will be most to your
minds?"

"Nothing will please us," said Gunnar Lambi's son, "until those
brothers, Njal's sons, are all slain."

"This," said Flosi, "will I promise to you, ye sons of Sigfus,
not to part from this quarrel before one of us bites the dust
before the other.  I will also know whether there be any man here
who will not stand by us in this quarrel."

But they all said they would stand by him.

Then Flosi said, "Come now all to me, and swear an oath that no
man will shrink from this quarrel."

Then all went up to Flosi and swore oaths to him; and then Flosi
said, "We will all of us shake hands on this, that he shall have
forfeited life and land who quits this quarrel ere it be over."

These were the chiefs who were with Flosi: -- Kol the son of
Thorstein Broadpaunch, the brother's son of Hall of the Side,
Hroald Auzur's son from Broadwater, Auzur son of Aunund Wallet-
back, Thorstein the Fair, the son of Gerleif, Glum Hildir's son,
Modolf Kettle's son, Thorir the son of Thord Illugi's son of
Mauratongue, Kolbein and Egil Flosi's kinsmen, Kettle Sigfus'
son, and Mord his brother, Ingialld of the Springs, Thorkel and
Lambi, Grani Gunnar's son, Gunnar Lambi's son, and Sigmund
Sigfus' son, and Hroar from Hromundstede.

Then Flosi said to the sons of Sigfus, "Choose ye now a leader,
whomsoever ye think best fitted; for some one man must needs be
chief over the quarrel"

Then Kettle of the Mark answered, "If the choice is to be left
with us brothers, then we will soon choose that this duty should
fall on thee; there are many things which lead to this.  Thou art
a man of great birth, and a mighty chief, stout of heart, and
strong of body, and wise withal, and so we think it best that
thou shouldst see to all that is needful in the quarrel."

"It is most fitting," said Flosi, "that I should agree to
undertake this as your prayer asks; and now I will lay down the
course which we shall follow, and my counsel is, that each man
ride home from the Thing, and look after his household during the
summer, so long as men's haymaking lasts.  I, too, will ride
home, and be at home this summer; but when that Lord's day comes
on which winter is eight weeks off, then I will let them sing me
a mass at home, and afterwards ride west across Loomnips Sand;
each of our men shall have two horses.  I will not swell our
company beyond those which have now taken the oath, for we have
enough and to spare if all keep true tryst.  I will ride all the
Lord's day and the night as well, but at even on the second day
of the week, I shall ride up to Threecorner ridge about mid-even. 
There shall ye then be all come who have sworn an oath in this
matter.  But if there be any one who has not come, and who has
joined us in this quarrel, then that man shall lose nothing save
his life, if we may have our way."

"How does that hang together," said Kettle, "that thou canst ride
from home on the Lord's day, and come the second day of the week
to Threecorner ridge?"

"I will ride," said Flosi "up from Skaptartongue, and north of
the Eyjafell Jokul, and so down into Godaland, and it may be done
if I ride fast.  And now I will tell you my whole purpose, that
when we meet there all together, we shall ride to Bergthorsknoll
with all our band, and fall on Njal's sons with fire and sword,
and not turn away before they are all dead.  Ye shall hide this
plan, for our lives lie on it.  And now we will take to our
horses and ride home."

Then they all went to their booths.

After that Flosi made them saddle his horses, and they waited for
no man, and rode home.

Flosi would not stay to meet Hall his father-in-law, for he knew
of a surety that Hall would set his face against all strong
deeds.

Njal rode home from the Thing and his sons.  They were at home
that summcr.  Njal asked Kari his son-in-law whether he thought
at all of riding east to Dyrholms to his own house.

"I will not ride east," answered Kari, "for one fate shall befall
me and thy sons.

Njal thanked him, and said that was only what was likely from
him.  There were nearly thirty fighting men in Njal's house,
reckoning the house-carles.

One day it happened that Rodny Hauskuld's daughter, the mother of
Hauskuld Njal's son, came to the Springs.  Her brother Ingialld
greeted her well, but she would not take his greeting, but yet
bade him go out with her.  Ingialld did so, and went out with
her; and so they walked away from the farm-yard both together. 
Then she clutched hold of him and they both sat down, and Rodny
said, "Is it true that thou hast sworn an oath to fall on Njal,
and slay him and his sons?"

"True it is," said he.

"A very great dastard art thou," she says, "thou, whom Njal hath
thrice saved from outlawry."

"Still it hath come to this," says Ingialld, "that my life lies
on it if I do not this?"

"Not so," says she, "thou shalt live all the same, and be called
a better man, if thou betrayest not him to whom thou oughtest to
behave best."

Then she took a linen hood out of her bag, it was clotted with
blood all over, and torn and tattered, and said, "This hood,
Hauskuld Njal's son, and thy sister's son, had on his head when
they slew him; methinks, then, it is ill doing to stand by those
from whom this mischief sprang."

"Well!" answers Ingialld, "so it shall be that I will not be
against Njal whatever follows after, but still I know that they
will turn and throw trouble on me."

"Now mightest thou," said Rodny, "yield Njal and his sons great
help, if thou tellest him all these plans."

"That I will not do," says Ingialld, "for then I am every man's
dastard if I tell what was trusted to me in good faith; but it is
a manly deed to sunder myself from this quarrel when I know that
there is a sure looking for of vengeance but tell Njal and his
sons to be ware of themselves all this summer, for that will be
good counsel, and to keep many men about them."

Then she fared to Bergthoknoll, and told Njal all this talk; and
Njal thanked her, and said she had done well, "For there would be
more wickedness in his falling on me than of all men else."

She fared home, but he told this to his sons.

There was a carline at Bergthorsknoll, whose name was Saevuna. 
She was wise in many things, and foresighted; but she was then
very old, and Njal's sons called her an old dotard, when she
talked so much, but still some things which she said came to
pass.  It fell one day that she took a cudgel in her hand, and
went up above the house to a stack of vetches.  She beat the
stack of vetches with her cudgel, and wished it might never
thrive, "Wretch that it was!"

Skarphedinn laughed at her, and asked why she was so angry with
the vetch stack.

"This stack of vetches," said the carline, "will be taken and
lighted with fire when Njal my master is burnt, house and all,
and Bergthorn my foster-child.  Take it away to the water, or
burn it up as quick as you can."

"We will not do that," says Skarphedinn, "for something else will
be got to light a fire with, if that were foredoomed, though this
stack were not here."

The carline babbled the whole summer about the vetchstack that it
should be got indoors, but something always hindered it.



124. OF PORTENTS

At Reykium on Skeid dwelt one Runolf Thorstein's son.  His son's
name was Hildiglum.  He went out on the night of the Lord's day,
when nine weeks were still to winter; he heard a great crash, so
that he thought both heaven and earth shook.  Then he looked into
the west "airt," and he thought he saw thereabouts a ring of
fiery hue, and within the ring a man on a grey horse.  He passed
quickly by him, and rode hard.  He had a flaming firebrand in his
hand, and he rode so close to him that he could see him plainly. 
He was as black as pitch, and he sung this song with a mighty
voice:

     "Here I ride swift steed,
     His Bank flecked with rime,
     Rain from his mane drips,
     Horse mighty for harm;
     Flames flare at each end,
     Gall glows in the midst,
     So fares it with Flosi's redes
     As this flaming brand flies;
     And so fares it with Flosi's redes
     As this flaming brand flies."

Then he thought he hurled the firebrand east towards the fells
before him, and such a blaze of fire leapt up to meet it that he
could not see the fells for the blaze.  It seemed as though that
man rode east among the flames and vanished there.

After that he went to his bed, and was senseless a long time,
but at last he came to himself.  He bore in mind all that had
happened, and told his father, but he bade him tell it to Hjallti
Skeggi's son.  So he went and told Hjallti, but he said he had
seen "`the Wolf's ride,' and that comes ever before great
tidings."



125. FLOSI'S JOURNEY FROM HOME

Flosi busked him from the east when two months were still to
winter, and summoned to him all his men who had promised him help
and company.  Each of them had two horses and good weapons, and
they all came to Swinefell, and were there that night.

Flosi made them say prayers betimes on the Lord's day, and
afterwards they sate down to meat.  He spoke to his household,
and told them what work each was to do while he was away.  After
that he went to his horses.

Flosi and his men rode first west on the Sand (1).  Flosi bade
them not to ride too hard at first; but said they would do well
enough at that pace, and he bade all to wait for the others if
any of them had need to stop.  They rode west to Woodcombe, and
came to Kirkby.  Flosi there bade all men to come into the
church, and pray to God, and men did so.

After that they mounted their horses, and rode on the fell, and
so to Fishwaters, and rode a little to the west of the lakes, and
so struck down west on to the Sand (2).  Then they left Eyjafell
Jokul on their left hand, and so came down into Godaland, and so
on to Markfleet, and came about nones (3) on the second day of
the week to Threecorner ridge, and waited till mid-even.  Then
all had came thither save Ingialld of the Springs.

The sons of Sigfus spoke much ill of him, but Flosi bade them not
blame Ingialld when he was not by, "But we will pay him for this
hereafter."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Sand," Skeidara sand.
(2)  "Sand," Maelifell's sand.
(3)  "Nones," the well-known canonical hour of the day, the ninth
     hour from six a.m., that is, about three o'clock when one of
     the church services took place.



126. OF PORTENTS AT BERGTHORSKNOLL

Now we must take up the story, and turn to Bergthorsknoll, and
say that Grim and Helgi go to Holar.  They had children out at
foster there, and they told their mother that they should not
come home that evening.  They were in Holar all the day, and
there came some poor women and said they had come from far. 
Those brothers asked them for tidings, and they said they had no
tidings to tell, "But still we might tell you one bit of news."

They asked what that might be, and bade them not hide it.  They
said so it should be.

"We came down out of Fleetlithe, and we saw all the sons of
Sigfus riding fully armed -- they made for Threecorner ridge, and
were fifteen in company.  We saw too Grani Gunnar's son and
Gunnar Lambi's son, and they were five in all.  They took the
same road, and one may say now that the whole country-side is
faring and flitting about."

"Then," said Helgi Njal's son, "Flosi must have come from the
east, and they must have all gone to meet him, and we two, Grim,
should be where Skarphedinn is."

Grim said so it ought to be, and they fared home.

That same evening Bergthora spoke to her household, and said,
"Now shall ye choose your meat to-night, so that each may have
what he likes best; for this evening is the last that I shall set
meat before my household."

"That shall not be," they said.

"It will be though," she says, "and I could tell you much more
if I would, but this shall be a token, that Grim and Helgi will
be home ere men have eaten their full to-night; and if this turns
out so, then the rest that I say will happen too."

After that she set meat on the board, and Njal said "Wondrously
now it seems to me.  Methinks I see all round the room, and it
seems as though the gable wall were thrown down, but the whole
board and the meat on it is one gore of blood."

All thought this strange but Skarphedinn, he bade men not be
downcast, nor to utter other unseemly sounds, so that men might
make a story out of them.

"For it befits us surely more than other men to bear us well, and
it is only what is looked for from us."

Grim and Helgi came home ere the board was cleared, and men were
much struck at that.  Njal asked why they had returned so quickly
but they told what they had heard.

Njal bade no man go to sleep, but to be ware of themselves.



127. THE ONSLAUGHT (1) ON BERGTHORSKNOLL

Now Flosi speaks to his men, "Now we will ride to Bergthorsknoll,
and come thither before supper-time."

They do so.  There was a dell in the knoll, and they rode
thither, and tethered their horses there, and stayed there till
the evening was far spent.

Then Flosi said, "Now we will go straight up to the house, and
keep close, and walk slow, and see what counsel they will take."

Njal stood out of doors, and his sons, and Kari and all the
serving-men, and they stood in array to meet them in the yard,
and they were near thirty of them.

Flosi halted and said, "Now we shall see what counsel they take,
for it seems to me, if they stand out of doors to meet us, as
though we should never get the mastery over them."

"Then is our journey bad," says Grani Gunnar's son, "if we are
not to dare to fall on them."

"Nor shall that be," says Flosi; "for we will fall on them though
they stand out of doors; but we shall pay that penalty, that many
will not go away to tell which side won the day."

Njal said to his men, "See ye now what a great band of men they
have."

"They have both a great and well-knit band," says Skarphedinn;
"but this is why they make a halt now, because they think it will
be a hard struggle to master us."

"That cannot be why they halt," says Njal; "and my will is that
our men go indoors, for they had hard work to master Gunnar of
Lithend, though he was alone to meet them; but here is a strong
house as there was there, and they will be slow to come to close
quarters."

"This is not to be settled in that wise," says Skarphedinn, "for
those chiefs fell on Gunnar's house, who were so nobleminded,
that they would rather turn back than burn him, house and all;
but these will fall on us at once with fire, if they cannot get
at us in any other way, for they will leave no stone unturned to
get the better of us; and no doubt they think, as is not
unlikely, that it will be their deaths if we escape out of their
hands.  Besides, I am unwilling to let myself be stifled indoors
like a fox in his earth."

"Now," said Njal, "as often it happens, my sons, ye set my
counsel at naught, and show me no honour, but when ye were
younger ye did not so, and then your plans were better
furthered."

"Let us do," said Helgi, "as our father wills; that will be best
for us."

"I am not so sure of that," says Skarphedinn, "for now he is
`fey'; but still I may well humour my father in this, by being
burnt indoors along with him, for I am not afraid of my death."

Then he said to Kari, "Let us stand by one another well, brother-
in-law, so that neither parts from the other."

"That I have made up my mind to do," says Kari; "but if it should
be otherwise doomed, -- well!  then it must be as it must be, and
I shall not be able to fight against it."

"Avenge us, and we will avenge thee," says Skarphedinn, "if we
live after thee."

Kari said so it should be.

Then they all went in, and stood in array at the door.

"Now are they all `fey,'" said Flosi, "since they have gone
indoors, and we will go right up to them as quickly as we can,
and throng as close as we can before the door, and give heed that
none of them, neither Kari nor Njal's sons, get away; for that
were our bane."

So Flosi and his men came up to the house, and set men
to watch round the house, if there were any secret doors in it. 
But Flosi went up to the front of the house with his men.

Then Hroald Auzur's son ran up to where Skarphedinn stood, and
thrust at him.  Skarphedinn hewed the spearhead off the shaft as
he held it, and made another stroke at him, and the axe fell on
the top of the shield, and dashed back the whole shield on
Hroald's body, but the upper horn of the axe caught him on the
brow, and he fell at full length on his back, and was dead at
once.

"Little chance had that one with thee, Skarphedinn," said Kari,
"and thou art our boldest."

"I'm not so sure of that," says Skarphedinn, and he drew up his
lips and smiled.

Kari, and Grim, and Helgi, threw out many spears, and wounded
many men; but Flosi and his men could do nothing.

At last Flosi said, "We have already gotten great manscathe in
our men; many are wounded, and he slain whom we would choose last
of all.  It is now clear that we shall never master them with
weapons; many now there be who are not so forward in fight as
they boasted, and yet they were those who goaded us on most.  I
say this most to Grani Gunnar's son, and Gunnar Lambi's son, who
were the least willing to spare their foes.  But still we shall
have to take to some other plan for ourselves, and now there are
but two choices left, and neither of them good.  One is to turn
away, and that is our death; the other, to set fire to the house,
and burn them inside it; and that is a deed which we shall have
to answer for heavily before God, since we are Christian men
ourselves; but still we must take to that counsel."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  The Icelandic word is "heimsokn," a term which still lingers
     in the grave offence known in Scottish law as "hamesucken."



128. NJAL'S BURNING

Now they took fire, and made a great pile before the doors.  Then
Skarphedinn said, "What, lads!  are ye lighting a fire, or are ye
taking to cooking?"

"So it shall be," answered Grani Gunnar's son; "and thou shalt
not need to be better done."

"Thou repayest me," said Skarphedinn, "as one may look for from
the man that thou art.  I avenged thy father, and thou settest
most store by that duty which is farthest from thee."

Then the women threw whey on the fire, and quenched it as fast as
they lit it.  Some, too, brought water, or slops.

Then Kol Thorstein's son said to Flosi, "A plan comes into my
mind; I have seen a loft over the hall among the crosstrees, and
we will put the fire in there, and light it with the vetch-stack
that stands just above the house."

Then they took the vetch-stack and set fire to it, and they who
were inside were not aware of it till the whole hall was a-blaze
over their heads.

Then Flosi and his men made a great pile before each of the
doors, and then the women folk who were inside began to weep and
to wail.

Njal spoke to them and said, "Keep up your hearts, nor utter
shrieks, for this is but a passing storm, and it will be long
before ye have another such; and put your faith in God, and
believe that he is so merciful that he will not let us burn both
in this world and the next."

Such words of comfort had he for them all, and others still more
strong.

Now the whole house began to blaze.  Then Njal went to the door
and said, "Is Flosi so near that he can hear my voice."

Flosi said that he could hear it.

"Wilt thou," said Njal, "take an atonement from my sons, or allow
any men to go out."

"I will not," answers Flosi, "take any atonement from thy sons,
and now our dealings shall come to an end once for all, and I
will not stir from this spot till they are all dead; but I will
allow the women and children and house-carles to go out."

Then Njal went into the house, and said to the fold, "Now all
those must go out to whom leave is given, and so go thou out
Thorhalla Asgrim's daughter, and all the people also with thee
who may."

Then Thorhalla said, "This is another parting between me and
Helgi than I thought of a while ago; but still I will egg on my
father and brothers to avenge this manscathe which is wrought
here."

"Go, and good go with thee," said Njal, "for thou art a brave
woman."

After that she went out and much folk with her.

Then Astrid of Deepback said to Helgi Njal's son, "Come thou out
with me, and I will throw a woman's cloak over thee, and tie thy
head with a kerchief."

He spoke against it at first, but at last he did so at the prayer
of others.

So Astrid wrapped the kerchief round Helgi's head, but Thorhilda,
Skarphedinn's wife, threw the cloak over him, and he went out
between them, and then Thorgerda Njal's daughter, and Helga her
sister, and many other folk went out too.

But when Helgi came out Flosi said, "That is a tall woman and
broad across the shoulders that went yonder, take her and hold
her."

But when Helgi heard that, he cast away the cloak.  He had got
his sword under his arm, and hewed at a man, and the blow fell on
his shield and cut off the point of it, and the man's leg as
well.  Then Flosi came up and hewed at Helgi's neck, and took off
his head at a stroke.

Then Flosi went to the door and called out to Njal, and said he
would speak with him and Bergthora.

Now Njal does so, and Flosi said, "I will offer thee, master
Njal, leave to go out, for it is unworthy that thou shouldst burn
indoors."

"I will not go out," said Njal, "for I am an old man, and little
fitted to avenge my sons, but I will not live in shame."

Then Flosi said to Bergthora, "Come thou out, housewife, for I
will for no sake burn thee indoors."

"I was given away to Njal young," said Bergthora, "and I have
promised him this, that we would both share the same fate."

After that they both went back into the house.

"What counsel shall we now take," said Bergthora.

"We will go to our bed," says Njal, "and lay us down; I have long
been eager for rest."

Then she said to the boy Thord, Kari's son, "Thee will I take
out, and thou shalt not burn in here."

"Thou hast promised me this, grandmother," says the boy, "that we
should never part so long as I wished to be with thee; but
methinks it is much better to die with thee and Njal than to live
after you."

Then she bore the boy to her bed, and Njal spoke to his steward
and said, "Now thou shalt see where we lay us down, and how I
lay us out, for I mean not to stir an inch hence, whether reek or
burning smart me, and so thou wilt be able to guess where to look
for our bones,"

He said he would do so.

There had been an ox slaughtered and the hide lay there.  Njal
told the steward to spread the hide over them, and he did so.

So there they lay down both of them in their bed, and put the boy
between them.  Then they signed themselves and the boy with the
cross, and gave over their souls into God's hand, and that was
the last word that men heard them utter.

Then the steward took the hide and spread it over them, and went
out afterwards.  Kettle of the Mark caught hold of him, and
dragged him out, he asked carefully after his father-in-law Njal,
but the steward told him the whole truth.  Then Kettle said,
"Great grief hath been sent on us, when we have had to share such
ill-luck together."

Skarphedinn saw how his father laid him down, and how he laid
himself out, and then he said, "Our father goes early to bed, and
that is what was to be looked for, for he is an old man."

Then Skarphedinn, and Kari, and Grim, caught the brands as fast
as they dropped down, and hurled them out at them, and so it went
on awhile.  Then they hurled spears in at them, but they caught
them all as they flew, and sent them back again.

Then Flosi bade them cease shooting, "for all feats of arms will
go hard with us when we deal with them; ye may well wait till the
fire overcomes them."

So they do that, and shoot no more.

Then the great beams out of the roof began to fall, and
Skarphedinn said, "Now must my father be dead, and I have neither
heard groan nor cough from him."

Then they went to the end of the hall, and there had fallen down
a cross-beam inside which was much burnt in the middle.

Kari spoke to Skarphedinn, and said, "Leap thou out here, and I
will help thee to do so, and I will leap out after thee, and then
we shall both get away if we set about it so, for hitherward
blows all the smoke."

"Thou shalt leap first," said Skarphedinn; "but I will leap
straightway on thy heels."

"That is not wise," says Kari, "for I can get out well enough
elsewhere, though it does not come about here."

"I will not do that," says Skarphedinn; "leap thou out first, but
I will leap after thee at once."

"It is bidden to every man," says Kari, "to seek to save his life
while he has a choice, and I will do so now; but still this
parting of ours will be in such wise that we shall never see one
another more; for if I leap out of the fire, I shall have no mind
to leap back into the fire to thee, and then each of us will have
to fare his own way."

"It joys me, brother-in-law," says Skarphedinn, "to think that if
thou gettest away thou wilt avenge me."

Then Kari took up a blazing bench in his hand, and runs up along
the cross-beam, then he hurls the bench out at the roof, and it
fell among those who were outside.

Then they ran away, and by that time all Kari's upper clothing
and his hair were a-b1aze, then he threw himself down from the
roof, and so crept along with the smoke.

Then one man said who was nearest, "Was that a man that leapt out
at the roof?"

"Far from it," says another; "more likely it was Skarphedinn who
hurled a firebrand at us."

After that they had no more mistrust.

Kari ran till he came to a stream, and then he threw himself down
into it, and so quenched the fire on him.

After that he ran along under shelter of the smoke into a hollow,
and rested him there, and that has since been called Kari's
Hollow.



129. SKARPHEDINN'S DEATH

Now it is to be told of Skarphedinn that he runs out on the
cross-beam straight after Kari, but when he came to where the
beam was most burnt, then it broke down under him.  Skarphedinn
came down on his feet, and tried again the second time, and
climbs up the wall with a run, then down on him came the wall-
plate, and he toppled down again inside.

Then Skarphedinn said, "Now one can see what will come;" and then
he went along the side wall.  Gunnar Lambi's son leapt up on the
wall and sees Skarphedinn, he spoke thus, "Weepest thou now,
Skarphedinn?"

"Not so," says Skarphedinn; "but true it is that the smoke makes
one's eyes smart, but is it as it seems to me, dost thou laugh?"

"So it is surely," says Gunnar, "and I have never laughed since
thou slewest Thrain on Markfleet."

Then Skarphedinn said, "Here now is a keepsake for thee;" and
with that he took out of his purse the jaw-tooth which he had
hewn out of Thrain, and threw it at Gunnar, and struck him in the
eye, so that it started out and lay on his cheek.

Then Gunnar fell down from the roof.

Skarphedinn then went to his brother Grim, and they held one
another by the hand and trode the fire; but when they came to the
middle of the hall Grim fell down dead.

Then Skarphedinn went to the end of the house, and then there was
a great crash, and down fell the roof.  Skarphedinn was then shut
in between it and the gable, and so he could not stir a step
thence.

Flosi and his band stayed by the fire until it was broad
daylight; then came a man riding up to them.  Flosi asked him for
his name, but he said his name was Geirmund, and that he was a
kinsman of the sons of Sigfus.

"Ye have done a mighty deed," he says.

"Men," said Flosi, "will call it both a mighty deed and an ill
deed, but that can't be helped now."

"How many men have lost their lives here?" asks Geirmund.

"Here have died," says Flosi, "Njal and Bergthora and all their
sons, Thord Kari's son, Kari Solmund's son, but besides these we
cannot say for a surety, because we know not their names."

"Thou tellest him now dead," said Geirmund, "with whom we have
gossiped this morning."

"Who is that?" says Flosi.

"We two," says Geirmund, "I and my neighbour Bard, met Kari
Solmund's son, and Bard gave him his horse, and his hair and his
upper clothes were burned off him!"

"Had he any weapons?" asks Flosi.

"He had the sword `Life-luller,'" says Geirmund, "and one edge of
it was blue with fire, and Bard and I said that it must have
become soft, but he answered thus, that he would harden it in the
blood of the sons of Sigfus or the other Burners."

"What said he of Skarphedinn?" said Flosi.

"He said both he and Grim were alive," answers Geirmund, "when
they parted; but he said that now they must be dead."

"Thou hast told us a tale," said Flosi, "which bodes us no idle
peace, for that man hath now got away who comes next to Gunnar of
Lithend in all things; and now, ye sons of Sigfus, and ye other
burners, know this, that such a great blood feud, and hue and cry
will be made about this burning, that it will make many a man
headless, but some will lose all their goods.  Now I doubt much
whether any man of you, ye sons of Sigfus, will dare to stay in
his house; and that is not to be wondered at; and so I will bid
you all to come and stay with me in the east, and let us all
share one fate."

They thanked him for his offer, and said they would be glad to
take it.

Then Modolf Kettle's son, sang a song:

     "But one prop of Njal's house liveth,
     All the rest inside are burnt,
     All but one -- those bounteous spenders,
     Sigfus' stalwart sons wrought this;
     Son of Gollnir (1) now is glutted
     Vengeance for brave Hauskuld's death,
     Brisk flew fire through thy dwelling,
     Bright flames blazed above thy roof."

"We shall have to boast of something else than that Njal has been
burnt in his house," says Flosi, "for there is no glory in that."

Then he went up on the gable, and Glum Hilldir's son, and some
other men.  Then Glum said, "Is Skarphedinn dead, indeed?" But
the others said he must have been dead long ago.

The fire sometimes blazed up fitfully and sometimes burned low,
and then they heard down in the fire beneath them that this song
was sung:

     "Deep, I ween, ye Ogre offspring
     Devilish brood of giant birth,
     Would ye groan with gloomy visage
     Had the fight gone to my mind;
     But my very soul it gladdens
     That my friends I who now boast high,
     Wrought not this foul deed, their glory,
     Save with footsteps filled with gore."

"Can Skarphedinn, think ye, have sung this song dead or alive?"
said Grani Gunnar's son.

"I will go into no guesses about that," says Flosi.

"We will look for Skarphedinn," says Grani, "and the other men
who have been here burnt inside the house."

"That shall not be," says Flosi, "it is just like such foolish
men as thou art, now that men will be gathering force all over
the country; and when they do come, I trow the very same man who
now lingers will be so scared that he will not know which way to
run; and now my counsel is that we all ride away as quickly as
ever we can."

Then Flosi went hastily to his horse and all his men.

Then Flosi said to Geirmund, "Is Ingialld, thinkest thou, at home
at the Springs?"

Geirmund said he thought he must be at home.

"There now is a man," says Flosi, "who has broken his oath with
us and all good faith."

Then Flosi said to the sons of Sigfus, "What course will ye now
take with Ingialld; will ye forgive him, or shall we now fall on
him and slay him?"

They all answered that they would rather fall on him and slay
him.

Then Flosi jumped on his horse, and all the others, and they rode
away.  Flosi rode first, and shaped his course for Rangriver, and
up along the river bank.

Then he saw a man riding down on the other bank of the river and
he knew that there was Ingialld of the Springs.  Flosi calls out
to him.  Ingialld halted and turned down to the river bank; and
Flosi said to him, "Thou hast broken faith with us, and hast
forfeited life and goods.  Here now are the sons of Sigfus, who
are eager to slay thee; but methinks thou hast fallen into a
strait, and I will give thee thy life if thou will hand over to
me the right to make my own award."

"I will sooner ride to meet Kari," said Ingialld, "than grant
thee the right to utter thine own award, and my answer to the
sons of Sigfus is this, that I shall be no whit more afraid of
them than they are of me."

"Bide thou there," says Flosi, "if thou art not a coward, for I
will send thee a gift."

"I will bide of a surety," says Ingialld.

Thorstein Kolbein's son, Flosi's brother's son, rode up by his
side and had a spear in his hand, he was one of the bravest of
men, and the most worthy of those who were with Flosi.

Flosi snatched the spear from him, and launched it at Ingialld,
and it fell on his left side, and passed through the shield just
below the handle, and clove it all asunder, but the spear passed
on into his thigh just above the knee-pan, and so on into the
saddle-tree, and there stood fast.

Then Flosi said to Ingialld, "Did it touch thee?

"It touched me sure enough," says Ingialld, "but I call this a
scratch and not a wound."

Then Ingialld plucked the spear out of the wound, and said to
Flosi, "Now bide thou, if thou art not a milksop."

Then he launched the spear back over the river.  Flosi sees that
the spear is coming straight for his middle, and then he backs
his horse out of the way, but the spear flew in front of Flosi's
horse, and missed him, but it struck Thorstein's middle, and down
he fell at once dead off his horse.

Now Ingialld runs for the wood, and they could not get at him.

Then Flosi said to his men, "Now have we gotten manscathe, and
now we may know, when such things befall us, into what a luckless
state we have got.  Now it is my counsel that we ride up to
Threecorner Ridge; thence we shall be able to see where men ride
all over the country, for by this time they will have gathered
together a great band, and they will think that we have ridden
east to Fleetlithe from Threecorner Ridge; and thence they will
think that we are riding north up on the fell, and so east to our
own country, and thither the greater part of the folk will ride
after us; but some will ride the coast road east to
Selialandsmull, and yet they will think there is less hope of
finding us thitherward, but I will now take counsel for all of
us, and my plan is to ride up into Threecorner-fell, and bide
there till three suns have risen and set in heaven."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Son of Gollnir," Njal, who was the son of Thorgeir Gelling
     or Gollnir.
(2)  "My friends," ironically of course.



130. OF KARI SOLMUND'S SON

Now it is to be told of Kari Solmund's son that he fared away
from that hollow in which he had rested himself until he met
Bard, and those words passed between them which Geirmund had
told.

Thence Kari rode to Mord, and told him the tidings, and he was
greatly grieved.

Kari said there were other things more befitting a man than to
weep for them dead, and bade him rather gather folk and come to
Holtford.

After that he rode into Thurso-dale to Hjallti Skeggi's son, and
as he went along Thurso water, he sees a man riding fast behind
him.  Kari waited for the man, and knows that he was Ingialld of
the Springs.  He sees that he is very bloody about the thigh; and
Kari asked Ingialld who had wounded him, and he told him.

"Where met ye two?" says Kari.

"By Rangwater side," says Ingialld, "and he threw a spear over
at me."

"Didst thou aught for it?" asks Kari.

"I threw the spear back," says Ingialld, "and they said that it
met a man, and he was dead at once."

"Knowest thou not," said Kari, "who the man was?"

"Methought he was like Thorstein Flosi's brother's son," says
Ingialld.

"Good luck go with thy hand," says Kari.

After that they rode both together to see Hjallti Skeggi's son,
and told him the tidings.  He took these deeds ill, and said
there was the greatest need to ride after them and slay them all.

After that he gathered men and roused the whole country; now he
and Kari and Ingialld ride with this band to meet Mord Valgard's
son, and they found him at Holtford, and Mord was there waiting
for them with a very great company.  Then they parted the hue and
cry; some fared the straight road by the east coast to
Selialandsmull, but some went up to Fleetlithe, and other-some
the higher road thence to Threecorner Ridge, and so down into
Godaland.  Thence they rode north to Sand.  Some too rode as far
as Fishwaters, and there turned back.  Some the coast road east
to Holt, and told Thorgeir the tidings, and asked whether they
had not ridden by there.

"This is how it is," said Thorgeir, "though I am not a mighty
chief, yet Flosi would take other counsel than to ride under my
eyes, when he has slain Njal, my father's brother, and my
cousins; and there is nothing left for any of you but e'en to
turn back again, for ye should have hunted longer nearer home;
but tell this to Kari, that he must ride hither to me and be here
with me if he will; but though he will not come hither east,
still I will look after his farm at Dyrholms if he will, but tell
him too that I will stand by him and ride with him to the
Althing.  And he shall also know this, that we brothers are the
next of kin to follow up the feud, and we mean so to take up the
suit, that outlawry shall follow and after that revenge, man for
man, if we can bring it about; but I do not go with you now,
because I know naught will come of it, and they will now be as
wary as they can of themselves."

Now they ride back, and all met at Hof and talked there among
themselves, and said that they had gotten disgrace since they had
not found them.  Alord said that was not so.  Then many men were
eager that they should fare to Fleetlithe, and pull down the
homesteads of all those who had been at those deeds, but still
they listened for Mord's utterance.

"That," he said, "would be the greatest folly."  They asked why
he said that.

"Because," he said, "if their houses stand, they will be sure to
visit them to see their wives; and then, as time rolls on, we may
hunt them down there; and now ye shall none of you doubt that I
will be true to thee Kari, and to all of you, and in all counsel,
for I have to answer for myself."

Hjallti bade him do as he said.  Then Hjallti bade Kari to come
and stay with him, he said he would ride thither first.  They
told him what Thorgeir had offered him, and he said he would make
use of that offer afterwards, but said his heart told him it
would be well if there were many such.

After that the whole band broke up.

Flosi and his men saw all these tidings from where they were on
the fell; and Flosi said, "Now we will take our horses and ride
away, for now it will be some good."

The sons of Sigfus asked whether it would be worth while to get
to their homes and tell the news.

"It must be Mord's meaning," says Flosi, "that ye will visit your
wives; and my guess is, that his plan is to let your houses stand
unsacked; but my plan is that not a man shall part from the
other, but all ride east with me."

So every man took that counsel, and then they all rode east and
north of the Jokul, and so on till they came to Swinefell.

Flosi sent at once men out to get in stores, so that nothing
might fall short.

Folsi never spoke about the deed, but no fear was found in him,
and he was at home the whole winter till Yule was over.



131. NJAL'S AND BERGTHORA'S BONES FOUND

Kari bade Hjallti to go and search for Njal's bones, "For all
will believe in what thou sayest and thinkest about them."

Hjallti said he would be most willing to bear Njal's bones to
church; so they rode thence fifteen men.  They rode east over
Thurso-water, and called on men there to come with them till they
had one hundred men, reckoning Njal's neighbours.

They came to Bergthorsknoll at mid-day.

Hjallti asked Kari under what part of the house Njal might be
lying, but Kari showed them to the spot, and there was a great
heap of ashes to dig away.  There they found the hide underneath,
and it was as though it were shrivelled with the fire.  They
raised up the hide, and lo! they were unburnt under it.  All
praised God for that, and thought it was a great token.

Then the boy was taken up who had lain between them, and of him a
finger was burnt off which he had stretched out from under the
hide.

Njal was home out, and so was Bergthora, and then all men went to
see their bodies.

Then Hjallti said, "What like look to you these bodies?"

They answered, "We will wait for thy utterance."

Then Hjallti said, "I shall speak what I say with all freedom of
speech.  The body of Bergthora looks as it was likely she would
look, and still fair; but Njal's body and visage seem to me so
bright that I have never seen any dead man's body so bright as
this."

They all said they thought so too.

Then they sought for Skarphedinn, and the men of the household
showed them to the spot where Flosi and his men heard the song
sung, and there the roof had fallen down by the gable, and there
Hjallti said that they should look.  Then they did so, and found
Skarphedinn's body there, and he had stood up hard by the gable-
wall, and his legs were burnt off him right up to the knees, but
all the rest of him was unburnt.  He had bitten through his under
lip, his eyes were wide open and not swollen nor starting out of
his head; he had driven his axe into the gable-wall so hard that
it had gone in up to the middle of the blade, and that was why it
was not softened.

After that the axe was broken out of the wall, and Hjallti took
up the axe, and said, "This is a rare weapon, and few would be
able to wield it."

"I see a man," said Kari, "who shall bear the axe."

"Who is that?" says Hjallti.

"Thorgeir Craggeir," says Kari, "he whom I now think to be the
greatest man in all their family."

Then Skarphedinn was stripped of his clothes, for they were
unburnt, he had laid his hands in a cross, and the right hand
uppermost.  They found marks on him; one between his shoulders
and the other on his chest, and both were branded in the shape of
a cross, and men thought that he must have burnt them in himself.

All men said that they thought that it was better to be near
Skarphedinn dead than they weened, for no man was afraid of him.

They sought for the bones of Grim, and found them in the midst
of the hall.  They found, too, there, right over against him
under the side wall, Thord Freedmanson; but in the weaving-room
they found Saevuna the carline, and three men more.  In all they
found there the bones of nine souls.  Now they carried the bodies
to the church, and then Hjallti rode home and Kari with him.  A
swelling came on Ingialld's leg, and then he fared to Hjallti,
and was healed there, but still he limped ever afterwards.

Kari rode to Tongue to Asgrim Ellidagrim's son.  By that time
Thorhalla was come home, and she had already told the tidings. 
Asgrim took Kari by both hands, and bade him be there all that
year.  Kari said so it should be.

Asgrim asked besides all the folk who had been in the house at
Bergthorsknoll to stay with him.  Kari said that was well
offered, and said he would take it on their behalf.

Then all the folk were flitted thither.

Thorhall Asgrim's son was so startled when he was told that his
foster-father Njal was dead, and that he had been burnt in his
house, that he swelled all over, and a stream of blood burst out
of both his ears, and could not be staunched, and he fell into a
swoon, and then it was staunched.

After that he stood up, and said he had behaved like a coward,
"But I would that I might be able to avenge this which has
befallen me on some of those who burnt him."

But when others said that no one would think this a shame to him,
he said he could not stop the mouths of the people from talking
about it.

Asgrim asked Kari what trust and help he thought he might look
for from those east of the rivers.  Kari said that Mord Valgard's
son, and Hjallti Skeggi's son, would yield him all the help they
could, and so, too, would Thorgeir Craggeir and all those
brothers.

Asgrim said that was great strength.

"What strength shall we have from thee?" says Kari.

"All that I can give," says Asgrim, "and I will lay down my life
on it."

"So do," says Kari.

"I have also," says Asgrim, "brought Gizur the White into the
suit, and have asked his advice how we shall set about it."

"What advice did he give?" asks Kari.

"He counselled," answers Asgrim, "`that we should hold us quite
still till spring, but then ride east and set the suit on foot
against Flosi for the manslaughter of Helgi, and summon the
neighbours from their homes, and give due notice at the Thing of
the suits for the burning, and summon the same neighbours there
too on the inquest before the court.  I asked Gizur who should
plead the suit for manslaughter, but he said that Mord should
plead it whether he liked it or not, and now,' he went on, `it
shall fall most heavily on him that up to this time all the suits
he has undertaken have had the worst ending.  Kari shall also be
wroth whenever he meets Mord, and so, if he be made to fear on
one side, and has to look to me on the other, then he will
undertake the duty.'"

Then Kari said, "We will follow thy counsel as long as we can,
and thou shalt lead us."

It is to be told of Kari that he could not sleep of nights. 
Asgrim woke up one night and heard that Kari was awake, and
Asgrim said, "Is it that thou canst not sleep at night?"

Then Kari sang this song:

     "Bender of the bow of battle,
     Sleep will not my eyelids seal,
     Still my murdered messmates' bidding
     Haunts my mind the livelong night;
     Since the men their brands abusing
     Burned last autumn guileless Njal,
     Burned him house and home together,
     Mindful am I of my hurt."

Kari spoke of no men so often as of Njal and Skarphedinn, and
Bergthora and Helgi.  He never abused his foes, and never
threatened them.



132. FLOSI'S DREAM

One night it so happened that Flosi struggled much in his sleep. 
Glum Hildir's son woke him up, and then Flosi said, "Call me
Kettle of the Mark."

Kettle came thither, and Flosi said, "I will tell thee my dream."

"I am ready to hear it," says Kettle.

"I dreamt," says Flosi, "that methought I stood below Loom-nip,
and went out and looked up to the Nip, and all at once it opened,
and a man came out of the Nip, and he was clad in goatskins, and
had an iron staff in his hand.  He called, as he walked, on many
of my men, some sooner and some later, and named them by name. 
First he called Grim the Red my kinsman, and Ami Kol's son.  Then
methought something strange followed, methought he called Eyjolf
Bolverk's son, and Ljot son of Hall of the Side, and some six men
more.  Then he held his peace awhile.  After that he called five
men of our band, and among them were the sons of Sigfus, thy
brothers; then he called other six men, and among them were
Lambi, and Modolf, and Glum.  Then he called three men.  Last of
all he called Gunnar Lambi's son, and Kol Tborstein's son.  After
that he came up to me; I asked him `What news?'  He said he had
tidings enough to tell.  Then I asked him for his name, but he
called himself Irongrim.  I asked him whither he was going; he
said he had to fare to the Althing.  `What shalt thou do there?'
I said.  `First I shall challenge the inquest,' he answers, `and
then the courts, then clear the field for fighters.'  After that
he sang this song:

     "Soon a man death's snake-strokes dealing
     High shall lift his head on earth,
     Here amid the dust low rolling
     Battered brainpans men shall see;
     Now upon the hills in hurly
     Buds the blue steel's harvest bright;
     Soon the bloody dew of battle
     Thigh-deep through the ranks shall rise."

"Then he shouted with such a mighty shout that methought
everything near shook, and dashed down his staff, and there was a
mighty crash.  Then he went back into the fell, but fear clung to
me; and now I wish thee to tell me what thou thinkest this dream
is."

"It is my foreboding," says Kettle, "that all those who were
called must be `fey.'  It seems to me good counsel that we tell
this dream to no man just now."

Flosi said so it should be.  Now the winter passes away till Yule
was over.  Then Flosi said to his men, "Now I mean that we should
fare from home, for methinks we shall not be able to have an idle
peace.  Now we shall fare to pray for help, and now that will
come true which I told you, that we should have to bow the knee
to many ere this quarrel were ended."



133. OF FLOSI'S JOURNEY AND HIS ASKING FOR HELP

After that they busked them from home all together.  Flosi was in
long-hose because he meant to go on foot, and then he knew that
it would seem less hard to the others to walk.

Then they fared from home to Knappvale, but the evening after to
Broadwater, and then to Calffell, thence by Bjornness to
Hornfirth, thence to Staffell in Lon, and then to Thvattwater to
Hall of the Side.

Flosi had to wife Steinvora, his daughter.

Hall gave them a very hearty welcome, and Flosi said to Hall, "I
will ask thee, father-in-law, that thou wouldst ride to the Thing
with me with all thy Thingmen."

"Now," answered Hall, "it has turned out as the saw says, `but a
short while is hand fain of blow'; and yet it is one and the same
man in thy band who now hangs his head, and who then goaded thee
on to the worst of deeds when it was still undone.  But my help I
am bound to lend thee in all such places as I may."

"What counsel dost thou give me," said Flosi, "in the strait in
which I now am."

"Thou shalt fare," said Hall, "north, right up to Weaponfirth,
and ask all the chiefs for aid, and thou wilt yet need it all
before the Thing is over."

Flosi stayed there three nights, and rested him, and fared thence
east to Geitahellna, and so to Berufirth; there they were the
night.  Thence they fared east to Broaddale in Haydale.  There
Hallbjorn the Strong dwelt.  He had to wife Oddny the sister of
Saurli Broddhelgi's son, and Flosi had a hearty welcome there.

Hallbjorn asked how far north among the firths Flosi meant to go. 
He said he meant to go as far as Weaponfirth.  Then Flosi took a
purse of money from his belt, and said he would give it to
Hallbjorn.  He took the money, but yet said he had no claim on
Flosi for gifts, "But still I would be glad to know in what thou
wilt that I repay thee."

"I have no need of money," says Flosi, "but I wish thou wouldst
ride to the Thing with me, and stand by me in my quarrel, but
still I have no ties or kinship to tell towards thee."

"I will grant thee that," said Hallbjorn, "to ride to the Thing
with thee, and to stand by thee in thy quarrel as I would by my
brother."

Flosi thanked him, and Hallbjorn asked much about the burning,
but they told him all about it at length.

Thence Flosi fared to Broaddale's heath, and so to Hrafnkelstede,
there dwelt Hrafnkell, the son of Thorir, the son of Hrafnkell
Raum.  Flosi had a hearty welcome there, and sought for help and
a promise to ride to the Thing from Hrafnkell, but he stood out a
long while, though the end of it was that he gave his word that
his son Thorir should ride with all their Thingmen, and yield him
such help as the other priests of the same district.

Flosi thanked him and fared away to Bersastede.  There Holmstein
son of Bersi the Wise dwelt, and he gave Flosi a very hearty
welcome.  Flosi begged him for help.  Holmstein said he had been
long in his debt for help.

Thence they fared to Waltheofstede -- there Saurli Broddhelgi's
son, Bjarni's brother, dwelt.  He had to wife Thordisa, a
daughter of Gudmund the Powerful, of Modruvale.  They had a
hearty welcome there.  But next morning Flosi raised the question
with Saurli that he should ride to the Althing with him, and bid
him money for it.

"I cannot tell about that," says Saurli, "so long as I do not
know on which side my father-in-law Gudmund the Powerful stands,
for I mean to stand by him on whichever side he stands."

"Oh!" said Flosi, "I see by thy answer that a woman rules in this
house."

Then Flosi stood up and bade his men take their upper clothing
and weapons, and then they fared away, and got no help there.  So
they fared below Lagarfleet and over the heath to Njardwick;
there two brothers dwelt, Thorkel the Allwise, and Thorwalld his
brother; they were sons of Kettle, the son of Thidrandi the Wise,
the son of Kettle Rumble, son of Thorir Thidrandi.  The mother of
Thorkel the Allwise and Thorwalld was Yngvillda, daughter of
Thorkel the Wise.  Flosi got a hearty welcome there, he told
those brothers plainly of his errand, and asked for their help;
but they put him off until he gave three marks of silver to each
of them for their aid; then they agreed to stand by Flosi.

Their mother Yngvillda was by when they gave their words to ride
to the Althing, and wept.  Thorkel asked why she wept; and she
answered, "I dreamt that thy brother Thorwalld was clad in a red
kirtle, and methought it was so tight as though it were sewn on
him; methought too that he wore red hose on his legs and feet,
and bad shoethongs were twisted round them; methought it ill to
see when I knew he was so uncomfortable, but I could do naught
for him."

They laughed and told her she had lost her wits, and said her
babble should not stand in the way of their ride to the Thing.

Flosi thanked them kindly, and fared thence to Weaponfirth and
came to Hof.  There dwelt Bjarni Broddhelgi's son (1).  Bjarni
took Flosi by both hands, and Flosi bade Bjarni money for his
help.

"Never," said Bjarni, "have I sold my manhood or help for bribes,
but now that thou art in need of help, I will do thee a good turn
for friendship's sake, and ride to the Thing with thee, and stand
by thee as I would by my brother."

"Then thou hast thrown a great load of debt on my hands," said
Flosi, "but still I looked for as much from thee."

Thence Flosi and his men fared to Crosswick.  Thorkell Geitis'
son was a great friend of his.  Flosi told him his errand, and
Thorkel said it was but his duty to stand by him in every way in
his power, and not to part from his quarrel.  Thorkel gave Flosi
good gifts at parting.

Thence they fared north to Weaponfirth and up into the Fleetdale
country, and turned in as guests at Holmstein's, the son of Bersi
the Wise.  Flosi told him that all had backed him in his need and
business well, save Saurli Broddhelgi's son.  Holmstein said the
reason of that was that he was not a man of strife.  Holmstein
gave Flosi good gifts.

Flosi fared up Fleetdale, and thence south on the fell across
Oxenlaya and down Swinehorndale, and so out by Alftafirth to the
west, and did not stop till he came to Thvattwater to his father-
in-law Hall's house.  There he stayed half a month, and his men
with him and rested him.

Flosi asked Hall what counsel he would now give him, and what he
should do next, and whether he should change his plans.

"My counsel," said Hall, "is this, that thou goest home to thy
house, and the sons of Sigfus with thee, but that they send men
to set their homesteads in order.  But first of all fare home,
and when ye ride to the Thing, ride all together, and do not
scatter your band.  Then let the sons of Sigfus go to see their
wives on the way.  I too will ride to the Thing, and Ljot my son
with all our Thing-men, and stand by thee with such force as I
can gather to me."

Flosi thanked him, and Hall gave him good gifts at parting.

Then Flosi went away from Thvattwater, and nothing is to be told
of his journey till he comes home to Swinefell.  There he stayed
at home the rest of the winter, and all the summer right up to
the Thing.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Broddhelgi was the son of Thorgil, the son of Thorstein the
     White, the son of Oliver, the son of Eyvalld, the son of
     Oxen-Thorir.  The mother of Bjarni was Halla, the daughter
     of Lyting.  The mother of Broddhelgi was Asvora, the
     daughter of Thorir, the son of Porridge-Atli, the son of
     Thorir Thidrandi.  Bjarni Broddhelgi's son had to wife
     Rannveiga the daughter of Thorgeir, the son of Eric of
     Gooddale, the son of Geirmund, the son of Hroald, the son of
     Eric Frizzelbeard.



134. OF THORHALL AND KARI

Thorhall Asgrim's son, and Kari Solmund's son, rode one day to
Mossfell to see Gizur the White; he took them with both hands,
and there they were at his house a very long while.  Once it
happened as they and Gizur talked of Njal's burning, that Gizur
said it was very great luck that Kari had got away.  Then a song
came into Kari's mouth.

     "I who whetted helmet-hewer (1),
     I who oft have burnished brand,
     From the fray went all unwilling
     When Njal's rooftree crackling roared;
     Out I leapt when bands of spearmen
     Lighted there a blaze of flame!
     Listen men unto my moaning,
     Mark the telling of my grief."

Then Gizur said, "It must be forgiven thee that thou art mindful,
and so we will talk no more about it just now."

Kari says that he will ride home; and Gizur said, "I will now
make a clean breast of my counsel to thee.  Thou shalt not ride
home, but still thou shalt ride away, and east under Eyjafell, to
see Thorgeir Craggeir, and Thorleif Crow.  They shall ride from
the east with thee.  They are the next of kin in the suit, and
with them shall ride Thorgrim the Big, their brother.  Ye shall
ride to Mord Valgard's son's house, and tell him this message
from me, that he shall take up the suit for manslaughter for
Helgi Njal's son against Flosi.  But if he utters any words
against this, then shalt thou make thy self most wrathful, and
make believe as though thou wouldst let thy axe fall on his head;
and in the second place, thou shalt assure him of my wrath if he
shows any ill will.  Along with that shalt thou say, that I will
send and fetch away my daughter Thorkatla, and make her come home
to me; but that he will not abide, for he loves her as the very
eyes in his head."

Kari thanked him for his counsel.  Kari spoke nothing of help to
him, for he thought he would show himself his good friend in this
as in other things.

Thence Kari rode east over the rivers, and so to Fleetlithe, and
east across Markfleet, and so on to Selialandsmull.  So they ride
east to Holt.

Thorgeir welcomed them with the greatest kindliness.  He told
them of Flosi's journey, and how great help he had got in the
east firths.

Kari said it was no wonder that he, who had to answer for so
much, should ask for help for himself.

Then Thorgeir said, "The better things go for them, the worse it
shall be for them; we will only follow them up so much the
harder."

Kari told Thorgeir of Gizur's advice.  After that they ride from
the east to Rangrivervale to Mord Valgard's son's house.  He gave
them a hearty welcome.  Kari told him the message of Gizur his
father-in-law.  He was slow to take the duty on him, and said it
was harder to go to law with Flosi than with any other ten men.

"Thou behavest now as he (1) thought," said Kari; "for thou art a
bad bargain in every way; thou art both a coward and heartless,
but the end of this shall be as is fitting, that Thorkatla shall
fare home to her father."

She busked her at once, and said she had long been "boun" to part
from Mord.  Then he changed his mood and his words quickly, and
begged off their wrath, and took the suit upon him at once.

"Now," said Kari, "thou has taken the suit upon thee, see that
thou pleadest it without fear, for thy life lies on it."

Mord said he would lay his whole heart on it to do this well and
manfully.

After that Mord summoned to him nine neighbours, they were all
near neighbours to the spot where the deed was done.  Then Mord
took Thorgeir by the hand and named two witnesses to bear
witness, "That Thorgeir Thorir's son hands me over a suit for
manslaughter against Flosi Thord's son, to plead it for the
slaying of Helgi Njal's son, with all those proofs which have to
follow the suit.  Thou handest over to me this suit to plead and
to settle, and to enjoy all rights in it, as though I were the
rightful next of kin.  Thou handest it over to me by law, and I
take it from thee by law."

A second time Mord named his witnesses, "To bear witness," said
he, "that I give notice of an assault laid down by law against
Flosi Thord's son, for that he dealt Helgi Njal's son a brain, or
a body, or a marrow wound, which proved a death wound; and from
which Helgi got his death.  I give notice of this before five
witnesses" -- here he named them all by name -- "I give this
lawful notice.  I give notice of a suit which Thorgeir Thorir's
son has handed over to me."

Again he named witnesses "To bear witness that I give notice of a
brain, or a body, or a marrow wound against Flosi Thord's son,
for that wound which proved a death wound, but Helgi got his
death therefrom on such and such a spot, when Flosi Thord's son
first rushed on Helgi Njal's son with an assault laid down by
law.  I give notice of this before five neighbours" -- then he
named them all by name -- "I give this lawful notice.  I give
notice of a suit which Thorgeir Thorir's son has handed over to
me."

Then Mord named his witnesses again "To bear witness," said he,
"that I summon these nine neighbours who dwell nearest the spot"
-- here he named them all by name -- "to ride to the Althing, and
to sit on the inquest to find whether Flosi Thord's son rushed
with an assault laid down by law on Helgi Njal's son, on that
spot where Flosi Thord's son dealt Helgi Njal's son a brain, or a
body, or a marrow wound, which proved a death wound, and from
which Helgi got his death.  I call on you to utter all those
words which ye are bound to find by law, and which I shall call
on you to utter before the court, and which belong to this suit;
I call upon you by a lawful summons -- I call on you so that ye
may yourselves hear -- I call on you in the suit which Thorgeir
Thorir's son has handed over to me."

Again Mord named his witnesses "To bear witness, that I summon
these nine neighbours who dwell nearest to the spot to ride to
the Althing, and to sit on an inquest to find whether Flosi
Thord's son wounded Helgi Njal's son with a brain, or body, or
marrow wound, which proved a death wound, and from which Helgi
got his death, on that spot where Flosi Thord's son first rushed
on Helgi Njal's son with an assault laid down by law.  I call on
you to utter all those words which ye are bound to find by law,
and which I shall call on you to utter before the court, and
which belong to this suit.  I call upon you by a lawful summons
-- I call on you so that ye may yourselves hear -- I call on you
in the suit which Thorgeir Thorir's son has handed over to me."

Then Mord said, "Now is the suit set on foot as ye asked, and
now I will pray thee, Thorgeir Craggeir, to come to me when thou
ridest to the Thing, and then let us both ride together, each
with our band, and keep as close as we can together, for my band
shall be ready by the very beginning of the Thing, and I will be
true to you in all things."

They showed themselves well pleased at that, and this was fast
bound by oaths, that no man should sunder himself from another
till Kari willed it, and that each of them should lay down his
life for the other's life.  Now they parted with friendship, and
settled to meet again at the Thing.

Now Thorgeir rides back east, but Kari rides west over the rivers
till he came to Tongue, to Asgrim's house.  He welcomed them
wonderfully well, and Kari told Asgrim all Gizur the White's
plan, and of the setting on foot of the suit.

"I looked for as much from him," says Asgrim, "that he would
behave well, and now he has shown it."

Then Asgrim went on, "What heardest thou from the east of Flosi?"

"He went east all the way to Weaponfirth," answers Kari, "and
nearly all the chiefs have promised to ride with him to the
Althing, and to help him.  They look, too, for help from the
Reykdalesmen, and the men of Lightwater, and the Axefirthers."

Then they talked much about it, and so the time passes away up to
the Althing.

Thorhall Asgrim's son took such a hurt in his leg that the foot
above the ankle was as big and swollen as a woman's thigh, and he
could not walk save with a staff.  He was a man tall in growth,
and strong and powerful, dark of hue in hair and skin, measured
and guarded in his speech, and yet hot and hasty tempered.  He
was the third greatest lawyer in all Iceland.

Now the time comes that men should ride from home to the Thing,
Asgrim said to Kari, "Thou shalt ride at the very beginning gf
the Thing, and fit up our booths, and my son Thorhall with thee. 
Thou wilt treat him best and kindest, as he is footlame, but we
shall stand in the greatest need of him at this Thing.  With you
two, twenty men more shall ride."

After that they made ready for their journey, and then they rode
to the Thing, and set up their booths, and fitted them out well.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Helmet-hewer," sword.
(2)  Gizur.



135. OF FLOSI AND THE BURNERS

Flosi rode from the east and those hundred and twenty men who had
been at the burning with him.  They rode till they came to
Fleetlithe.  Then the sons of Sigfus looked after their
homesteads and tarried there that day, but at even they rode west
over Thurso-water, and slept there that night.  But next morning
early they saddled their horses and rode off on their way.

Then Flosi said to his men, "Now will we ride to Tongue to Asgrim
to breakfast, and trample down his pride a little."

They said that were well done.  They rode till they had a short
way to Tongue.  Asgrim stood out of doors, and some men with him. 
They see the band as soon as ever they could do so from the
house.  Then Asgrim's men said, "There must be Thorgeir
Craggeir."

"Not he," said Asgrim.  "I think so all the more because these
men fare with laughter and wantonness; but such kinsmen of Njal
as Thorgeir is would not smile before some vengeance is taken for
the burning, and I will make another guess, and maybe ye will
think that unlikely.  My meaning is that it must be Flosi and the
burners with him, and they must mean to humble us with insults,
and we will now go indoors all of us."

Now they do so, and Asgrim made them sweep the house and put up
the hangings, and set the boards and put meat on them.  He made
them place stools along each bench, all down the room.

Flosi rode into the "town," and bade men alight from their horses
and go in.  They did so, and Flosi and his men went into the
hall.  Asgrim sate on the cross-bench on the dais.  Flosi looked
at the benches and saw that all was made ready that men needed to
have.  Asgrim gave them no greeting, but said to Flosi, "The
boards are set, so that meat may be free to those that need it."

Flosi sat down to the board, and all his men; but they laid their
arms up against the wainscot.  They sat on the stools who found
no room on the benches; but four men stood with weapons just
before where Flosi sat while they ate.

Asgrim kept his peace during the meat, but was as red to look on
as blood.

But when they were full, some women cleared away the boards,
while others brought in water to wash their hands.  Flosi was in
no greater hurry than if he had been at home.  There lay a
pole-axe in the corner of the dais.  Asgrim caught it up with
both hands, and ran up to the rail at the edge of the dais, and
made a blow at Flosi's head.  Glum Hilldir's son happened to see
what he was about to do, and sprang up at once, and got hold of
the axe above Asgrim's hands, and turned the edge at once on
Asgrim; for Glum was very strong.  Then many more men ran up and
seized Asgrim, but Flosi said that no man was to do Asgrim any
harm, "For we put him to too hard a trial, and he only did what
he ought, and showed in that that he had a big heart."

Then Flosi said to Asgrim, "Here, now, we shall part safe and
sound, and meet at the Thing, and there begin our quarrel over
again."

"So it will be," says Asgrim; "and I would wish that, ere this
Thing be over, ye should have to take in some of your sails."

Flosi answered him never a word, and then they went out, and
mounted their horses, and rode away.  They rode till they came to
Laugarwater, and were there that night; but next morning they
rode on to Baitvale, and baited their horses there, and there
many bands rode to meet them.  There was Hall of the Side, and
all the Eastfirthers.  Flosi gretted them well, and told them of
his journeys and dealings with Asgrim.  Many praised him for
that, and said such things were bravely done.

Then Hall said, "I look on this in another way than ye do, for
methinks it was a foolish prank -- they were sure to bear in mind
their griefs, even though they were not reminded of them anew;
but those men who try others so heavily must look for all evil."

It was seen from Hall's way that he thought this deed far too
strong.  They rode thence all together, till they came to the
Upper Field, and there they set their men in array, and rode down
on the Thing.

Flosi had made them fit out Byrgir's booth ere be rode to the
Thing; but the Eastfirthers rode to their own booths.



136. OF THORGEIR CRAGGEIR

Thorgeir Craggier rode from the east with much people.  His
brothers were with him, Thorleif Crow and Thorgrim the Big.  They
came to Hof, to Mord Valgard's son's house, and bided there till
he was ready.  Mord had gathered every man who could bear arms,
and they could see nothing about him but that he was most
steadfast in everything, and now they rode until they came west
across the rivers.  Then they waited for Hjallti Skeggi's son. 
He came after they had waited a short while, and they greeted him
well, and rode afterwards all together till they came to Reykia
in Bishop's tongue, and bided there for Asgrim Ellidagrim's son,
and he came to meet them there.  Then they rode west across
Bridgewater.  Then Asgrim told them all that had passed between
him and Flosi; and Thorgeir said, "I would that we might try
their bravery ere the Thing closes."

They rode until they came to Baitvale.  There Gizur the White
came to meet them with a very great company, and they fell to
talking together.  Then they rode to the Upper Field, and drew up
all their men in array there, and so rode to the Thing.

Flosi and his men all took to their arms, and it was within an
ace that they would fall to blows.  But Asgrim and his friends
and their followers would have no hand in it, and rode to their
booths; and now all was quiet that day, so that they had naught
to do with one another.  Thither were come chiefs from all the
Quarters of the land; there had never been such a crowded Thing
before, that men could call to mind.



137. OF EYJOLF BOLVERK'S SON

There was a man named Eyjolf.  He was the son of Bolverk, the son
of Eyjolf the Guileful, of Otterdale (1).  Eyjolf was a man of
great rank, and best skilled in law of all men, so that some said
he was the third best lawyer in Iceland.  He was the fairest in
face of all men, tall and strong, and there was the making of a
great chief in him.  He was greedy of money, like the rest of his
kinsfolk.

One day Flosi went to the booth of Bjarni Broddhelgi's son. 
Bjarni took him by both hands, and sat Flosi down by his side. 
They talked about many things, and at last Flosi said to Bjarni,
"What counsel shall we now take?"

"I think," answered Bjarni, "that it is now hard to say what to
do, but the wisest thing seems to me to go round and ask for
help, since they are drawing strength together against you.  I
will also ask thee, Flosi, whether there be any very good lawyer
in your band; for now there are but two courses left; one to ask
if they will take an atonement, and that is not a bad choice, but
the other is to defend the suit at law, if there be any defence
to it, though that will seem to be a bold course; and this is why
I think this last ought to be chosen, because ye have hitherto
fared high and mightily, and it is unseemly now to take a lower
course."

"As to thy asking about lawyers said Flosi, "I will answer thee
at once that there is no such man in our band; nor do I know
where to look for one except it be Thorkel Geitir's son, thy
kinsman."

"We must not reckon on him," said Bjarni, "for though he knows
something of law, he is far too wary, and no man need hope to
have him as his shield; but he will back thee as well as any man
who backs thee best, for he has a stout heart; besides, I must
tell thee that it will be that man's bane who undertakes the
defence in this suit for the burning, but I have no mind that
this should befall my kinsmen Thorkel, so ye must turn your eyes
elsewhither."

Flosi said he knew nothing about who were the best lawyers.

"There is a man named Eyjolf," said Bjarni; "he is Bolverk's son,
and he is the best lawyer in the Westfirther's Quarter; but you
will need to give him much money if you are to bring him into the
suit, but still we must not stop at that.  We must also go with
our arms to all law business, and be most wary of ourselves, but
not meddle with them before we are forced to fight for our lives. 
And now I will go with thee, and set out at once on our begging
for help, for now methinks the peace will be kept but a little
while longer."

After that they go out of the booth, and to the booths of the
Axefirthers.  Then Bjarni talks with Lyting and Bleing, and Hroi
Arnstein's son, and he got speedily whatever he asked of them. 
Then they fared to see Kol, the son of Killing-Skuti, and Eyvind
Thorkel's son, the son of Askel the Priest, and asked them for
their help; but they stood out a long while, but the end of it
was that they took three marks of silver for it, and so went into
the suit with them.

Then they went to the booths of the men of Lightwater, and stayed
there some time.  Flosi begged the men of Lightwater for help,
but they were stubborn and hard to win over, and then Flosi said,
with much wrath, "Ye are ill-behaved!  Ye are grasping and
wrongful at home in your own country, and ye will not help men at
the Thing, though they need it.  No doubt you will be held up to
reproach at the Thing, and very great blame will be laid on you
if ye bear not in mind that scorn and those biting words which
Skarphedinn hurled at you men of Lightwater."

But on the other hand, Flosi dealt secretly with them, and bade
them money for their help, and so coaxed them over with fair
words, until it came about that they promised him their aid, and
then became so steadfast that they said they would fight for
Flosi, if need were.

Then Bjarni said to Flosi, "Well done!  Well done!  Thou art a
mighty chief, and a bold outspoken man, and reckest little what
thou savest to men."

After that they fared away west across the river, and so to the
Hladbooth.  They saw many men outside before the booth.  There
was one man who had a scarlet cloak over his shoulders, and a
gold band round his head, and an axe studded with silver in his
hand.

"This is just right," said Bjarni, "here now is the man I spoke
of, Eyjolf Bolverk's son, if thou wilt see him, Flosi."

Then they went to meet Eyjolf, and hailed him.  Eyjolf knew
Bjarni at once, and greeted him well.  Bjarni took Eyjolf by the
hand, and led him up into the "Great Rift."  Flosi's and Bjarni's
men followed after, and Eyjolf's men went also with him.  They
bade them stay upon the lower brink of the Rift, and look about
them, but Flosi, and Bjarni, and Eyjolf went on till they came to
where the path leads down from the upper brink of the Rift.

Flosi said it was a good spot to sit down there, for they could
see around them far and wide.  Then they sat them down there. 
They were four of them together, and no more.

Then Bjarni spoke to Eyjolf, and said "Thee, friend, have we come
to see, for we much need thy help in every way."

"Now," said Eyjolf, "there is good choice of men here at the
Thing, and ye will not find it hard to fall on those who will be
a much greater strength to you than I can be."

"Not so," said Bjarni, "thou hast many things which show that
there is no greater man than thou at the Thing; first of all,
that thou art so well-born, as all those men are who are sprung
from Ragnar Hairybreeks; thy forefathers, too, have always stood
first in great suits, both here at the Thing and at home in their
own country, and they have always had the best of it; we think,
therefore, it is likely that thou wilt be lucky in winning suits,
like thy kinsfolk."

"Thou speakest well, Bjarni," said Evjolf; "but I think that I
have small share in all this that thou savest."

Then Flosi said, "There is no need beating about the bush as to
what we have in mind.  We wish to ask for thy help, Eyjolf, and
that thou wilt stand by us in our suits, and go to the court with
us, and undertake the defence, if there be any, and plead it for
us, and stand by us in all things that may happen at this Thing."

Eyjolf jumped up in wrath, and said that no man had any right to
think that he could make a catspaw of him, or drag him on if he
had no mind to go himself.

"I see, too, now," he says, "what has led you to utter all those
fair words with which ye began to speak to me."

Then Hallbjorn the Strong caught hold of him and sate him down by
his side, between him and Bjarni, and said, "No tree falls at the
first stroke, friend, but sit here awhile by us."  Then Flosi
drew a gold ring off his arm.

"This ring will I give thee, Eyjolf, for thy help and friendship,
and so show thee that I will not befool thee.  It will be best
for thee to take the ring, for there is no man here at the Thing
to whom I have ever given such a gift."

The ring was such a good one, and so well made, that it was worth
twelve hundred yards of russet stuff.

Hallbjorn drew the ring on Eyjolf's arm; and Eyjolf said, "It is
now most fitting that I should take the ring, since thou behavest
so handsomely; and now thou mayest make up thy mind that I will
undertake the defence, and do all things needful."

"Now," said Bjarni, "ye behave handsomely on both sides, and here
are men well fitted to be witnesses, since I and Hallbjorn are
here, that thou hast undertaken the suit."

Then Eyjolf arose, and Flosi too, and they took one another by
the hand; and so Eyjolf undertook the whole defence of the suit
off Flosi's hands, and so, too, if any suit arose out of the
defence, for it often happens that what is a defence in one suit,
is a plaintiff's plea in another.  So he took upon him all the
proofs and proceedings which belonged to those suits, whether
they were to be pleaded before the Quarter Court or the Fifth
Court.  Flosi handed them over in lawful form, and Eyjolf took
them in lawful form, and then he said to Flosi and Bjarni, "Now I
have undertaken this defence just as ye asked, but my wish it is
that ye should still keep it secret at first; but if the matter
comes into the Fifth Court, then be most careful not to say that
ye have given goods for my help."

Then Flosi went home to his booth, and Bjarni with him, but
Eyjolf went to the booth of Snorri the Priest, and sate down by
him, and they talked much together.

Snorri the Priest caught hold of Eyjolf's arm, and turned up the
sleeve, and sees that he had a great ring of gold on his arm. 
Then Snorri the Priest said, "Pray, was this ring bought or
given?"

Eyjolf was put out about it, and had never a word to say.  Then
Snorri said, "I see plainly that thou must have taken it as a
gift, and may this ring not be thy death!"

Eyjolf jumped up and went away, and would not speak about it; and
Snorri said, as Eyjolf arose, "It is very likely that thou wilt
know what kind of gift thou hast taken by the time this Thing is
ended."

Then Eyjolf went to his booth.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Eyjolf the Guileful was the son of Thord Gellir, the son of
     Oleif Feilan.  The mother of Eyjolf the Guileful was Rodny,
     the daughter of Skeggi of Midfirth.



138. OF ASGRIM, AND GIZUR, AND KARI

Now Asgrim Ellidagrim's son talks to Gizur the White, and Kari
Solmund's son, and to Hjallti Skeggi's son, Mord Valgard's son,
and Thorgeir Craggeir, and says, "There is no need to have any
secrets here, for only those men are by who know all our counsel. 
Now I will ask you if ye know anything of their plans, for if you
do, it seems to me that we must take fresh counsel about our own
plans."

"Snorri the Priest," answers Gizur the White, "sent a man to me,
and bade him tell me that Flosi had gotten great help from the
Northlanders; but that Eyjolf Bolverk's son, his kinsman, had had
a gold ring given him by some one, and made a secret of it, and
Snorri said it was his meaning that Eyjolf Bolverk's son must be
meant to defend the suit at law, and that the ring must have been
given him for that."

They were all agreed that it must be so.  Then Gizur spoke to
them, "Now has Mord Valgard's son, my son-in-law, undertaken a
suit, which all must think most hard, to prosecute Flosi; and now
my wish is that ye share the other suits amongst you, for now it
will soon be time to give notice of the suits at the Hill of
Laws.  We shall need also to ask for more help."

Asgrim said so it should be, "but we will beg thee to go round
with us when we ask for help."  Gizur said he would be ready to
do that.

After that Gizur picked out all the wisest men of their company
to go with him as his backers.  There was Hjallti Skeggi's son,
and Asgrim, and Kari, and Thorgeir Craggeir.

Then Gizur the White said, "Now will we first go to the booth of
Skapti Thorod's son," and they do so.  Gizur the White went
first, then Hjallti, then Kari, then Asgrim, then Thorgeir
Craggeir, and then his brothers.

They went into the booth.  Skapti sat on the cross bench on the
dais, and when he saw Gizur the White he rose up to meet him, and
greeted him and all of them well, and bade Gizur to sit down by
him, and he does so.  Then Gizur said to Asgrim, "Now shalt thou
first raise the question of help with Skapti, but I will throw in
what I think good."

"We are come hither," said Asgrim, "for this sake, Skapti, to
seek help and aid at thy hand."

"I was thought to be hard to win the last time," said Skapti,
"when I would not take the burden of your trouble on me."

"It is quite another matter now," said Gizur.  "Now the feud is
for master Njal and mistress Bergthora, who were burnt in their
own house without a cause, and for Njal's three sons, and many
other worthy men, and thou wilt surely never be willing to yield
no help to men, or to stand by thy kinsmen and connections."

"It was in my mind," answers Skapti, "when Skarphedinn told me
that I had myself borne tar on my own head, and cut up a sod of
turf and crept under it, and when he said that I had been so
afraid that Thorolf Lopt's son of Eyrar bore me abroad in his
ship among his meal-sacks, and so carried me to Iceland, that I
would never share in the blood feud for his death."

"Now there is no need to bear such things in mind," said Gizur
the White, "for he is dead who said that, and thou wilt surely
grant me this, though thou wouldst not do it for other men's
sake."

"This quarrel," says Skapti, "is no business of thine, except
thou choosest to be entangled in it along with them."

Then Gizur was very wrath, and said, "Thou art unlike thy father,
though he was thought not to be quite cleanhanded; yet was he
ever helpful to men when they needed him most."

"We are unlike in temper," said Skapti.  "Ye two, Asgrim and
thou, think that ye have had the lead in mighty deeds; thou,
Gizur the White, because thou overcamest Gunnar of Lithend; but
Asgrim, for that he slew Gauk, his foster-brother."

"Few," said Asgrim, "bring forward the better if they know the
worse, but many would say that I slew not Gauk ere I was driven
to it.  There is some excuse for thee for not helping us, but
none for heaping reproaches on us; and I only wish before this
Thing is out that thou mayest get from this suit the greatest
disgrace, and that there may be none to make thy shame good."

Then Gizur and his men stood up all of them, and went out, and so
on to the booth of Snorri the Priest.

Snorri sat on the cross-bench in his booth; they went into the
booth, and he knew the men at once, and stood up to meet them,
and bade them all welcome, and made room for them to sit by him.

After that, they asked one another the news of the day.

Then Asgrim spoke to Snorri, and said, "For that am I and my
kinsman Gizur come hither, to ask thee for thy help."

"Thou speakest of what thou mayest always be forgiven for asking,
for help in the blood-feud after such connections as thou hadst. 
We, too, got many wholesome counsels from Njal, though few now
bear that in mind; but as yet I know not of what ye think ye
stand most in need."

"We stand most in need," answers Asgrim, "of brisk lads and good
weapons, if we fight them here at the Thing."

"True it is," said Snorri, "that much lies on that, and it is
likeliest that ye will press them home with daring, and that they
will defend themselves so in like wise, and neither of you will
allow the others' right.  Then ye will not bear with them and
fall on them, and that will be the only way left; for then they
will seek to pay you off with shame for manscathe, and with
dishonour for loss of kin."

It was easy to see that he goaded them on in everything.

Then Gizur the White said "Thou speakest well, Snorri, and thou
behavest ever most like a chief when most lies at stake."

"I wish to know," said Asgrim, "in what way thou wilt stand by
us if things turn out as thou sayest."

"I will show thee those marks of friendship," said Snorri, "on
which all your honour will hang, but I will not go with you to
the court.  But if ye fight here on the Thing, do not fall on
them at all unless ye are all most steadfast and dauntless, for
you have great champions against you.  But if ye are overmatched,
ye must let yourselves be driven hither towards us, for I shall
then have drawn up my men in array hereabouts, and shall be ready
to stand by you.  But if it falls out otherwise, and they give
way before you, my meaning is that they will try to run for a
stronghold in the "Great Rift."  But if they come thither, then
ye will never get the better of them.  Now I will take that on my
hands, to draw up my men there, and guard the pass to the
stronghold, but we will not follow them whether they turn north
or south along the river.  And when you have slain out of their
band about as many as I think ye will be able to pay blood-fines
for, and yet keep your priesthoods and abodes, then I will run up
with all my men and part you.  Then ye shall promise to do as I
bid you, and stop the battle, if I on my part do what I have now
promised."

Gizur thanked him kindly, and said that what he had said was just
what they all needed, and then they all went out.

"Whither shall we go now?" said Gizur.

"To the Nortlanders' booth," said Asgrim.

Then they fared thither.



139. OF ASGRIM AND GUDMUND

And when they came into the booth then they saw where Gudmund the
Powerful sate and talked with Einar Conal's son, his foster-
child; he was a wise man.

Then they come before him, and Gudmund welcomed them very
heartily, and made them clear the booth for them, that they might
all be able to sit down.

Then they asked what tidings, and Asgrim said, "There is no need
to mutter what I have to say.  We wish, Gudmund, to ask for thy
steadfast help."

"Have ye seen any other chiefs before?" said Gudmund.

They said they had been to see Skapti Thorod's son and Snorri the
Priest, and told him quietly how they had fared with each of
them.

Then Gudmund said, "Last time I behaved badly and meanly to you. 
Then I was stubborn, but now ye shall drive your bargain with me
all the more quickly because I was more stubborn then, and now I
will go myself with you to the court with all my Thing-men, and
stand by you in all such things as I can, and fight for you
though this be needed, and lay down my life for your lives.  I
will also pay Skapti out in this way, that Thorstein Gape-mouth
his son shall be in the battle on our side, for he will not dare
to do aught else than I will, since he has Jodisa my daughter to
wife, and then Skapti will try to part us."

They thanked him, and talked with him long and low afterwards, so
that no other men could hear.

Then Gudmund bade them not to go before the knees of any other
chiefs, for he said that would be little-hearted.

"We will now run the risk with the force that we have.  Ye must
go with your weapons to all law-business, but not fight as things
stand."

Then they went all of them home to their booths, and all this was
at first with few men's knowledge.

So now the Thing goes on.



140. OF THE DECLARATIONS OF THE SUITS

It was one day that men went to the Hill of Laws, and the chiefs
were so placed that Asgrim Ellidagrim's son, and Gizur the White,
and Gudmund the Powerful, and Snorri the Priest, were on the
upper hand by the Hill of Laws; but the Eastfirthers stood down
below.

Mord Valgard's son stood next to Gizur his father-in-law, he was
of all men the readiest-tongued.

Gizur told him that he ought to give notice of the suit for
manslaughter, and bade him speak up, so that all might hear him
well.

Then Mord took witness and said, "I take witness to this that I
give notice of an assault laid down by law against Flosi Thord's
son, for that be rushed at Helgi Njal's son and dealt him a
brain, or a body, or a marrow wound, which proved a death-wound,
and from which Helgi got his death.  I say that in this suit he
ought to be made a guilty man, an outlaw, not to be fed, not to
be forwarded, not to be helped or harboured in any need.  I say
that all his goods are forfeited, half to me and half to the men
of the Quarter, who have a right by law to take his forfeited
goods.  I give notice of this suit for manslaughter in the
Quarter Court into which this suit ought by law to come.  I give
notice of this lawful notice; I give notice in the hearing of all
men on the Hill of Laws; I give notice of this suit to be pleaded
this summer, and of full outlawry against Flosi Thord's son; I
give notice of a suit which Thorgeir Thorir's son has handed over
to me."

Then a great shout was uttered at the Hill of Laws, that Mord
spoke well and boldly.

Then Mord began to speak a second time.

"I take you to witness to this," says he, "that I give notice
of a suit against Flosi Thord's son.  I give notice for that he
wounded Helgi Njal's son with a brain, or a body, or a marrow
wound, which proved a death-wound, and from which Helgi got his
death on that spot where Flosi Thord's son had first rushed on
Helgi Njal's son with an assault laid down by law.  I say that
thou, Flosi, ought to be made in this suit a guilty man, an
outlaw, not to be fed, not to be forwarded, not to be helped or
harboured in any need.  I say that all thy goods are forfeited,
half to me and half to the men of the Quarter, who have a right
by law to take the goods which have been forfeited by thee.  I
give notice of this suit in the Quarter Court into which it ought
by law to come; I give notice of this lawful notice; I give
notice of it in the hearing of all men on the Hill of Laws; I
give notice of this suit to be pleaded this summer, and of full
outlawry against Flosi Thord's son.  I give notice of the suit
which Thorgeir Thorir's son hath handed over to me."

After that Mord sat him down.

Flosi listened carefully, but said never a word the while.

Then Thorgeir Craggeir stood up and took witness, and said, "I
take witness to this, that I give notice of a suit against Glum
Hilldir's son, in that he took firing and lit it, and bore it to
the house at Bergthorsknoll, when they were burned inside it, to
wit, Njal Thorgeir's son, and Bergthora Skarphedinn's daughter,
and all those other men who were burned inside it there and then. 
I say that in this suit he ought to be made a guilty man, an
outlaw, not to be fed, not to be forwarded, not to be helped or
harboured in any need.  I say that all his goods are forfeited. 
half to me, and half to the men of the Quarter, who have a right
by law to take his forfeited goods; I give notice of this suit in
the Quarter Court, into which it ought by law to come.  I give
notice in the hearing of all men on the Hill of Laws.  I give
notice of this suit to be pleaded this summer, and of full
outlawry against Glum Hilldir's son."

Kari Solmund's son declared his suits against Kol Thorstein's
son, and Gunnar Lambi's son, and Grani Gunnar's son, and it was
the common talk of men that he spoke wondrous well.

Thorleif Crow declared his suit against all the sons of Sigfus,
but Thorgrim the Big, his brother, against Modolf Kettle's son,
and Lambi Sigurd's son, and Hroar Hamond's son, brother of
Leidolf the Strong.

Asgrim Ellidagrim's son declared his suit against Leidolf and
Thorstein Geirleif's son, Arni Kol's son, and Grim the Red.

And they all spoke well. 

After that other men gave notice of their suits, and it was far
on in the day that it went on so.

Then men fared home to their booths.

Eyjolf Bolverk's son went to his booth with Flosi, they passed
east around the booth and Flosi said to Eyjolf.

"See'st thou any defence in these suits."

"None," says Eyjolf.

"What counsel is now to be taken?" says Flosi.

"I will give thee a piece of advice," said Eyjolf.  "Now thou
shalt hand over thy priesthood to thy brother Thorgeir, but
declare that thou hast joined the Thing of Askel the Priest the
son of Thorkettle, north away in Reykiardale; but if they do not
know this, then may be that this will harm them, for they will be
sure to plead their suit in the Eastfirthers' court, but they
ought to plead it in the Northlanders' court, and they will
overlook that, and it is a Fifth Court matter against them if
they plead their suit in another court than that in which they
ought, and then we will take that suit up, but not until we have
no other choice left."

"May be," said Flosi, "that we shall get the worth of the ring."

"I don't know that," says Eyjolf; "but I will stand by thee at
law, so that men shall say that there never was a better defence. 
Now, we must send for Askel, but Thorgeir shall come to thee at
once, and a man with him."

A little while after Thorgeir came, and then he took on him
Flosi's leadership and priesthood.

By that time Askel was come thither too, and then Flosi declared
that he had joined his Thing, and this was with no man's
knowledge save theirs.

Now all is quite till the day when the courts were to go out to
try suits.



141. NOW MEN GO TO THE COURTS

Now the time passes away till the courts were to go out to try
suits.  Both sides then made them ready to go thither, and armed
them.  Each side put war-tokens on their helmets.

Then Thorhall Asgrim's son said, "Walk hastily in nothing father
mine, and do everything as lawfully and rightly as ye can, but if
ye fall into any strait let me know as quickly as ye can, and
then I will give you counsel."

Asgrim and the others looked at him, and his face was as though
it were all blood, but great teardrops gushed out of his eyes. 
He bade them bring him his spear, that had been a gift to him
from Skarphedinn, and it was the greatest treasure.

Asgrim said as they went away, "Our kinsman Thorhall was not easy
in his mind as we left him behind in the booth, and I know not
what he will be at."

Then Asgrim said again, "Now we will go to Mord Valgard's son,
and think of nought else but the suit, for there is more sport in
Flosi than in very many other men."

Then Asgrim sent a man to Gizur the White, and Hjallti Skeggi's
son, and Gudmund the Powerful.  Now they all came together, and
went straight to the court of Eastfirthers.  They went to the
court from the south, but Flosi and all the Eastfirthers with him
went to it from the north.  There were also the men of Reykdale
and the Axefirthers with Flosi.  There, too, was Eyjolf Bolverk's
son.  Flosi looked at Eyjolf, and said, "All now goes fairly, and
may be that it will not be far off from thy guess."

"Keep thy peace about it," says Eyjolf, "and then we shall be
sure to gain our point."

Now Mord took witness, and bade all those men who had suits of
outlawry before the court to cast lots who should first plead or
declare his suit, and who next, and who last; he bade them by a
lawful bidding before the court, so that the judges heard it. 
Then lots were cast as to the declarations, and he, Mord, drew
the lot to declare his suit first.

Now Mord Valgard's son took witness the second time, and said, "I
take witness to this, that I except all mistakes in words in my
pleading, whether they be too many or wrongly spoken, and I claim
the right to amend all my words until I have put them into proper
lawful shape.  I take witness to myself of this."

Again Mord said, "I take witness to this, that I bid Flosi
Thord's son, or any other man who has undertaken the defence made
over to him by Flosi, to listen for him to my oath, and to my
declaration of my suit, and to all the proofs and proceedings
which I am about to bring forward against him; I bid him by a
lawful bidding before the court, so that the judges may hear it
across the court."

Again Mord Valgard's son said, "I take witness to this, that I
take an oath on the book, a lawful oath, and I say it before God,
that I will so plead this suit in the most truthful, and most
just and most lawful way, so far as I know; and that I will bring
forward all my proofs in due form, and utter them faithfully so
long as I am in this suit."

After that he spoke in these words, "I have called Thorodd as my
first witness, and Thorbjorn as my second; I have called them to
bear witness that I gave notice of an assault laid down by law
against Flosi Thord's son, on that spot where he, Flosi Thord's
son, rushed with an assault laid down by law on Helgi Njal's son,
when Flosi Thord's son wounded Helgi Njal's son with a brain, or
a body, or a marrow wound, which proved a death-wound, and from
which Helgi got his death.  I said that he ought to be made in
this suit a guilty man, an outlaw, not to be fed, not to be
forwarded, not to be helped or harboured in any need; I said that
all his goods were forfeited half to me and half to the men of
the Quarter who have the right by law to take the goods which he
has forfeited; I gave notice of the suit in the quarter Court
into which the suit ought by law to come; I gave notice of that
lawful notice; I gave notice in the hearing of all men at the
Hill of Laws; I gave notice of this suit to be pleaded now this
summer, and of full outlawry against Flosi Thord's son.  I gave
notice of a suit which Thorgeir Thorir's son had handed over to
me; and I had all these words in my notice which I have now used
in this declaration of my suit.  I now declare this suit of
outlawry in this shape before the court of the Eastfirthers over
the head of John, as I uttered it when I gave notice of it."

Then Mord spoke again, "I have called Thorodd as my first
witness, and Thorbjorn as my second.  I have called them to bear
witness that I gave notice of a suit against Flosi Thord's son
for that he wounded Helgi Njal's son with a brain or a body, or a
marrow wound, which proved a death-wound, and from which Helgi
got his death.  I said that he ought to be made in this suit a
guilty man, an outlaw, not to be fed, not to be forwarded, not to
be helped or harboured in any need; I said that all his goods
were forfeited, half to me and half to the men of the Quarter who
have the right by law to take the goods which he has forfeited; I
gave notice of the suit in the Quarter Court into which the suit
ought by law to come; I gave notice of that lawful notice; I gave
notice in the hearing of all men at the Hill of Laws; I gave
notice of this suit to be pleaded now this summer, and of full
outlawry against Flosi Thord's son.  I gave notice of a suit
which Thorgeir Thorir's son had handed over to me; and I had all
these words in my notice which I have now used in this
declaration of my suit.  I now declare this suit of outlawry in
this shape before the court of the Eastfirthers over the head of
John, as I uttered it when I gave notice of it."

Then Mord's witnesses to the notice came before the court, and
spake so that one uttered their witness, but both confirmed it by
their common consent in this form, "I bear witness that Mord
called Thorodd as his first witness, and me as his second, and my
name is Thorbjorn" -- then he named his father's name -- "Mord
called us two as his witnesses that he gave notice of an assault
laid down by law against Flosi Thord's son when he rushed on
Helgi Njal's son, in that spot where Flosi Thord's son dealt
Helgi Njal's son a brain, or a body, or a marrow wound, that
proved a death-wound, and from which Helgi got his death.  He
said that Flosi ought to be made in this suit a guilty man, an
outlaw, not to be fed, not to be forwarded, not to be helped or
harboured by any man; he said that all his goods were forfeited,
half to himself and half to the men of the Quarter who have the
right by law to take the goods which he had forfeited; he gave
notice of the suit in the Quarter Court into which the suit ought
by law to come; he gave notice of that lawful notice; he gave
notice in the hearing of all men at the Hill of Laws; he gave
notice of this suit to be pleaded now this summer, and of full
outlawry against Flosi Thord's son.  He gave notice of a suit
which Thorgeir Thorir's son had handed over to him.  He used all
those words in his notice which he used in the declaration of his
suit, and which we have used in bearing witness; we have now
borne our witness rightly and lawfully, and we are agreed in
bearing it; we bear this witness in this shape before the
Eastfirthers' Court over the head of John, as Mord uttered it
when he gave his notice."

A second time they bore their witness of the notice before the
court, and put the wounds first and the assault last, and used
all the same words as before, and bore their witness in this
shape before the Eastfirthers' Court just as Mord uttered them
when he gave his notice.

Then Mord's witnesses to the handing over of the suit went before
the court, and one uttered their witness, and both confirmed it
by common consent, and spoke in these words, "That those two,
Mord Valgard's son and Thorgeir Thorir's son, took them to
witness that Thorgeir Thorir's son handed over a suit for
manslaughter to Mord Valgard's son against Flosi Thord's son for
the slaying of Helgi Njal's son; he handed over to him then this
suit, with all the proofs and proceedings which belonged to the
suit, he handed it over to him to plead and to settle, and to
make use of all rights as though he were the rightful next of
kin: Thorgeir handed it over lawfully, and Mord took it lawfully.

They bore witness of the handing over of the suit in this shape
before the Eastfirther's Court over the head of John, just as
Mord or Thorgeir had called them as witnesses to prove.

They made all these witnesses swear on oath ere they bore
witness, and the judges too.

Again Mord Valgard's son took witness.  "I take witness to this,"
said he, "that I bid those nine neighbours whom I summoned when I
laid this suit against Flosi Thord's son, to take their seats
west on the river-bank, and I call on the defendant to challenge
this request, I call on him by a lawful bidding before the court
so that the judges may hear."

Again Mord took witness.  "I take witness to this, that I bid
Flosi Thord's son, or that other man who has the defence handed
over to him, to challenge the inquest which I have caused to,
take their seats west on the river-bank.  I bid thee by a lawful
bidding before the court so that the judges may hear."

Again Mord took witness.  "I take witness to this, that now are
all the first steps and proofs brought forward which belong to
the suit.  Summons to bear my oath, oath taken, suit declared,
witness borne to the notice, witness home to the handing over of
the suit, the neighbours on the inquest bidden to take their
seats, and the defendant bidden to challenge the inquest.  I take
this witness to these steps and proofs which are now brought
forward, and also to this that I shall not be thought to have
left the suit though I go away from the court to look up proofs,
or on other business."

Now Flosi and his men went thither where the neighbours on the
inquest sate.

Then Flosi said to his men, "The sons of Sigfus must know best
whether these are the rightful neighbours to the spot who are
here summoned."

Kettle of the Mark answered, "Here is that neighbour who held
Mord at the font when he was baptized, but another is his second
cousin by kinship.

Then they reckoned up his kinship, and proved it with an oath.

Then Eyjolf took witness that the inquest should do nothing till
it was challenged.

A second time Eyjolf took witness, "I take witness to this," said
he, "that I challenge both these men out of the inquest, and set
them aside" -- here he named them by name, and their fathers as
well -- "for this sake, that one of them is Mord's second cousin
by kinship, but the other for gossipry (2), for which sake it is
lawful to challenge a neighbour on the inquest; ye two are for a
lawful reason incapable of uttering a finding, for now a lawful
challenge has overtaken you, therefore I challenge and set you
aside by the rightful custom of pleading at the Althing, and by
the law of the land; I challenge you in the cause which Flosi
Thord's son has handed over to me."

Now all the people spoke out, and said that Mord's suit had come
to naught, and all were agreed in this that the defence was
better than the prosecution.

Then Asgrim said to Mord, "The day is not yet their own, though
they think now that they have gained a great step; but now some
one shall go to see Thorhall my son, and know what advice he
gives us."

Then a trusty messenger was sent to Thorhall, and told him as
plainly as he could how far the suit had gone, and how Flosi and
his men thought they had brought the finding of the inquest to a
dead lock.

"I will so make it out," says Thorhall, "that this shall not
cause you to lose the suit; and tell them not to believe it,
though quirks and quibbles be brought against them, for that
wiseacre Eyjolf has now overlooked something.  But now thou shalt
go back as quickly as thou canst, and say that Mord Valgard's son
must go before the court, and take witness that their challenge
has come to naught," and then he told him step by step how they
must proceed.

The messenger came and told them Thorhall's advice.

Then Mord Valgard's son went to the court and took witness.  "I
take witness to this," said he, "that I make Eyjolf's challenge
void and of none effect; and my ground is, that he challenged
them not for their kinship to the true plaintiff, the next of
kin, but for their kinship to him who pleaded the suit; I take
this witness to myself, and to all those to whom this witness
will be of use."

After that he brought that witness before the court.

Now he went whither the neighbours sate on the inquest, and bade
those to sit down again who had risen up, and said they were
rightly called on to share in the finding of the inquest.

Then all said that Thorhall had done great things, and all
thought the prosecution better than the defence.

Then Flosi said to Eyjolf, "Thinkest thou that this is good law?"

"I think so, surely," he says, "and beyond a doubt we overlooked
this; but still we will have another trial of strength with
them."

Then Eyjolf took witness.  "I take witness to this," said he,
"that I challenge these two men out of the inquest" -- here he
named them both -- "for that sake that they are lodgers, but not
householders; I do not allow you two to sit on the inquest, for
now a lawful challenge has overtaken you; I challenge you both
and set you aside out of the inquest, by the rightful custom of
the Althing and by the law of the land."

Now Eyjolf said he was much mistaken if that could be shaken; and
then all said that the defence was better than the prosecution.

Now all men praised Eyjolf, and said there was never a man who
could cope with him in lawcraft.

Mord Valgard's son and Asgrim Ellidagrim's son now sent a man to
Thorhall to tell him how things stood; but when Thorhall heard
that, he asked what goods they owned, or if they were paupers?

The messenger said that one gained his livelihood by keeping
milch-kine, and "he has both cows and ewes at his abode; but the
other has a third of the land which he and the freeholder farm,
and finds his own food: and they have one hearth between them, he
and the man who lets the land, and one shepherd."

Then Thorhall said, "They will fare now as before, for they must
have made a mistake, and I will soon upset their challenge and
this though Eyjolf had used such big words that it was law."

Now Thorhall told the messenger plainly, step by step, how they
must proceed; and the messenger came back and told Mord and
Asgrim all the counsel that Thorhall had given.

Then Mord went to the court and took witness.  "I take witness to
this, that I bring to naught Eyjolf Bolverk's son's challenges
for that he has challenged those men out of the inquest who have
a lawful right to be there; every man has a right to sit on an
inquest of neighbours, who owns three hundreds in land or more,
though he may have no dairystock; and he too has the same right
who lives by dairystock worth the same sum, though he leases no
land."

Then he brought this witness before the court, and then he went
whither the neighbours on the inquest were, and bade them sit
down, and said they were rightfully among the inquest.

Then there was a great shout and cry and then all men said that
Flosi's and Eyjolf's cause was much shaken, and now men were of
one mind as to this, that the prosecution was better than the
defence.

Then Flosi said to Eyjolf, "Can this be law?"

Eyjolf said be had not wisdom enough to know that for a surety,
and then they sent a man to Skapti, the Speaker of the Law, to
ask whether it were good law, and he sent them back word that it
was surely good law, though few knew it.

Then this was told to Flosi, and Eyjolf Bolverk's son asked the
sons of Sigfus as to the other neighbours who were summoned
thither.

They said there were four of them who were wrongly summoned; "for
those sit now at home who were nearer neighbours to the spot."

Then Eyjolf took witness that he challenged all those four men
out of the inquest, and that he did it with lawful form of
challenge.  After that he said to the neighbours, "Ye are bound
to render lawful justice to both sides, and now ye shall go
before the court when ye are called, and take witness that ye
find that bar to uttering your finding; that ye are but five
summoned to utter your finding, but that ye ought to be nine;. 
and now Thorhall may prove and carry his point in every suit, if
he can cure this flaw in this suit."

And now it was plain in everything that Flosi and Eyjolf were
very boastful; and there was a great cry that now the suit for
the burning was quashed, and that again the defence was better
than the prosecution.

Then Asgrim spoke to Mord, "They know not yet of what to boast
ere we have seen my son Thorhall.  Njal told me that he had so
taught Thorhall law, that he would turn out the best lawyer in
Iceland whenever it were put to the proof."

Then a man was sent to Thorhall to tell him how things stood, and
of Flosi's and Eyjolf's boasting, and the cry of the people that
the suit for the burning was quashed in Mord's hands.

"It will be well for them," says Thorhall, "if they get not
disgrace from this.  Thou shalt go and tell Mord to take witness
and swear an oath, that the greater part of the inquest is
rightly summoned, and then he shall bring that witness before the
court, and then he may set the prosecution on its feet again; but
he will have to pay a fine of three marks for every man that he
has wrongly summoned; but he may not be prosecuted for that at
this Thing; and now thou shalt go back."

He does so, and told Mord and Asgrim all, word for word, that
Thorhall had said.

Then Mord went to the court, and took witness, and swore an oath
that the greater part of the inquest was rightly summoned, and
said then that he had set the prosecution on its feet again, and
then he went on, "And so our foes shall have honour from
something else than from this, that we have here taken a great
false step."

Then there was a great roar that Mord handled the suit well; but
it was said that Flosi and his men betook them only to quibbling
and wrong.

Flosi asked Eyjolf if this could be good law, but he said he
could not surely tell, but said the Lawman must settle this
knotty point.

Then Thorkel Geiti's son went on their behalf to tell the Lawman
how things stood, and asked whether this were good law that Mord
had said.

"More men are great lawyers now," says Skapti, "than I thought. 
I must tell thee, then, that this is such good law in all points,
that there is not a word to say against it; but still I thought
that I alone would know this, now that Njal was dead, for he was
the only man I ever knew who knew it."

Then Thorkell went back to Flosi and Eyjolf, and said that this
was good law.

Then Mord Valgard's son went to the court and took witness.  "I
take witness to this," he said, "that I bid those neighbours on
the inquest in the suit which I set on foot against Flosi Thord's
son now to utter their finding, and to find it either against him
or for him; I bid them by a lawful bidding before the court, so
that the judges may hear it across the court."

Then the neighbours on Mord's inquest went to the court, and one
uttered their finding, but all confirmed it by their consent; and
they spoke thus, word for word, "Mord Valgard's son summoned nine
of us thanes on this inquest, but here we stand five of us, but
four have been challenged and set aside, and now witness has been
home as to the absence of the four who ought to have uttered this
finding along with us, and now we are bound by law to utter our
finding.  We were summoned to bear this witness, whether Flosi
Thord's son rushed with an assault laid down by law on Helgi
Njal's son, on that spot where Flosi Thord's son wounded Helgi
Njal's son with a brain, or a body, or a marrow wound, which
proved a death-wound, and from which Helgi got his death.  He
summoned us to utter all those words which it was lawful for us
to utter, and which he should call on us to answer before the
court, and which belong to this suit; he summoned us, so that we
heard what he said; he summoned us in a suit which Thorgeir
Thorir's son had handed over to him, and now we have all sworn an
oath, and found our lawful finding, and are all agreed, and we
utter our finding against Flosi, and we say that he is truly
guilty in this suit.  We nine men on this inquest of neighbours
so shapen, utter this our finding before the Eastfirthers' Court
over the head of John, as Mord summoned us to do; but this is the
finding of all of us."

Again a second time they uttered their finding against Flosi, and
uttered it first about the wounds, and last about the assault,
but all their other words they uttered just as they had before
uttered their finding against Flosi, and brought him in truly
guilty in the suit.

Then Mord Valgard's son went before the court, and took witness
that those neighbours whom he had summoned in the suit which he
had set on foot against Flosi Thord's son had now uttered their
finding, and brought him in truly guilty in the suit; he took
witness to this for his own part, or for those who might wish to
make use of this witness.

Again a second time Mord took witness and said, "I take witness
to this that I call on Flosi, or that man who has to undertake
the lawful defence which he has handed over to him, to begin his
defence to this suit which I have set on foot against him, for
now all the steps and proofs have been brought forward which
belong by law to this suit; all witness home, the finding of the
inquest uttered and brought in, witness taken to the finding, and
to all the steps which have gone before; but if any such thing
arises in their lawful defence which I need to turn into a suit
against them, then I claim the right to set that suit on foot
against them.  I bid this my lawful bidding before the court, so
that the judges may hear."

"It gladdens me now, Eyjolf," said Flosi, "in my heart to think
what a wry face they will make, and how their pates will tingle
when thou bringest forward our defence."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  John for a man, and Gudruna for a woman, were standing names
     in the Formularies of the Icelandic code, answering to the
     "M or N" in our Liturgy, or to those famous fictions of
     English law, "John Doe and Richard Roe."
(2)  "Gossipry," that is, because they were gossips, "God's sib",
     relations by baptism.



142. OF EYJOLF BOLVERK'S SON

Then Eyjolf Bolverk's son went before the court, and took witness
to this, "I take witness that this is a lawful defence in this
cause, that ye have pleaded the suit in the Eastfirthers' Court,
when ye ought to have pleaded it in the Northlanders' Court; for
Flosi has declared himself one of the Thingmen of Askel the
Priest and here now are those two witnesses who were by, and who
will bear witness that Flosi handed over his priesthood to his
brother Thorgeir, but afterwards declared himself one of Askel
the Priest's Thingmen.  I take witness to this for my own part,
and for those who may need to make use of it."

Again Eyjolf took witness, "I take witness," he said, "to this,
that I bid Mord who pleads this suit, or the next of kin, to
listen to my oath, and to my declaration of the defence which I
am about to bring forward; I bid him by a lawful bidding before
the court, so that the judges may hear me."

Again Eyjolf took witness, "I take witness to this, that I swear
an oath on the book, a lawful oath, and say it before God, that I
will so defend this cause, in the most truthful, and most just,
and most lawful way, so far as I know, and so fulfil all lawful
duties which belong to me at this Thing."

Then Eyjolf said, "These two men I take to witness that I bring
forward this lawful defence that this suit was pleaded in another
Quarter Court, than that in which it ought to have been pleaded;
and I say that for this sake their suit has come to naught; I
utter this defence in this shape before the Eastfirthers' Court."

After that he let all the witness be brought forward which
belonged to the defence, and then he took witness to all the
steps in the defence to prove that they had all been duly taken.

After that Eyjolf again took witness and said, "I take witness to
this, that I forbid the judges, by a lawful protest before the
priest, to utter judgment in the suit of Mord and his friends,
for now a lawful defence has been brought before the court.  I
forbid you by a protest made before a priest; by a full, fair,
and binding protest; as I have a right to forbid you by the
common custom of the Althing, and by the law of the land."

After that be called on the judges to pronounce for the defence.

Then Asgrim and his friends brought on the other suits for the
burning, and those suits took their course.



143. THE COUNSEL OF THORHALL ASGRIM'S SON

Now Asgrim and his friends sent a man to Thorhall, and let him be
told in what a strait they had come.

"Too far off was I now," answers Thorhall, "for this cause might
still not have taken this turn if I had been by.  I now see their
course that they must mean to summon you to the Fifth Court for
contempt of the Thing.  They must also mean to divide the
Eastfirthers Court in the suit for the burning, so that no
judgment may be given, for now they behave so as to show that
they will stay at no ill.  Now shaft thou go back to them as
quickly as thou canst, and say that Mord must summon them both,
both Flosi and Eyjolf, for having brought money into the Fifth
Court, and make it a case of lesser outlawry.  Then he shall
summon them with a second summons for that they have brought
forward that witness which had nothing to do with their cause,
and so were guilty of contempt of the Thing; and tell them that I
say this, that if two suits for lesser outlawry hang over one and
the same man, that he shall be adjudged a thorough outlaw at
once.  And for this ye must set your suits on foot first, that
then ye will first go to trial and judgment."

Now the messenger went his way back and told Mord and Asgrim.

After that they went to the Hill of Laws, and Mord Valgard's son
took witness.  "I take witness to this that I summon Flosi
Thord's son, for that he gave money for his help here at the
Thing to Eyjolf Bolverk's son.  I say that he ought on this
charge to be made a guilty outlaw, for this sake alone to be
forwarded or to be allowed the right of frithstow (1), if his
fine and bail are brought forward at the execution levied on his
house and goods, but else to become a thorough outlaw.  I say all
his goods are forfeited, half to me and half to the men of the
Quarter who have the right by law to take his goods after he has
been outlawed.  I summon this cause before the Fifth Court,
whither the cause ought to come by law; I summon it to be pleaded
now and to full outlawry.  I summon with a lawful summons.  I
summon in the hearing of all men at the Hill of Laws."

With a like summons he summoned Eyjolf Bolverk's son, for that he
had taken and received the money, and he summoned him for that
sake to the Fifth Court.

Again a second time he summoned Flosi and Eyjolf, for that sake
that they had brought forward that witness at the Thing which had
nothing lawfully to do with the cause of the parties, and had so
been guilty of contempt of the Thing; and he laid the penalty for
that at lesser outlawry.

Then they went away to the Court of Laws, there the Fifth Court
was then set.

Now when Mord and Asgrim had gone away, then the judges in the
Eastfirthers' Court could not agree how they should give
judgment, for some of them wished to give judgment for Flosi, but
some for Mord and Asgrim.  Then Flosi and Eyjolf tried to divide
the court, and there they stayed, and lost time over that while
the summoning at the Hill of Laws going on.  A little while after
Flosi and Eyjolf were told that they had been summoned at the
Hill of Laws into the Fifth Court, each of them with two summons. 
Then Eyjolf said, "In an evil hour have we loitered here while
they have been before us in quickness of summoning.  Now hath
come out Thorhall's cunning, and no man is his match in wit.  Now
they have the first right to plead their cause before the court,
and that was everything for them; but still we will go to the
Hill of Laws, and set our suit on foot against them, though that
will now stand us in little stead."

Then they fared to the Hill of Laws, and Eyjolf summoned them for
contempt of the Thing.

After that they went to the Fifth Court.

Now we must say that when Mord and Asgrim came to the Fifth
Court, Mord took witness and bade them listen to his oath and the
declaration of his suit, and to all those proofs and steps which
he meant to bring forward against Flosi and Eyjolf.  He bade them
by a lawful bidding before the court, so that the judges could
hear him across the court.

In the Fifth Court vouchers had to follow the oaths of the
parties, and they had to take an oath after them.

Mord took witness.  "I take witness," he said, "to this, that I
take a Fifth Court oath.  I pray God so to help me in this light
and in the next, as I shall plead this suit as I know to be most
truthful, and just, and lawful.  I believe with all my heart that
Flosi is truly guilty in this suit, if I may bring forward my
proofs; and I have not brought money into this court in this
suit, and I will not bring it.  I have not taken money, and I
will not take it, neither for a lawful nor for an unlawful end."

The men who were Mord's vouchers then went two of them before the
court, and took witness to this -- "We take witness that we take
an oath on the book, a lawful oath; we pray God so to help us two
in this light and in the next, as we lay it on our honour that we
believe with all our hearts that Mord will so plead this suit as
he knows to be most truthful, and most just, and most lawful, and
that he hath not brought money into this court in this suit to
help himself, and that he will not offer it, and that he hath not
taken money, nor will he take it, either for a lawful or unlawful
end."

Mord had summoned nine neighbours who lived next to the
Thingfield on the inquest in the suit, and then Mord took
witness, and declared those four suits which he had set on foot
against Flosi and Eyjolf; and Mord used all those words in his
declaration that he had used in his summons.  He declared his
suits for outlawry in the same shape before the Fifth Court as he
had uttered them when he summoned the defendants.

Mord took witness, and bade those nine neighbours on the inquest
to take their seats west on the river bank.

Mord took witness again, and bade Flosi and Eyjolf to challenge
the inquest.

They went up to challenge the inquest, and looked narrowly at
them, but could get none of them set aside; then they went away
as things stood, and were very ill pleased with their case.

Then Mord took witness, and bade those nine neighbours whom he
had before called on the inquest, to utter their finding, and to
bring it in either for or against Flosi.

Then the neighbours on Mord's inquest came before the court, and
one uttered the finding, but all the rest confirmed it by their
consent.  They had all taken the Fifth Court oath, and they
brought in Flosi as truly guilty in the suit, and brought in
their finding against him.  They brought it in such a shape
before the Fifth Court over the head of the same man over whose
head Mord had already declared his suit.  After that they brought
in all those findings which they were bound to bring in all the
other suits, and all was done in lawful form.

Eyjolf Bolverk's son and Flosi watched to find a flaw in the
proceedings, but could get nothing done.

Then Mord Valgard's son took witness.  "I take witness," said he,
"to this, that these nine neighbours whom I called on these suits
which I have had hanging over the heads of Flosi Thord's son, and
Eyjolf Bolverk's son, have now uttered their finding, and have
brought them in truly guilty in these suits."

He took this witness for his own part.

Again Mord took witness.  "I take witness," he said, "to this,
that I bid Flosi Thord's son, or that other man who has taken his
lawful defence in hand, now to begin their defence; for now all
the steps and proofs have been brought forward in the suit,
summons to listen to oaths, oaths taken, suit declared, witness
taken to the summons, neighbours called on to take their seats on
the inquest, defendant called on to challenge the inquest,
finding uttered, witness taken to the finding."

He took this witness to all the steps that had been taken in the
suit.

Then that man stood up over whose head the suit had been declared
and pleaded, and summed up the case.  He summed up first how Mord
had bade them listen to his oath, and to his declaration of the
suit, and to all the steps and proofs in it; then he summed up
next how Mord took his oath and his vouchers theirs; then he
summed up how Mord pleaded his suit, and used the very words in
his summing up that Mord had before used in declaring and
pleading his suit, and which he had used in his summons, and he
said that the suit came before the Fifth Court in the same shape
as it was when he uttered it at the summoning.  Then he summed up
that men had borne witness to the summoning, and repeated all
those words that Mord had used in his summons, and which they had
used in bearing their witness, "and which I now," he said, "have
used in my summing up, and they bore their witness in the same
shape before the Fifth Court as he uttered them at the
summoning."  After that he summed up that Mord bade the
neighbours on the inquest to take their seats, then he told next
of all how he bade Flosi to challenge the inquest, or that man
who had undertaken this lawful defence for him; then he told how
the neighbours went to the court, and uttered their finding, and
brought in Flosi truly guilty in the suit, and how they brought
in the finding of an inquest of nine men in that shape before the
Fifth Court.  Then he summed up how Mord took witness to all the
steps in the suit, and how he had bidden the defendant to begin
his defence.

After that Mord Valgard's son took witness.  "I take witness," he
said, "to this, that I forbid Flosi Thord's son, or that other
man who has undertaken the lawful defence for him, to set up his
defence; for now are all the steps taken which belong to the
suit, when the case has been summed up and the proofs repeated."

After that the foreman added these words of Mord to his summing
up.

Then Mord took witness, and prayed the judges to give judgment in
this suit.

Then Gizur the White said, "Thou wilt have to do more yet, Mord,
for four twelves can have no right to pass judgment."

Now Flosi said to Eyjolf, "What counsel is to be taken now?"

Then Eyjolf said, "Now we must make the best of a bad business;
but still we will bide our time, for now I guess that they will
make a false step in their suit, for Mord prayed for judgment at
once in the suit, but they ought to call and set aside six men
out of the court, and after that they ought to offer us to call
and set aside six other men, but we will not do that, for then
they ought to call and set aside those six men, and they will
perhaps overlook that; then all their case has come to naught if
they do not do that, for three twelves have to judge in every
cause."

"Thou art a wise man, Eyjolf," said Flosi, "so that few can come
nigh thee."

Mord Valgard's son took witness. "I take witness," he said "to
this, that I call and set aside these six men out of the court" 
-- and named them all by name -- "I do not allow you to sit in
the court; I call you out and set you aside by the rightful
custom of the Althing, and the law of the land."

After that he offered Eyjolf and Flosi, before witnesses, to call
out by name and set aside other six men, but Flosi and Eyjolf
would not call them out.

Then Mord made them pass judgment in the cause; but when the
judgment was given, Eyjolf took witness, and said that all their
judgment had come to naught, and also everything else that had
been done, and his ground was that three twelves and one half had
judged, when three only ought to have given judgment.

"And now we will follow up our suits before the Fifth Court,"
said Eyjolf, "and make them outlaws."

Then Gizur the White said to Mord Valgard's son, "Thou hast made
a very great mistake in taking such a false step, and this is
great ill-luck; but what counsel shall we now take, kinsman
Asgrim?" says Gizur.

Then Asgrim said, "Now we will send a man to my son Thorhall,
and know what counsel he will give us."


ENDNOTES:

(1)  An old English law term for asylum or sanctuary.



144. BATTLE AT THE ALTHING

Now Snorri the Priest hears how the causes stood, and then he
begins to draw up his men in arry below "the Great Rift," between
it and Hadbooth, and laid down beforehand to his men how they
were to behave.

Now the messenger comes to Thorhall Asgrim's son, and tells him
how things stood, and how Mord Valgard's son and his friends
would all be made outlaws, and the suits for manslaughter be
brought to naught.

But when he heard that, he was so shocked at it that he could not
utter a word.  He jumped up then from his bed, and clutched with
both hands his spear, Skarphedinn's gift, and drove it through
his foot; then flesh clung to the spear, and the eye of the boil
too, for he had cut it clean out of the foot, but a torrent of
blood and matter poured out, so that it fell in a stream along
the floor.  Now he went out of the booth unhalting, and walked so
hard that the messenger could not keep up with him, and so he
goes until he came to the Fifth Court.  There he met Grim the
Red, Flosi's kinsman, and as soon as ever they met, Thorhall
thrust at him with the spear, and smote him on the shield and
clove it in twain, but the spear passed right through him, so
that the point came out between his shoulders.  Thorhall cast him
off his spear.

Then Kari Solmund's son caught sight of that, and said to Asgrim,
"Here, now, is come Thorhall thy son, and has straightway slain
a man, and this is a great shame, if he alone shall have the
heart to avenge the burning."

"That shall not be," says Asgrim, "but let us turn on them now."

Then there was a mighty cry all over the host, and then they
shouted their war-cries.

Flosi and his friends then turned against their foes, and both
sides egged on their men fast.

Kari Solmund's son turned now thither where Ami Kol's son and
Hallbjorn the Strong were in front, and as soon as ever Hallbjorn
saw Kari, he made a blow at him, and aimed at his leg, but Kari
leapt up into the air, and Hallbjorn missed him.  Kari turned on
Arni Kol's son and cut at him, and smote him on the shoulder, and
cut asunder the shoulder blade and collar-bone, and the blow went
right down into his breast, and Ami fell down dead at once to
earth.

After that he hewed at Hallbjorn and caught him on the shield,
and the blow passed through the shield, and so down and cut off
his great toe.  Holmstein hurled a spear at Kari, but he caught
it in the air, and sent it back, and it was a man's death in
Flosi's band.

Thorgeir Craggeir came up to where Hallbjorn the Strong was
in front, and Thorgeir made such a spear-thrust at him with his
left hand that Hallbjorn fell before it, and had hard work to get
on his feet again, and turned away from the fight there and then. 
Then Thorgeir met Thorwalld Kettle Rumble's son, and hewed at him
at once with the axe, "the ogress of war," which Skarphedinn had
owned.  Thorwalld threw his shield before him, and Thorgeir hewed
the shield and cleft it from top to bottom, but the upper horn of
the axe made its way into his breast, and passed into his trunk,
and Thorwalld fell and was dead at once.

Now it must be told how Asgrim Ellidagrim's son, and Thorhall his
son, Hjallti Skeggi's son, and Gizur the White, made an onslaught
where Flosi and the sons of Sigfus and the other burners were; --
then there was a very hard fight, and the end of it was that they
pressed on so hard, that Flosi and his men gave way before them. 
Gudmund the Powerful, and Mord Valgard's son, and Thorgeir
Craggeir, made their onslaught where the Axefirthers and
Eastfirthers, and the men of Reykdale stood, and there too there
was a very hard fight.

Kari Solmund's son came up where Bjarni Broddhelgi's son had the
lead.  Kari caught up a spear and thrust at him, and the blow
fell on his shield.  Bjarni slipped the shield on one side of
him, else it had gone straight through him.  Then he cut at Kari
and aimed at his leg, but Kari drew back his leg and turned short
round on his heel, and Bjarni missed him.  Kari cut at once at
him, and then a man ran forward and threw his shield before
Bjarni.  Kari cleft the shield in twain, and the point of the
sword caught his thigh, and ripped up the whole leg down to the
ankle.  That man fell there and then, and was ever after a
cripple so long as he lived.

Then Kari clutched his spear with both hands, and turned on
Bjarni and thrust at him; he saw he had no other chance but to
throw himself down sidelong away from the blow, but as soon as
ever Bjarni found his feet, away he fell back out of the fight.

Thorgeir Craggeir and Gizur the White fell on there where
Holmstein the son of Bersi the Wise, and Thorkel Geiti's son were
leaders, and the end of the struggle was, that Holmstein and
Thorkel gave way, and then arose a mighty hooting after them from
the men of Gudmund the Powerful.

Thorwalld Tjorfi's son of Lightwater got a great wound, he was
shot in the forearm, and men thought that Halldor Gudmund the
Powerful's son had hurled the spear, but he bore that wound about
with him all his life long, and got no atonement for it.

Now there was a mighty throng.  But though we here tell of some
of the deeds that were done, still there are far many more of
which men have handed down no stories.

Flosi had told them that they should make for the stronghold in
the Great Rift if they were worsted, "For there," said he, "they
will only be able to attack us on one side."  But the band which
Hall of the Side and his son Ljot led, had fallen away out of the
fight before the onslaught of that father and son, Asgrim and
Thorhall.  They turned down east of Axewater, and Hall said,
"This is a sad state of things when the whole host of men at the
Thing fight, and I would, kinsman Ljot, that we begged us help
even though that be brought against us by some men, and that we
part them.  Thou shalt wait for me at the foot of the bridge, and
I will go to the booths and beg for help."

"If I see," said Ljot, "that Flosi and his men need help from our
men, then I will at once run up and aid them."

"Thou wilt do in that as thou pleasest," says Hall, "but I pray
thee to wait for me here."

Now flight breaks out in Flosi's band, and they all fly west
across Axewater; but Asgrim and Gizur the White went after them
and all their host.  Flosi and his men turned down between the
river and the Outwork booth.  Snorri the Priest had drawn up his
men there in array, so thick that they could not pass that way,
and Snorri the Priest called out then to Flosi, "Why fare ye in
such haste, or who chase you?"

"Thou askest not this," answered Flosi, "because thou dost not
know it already; but whose fault is it that we cannot get to the
stronghold in the Great Rift?"

"It is not my fault," says Snorri, "but it is quite true that I
know whose fault it is, and I will tell thee if thou wilt; it is
the fault of Thorwalld Cropbeard and Kol."

They were both then dead, but they had been the worst men in all
Flosi's band.

Again Snorri said to his men, "Now do both, cut at them and
thrust at them, and drive them away hence, they will then hold
out but a short while here, if the others attack them from below;
but then ye shall not go after them, but let both sides shift for
themselves."

The son of Skapti Thorod's son was Thorstein gapemouth, as was
written before, he was in the battle with Gudmund the Powerful,
his father-in-law, and as soon as Skapti knew that, he went to
the booth of Snorri the Priest, and meant to beg for help to part
them; but just before he had got as far as the door of Snorri's
booth, there the battle was hottest of all.  Asgrim and his
friends, and his men were just coming up thither, and then
Thorhall said to his father Asgrim, "See there now is Skapti
Thorod's son, father."

"I see him kinsman," said Asgrim, and then he shot a spear at
Skapti, and struck him just below where the calf was fattest, and
so through both his legs.  Skapti fell at the blow, and could not
get up again, and the only counsel they could take who were by,
was to drag Skapti flat on his face into the booth of a turf-
cutter.

Then Asgrim and his men came up so fast that Flosi and his men
gave way before them south along the river to the booths of the
men of Modruvale.  There there was a man outside one booth whose
name was Solvi; he was boiling broth in a great kettle, and had
just then taken the meat out, and the broth was boiling as hotly
as it could.

Solvi cast his eyes on the Eastfirthers as they fled, and they
were then just over against him, and then he said, "Can all these
cowards who fly here be Eastfirthers, and yet Thorkel Geiti's
son, he ran by as fast as any one of them, and very great lies
have been told about him when men say that he is all heart, but
now no one ran faster than he."

Hallbjorn the Strong was near by then, and said, "Thou shalt not
have it to say that we are all cowards."

And with that he caught hold of him, and lifted him up aloft, and
thrust him head down into the broth-kettle.  Solvi died at once;
but then a rush was made at Hallbjorn himself, and he had to turn
and fly.

Flosi threw a spear at Bruni Haflidi's son, and caught him at the
waist, and that was his bane; he was one of Gudmund the
Powerful's band.

Thorstein Hlenni's son took the spear out of the wound, and
hurled it back at Flosi, and hit him on the leg, and he got a
great wound and fell; he rose up again at once.

Then they passed on to the Waterfirthers' booth, and then Hall
and Ljot came from the east across the river, with all their
band; but just when they came to the lava, a spear was hurled out
of the band of Gudmund the Powerful, and it struck Ljot in the
middle, and he fell down dead at once; and it was never known
surely who had done that manslaughter.

Flosi and his men turned up round the Waterfirther's booth, and
then Thorgeir Craggeir said to Kari Solmund's son, "Look, yonder
now is Eyjolf Bolverk's son, if thou hast a mind to pay him off
for the ring."

"That I ween is not far from my mind," says Kari, and snatched a
spear from a man, and hurled it at Eyjolf, and it struck him in
the waist, and went through him, and Eyjolf then fell dead to
earth.

Then there was a little lull in the battle, and then Snorri the
Priest came up with his band, and Skapti was there in his
company, and they ran in between them, and so they could not get
at one another to fight.

Then Hall threw in his people with theirs, and was for parting
them there and then, and so a truce was set, and was to be kept
throughout the Thing, and then the bodies were laid out and borne
to the church, and the wounds of those men were bound up who were
hurt.

The day after men went to the Hill of Laws.  Then Han of the Side
stood up and asked for a hearing, and got it at once; and he
spoke thus, "Here there have been hard happenings in lawsuits
and loss of life at the Thing, and now I will show again that I
am little-hearted, for I will now ask Asgrim and the others who
take the lead in these suits, that they grant us an atonement on
even terms;" and so he goes on with many fair words.

Kari Solmund's son said, "Though all others take an atonement in
their quarrels, yet will I take no atonement in my quarrel; for
ye will wish to weigh these manslayings against the burning, and
we cannot bear that."

In the same way spoke Thorgeir Craggeir.

Then Skapti Thorod's son stood up and said, "Better had it been
for thee, Kari, not to have run away from thy father-in-law and
thy brothers-in-law, than now to sneak out of this atonement."

Then Kari sang these verses:

     "Warrior wight that weapon wieldest
     Spare thy speering why we fled,
     Oft for less falls hail of battle,
     Forth we fled to wreak revenge;
     Who was he, fainthearted foeman,
     Who, when tongues of steel sung high,
     Stole beneath the booth for shelter,
     While his beard blushed red for shame?

     "Many fetters Skapti fettered
     When the men, the Gods of fight,
     From the fray fared all unwilling
     Where the skald scarce held his shield;
     Then the suttlers dragged the lawyer
     Stout in scolding to their booth,
     Laid him low amongst the riffraff,
     How his heart then quaked for fear.

     "Men who skim the main on sea stag
     Well in this ye showed your sense
     Making game about the Burning,
     Mocking Helgi, Grim, and Njal;
     Now the moor round rocky Swinestye (1),
     As men run and shake their shields,
     With another grunt shall rattle
     When this Thing is past and gone."

Then there was great laughter.  Snorri the Priest smiled and sang
this between his teeth, but so that many heard:

     "Skill hath Skapti us to tell
     Whether Asgrim's shaft flew well;
     Holmstein hurried swift to flight,
     Thorstein turned him soon to fight."

Now men burst out in great fits of laughter.

Then Hall of the Side said, "All men know what a grief I have
suffered in the loss of my son Ljot; many will think that he
would be valued dearest of all those men who have fallen here;
but I will do this for the sake of an atonement -- I will put no
price on my son, and yet will come forward and grant both pledges
and peace to those who are my adversaries.  I beg thee, Snorri
the Priest, and other of the best men, to bring this about, that
there may be an atonement between us."

Now he sits him down, and a great hum in his favour followed, and
all praised his gentleness and goodwill.

Then Snorri the Priest stood up and made a long and clever
speech, and begged Asgrim and the others who took the lead in the
quarrel to look towards an atonement.

Then Asgrim said, "I made up my mind when Flosi made an inroad
on my house that I would never be atoned with him; but now Snorri
the Priest, I will take an atonement from him for thy word's sake
and other of our friends."

In the same way spoke Thorleif Crow and Thorgrim the Big, that
they were willing to be atoned, and they urged in every way their
brother Thorgeir Craggeir to take an atonement also; but he hung
back, and says he would never part from Kari.

Then Gizur the White said, "Now Flosi must see that he must make
his choice, whether he will be atoned on the understanding that
some will be out of the atonement."

Flosi says he will take that atonement; "And methinks it is so
much the better," he says, "that I have fewer good men and true
against me."

Then Gudmund the Powerful said, "I will offer to handsel peace
on my behalf for the slayings that have happened here at the
Thing, on the understanding that the suit for the burning is not
to fall to the ground."

In the same way spoke Gizur the White and Hjallti Skeggi's son,
Asgrim Ellidagrim's son and Mord Valgard's son.

In this way the atonement came about, and then hands were shaken
on it, and twelve men were to utter the award; and Snorri the
Priest was the chief man in the award, and others with him.  Then
the manslaughters were set off the one against the other, and
those men who were over and above were paid for in fines.  They
also made an award in the suit about the burning.

Njal was to be atoned for with a triple fine, and Bergthora with
two.  The slaying of Skarphedinn was to be set off against that
of Hauskuld the Whiteness Priest.  Both Grim and Helgi were to be
paid for with double fines; and one full man-fine should be paid
for each of those who had been burnt in the house.

No atonement was taken for the slaying of Thord Kari's son.

It was also in the award that Flosi and all the burners should go
abroad into banishment, and none of them was to sail the same
summer unless he chose; but if he did not sail abroad by the time
that three winters were spent, then he and all the burners were
to become thorough outlaws.  And it was also said that their
outlawry might be proclaimed either at the Harvest-Thing or
Spring-Thing, whichever men chose; and Flosi was to stay abroad
three winters.

As for Gunnar Lambi's son, and Grani Gunnar's son, Glum Hilldir's
son, and Kol Thorstein's son, they were never to be allowed to
come back.

Then Flosi was asked if he would wish to have a price put upon
his wound, but he said he would not take bribes for his hurt.

Eyjolf Bolverk's son had no fine awarded for him, for his
unfairness and wrongfulness.

And now this settlement and atonement was handselled and was well
kept afterwards.

Asgrim and his friends gave Snorri the priest good gifts, and he
had great honour from these suits.

Skapti got a fine for his hurt.

Gizur the White, and Hjallti Skeggi's son, and Asgrim
Ellidagrim's son, asked Gudmund the Powerful to come and see them
at home.  He accepted the bidding, and each of them gave him a
gold ring.

Now Gudmund rides home north and had praise from every man for
the part he had taken in these quarrels.

Thorgeir Craggeir asked Kari to go along with him, but yet first
of all they rode with Gudmund right up to the fells north.  Kari
gave Gudmund a golden brooch, but Thorgeir gave him a silver
belt, and each was the greatest treasure.  So they parted with
the utmost friendship, and Gudmund is out of this story.

Kari and Thorgeir rode south from the fell, and down to the
Rapes (1), and so to Thurso-water.

Flosi, and the burners along with him, rode east to Fleetlithe,
and he allowed the sons of Sigfus to settle their affairs at
home.  Then Flosi heard that Thorgeir and Kari had ridden north
with Gudmund the Powerful, and so the burners thought that Kari
and his friend must mean to stay in the north country; and then
the sons of Sigfus asked leave to go east under Eyjafell to get
in their money, for they had money out on call at Headbrink. 
Flosi gave them leave to do that, but still bade them be ware of
themselves, and be as short a time about it as they could.

Then Flosi rode up by Godaland, and so north of Eyjafell Jokul,
and did not draw bridle before he came home east to Swinefell.

Now it must be said that Hall of the Side had suffered his son to
fall without a fine, and did that for the sake of an atonement,
but then the whole host of men at the Thing agreed to pay a fine
for him, and the money so paid was not less than eight hundred in
silver, but that was four times the price of a man; but all the
others who had been with Flosi got no fines paid for their hurts,
and were very ill pleased at it.

The sons of Sigfus stayed at home two nights, but the third day
they rode east to Raufarfell, and were there the night.  They
were fifteen together, and had not the least fear for themselves. 
They rode thence late, and meant to reach Headbrink about even. 
They baited their horses in Carlinedale, and then a great slumber
came over them.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Swinestye," ironically for Swinefell, where Flosi lived.
(2)  This is the English equivalent for the Icelandic Hrep, a
     district.  It still lingers in "the Rape of Bramber," and
     other districts in Sussex and the southeast.



145. OF KARI AND THORGEIR

Those two, Kari Solmund's son and Thorgeir Craggeir, rode that
day east across Markfleet, and so on east to Selialandsmull. 
They found there some women.  The wives knew them, and said to
them, "Ye two are less wanton than the sons of Sigfus yonder, but
still ye fare unwarily."

"Why do ye talk thus of the sons of Sigfus, or what do ye know
about them?"

"They were last night," they said, "at Raufarfell, and meant to
get to Myrdale to-night, but still we thought they must have some
fear of you, for they asked when ye would be likely to come
home."

Then Kari and Thorgeir went on their way and spurred their
horses.

"What shall we lay down for ourselves to do now," said Thorgeir,
"or what is most to thy mind?  Wilt thou that we ride on their
track?"

"I will not hinder this," answers Kari, "nor will I say what
ought to be done, for it may often be that those live long who
are slain with words alone (1); but I well know what thou meanest
to take on thyself, thou must mean to take on thy hands eight
men, and after all that is less than it was when thou slewest
those seven in the sea-crags (2), and let thyself down by a rope
to get at them; but it is the way with all you kinsmen, that ye
always wish to be doing some famous feat, and now I can do no
less than stand by thee and have my share in the story.  So now
we two alone will ride after them, for I see that thou hast so
made up thy mind."

After that they rode east by the upper way, and did not pass by
Holt, for Thorgeir would not that any blame should be laid at his
brother's door for what might be done.

Then they rode east to Myrdale, and there they met a man who had
turf-panniers on his horse.  He began to speak thus, "Too few
men, messmate Thorgeir, hast thou now in thy company."

"How is that?" says Thorgeir.

"Why," said the other, "because the prey is now before thy hand. 
The sons of Sigfus rode by a while ago, and mean to sleep the
whole day east in Carlinedale, for they mean to go no farther
to-night than to Headbrink."

After that they rode on their way east on Arnstacks heath, and
there is nothing to be told of their journey before they came to
Carlinedale-water.

The stream was high, and now they rode up along the river, for
they saw there horses with saddles.  They rode now thitherward,
and saw that there were men asleep in a dell and their spears
were standing upright in the ground a little below them.  They
took the spears from them, and threw them into the river.

Then Thorgeir said, "Wilt thou that we wake them?"

"Thou hast not asked this," answers Kari, "because thou hast not
already made up thy mind not to fall on sleeping men, and so to
slay a shameful manslaughter."

After that they shouted to them, and then they all awoke and
grasped at their arms.

They did not fall on them till they were armed.

Thorgeir Craggeir runs thither where Thorkell Sigfus' son stood,
and just then a man ran behind his back, but before he could do
Thorgeir any hurt, Thorgeir lifted the axe, "the ogress of war,"
with both hands, and dashed the hammer of the axe with a back-
blow into the head of him that stood behind him, so that his
skull was shattered to small bits.

"Slain is this one," said Thorgeir; and down the man fell at
once, and was dead.

But when he dashed the axe forward, he smote Thorkell on the
shoulder, and hewed it off, arm and all.

Against Kari came Mord Sigfus' son, and Sigmund Sigfus' son, and
Lambi Sigurd's son; the last ran behind Kari's back, and thrust
at him with a spear; Kari caught sight of him, and leapt up as
the blow fell, and stretched his legs far apart, and so the blow
spent itself on the ground, but Kari jumped down on the spear-
shaft, and snapped it in sunder.  He had a spear in one hand, and
a sword in the other, but no shield.  He thrust with the right
hand at Sigmund Sigfus' son, and smote him on his breast, and the
spear came out between his shoulders, and down he fell and was
dead at once, With his left hand he made a cut at Mord, and smote
him on the hip, and cut it asunder, and his backbone too; he fell
flat on his face, and was dead at once.

After that he turned sharp round on his heel like a whipping-top,
and made at Lambi Sigurd's son, but he took the only way to save
himself, and that was by running away as hard as he could.

Now Thorgeir turns against Leidolf the Strong, and each hewed at
the other at the same moment, and Leidolf's blow was so great
that it shore off that part of the shield on which it fell.

Thorgeir had hewn with "the ogress of war," holding it with both
hands, and the lower horn fell on the shield and clove it in
twain, but the upper caught the collarbone and cut it in two and
tore on down into the breast and trunk.  Kari came up just then,
and cut off Leidolf's leg at mid-thigh, and then Leidolf fell and
died at once.

Kettle of the Mark said, "We will now run for our horses, for we
cannot hold our own here, for the overbearing strength of these
men."

Then they ran for their horses, and leapt on their backs; and
Thorgeir said, "Wilt thou that we chase them?  If so, we shall
yet slay some of them."

"He rides last," says Kari, "whom I would not wish to slay, and
that is Kettle of the Mark, for we have two sisters to wife; and
besides, he has behaved best of all of them as yet in our
quarrels."

Then they got on their horses, and rode till they came home to
Holt.  Then Thorgeir made his brothers fare away east to Skoga,
for they had another farm there, and because Thorgeir would not
that his brothers should be called truce-breakers.

Then Thorgeir kept many men there about him, so that there were
never fewer than thirty fighting men there.

Then there was great joy there, and men thought Thorgeir had
grown much greater, and pushed himself on; both he and Kari too. 
Men long kept in mind this hunting of theirs, how they rode upon
fifteen men and slew those five, but put those ten to flight who
got away.

Now it is to be told of Kettle, that they rode as they best might
till they came home to Swinefell, and told how bad their journey
had been.

Flosi said it was only what was to be looked for; "And this is a
warning that ye should never do the like again."

Flosi was the merriest of men, and the best of hosts, and it is
so said that he had most of the chieftain in him of all the men
of his time.

He was at home that summer, and the winter too.

But that winter, after Yule, Hall of the Side came from the east,
and Kol his son.  Flosi was glad at his coming, and they often
talked about the matter of the burning.  Flosi said they had
already paid a great fine, and Hall said it was pretty much what
he had guessed would come of Flosi's and his friends' quarrel. 
Then he asked him what counsel he thought best to be taken, and
Hall answers, "The counsel is, that thou beest atoned with
Thorgeir if there be a choice, and yet he will be hard to bring
to take any atonement."

"Thinkest thou that the manslaughters will then be brought to an
end?" asks Flosi.

"I do not think so," says Hall; "but you will have to do with
fewer foes if Kari be left alone; but if thou art not atoned with
Thorgeir, then that will be thy bane."

"What atonement shall we offer him?" asks Flosi.

"You will all think that atonement hard," says Hall, "which he
will take, for he will not hear of an atonement unless he be not
called on to pay any fine for what he has just done, but he will
have fines for Njal and his sons, so far as his third share
goes."

"That is a hard atonement," says Flosi.

"For thee at least," says Hall, "that atonement is not hard, for
thou hast not the blood-feud after the sons of Sigfus; their
brothers have the blood-feud, and Hammond the Halt after his son;
but thou shalt now get an atonement from Thorgeir, for I will now
ride to his house with thee, and Thorgeir will in anywise receive
me well: but no man of those who are in this quarrel will dare to
sit in his house on Fleetlithe if they are out of the atonement,
for that will be their bane; and, indeed, with Thorgeir's turn of
mind, it is only what must be looked for."

Now the sons of Sigfus were sent for, and they brought this
business before them; and the end of their speech was, on the
persuasion of Hall, that they all thought what he said right, and
were ready to be atoned.

Grani Gunnar's son and Gunnar Lambi's son, said, "It will be in
our power, if Kari be left alone behind, to take care that he be
not less afraid of us than we of him."

"Easier said than done," says Hall, "and ye will find it a dear
bargain to deal with him.  Ye will have to pay a heavy fine
before you have done with him."

After that they ceased speaking about it.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "With words alone."  The English proverb, "Threatened men
     live long."
(2)  "Sea crags." Hence Thorgeir got his surname "Craggeir."



146. THE AWARD OF ATONEMENT WITH THORGEIR CRAGGEIR

Hall of the Side and his son Kol, seven of them in all, rode west
over Loomnip's Sand, and so west over Amstacksheath, and did not
draw bridle till they came into Myrdale.  There they asked
whether Thorgeir would be at home at Holt, and they were told
that they would find him at home.

The men asked whither Hall meant to go.

"Thither to Holt," he said.

They said they were sure he went on a good errand.

He stayed there some while and baited their horses, and after
that they mounted their horses and rode to Solheim about even,
and they were there that night, but the day after they rode to
Holt.

Thorgeir was out of doors, and Kari too, and their men, for they
had seen Hall's coming.  He rode in a blue cape, and had a little
axe studded with silver in his hand; but when they came into the
"town," Thorgeir went to meet him, and helped him off his horse,
and both he and Kari kissed him and led him in between them into
the sittingroom, and sate him down in the high seat on the dais,
and they asked him tidings about many things.

He was there that night.  Next morning Hall raised the question
of the atonement with Thorgeir, and told him what terms they
offered him; and he spoke about them with many fair and kindly
words.

"It may be well known to thee," answers Thorgeir, "that I said I
would take no atonement from the burners."

"That was quite another matter then," says Hall; "ye were then
wroth with fight, and, besides, ye have done great deeds in the
way of manslaying since."

"I daresay ye think so," says Thorgeir, "but what atonement do ye
offer to Kari?"

"A fitting atonement shall be offered him," says Hall, "if he
will take it."

Then Kari said, "I pray this of thee, Thorgeir, that thou wilt be
atoned, for thy lot cannot be better than good."

"Methinks," says Thorgeir, "it is ill done to take in atonement,
and sunder myself from thee, unless thou takest the same
atonement as I"

"I will not take any atonement," says Kari, "but yet I say that
we have avenged the burning; but my son, I say, is still
unavenged, and I mean to take that on myself alone, and see what
I can get done."

But Thorgeir would take no atonement before Kari said that he
would take it ill if he were not atoned.  Then Thorgeir
handselled a truce to Flosi and his men, as a step to a meeting
for atonement; but Hall did the same on behalf of Flosi and the
sons of Sigfus.

But ere they parted, Thorgeir gave Hall a gold ring and a scarlet
cloak, but Kari gave him a silver brooch, and there were hung to
it four crosses of gold.  Hall thanked them kindly for their
gifts, and rode away with the greatest honour.  He did not draw
bridle till he came to Swinefell, and Flosi gave him a hearty
welcome.  Hall told Flosi all about his errand and the talk he
had with Thorgeir, and also that Thorgeir would not take the
atonement till Kari told him he would quarrel with him if he did
not take it; but that Kari would take no atonement.

"There are few men like Kari," said Flosi, "and I would that my
mind were shapen altogether like his."

Hall and Kol stayed there some while, and afterwards they rode
west at the time agreed on to the meeting for atonement, and met
at Headbrink, as had been settled between them.

Then Thorgeir came to meet them from the west, and then they
talked over their atonement, and all went off as Hall had said.

Before the atonement, Thorgeir said that Kari should still have
the right to be at his house all the same if he chose.

"And neither side shall do the others any harm at my house; and I
will not have the trouble of gathering in the fines from each of
the burners; but my will is that Flosi alone shall be answerable
for them to me, but he must get them in from his followers.  My
will also is that all that award which was made at the Thing
about the burning shall be kept and held to; and my will also is,
Flosi, that thou payest me up my third share in unclipped coin."

Flosi went quickly into all these terms.

Thorgeir neither gave up the banishment nor the outlawry.

Now Flosi and Hall rode home east, and then Hall said to Flosi,
"Keep this atonement well, son-in-law, both as to going abroad
and the pilgrimage to Rome (1), and the fines, and then thou wilt
be thought a brave man, though thou hast stumbled into this
misdeed, if thou fulfillest handsomely all that belongs to it."

Flosi said it should be so.

Now Hall rode home east, but Flosi rode home to Swinefell, and
was at home afterwards.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Pilgrimage to Rome."  This condition had not been mentioned
     before.



147. KARI COMES TO BJORN'S HOUSE IN THE MARK

Thorgeir Craggeir rode home from the peace meeting, and Kari
asked whether the atonement had come about.  Thorgeir said that
they now fully atoned.

Then Kari took his horse and was for riding away.

"Thou hast no need to ride away," says Thorgeir, "for it was laid
down in our atonement that thou shouldst be here as before if
thou chosest."

"It shall not be so, cousin, for as soon as ever I slay a man
they will be sure to say that thou wert in the plot with me, and
I will not have that!  But I wish this, that thou wouldst let me
hand over in trust to thee my goods, and the estates of me and my
wife Helga Njal's daughter, and my three daughters, and then they
will not be seized by those adversaries of mine."

Thorgeir agreed to what Kari wished to ask of him, and then
Thorgeir had Kari's goods handed over to him in trust.

After that Kari rode away.  He had two horses and his weapons and
outer clothing, and some ready money in gold and silver.

Now Kari rode west by Selialandsmull and up along Markfleet, and
so on up into Thorsmark.  There there are three farms all called
"Mark."  At the midmost farm dwelt that man whose name was Bjorn,
and his surname was Bjorn the White; he was the son of Kadal, the
son of Bjalfi.  Bjalfi had been the freedman of Asgerda, the
mother of Njal and Holt-Thorir; Bjorn had to wife Valgerda, she
was the daughter of Thorbrand, the son of Asbrand.  Her mother's
name was Gudlauga, she was a sister of Hamond, the father of
Gunnar of Lithend; she was given away to Bjorn for his money's
sake, and she did not love him much, but yet they had children
together, and they had enough and to spare in the house.

Bjorn was a man who was always boasting and praising himself, but
his housewife thought that bad.  He was sharpsighted and swift of
foot.

Thither Kari turned in as a guest, and they took him by both
hands, and he was there that night.  But the next morning Kari
said to Bjom, "I wish thou wouldst take me in, for I should think
myself well housed here with thee.  I would too that thou
shouldst be with me in my journeyings, as thou art a
sharpsighted, swiftfooted man, and besides I think thou wouldst
be dauntless in an onslaught."

"I can't blame myself," says Bjorn, "for wanting either sharp
sight, or dash, or any other bravery; but no doubt thou camest
hither because all thy other earths are stopped.  Still at thy
prayer, Kari, I will not look on thee as an everyday man; I will
surely help thee in all that thou askest."

"The trolls take thy boasting and bragging," said his housewife,
"and thou shouldst not utter such stuff and silliness to any one
than thyself.  As for me, I will willingly give Kari meat and
other good things, which I know will be useful to him; but on
Bjom's hardihood, Kari, thou shalt not trust, for I am afraid
that thou wilt find it quite otherwise than he says."

"Often hast thou thrown blame upon me," said Bjorn, "but for all
that I put so much faith in myself that though I am put to the
trial I will never give way to any man; and the best proof of it
is this, that few try a tussle with me because none dare to do
so."

Kari was there some while in hiding, and few men knew of it.

Now men think that Kari must have ridden to the north country to
see Gudmund the Powerful, for Kari made Bjorn tell his neighbours
that he had met Kari on the beaten track, and that he rode thence
up into Godaland, and so north to Goose-sand, and then north to
Gudmund the Powerful at Modruvale.

So that story was spread over all the country.



148. OF FLOSI AND THE BURNERS

Now Flosi spoke to the burners, his companions, "It will no
longer serve our turn to sit still, for now we shall have to
think of our going abroad and of our fines, and of fulfilling our
atonement as bravely as we can, and let us take a passage
wherever it seems most likely to get one."

They bade him see to all that.  Then Flosi said, "We will ride
east to Hornfirth; for there that ship is laid up, which is owned
by Eyjolf Nosy, a man from Drontheim, but he wants to take to him
a wife here, and he will not get the match made unless he settles
himself down here.  We will buy the ship of him, for we shall
have many men and little freight.  The ship is big and will take
us all."

Then they ceased talking of it.

But a little after they rode east, and did not stop before they
came east to Bjornness in Homfirth, and there they found Eyjolf,
for he had been there as a guest that winter.

There Flosi and his men had a hearty welcome, and they were there
the night.  Next morning Flosi dealt with the captain for the
ship, but he said he would not be hard to sell the ship if he
could get what he wanted for her.  Flosi asked him in what coin
he wished to be paid for her; the Easterling says he wanted land
for her near where he then was.

Then Eyjolf told Flosi all about his dealings with his host, and
Flosi says he will pull an oar with him, so that his marriage
bargain might be struck, and buy the ship of him afterwards.  The
Easterling was glad at that.  Flosi offered him land at
Borgarhaven, and now the Easterling holds on with his suit to his
host when Flosi was by, and Flosi threw in a helping word, so
that the bargain was brought about between them.

Flosi made over the land at Borgarhaven to the Easterling, but
shook hands on the bargain for the ship.  He got also from the
Easterling twenty hundreds in wares, and that was also in their
bargain for the land.

Now Flosi rode back home.  He was so beloved by his men that
their wares stood free to him to take either on loan or gift,
just as he chose.

He rode home to Swinefell, and was at home a while.

Then Flosi sent Kol Thorstein's son and Gunnar Lambi's son east
to Hornfirth.  They were to be there by the ship, and to fit her
out, and set up booths, and sack the wares, and get all things
together that were needful.

Now we must tell of the sons of Sigfus how they say to Flosi that
they will ride west to Fleetlithe to set their houses in order,
and get wares thence, and such other things as they needed. 
"Kari is not there now to be guarded against," they say, "if he
is in the north country as is said."

"I know not," answers Flosi, "as to such stories, whether there
be any truth in what is said of Kari's journeyings; methinks, we
have often been wrong in believing things which are nearer to
learn than this.  My counsel is that ye go many of you together,
and part as little as ye can, and be as wary of yourselves as ye
may.  Thou, too, Kettle of the Mark shalt bear in mind that dream
which I told thee, and which thou prayedst me to hide; for many
are those in thy company who were then called."

"All must come to pass as to man's life," said Kettle, "as it is
foredoomed; but good go with thee for thy warning."

Now they spoke no more about it.

After that the sons of Sigfus busked them and those men with them
who were meant to go with them.  They were eight in all, and then
they rode away, and ere they went they kissed Flosi, and he bade
them farewell, and said he and some of those who rode away would
not see each other more.  But they would not let themselves be
hindered.  They rode now on their way, and Flosi said that they
should take his wares in Middleland, and carry them east, and do
the same in Landsbreach and Woodcombe.

After that they rode to Skaptartongue, and so on the fell, and
north of Eyjafell Jokul, and down into Godaland, and so down into
the woods in Thorsmark.

Bjorn of the Mark caught sight of them coming, and went at once
to meet them.

Then they greeted each other well, and the sons of Sigfus asked
after Kari Solmund's son.

"I met Kari," said Bjorn, "and that is now very long since; he
rode hence north on Goose-sand, and meant to go to Gudmund the
Powerful, and methought if he were here now, he would stand in
awe of you, for he seemed to be left all alone."

Grani Gunnar's son said, "He shall stand more in awe of us yet
before we have done with him, and he shall learn that as soon as
ever he comes within spearthrow of us; but as for us, we do not
fear him at all, now that he is all alone."

Kettle of the Mark bade them be still, and bring out no big
words.

Bjorn asked when they would be coming back.

"We shall stay near a week in Fleetlithe," said they, and so they
told him when they should be riding back on the fell.

With that they parted.

Now the sons of Sigfus rode to their homes, and their households
were glad to see them.  They were there near a week.

Now Bjorn comes home and sees Kari, and told him all about the
doings of the sons of Sigfus, and their purpose.

Kari said he had shown in this great faithfulness to him, and
Bjorn said, "I should have thought there was more risk of any
other man's failing in that than of me if I had pledged my help
or care to any one."

"Ah," said his mistress, "but you may still be bad and yet not be
so bad as to be a traitor to thy master."

Kari stayed there six nights after that.



149. OF KARI AND BJORN

Now Kari talks to Bjorn and says, "We shall ride east across the
fell and down into Skaptartongue, and fare stealthily over
Flosi's country, for I have it in my mind to get myself carried
abroad east in Alftafirth."

"This is a very riskful journey," said Bjorn, "and few would have
the heart to take it save thou and I."

"If thou backest Kari ill," said his housewife, "know this, that
thou shalt never come afterwards into my bed, and my kinsmen
shall share our goods between us."

"It is likelier, mistress," said he, "that thou wilt have to look
out for something else than this if thou hast a mind to part from
me: for I will bear my own witness to myself what a champion and
daredevil I am when weapons clash."

Now they rode that day east on the fell to the north of the
Jokul, but never on the highway, and so down into Skaptartongue,
and above all the homesteads to Skaptarwater, and led their
horses into a dell, but they themselves were on the look-out, and
had so placed themselves that they could not be seen.

Then Kari said to Bjorn, "What shall we do now if they ride down
upon us here from the fell?"

"Are there not but two things to be done," said Bjorn; "one to
ride away from them north under the crags, and so let them ride
by us, or to wait and see if any of them lag behind, and then to
fall on them."

They talked much about this, and one while Bjorn was for flying
as fast as he could in every word he spoke, and at another for
staying and fighting it out with them, and Kari thought this the
greatest sport.

The sons of Sigfus rode from their homes the same day that they
had named to Bjorn.  They came to the Mark and knocked at the
door there, and wanted to see Bjorn; but his mistress went to the
door and greeted them.  They asked at once for Bjorn, and she
said he had ridden away down under Eyjafell, and so east under
Selialandsmull, and on east to Holt, "for he has some money to
call in thereabouts," she said.

They believed this, for they knew that Bjorn had money out at
call there.

After that they rode east on the fell, and did not stop before
they came to Skaptartongue, and so rode down along Skaptarwater,
and baited their horses just where Kari had thought they would. 
Then they split their band.  Kettle of the Mark rode east into
Middleland, and eight men with him, but the others laid them down
to sleep, and were not ware of aught until Kari and Bjorn came up
to them.  A little ness ran out there into the river; into it
Kari went and took his stand, and bade Bjorn stand back to back
with him, and not to put himself too forward, "but give me all
the help thou canst."

"Well," says Bjorn, "I never had it in my head that any man
should stand before me as a shield, but still as things are thou
must have thy way; but for all that, with my gift of wit and my
swiftness I may be of some use to thee, and not harmless to our
foes."

Now they all rose up and ran at them, and Modolf Kettle's son was
quickest of them, and thrust at Kari with his spear.  Kari had
his shield before him, and the blow fell on it, and the spear
stuck fast in the shield.  Then Kari twists the shield so
smartly, that the spear snapped short off, and then he drew his
sword and smote at Modolf; but Modolf made a cut at him too, and
Kari's sword fell on Modolf's hilt, and glanced off it on to
Modolf's wrist, and took the arm off, and down it fell, and the
sword too.  Then Kari's sword passed on into Modolf's side, and
between his ribs, and so Modolf fell down and was dead on the
spot.

Grani Gunnar's son snatched up a spear and hurled it at Kari, but
Kari thrust down his shield so hard that the point stood fast in
the ground, but with his left hand he caught the spear in the
air, and hurled it back at Grani, and caught up his shield again
at once with his left hand.  Grani had his shield before him, and
the spear came on the shield and passed right through it, and
into Grani's thigh just below the small guts, and through the
limb, and so on, pinning him to the ground, and he could not get
rid of the spear before his fellows drew him off it, and carried
him away on their shields, and laid him down in a dell.

There was a man who ran up to Kari's side, and meant to cut off
his leg, but Bjorn cut off that man's arm, and sprang back again
behind Kari, and they could not do him any hurt.  Kari made a
sweep at that same man with his sword, and cut him asunder at the
waist.

Then Lambi Sigfus' son rushed at Kari, and hewed at him with his
sword.  Kari caught the blow sideways on his shield, and the
sword would not bite; then Kari thrust at Lambi with his sword
just below the breast, so that the point came out between his
shoulders, and that was his deathblow.

Then Thorstein Geirleif's son rushed at Kari, and thought to take
him in flank, but Kari caught sight of him, and swept at him with
his sword across the shoulders, so that the man was cleft asunder
at the chine.

A little while after he gave Gunnar of Skal, a good man and true,
his deathblow.  As for Bjorn, he had wounded three men who had
tried to give Kari wounds, and yet he was never so far forward
that he was in the least danger, nor was he wounded, nor was
either of those companions hurt in that fight, but all those that
got away were wounded.

Then they ran for their horses, and galloped them off across
Skaptarwater as hard as they could, and they were so scared that
they stopped at no house, nor did they dare to stay and tell the
tidings anywhere.

Kari and Bjorn hooted and shouted after them as they galloped
off.  So they rode east to Woodcombe, and did not draw bridle
till they came to Swinefell.

Flosi was not at home when they came thither, and that was why no
hue and cry was made thence after Kari.

This journey of theirs was thought most shameful by all men.

Kari rode to Skal, and gave notice of these manslayings as done
by his hand; there, too, he told them of the death of their
master and five others, and of Grani's wound, and said it would
be better to bear him to the house if he were to live.

Bjorn said he could not bear to slay him, though he said he was
worthy of death; but those who answered him said they were sure
few had bitten the dust before him.  But Bjorn told them he had
it now in his power to make as many of the Sidemen as he chose
bite the dust; to which they said it was a bad look out.

Then Kari and Bjorn ride away from the house.



150. MORE OF KARI AND BJORN

Then Kari asked Bjorn, "What counsel shall we take now?  Now I
will try what thy wit is worth."

"Dost thou think now," answered Bjorn, "that much lies on our
being as wise as ever we can?"

"Ay," said Kari, "I think so surely."

"Then our counsel is soon taken," says Bjorn.  "We will cheat
them all as though they were giants; and now we will make as
though we were riding north on the fell, but as soon as ever we
are out of sight behind the brae, we will turn down along
Skaptarwater, and hide us there where we think handiest, so long
as the hue and cry is hottest, if they ride after us."

"So will we do," said Kari; "and this I had meant to do all
along."

"And so you may put it to the proof," said Bjorn, "that I am no
more of an every-day body in wit than I am in bravery."

Now Kari and his companion rode as they had purposed down along
Skaptarwater, till they came where a branch of the stream ran
away to the south-east; then they turned down along the middle
branch, and did not draw bridle till they came into Middleland,
and on that moor which is called Kringlemire; it has a stream of
lava all around it.

Then Kari said to Bjorn that he must watch their horses, and keep
a good look-out; "But as for me," he says, "I am heavy with
sleep."

So Bjorn watched the horses, but Kari lay him down, and slept but
a very short while ere Bjorn waked him up again, and he had
already led their horses together, and they were by their side. 
Then Bjorn said to Kari, "Thou standest in much need of me
though!  A man might easily have run away from thee if he had not
been as brave-hearted as I am; for now thy foes are riding upon
thee, and so thou must up and be doing."

Then Kari went away under a jutting crag, and Bjorn said, "Where
shall I stand now?"

"Well!" answers Kari, "now there are two choices before thee; one
is, that thou standest at my back and have my shield to cover
thyself with, if it can be of any use to thee; and the other is,
to get on thy horse and ride away as fast as thou canst."

"Nay," says Bjorn, "I will not do that, and there are many things
against it; first of all, may be, if I ride away, some spiteful
tongues might begin to say that I ran away from thee for faint-
heartedness; and another thing is, that I well know what game
they will think there is in me, and so they will ride after me,
two or three of them, and then I should be of no use or help to
thee after all.  No! I will rather stand by thee and keep them
off so long as it is fated."

Then they had not long to wait ere horses with packsaddles were
driven by them over the moor, and with them went three men.

Then Kari said, "These men see us not."

"Then let us suffer them to ride on," said Bjorn.

So those three rode on past them; but the six others then came
riding right up to them, and they all leapt off their horses
straightway in a body, and turned on Kari and his companion.

First, Glum Hildir's son rushed at them, and thrust at Kari with
a spear; Kari turned short round on his heel, and Glum missed
him, and the blow fell against the rock.  Bjorn sees that and
hewed at once the head off Glum's spear.  Kari leant on one side
and smote at Glum with his sword, and the blow fell on his thigh,
and took off the limb high up in the thigh, and Glum died at
once.

Then Vebrand and Asbrand the sons of Thorbrand ran up to Kari,
but Kari flew at Vebrand and thrust his sword through him, but
afterwards he hewed off both of Asbrand's feet from under him.

In this bout both Kari and Bjorn were wounded.

Then Kettle of the Mark rushed at Kari, and thrust at him with
his spear.  Kari threw up his leg, and the spear stuck in the
ground, and Kari leapt on the spear-shaft, and snapped it in
sunder.

Then Kari grasped Kettle in his arms, and Bjorn ran up just then,
and wanted to slay him, but Kari said, "Be still now.  I will
give Kettle peace; for though it may be that Kettle's life is in
my power, still I will never slay him."

Kettle answers never a word, but rode away after his companions,
and told those the tidings who did not know them already.

They told also these tidings to the men of the Hundred, and they
gathered together at once a great force of armed men, and went
straightway up all the water-courses, and so far up on the fell
that they were three days in the chase; but after that they
turned back to their own homes, but Kettle and his companions
rode east to Swinefell, and told the tidings these.

Flosi was little stirred at what had befallen them, but said, "No
one could tell whether things would stop there, for there is no
man like Kari of all that are now left in Iceland."



151. OF KARI AND BJORN AND THORGEIR

Now we must tell of Bjorn and Kari that they ride down on the
Sand, and lead their horses under the banks where the wild oats
grew, and cut the oats for them, that they might not die of
hunger.  Kari made such a near guess, that he rode away thence at
the very time that they gave over seeking for him.  He rode by
night up through the Hundred, and after that he took to the fell;
and so on all the same way as they had followed when they rode
east, and did not stop till they came at Midmark.

Then Bjorn said to Kari, "Now shalt thou be my great friend
before my mistress, for she will never believe one word of what I
say; but everything lies on what you do, so now repay me for the
good following which I have yielded to thee."

"So it shall be; never fear," says Kari.

After that they ride up to the homestead, and then the mistress
asked them what tidings, and greeted them well.

"Our troubles have rather grown greater, old lass!"

She answered little, and laughed; and then the mistress went on
to ask, "How did Bjorn behave to thee, Kari?"

"Bare is back," he answers, "without brother behind it, and Bjorn
behaved well to me.  He wounded three men, and, besides, he is
wounded himself, and he stuck as close to me as he could in
everything."

They were three nights there, and after that they rode to Holt to
Thorgeir, and told him alone these tidings, for those tidings had
not yet been heard there.

Thorgeir thanked him, and it was quite plain that he was glad at
what he heard.  He asked Kari what now was undone which he meant
to do.

"I mean," answers Kari, "to kill Gunnar Lambi's son and Kol
Thorstein's son, if I can get a chance.  Then we have slain
fifteen men, reckoning those five whom we two slew together.  But
one boon I will now ask of thee."

Thorgeir said he would grant him whatever he asked.

"I wish, then, that thou wilt take under thy safeguard this man
whose name is Bjorn, and who has been in these slayings with me,
and that thou wilt change farms with him, and give him a farm
ready stocked here close by thee, and so hold thy hand over him
that no-vengeance may befall him; but all this will be an easy
matter for thee who art such a chief."

"So it shall be," says Thorgeir.

Then he gave Bjorn a ready-stocked farm at Asolfskal, but he took
the farm in the Mark into his own hands.  Thorgeir flitted all
Bjorn's household stuff and goods to Asolfskal, and all his live
stock; and Thorgeir settled all Bjorn's quarrels for him, and he
was reconciled to them with a full atonement.  So Bjorn was
thought to be much more of a man than he had been before.

Then Kari rode away, and did not draw rein till he came west to
Tongue to Asgrim Ellidagrim's son.  He gave Kari a most hearty
welcome, and Kari told him of all the tidings that had happened
in these slayings.

Asgrim was well pleased at them, and asked what Kari meant to do
next.

"I mean," said Kari, "to fare abroad after them, and so dog their
footsteps and slay them, if I can get at them."

Asgrim said there was no man like him for bravery and hardihood.

He was there some nights, and after that he rode to Gizur the
White, and he took him by both hands.  Kari stayed there somme
while, and then he told Gizur that he wished to ride down to
Eyrar.

Gizur gave Kari a good sword at parting.

Now he rode down to Eyrar, and took him a passage with Kolbein
the Black; he was an Orkneyman and an old friend of Kari, and he
was the most forward and brisk of men.

He took Kari by both hands, and said that one fate should befall
both of them.



152. FLOSI GOES ABROAD

Now Flosi rides east to Hornfirth, and most of the men in his
Thing followed him, and bore his wares east, as well as all his
stores and baggage which he had to take with him.

After that they busked them for their voyage, and fitted out
their ship.

Now Flosi stayed by the ship until they were "boun."  But as soon
as ever they got a fair wind they put out to sea.  They had it
long passage and hard weather.

Then they quite lost their reckoning, and sailed on and on, and
all at once three great waves broke over their ship, one after
the other.  Then Flosi said they must be near some land, and that
this was a ground-swell.  A great mist was on them, but the wind
rose so that a great gale overtook them, and they scarce knew
where they were before they were dashed on shore at dead of
night, and the men were saved, but the ship was dashed all to
pieces, and they could not save their goods.

Then they had to look for shelter and warmth for themselves, and
the day after they went up on a height.  The weather was then
good.

Flosi asked if any man knew this land, and there were two men of
their crew who had fared thither before, and said they were quite
sure they knew it, and, say they, "We are come to Hrossey in the
Orkneys."

"Then we might have made a better landing," said Flosi, "for Grim
and Helgi, Njal's sons, whom I slew, were both of them of Earl
Sigurd Hlodver's son's bodyguard."

Then they sought for a hiding-place and spread moss over
themselves, and so lay for a while, but not for long, ere Flosi
spoke and said, "We will not lie here any longer until the
landsmen are ware of us."

Then they arose, and took counsel, and then Flosi said to his
men, "We will go all of us and give ourselves up to the earl; for
there is naught else to do, and the earl has our lives at his
pleasure if he chooses to seek for them."

Then they all went away thence, and Flosi said that they must
tell no man any tidings of their voyage, or what manner of men
they were, before he told them to the earl.

Then they walked on until they met men who showed them to the
town, and then they went in before the earl, and Flosi and all
the others hailed him.

The earl asked what men they might be, and Flosi told his name,
and said out of what part of Iceland he was.

The earl had already heard of the burning, and so be knew the men
at once, and then the earl asked Flosi, "What hast thou to tell
me about Helgi Njal's son, my henchman."

"This," said Flosi, "that I hewed off his head."

"Take them all," said the earl.

Then that was done, and just then in came Thorstein, son of Hall
of the Side.  Flosi had to wife Steinvora, Thorstein's sister. 
Thorstein was one of Earl Sigurd's bodyguard, but when be saw
Flosi seized and held, he went in before the earl, and offered
for Flosi all the goods he had.

The earl was very wroth a long time, but at last the end of it
was, by the prayer of good men and true, joined to those of
Thorstein, for he was well backed by friends, and many threw in
their word with his, that the earl took an atonement from them,
and gave Flosi and all the rest of them peace.  The earl held to
that custom of mighty men that Flosi took that place in his
service which Helgi Njal's son had filled.

So Flosi was made Earl Sigurd's henchman, and he soon won his way
to great love with the earl.



153. KARI GOES ABROAD

Those messmates Kari and Kolbein the Black put out to sea from
Eyrar half a month later than Flosi and his companions from
Hornfirth.

They got a fine fair wind, and were but a short time out.  The
first land they made was the Fair Isle, it lies between Shetland
and the Orkneys.  There that man whose name was David the White
took Kari into his house, and he told him all that he had heard
for certain about the doings of the burners.  He was one of
Kari's greatest friends, and Kari stayed with him for the winter.

There they heard tidings from the west out of the Orkneys of all
that was done there.

Earl Sigurd bade to his feast at Yule Earl Gilli, his brother-
in-law, out of the Southern isles; he had to wife Swanlauga, Earl
Sigurd's sister; and then, too, came to see Earl Sigurd that king
from Ireland whose name was Sigtrygg.  He was a son of Olaf
Rattle, but his mother's name was Kormlada; she was the fairest
of all women, and best gifted in everything that was not in her
own power, but it was the talk of men that she did all things ill
over which she had any power.

Brian was the name of the king who first had her to wife, but
they were then parted.  He was the best-natured of all kings.  He
had his seat in Connaught, in Ireland; his brother's name was
Wolf the Quarrelsome, the greatest champion and warrior; Brian's
foster-child's name was Kerthialfad.  He was the son of King
Kylfi, who had many wars with King Brian, and fled away out of
the land before him, and became a hermit; but when King Brian
went south on a pilgrimage, then he met King Kylfi, and then they
were atoned, and King Brian took his son Kerthialfad to him, and
loved him more than his own sons.  He was then full grown when
these things happened, and was the boldest of all men.

Duncan was the name of the first of King Brian's sons; the second
was Margad; the third, Takt, whom we call Tann, he was the
youngest of them; but the elder sons of King Brian were full
grown, and the briskest of men.

Kormlada was not the mother of King Brian's children, and so grim
was she against King Brian after their parting, that she would
gladly have him dead.

King Brian thrice forgave all his outlaws the same fault, but if
they misbehaved themselves oftener, then he let them be judged by
the law; and from this one may mark what a king he must have
been.

Kormlada egged on her son Sigtrygg very much to kill King Brian,
and she now sent him to Earl Sigurd to beg for help.

King Sigtrygg came before Yule to the Orkneys, and there, too,
came Earl Gilli, as was written before.

The men were so placed that King Sigtrygg sat in a high seat in
the middle, but on either side of the king sat one of the earls. 
The men of King Sigtrygg and Earl Gilli sate on the inner side
away from him, but on the outer side away from Earl Sigurd, sate
Flosi and Thorstein, son of Hall of the Side, and the whole hall
was full.

Now King Sigtrygg and Earl Gilli wished to hear of these tidings
which had happened at the burning, and so, also, what had
befallen since.

Then Gunnar Lambi's son was got to tell the tale, and a stool was
set for him to sit upon.



154. GUNNAR LAMBI'S SON'S SLAYING

Just at that very time Kari and Kolbein and David the White came
to Hrossey unawares to all men.  They went straightway up on
land, but a few men watched their ship.

Kari and his fellows went straight to the earl's homestead, and
came to the hall about drinking time.

It so happened that just then Gunnar was telling the story of the
burning, but they were listening to him meanwhile outside.  This
was on Yule-day itself.

Now King Sigtrygg asked, "How did Skarphedinn bear the burning?"

"Well at first for a long time," said Gunnar, "but still the end
of it was that he wept."  And so he went on giving an unfair
leaning in his story, but every now and then he laughed out loud.

Kari could not stand this, and then he ran in with his sword
drawn, and sang this song:

     "Men of might, in battle eager,
     Boast of burning Njal's abode,
     Have the Princes heard how sturdy
     Seahorse racers sought revenge?
     Hath not since, on foemen holding
     High the shield's broad orb aloft,
     All that wrong been fully wroken?
     Raw flesh ravens got to tear."

So he ran in up the hall, and smote Gunnar Lambi's son on the
neck with such a sharp blow, that his head spun off on to the
board before the king and the earls, and the board was all one
gore of blood, and the earl's clothing too.

Earl Sigurd knew the man that had done the deed, and called out,
"Seize Kari and kill him."

Kari had been one of Earl Sigurd's bodyguard, and he was of all
men most beloved by his friends; and no man stood up a whit more
for the earl's speech.

"Many would say, Lord," said Kari, "that I have done this deed on
your behalf, to avenge your henchman."

Then Flosi said, "Kari hath not done this without a cause; he is
in no atonement with us, and he only did what he had a right to
do."

So Kari walked away, and there was no hue and cry after him. 
Kari fared to his ship, and his fellows with him.  The weather
was then good, and they sailed off at once south to Caithness,
and went on shore at Thraswick to the house of a worthy man whose
name was Skeggi, and with him they stayed a very long while.

Those behind in the Orkneys cleansed the board, and bore out the
dead man.

The earl was told that they had set sail south for Scotland, and
King Sigtrygg said, "This was a mighty bold fellow, who dealt his
stroke so stoutly, and never thought twice about it!"

Then Earl Sigurd answered, "There is no man like Kari for dash
and daring."

Now Flosi undertook to tell the story of the burning, and he was
fair to all; and therefore what he said was believed.

Then King Sigtrygg stirred in his business with Earl Sigurd, and
bade him go to the war with him against King Brian.

The earl was long steadfast, but the end of it was that he let
the king have his way, but said he must have his mother's hand
for his help, and be king in Ireland, if they slew Brian.  But
all his men besought Earl Sigurd not to go into the war, but it
was all no good.

So they parted on the understanding that Earl Sigurd gave his
word to go; but King Sigtrygg promised him his mother and the
kingdom.

It was so settled that Earl Sigurd was to come with all his host
to Dublin by Palm Sunday.

Then King Sigtrygg fared south to Ireland, and told his mother
Kormlada that the earl had undertaken to come, and also what he
had pledged himself to grant him.

She showed herself well pleased at that, but said they must
gather greater force still.

Sigtrygg asked whence this was to be looked for?

She said there were two vikings lying off the west of Man; and
that they had thirty ships, and, she went on, "They are men of
such hardihood that nothing can withstand them.  The one's name
is Ospak, and the other's Brodir.  Thou shalt fare to find them,
and spare nothing to get them into thy quarrel, whatever price
they ask."

Now King Sigtrygg fares and seeks the vikings, and found them
lying outside off Man; King Sigtrygg brings forward his errand at
once, but Brodir shrank from helping him until he, King Sigtrygg,
promised him the kingdom and his mother, and they were to keep
this such a secret that Earl Sigurd should know nothing about it;
Brodir too was to come to Dublin on Palm Sunday.

So King Sigtrygg fared home to his mother, and told her how
things stood.

After that those brothers, Ospak and Brodir, talked together, and
then Brodir told Ospak all that he and Sigtrygg had spoken of,
and bade him fare to battle with him against King Brian, and said
he set much store on his going.

But Ospak said he would not fight against so good a king.

Then they were both wroth, and sundered their band at once. 
Ospak had ten ships and Brodir twenty.

Ospak was a heathen, and the wisest of all men.  He laid his
ships inside in a sound, but Brodir lay outside him.

Brodir had been a Christian man and a mass-deacon by
consecration, but he had thrown off his faith and become God's
dastard, and now worshipped heathen fiends, and he was of all men
most skilled in sorcery.  He had that coat of mail on which no
steel would bite.  He was both tall and strong, and had such long
locks that he tucked them under his belt.  His hair was black.



155. OF SIGNS AND WONDERS

It so happened one night that a great din passed over Brodir and
his men, so that they all woke, and sprang up and put on their
clothes.

Along with that came a shower of boiling blood.

Then they covered themselves with their shields, but for all that
many were scalded.

This wonder lasted all till day, and a man had died on board
every ship.

Then they slept during the day, but the second night there was
again a din, and again they all sprang up.  Then swords leapt out
of their sheaths, and axes and spears flew about in the air and
fought.

The weapons pressed them so hard that they had to shield
themselves, but still many were wounded, and again a man died out
of every ship.

This wonder lasted all till day.

Then they slept again the day after.

But the third night there was a din of the same kind, and then
ravens flew at them, and it seemed to them as though their beaks
and claws were of iron.

The ravens pressed them so hard that they had to keep them off
with their swords, and covered themselves with their shields, and
so this went on again till day, and then another man had died in
every ship.

Then they went to sleep first of all, but when Brodir woke up, he
drew his breath painfully, and bade them put off the boat. 
"For," he said, "I will go to see Ospak."

Then he got into the boat and some men with him, but when he
found Ospak he told him of the wonders which had befallen them,
and bade him say what he thought they bodcd.

Ospak would not tell him before he pledged him peace, and Brodir
promised him peace, but Ospak still shrank from telling him till
night fell.

Then Ospak spoke and said, "When blood rained on you, therefore
shall ye shed many men's blood, both of your own and others.  But
when ye heard a great din, then ye must have been shown the crack
of doom, and ye shall all die speedily.  But when weapons fought
against you, that must forebode a battle; but when ravens pressed
you, that marks the devils which ye put faith in, and who will
drag you all down to the pains of hell."

Then Brodir was so wroth that he could answer never a word, but
he went at once to his men, and made them lay his ships in a line
across the sound, and moor them by bearing their cables on shore
at either end of the line, and meant to slay them all next
morning.

Ospak saw all their plan, and then he vowed to take the true
faith, and to go to King Brian, and follow him till his death-
day.

Then he took that counsel to lay his ships in a line, and punt
them along the shore with poles, and cut the cables of Brodir's
ships.  Then the ships of Brodir's men began to fall aboard of
one another when they were all fast asleep; and so Ospak and his
men got out of the firth, and so west to Ireland, and came to
Connaught.

Then Ospak told King Brian all that he had learnt, and took
baptism, and gave himself over into the king's hand.

After that King Brian made them gather force over all his realm,
and the whole host was to come to Dublin in the week before Palm
Sunday.



156. BRIAN'S BATTLE

Earl Sigurd Hlodver's son busked him from the Orkneys, and Flosi
offered to go with him.

The earl would not have that, since he had his pilgrimage to
fulfil.

Flosi offered fifteen men of his band to go on the voyage, and
the earl accepted them, but Flosi fared with Earl Gilli to the
Southern isles.

Thorstein, the son of Hall of the Side, went along with Earl
Sigurd, and Hrafn the Red, and Erling of Straumey.

He would not that Hareck should go, but said he would be sure to
be the first to tell him the tidings of his voyage.

The earl came with all his host on Palm Sunday to Dublin, and
there too was come Brodir with all his host.

Brodir tried by sorcery how the fight would go, but the answer
ran thus, that if the fight were on Good-Friday King Brian would
fall but win the day; but if they fought before, they would all
fall who were against him.

Then Brodir said that they must not fight before the Friday.

On the fifth day of the week a man rode up to Kormlada and her
company on an apple-grey horse, and in his hand he held a
halberd; he talked long with them.

King Brian came with all his host to the Burg, and on the Friday
the host fared out of the Burg, and both armies were drawn up in
array.

Brodir was on one wing of the battle, but King Sigtrygg on the
other.

Earl Sigurd was in the mid battle.

Now it must be told of King Brian that he would not fight on the
fast-day, and so a shieldburg (1) was thrown round him, and his
host was drawn up in array in front of it.

Wolf the Quarrelsome was on that wing of the battle against which
Brodir stood; but on the other wing, where Sigtrygg stood against
them, were Ospak and his sons.

But in mid battle was Kerthialfad, and before him the banners
were home.

Now the wings fall on one another, and there was a very hard
fight.  Brodir went through the host of the foe, and felled all
the foremost that stood there, but no steel would bite on his
mail.

Wolf the Quarrelsome turned then to meet him, and thrust at him
thrice so hard that Brodir fell before him at each thrust, and
was well-nigh not getting on his feet again; but as soon as ever
he found his feet, he fled away into the wood at once.

Earl Sigurd had a hard battle against Kerthialfad, and
Kerthialfad came on so fast that he laid low all who were in the
front rank, and he broke the array of Earl Sigurd right up to his
banner, and slew the banner-bearer.

Then he got another man to bear the banner, and there was again a
hard fight.

Kerthialfad smote this man too his death blow at once, and so on
one after the other all who stood near him.

Then Earl Sigurd called on Thorstein the son of Hall of the Side,
to bear the banner, and Thorstein was just about to lift the
banner, but then Asmund the White said, "Don't bear the banner!
For all they who bear it get their death."

"Hrafn the Red!" called out Earl Sigurd, "bear thou the banner."

"Bear thine own devil thyself," answered Hrafn.

Then the earl said, "`Tis fittest that the beggar should bear the
bag;'" and with that he took the banner from the staff and put it
under his cloak.

A little after Asmund the White was slain, and then the earl was
pierced through with a spear.

Ospak had gone through all the battle on his wing, he had been
sore wounded, and lost both his sons ere King Sigtrygg fled
before him.

Then flight broke out throughout all the host.

Thorstein Hall of the Side's son stood still while all the others
fled, and tied his shoe-string.  Then Kerthialfad asked why he
ran not as the others.

"Because," said Thorstein, "I can't get home to-night, since I
am at home out in Iceland."

Kerthialfad gave him peace.

Hrafn the Red was chased out into a certain river; he thought he
saw there the pains of hell down below him, and he thought the
devils wanted to drag him to them.

Then Hrafn said, "Thy dog (2), Apostle Peter!  hath run twice to
Rome, and he would run the third time if thou gavest him leave."

Then the devils let him loose, and Hrafn got across the river.

Now Brodir saw that King Brian's men were chasing the fleers, and
that there were few men by the shieldburg.

Then he rushed out of the wood, and broke through the shieldburg,
and hewed at the king.

The lad Takt threw his arm in the way, and the stroke took it off
and the king's head too, but the king's blood came on the lad's
stump, and the stump was healed by it on the spot.

Then Brodir called out with a loud voice, "Now let man tell man
that Brodir felled Brian."

Then men ran after those who were chasing the fleers, and they
were told that King Brian had fallen, and then they turned back
straightway, both Wolf the Quarrelsome and Kerthialfad.

Then they threw a ring round Brodir and his men, and threw
branches of trees upon them, and so Brodir was taken alive.

Wolf the Quarrelsome cut open his belly, and led him round and
round the trunk of a tree, and so wound all his entrails out of
him, and he did not die before they were all drawn out of him.

Brodir's men were slain to a man.

After that they took King Brian's body and laid it out.  The
king's head had grown fast to the trunk.

Fifteen men of the burners fell in Brian's battle, and there,
too, fell Halldor the son of Gudmund the Powerful, and Erling
of Straumey.

On Good-Friday that event happened in Caithness that a man whose
name was Daurrud went out.  He saw folk riding twelve together to
a bower, and there they were all lost to his sight.  He went to
that bower and looked in through a window slit that was in it,
and saw that there were women inside, and they had set up a loom. 
Men's heads were the weights, but men's entrails were the warp
and weft, a sword was the shuttle, and the reels were arrows.

They sang these songs, and he learnt them by heart:

THE WOOF OF WAR.

     "See! warp is stretched
     For warriors' fall,
     Lo! weft in loom
     'Tis wet with blood;
     Now fight foreboding,
     'Neath friends' swift fingers,
     Our grey woof waxeth
     With war's alarms,
     Our warp bloodred,
     Our weft corseblue.

     "This woof is y-woven
     With entrails of men,
     This warp is hardweighted
     With heads of the slain,
     Spears blood-besprinkled
     For spindles we use,
     Our loom ironbound,
     And arrows our reels;
     With swords for our shuttles
     This war-woof we work;
     So weave we, weird sisters,
     Our warwinning woof.

     "Now Warwinner walketh
     To weave in her turn,
     Now Swordswinger steppeth,
     Now Swiftstroke, now Storm;
     When they speed the shuttle
     How spearheads shall flash!
     Shields crash, and helmgnawer (3)
     On harness bite hard!

     "Wind we, wind swiftly
     Our warwinning woof
     Woof erst for king youthful
     Foredoomed as his own,
     Forth now we will ride,
     Then through the ranks rushing
     Be busy where friends
     Blows blithe give and take.

     "Wind we, wind swiftly
     Our warwinning woof,
     After that let us steadfastly
     Stand by the brave king;
     Then men shall mark mournful
     Their shields red with gore,
     How Swordstroke and Spearthrust
     Stood stout by the prince.

     "Wind we, wind swiftly
     Our warwinning woof.
     When sword-bearing rovers
     To banners rush on,
     Mind, maidens, we spare not
     One life in the fray!
     We corse-choosing sisters
     Have charge of the slain.

     "Now new-coming nations
     That island shall rule,
     Who on outlying headlands
     Abode ere the fight;
     I say that King mighty
     To death now is done,
     Now low before spearpoint
     That Earl bows his head.

     "Soon over all Ersemen
     Sharp sorrow shall fall,
     That woe to those warriors
     Shall wane nevermore;
     Our woof now is woven.
     Now battlefield waste,
     O'er land and o'er water
     War tidings shall leap.

     "Now surely 'tis gruesome
     To gaze all around.
     When bloodred through heaven
     Drives cloudrack o'er head;
     Air soon shall be deep hued
     With dying men's blood
     When this our spaedom
     Comes speedy to pass.

     "So cheerily chant we
     Charms for the young king,
     Come maidens lift loudly
     His warwinning lay;
     Let him who now listens
     Learn well with his ears
     And gladden brave swordsmen
     With bursts of war's song.

     "Now mount we our horses,
     Now bare we our brands,
     Now haste we hard, maidens,
     Hence far, far, away."

Then they plucked down the Woof and tore it asunder, and each
kept what she had hold of.

Now Daurrud goes away from the Slit, and home; but they got on
their steeds and rode six to the south, and the other six to the
north.

A like event befell Brand Gneisti's son in the Faroe Isles.

At Swinefell, in Iceland, blood came on the priest's stole on
Good-Friday, so that he had to put it off.

At Thvattwater the priest thought he saw on Good-Friday a long
deep of the sea hard by the altar, and there he saw many awful
sights, and it was long ere he could sing the prayers.

This event happened in the Orkneys, that Hareck thought he saw
Earl Sigurd, and some men with him.  Then Hareck took his horse
and rode to meet the earl.  Men saw that they met and rode under
a brae, but they were never seen again, and not a scrap was ever
found of Hareck.

Earl Gilli in the Southern isles dreamed that a man came to him
and said his name was Hostfinn, and told him he was come from
Ireland.

The earl thought he asked him for tidings thence, and then he
sang this song:

     "I have been where warriors wrestled,
     High in Erin sang the sword,
     Boss to boss met many bucklers,
     Steel rung sharp on rattling helm;
     I can tell of all their struggle;
     Sigurd fell in flight of spears;
     Brian fell, but kept his kingdom
     Ere he lost one drop of blood."

Those two, Flosi and the earl, talked much of this dream.  A week
after, Hrafn the Red came thither, and told them all the tidings
of Brian's battle, the fall of the king, and of Earl Sigurd, and
Brodir, and all the Vikings.

"What," said Flosi, "hast thou to tell me of my men?

"They all fell there," says Hrafn, "but thy brother-in-law
Thorstein took peace from Kerthialfad, and is now with him."

Flosi told the earl that he would now go away, "For we have our
pilgrimage south to fulfil."

The earl bade him go as he wished, and gave him a ship and all
else that he needed, and much silver.

Then they sailed to Wales, and stayed there a while.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Shieldburg," that is, a ring of men holding their shields
     locked together.
(2)  "Thy dog," etc.  Meaning that he would go a third time on a
     pilgrimage to Rome if St. Peter helped him out of this
     strait.
(3)  "Helmgnawer," the sword that bites helmets.



157. THE SLAYING OF KOL THORSTEIN'S SON

Kari Solmund's son told master Skeggi that he wished he would get
him a ship.  So master Skeggi gave Kari a longship, fully trimmed
and manned, and on board it went Kari, and David the White, and
Kolbein the Black.

Now Kari and his fellows sailed south through Scotland's firths,
and there they found men from the Southern isles.  They told Kari
the tidings from Ireland, and also that Flosi was gone to Wales,
and his men with him.

But when Kari heard that, he told his messmates that he would
hold on south to Wales, to fall in with Flosi and his band.  So
he bade them then to part from his company, if they liked it
better, and said that he would not wish to beguile any man into
mischief, because he thought he had not yet had revenge enough on
Flosi and his band.

All chose to go with him; and then he sails south to Wales, and
there they lay in hiding in a creek out of the way.

That morning Kol Thorstein's son went into the town to buy
silver.  He of all the burners had used the bitterest words.  Kol
had talked much with a mighty dame, and he had so knocked the
nail on the head, that it was all but fixed that he was to have
her, and settle down there.

That same morning Kari went also into the town.  He came where
Kol was telling the silver.

Kari knew him at once, and ran at him with his drawn sword and
smote him on the neck; but he still went on telling the silver,
and his head counted "ten" just as it spun off his body.

Then Kari said, "Go and tell this to Flosi, that Kari Solmund's
son hath slain Kol Thorstein's son.  I give notice of this
slaying as done by my hand."

Then Kari went to his ship, and told his shipmates of the
manslaughter.

Then they sailed north to Beruwick, and laid up their ship, and
fared up into Whitherne in Scotland, and were with Earl Malcolm
that year.

But when Flosi heard of Kol's slaying, he laid out his body, and
bestowed much money on his burial.

Flosi never uttered any wrathful words against Kari.

Thence Flosi fared south across the sea and began his pilgrimage,
and went on south, and did not stop till he came to Rome.  There
he got so great honour that he took absolution from the Pope
himself, and for that he gave a great sum of money.

Then he fared back again by the east road, and stayed long in
towns, and went in before mighty men, and had from them great
honour.

He was in Norway the winter after, and was with Earl Eric till he
was ready to sail, and the earl gave him much meal, and many
other men behaved handsomely to him.

Now he sailed out to Iceland, and ran into Hornfirth, and thence
fared home to Swinefell.  He had then fulfilled all the terms of
his atonement, both in fines and foreign travel.



158. OF FLOSI AND KARI

Now it is to be told of Kari that the summer after he went down
to his ship and sailed south across the sea, and began his
pilgrimage in Normandy, and so went south and got absolution and
fared back by the western way, and took his ship again in
Normandy, and sailed in her north across the sea to Dover in
England.

Thence he sailed west, round Wales, and so north, through
Scotland's firths, and did not stay his course till he came to
Thraswick in Caithness, to master Skeggi's house.

There he gave over the ship of burden to Kolbein and David, and
Kolbein sailed in that ship to Norway, but David stayed behind in
the Fair Isle.

Kari was that winter in Caithness.  In this winter his housewife
died out in Iceland.

The next summer Kari busked him for Iceland.  Skeggi gave him a
ship of burden, and there were eighteen of them on board her.

They were rather late "boun," but still they put to sea, and had
a long passage, but at last they made Ingolf's Head.  There their
ship was dashed all to pieces, but the men's lives were saved. 
Then, too, a gale of wind came on them.

Now they ask Kari what counsel was to be taken; but he said their
best plan was to go to Swinefell and put Flosi's manhood to the
proof.

So they went right up to Swinefell in the storm.  Flosi was in
the sitting-room.  He knew Kari as soon as ever he came into the
room, and sprang up to meet him, and kissed him, and sate him
down in the high seat by his side.

Flosi asked Kari to be there that winter, and Kari took his
offer.  Then they were atoned with a full atonement.

Then Flosi gave away his brother's daughter Hildigunna, whom
Hauskuld the priest of Whiteness had had to wife to Kari, and
they dwelt first of all at Broadwater.

Men say that the end of Flosi's life was, that he fared abroad,
when he had grown old, to seek for timber to build him a hall;
and he was in Norway that winter, but the next summer he was late
"boun"; and men told him that his ship was not seaworthy.

Flosi said she was quite good enough for an old and deathdoomed
man, and bore his goods on shipboard and put out to sea.  But of
that ship no tidings were ever heard.

These were the children of Kari Solmund's son and Helga Njal's
daughter -- Thorgerda and Ragneida, Valgerda, and Thord who was
burnt in Njal's house.  But the children of Hildigunna and Kari,
were these, Starkad, and Thord, and Flosi.

The son of Burning-Flosi was Kolbein, who has been the most
famous man of any of that stock.

And here we end the STORY of BURNT NJAL.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Njal's Saga by Unknown Icelanders

