Project Gutenberg Etext of The Phoenix and the Carpet by Nesbit 
#4 in our series by E. Nesbit


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Phoenix and the Carpet

by E. Nesbit

March, 1997  [Etext #836]


Project Gutenberg Etext of The Phoenix and the Carpet by Nesbit 
*****This file should be named phcar10.txt or phcar10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, phcar11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, phcar10a.txt.


This Etext created by Jo Churcher, Scarborough, Ontario
(jchurche@interlog.com)


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Phoenix and the Carpet

E.  Nesbit



TO

My Dear Godson
HUBERT GRIFFITH
and his sister
MARGARET


TO HUBERT

Dear Hubert, if I ever found
A wishing-carpet lying round,
I'd stand upon it, and I'd say:
'Take me to Hubert, right away!'
And then we'd travel very far
To where the magic countries are
That you and I will never see,
And choose the loveliest gifts for you, from me.

But oh! alack! and well-a-day!
No wishing-carpets come my way.
I never found a Phoenix yet,
And Psammeads are so hard to get!
So I give you nothing fine--
Only this book your book and mine,
And hers, whose name by yours is set;
Your book, my book, the book of Margaret!

E. NESBIT
DYMCHURCH
September, 1904


CONTENTS

1 The Egg
2 The Topless Tower
3 The Queen Cook
4 Two Bazaars
5 The Temple
6 Doing Good
7 Mews from Persia
8 The Cats, the Cow, and the Burglar
9 The Burglar's Bride
10 The Hole in the Carpet
11 The Beginning of the End
12 The End of the End




CHAPTER 1
THE EGG


It began with the day when it was almost the Fifth of November, and
a doubt arose in some breast--Robert's, I fancy--as to the quality
of the fireworks laid in for the Guy Fawkes celebration.

'They were jolly cheap,' said whoever it was, and I think it was
Robert, 'and suppose they didn't go off on the night?  Those
Prosser kids would have something to snigger about then.'

'The ones _I_ got are all right,' Jane said; 'I know they are,
because the man at the shop said they were worth thribble the
money--'

'I'm sure thribble isn't grammar,' Anthea said.

'Of course it isn't,' said Cyril; 'one word can't be grammar all by
itself, so you needn't be so jolly clever.'

Anthea was rummaging in the corner-drawers of her mind for a very
disagreeable answer, when she remembered what a wet day it was, and
how the boys had been disappointed of that ride to London and back
on the top of the tram, which their mother had promised them as a
reward for not having once forgotten, for six whole days, to wipe
their boots on the mat when they came home from school.

So Anthea only said, 'Don't be so jolly clever yourself, Squirrel. 
And the fireworks look all right, and you'll have the eightpence
that your tram fares didn't cost to-day, to buy something more
with.  You ought to get a perfectly lovely Catharine wheel for
eightpence.'

'I daresay,' said Cyril, coldly; 'but it's not YOUR eightpence
anyhow--'

'But look here,' said Robert, 'really now, about the fireworks.  We
don't want to be disgraced before those kids next door.  They think
because they wear red plush on Sundays no one else is any good.'

'I wouldn't wear plush if it was ever so--unless it was black to be
beheaded in, if I was Mary Queen of Scots,' said Anthea, with scorn.

Robert stuck steadily to his point.  One great point about Robert
is the steadiness with which he can stick.

'I think we ought to test them,' he said.

'You young duffer,' said Cyril, 'fireworks are like postage-stamps.
You can only use them once.'

'What do you suppose it means by "Carter's tested seeds" in the
advertisement?'

There was a blank silence.  Then Cyril touched his forehead with
his finger and shook his head.

'A little wrong here,' he said.  'I was always afraid of that with
poor Robert.  All that cleverness, you know, and being top in
algebra so often--it's bound to tell--'

'Dry up,' said Robert, fiercely.  'Don't you see?  You can't TEST
seeds if you do them ALL.  You just take a few here and there, and
if those grow you can feel pretty sure the others will be--what do
you call it?--Father told me--"up to sample".  Don't you think we
ought to sample the fire-works?  Just shut our eyes and each draw
one out, and then try them.'

'But it's raining cats and dogs,' said Jane.

'And Queen Anne is dead,' rejoined Robert.  No one was in a very
good temper.  'We needn't go out to do them; we can just move back
the table, and let them off on the old tea-tray we play toboggans
with.  I don't know what YOU think, but _I_ think it's time we did
something, and that would be really useful; because then we
shouldn't just HOPE the fireworks would make those Prossers sit
up--we should KNOW.'

'It WOULD be something to do,' Cyril owned with languid approval.

So the table was moved back.  And then the hole in the carpet, that
had been near the window till the carpet was turned round, showed
most awfully.  But Anthea stole out on tip-toe, and got the tray
when cook wasn't looking, and brought it in and put it over the
hole.

Then all the fireworks were put on the table, and each of the four
children shut its eyes very tight and put out its hand and grasped
something.  Robert took a cracker, Cyril and Anthea had Roman
candles; but Jane's fat paw closed on the gem of the whole collection, 
the Jack-in-the-box that had cost two shillings, and one at least of the 
party--I will not say which, because it was sorry afterwards--declared 
that Jane had done it on purpose.  Nobody was pleased.  For the worst of 
it was that these four children, with a very proper dislike of anything 
even faintly bordering on the sneakish, had a law, unalterable as those 
of the Medes and Persians, that one had to stand by the results of a
toss-up, or a drawing of lots, or any other appeal to chance, however 
much one might happen to dislike the way things were turning out.

'I didn't mean to,' said Jane, near tears.  'I don't care, I'll
draw another--'

'You know jolly well you can't,' said Cyril, bitterly.  'It's
settled.  It's Medium and Persian.  You've done it, and you'll have
to stand by it--and us too, worse luck.  Never mind.  YOU'LL have
your pocket-money before the Fifth.  Anyway, we'll have the
Jack-in-the-box LAST, and get the most out of it we can.'

So the cracker and the Roman candles were lighted, and they were
all that could be expected for the money; but when it came to the
Jack-in-the-box it simply sat in the tray and laughed at them, as
Cyril said.  They tried to light it with paper and they tried to
light it with matches; they tried to light it with Vesuvian fusees
from the pocket of father's second-best overcoat that was hanging
in the hall.  And then Anthea slipped away to the cupboard under
the stairs where the brooms and dustpans were kept, and the rosiny
fire-lighters that smell so nice and like the woods where
pine-trees grow, and the old newspapers and the bees-wax and turpentine, 
and the horrid an stiff dark rags that are used for cleaning brass and 
furniture, and the paraffin for the lamps.  She came back with a little 
pot that had once cost    sevenpence-halfpenny when it was full of 
red-currant jelly; but the jelly had been all eaten long ago, and now 
Anthea had filled the  jar with paraffin.  She came in, and she threw the 
paraffin over the tray just at the moment when Cyril was trying with the
twenty-third match to light the Jack-in-the-box.  The
Jack-in-the-box did not catch fire any more than usual, but the
paraffin acted quite differently, and in an instant a hot flash of
flame leapt up and burnt off Cyril's eyelashes, and scorched the
faces of all four before they could spring back.  They backed, in
four instantaneous bounds, as far as they could, which was to the
wall, and the pillar of fire reached from floor to ceiling.

'My hat,' said Cyril, with emotion, 'You've done it this time,
Anthea.'

The flame was spreading out under the ceiling like the rose of fire
in Mr Rider Haggard's exciting story about Allan Quatermain. 
Robert and Cyril saw that no time was to be lost.  They turned up
the edges of the carpet, and kicked them over the tray.  This cut
off the column of fire, and it disappeared and there was nothing
left but smoke and a dreadful smell of lamps that have been turned
too low.

All hands now rushed to the rescue, and the paraffin fire was only
a bundle of trampled carpet, when suddenly a sharp crack beneath
their feet made the amateur firemen start back.  Another crack--the
carpet moved as if it had had a cat wrapped in it; the
Jack-in-the-box had at last allowed itself to be lighted, and it
was going off with desperate violence inside the carpet.

Robert, with the air of one doing the only possible thing, rushed
to the window and opened it.  Anthea screamed, Jane burst into
tears, and Cyril turned the table wrong way up on top of the carpet
heap.  But the firework went on, banging and bursting and
spluttering even underneath the table.

Next moment mother rushed in, attracted by the howls of Anthea, and
in a few moments the firework desisted and there was a dead
silence, and the children stood looking at each other's black
faces, and, out of the corners of their eyes, at mother's white
one.

The fact that the nursery carpet was ruined occasioned but little
surprise, nor was any one really astonished that bed should prove
the immediate end of the adventure.  It has been said that all
roads lead to Rome; this may be true, but at any rate, in early
youth I am quite sure that many roads lead to BED, and stop
there--or YOU do.

The rest of the fireworks were confiscated, and mother was not
pleased when father let them off himself in the back garden, though
he said, 'Well, how else can you get rid of them, my dear?'

You see, father had forgotten that the children were in disgrace,
and that their bedroom windows looked out on to the back garden. 
So that they all saw the fireworks most beautifully, and admired
the skill with which father handled them.

Next day all was forgotten and forgiven; only the nursery had to be
deeply cleaned (like spring-cleaning), and the ceiling had to be
whitewashed.

And mother went out; and just at tea-time next day a man came with
a rolled-up carpet, and father paid him, and mother said--

'If the carpet isn't in good condition, you know, I shall expect
you to change it.'  And the man replied--

'There ain't a thread gone in it nowhere, mum.  It's a bargain, if
ever there was one, and I'm more'n 'arf sorry I let it go at the
price; but we can't resist the lydies, can we, sir?' and he winked
at father and went away.

Then the carpet was put down in the nursery, and sure enough there
wasn't a hole in it anywhere.

As the last fold was unrolled something hard and loud-sounding
bumped out of it and trundled along the nursery floor.  All the
children scrambled for it, and Cyril got it.  He took it to the
gas.  It was shaped like an egg, very yellow and shiny,
half-transparent, and it had an odd sort of light in it that
changed as you held it in different ways.  It was as though it was
an egg with a yolk of pale fire that just showed through the stone.

'I MAY keep it, mayn't I, mother?' Cyril asked.

And of course mother said no; they must take it back to the man who
had brought the carpet, because she had only paid for a carpet, and
not for a stone egg with a fiery yolk to it.

So she told them where the shop was, and it was in the Kentish Town
Road, not far from the hotel that is called the Bull and Gate.  It
was a poky little shop, and the man was arranging furniture outside
on the pavement very cunningly, so that the more broken parts
should show as little as possible.  And directly he saw the
children he knew them again, and he began at once, without giving
them a chance to speak.

'No you don't' he cried loudly; 'I ain't a-goin' to take back no
carpets, so don't you make no bloomin' errer.  A bargain's a
bargain, and the carpet's puffik throughout.'

'We don't want you to take it back,' said Cyril; 'but we found
something in it.'

'It must have got into it up at your place, then,' said the man,
with indignant promptness, 'for there ain't nothing in nothing as
I sell.  It's all as clean as a whistle.'

'I never said it wasn't CLEAN,' said Cyril, 'but--'

'Oh, if it's MOTHS,' said the man, 'that's easy cured with borax. 
But I expect it was only an odd one.  I tell you the carpet's good
through and through.  It hadn't got no moths when it left my
'ands--not so much as an hegg.'

'But that's just it,' interrupted Jane; 'there WAS so much as an
egg.'

The man made a sort of rush at the children and stamped his foot.

'Clear out, I say!' he shouted, 'or I'll call for the police.  A
nice thing for customers to 'ear you a-coming 'ere a-charging me
with finding things in goods what I sells.  'Ere, be off, afore I
sends you off with a flea in your ears.  Hi! constable--'

The children fled, and they think, and their father thinks, that
they couldn't have done anything else.  Mother has her own opinion.

But father said they might keep the egg.

'The man certainly didn't know the egg was there when he brought
the carpet,' said he, 'any more than your mother did, and we've as
much right to it as he had.'

So the egg was put on the mantelpiece, where it quite brightened up
the dingy nursery.  The nursery was dingy, because it was a
basement room, and its windows looked out on a stone area with a
rockery made of clinkers facing the windows.  Nothing grew in the
rockery except London pride and snails.

The room had been described in the house agent's list as a
'convenient breakfast-room in basement,' and in the daytime it was
rather dark.  This did not matter so much in the evenings when the
gas was alight, but then it was in the evening that the
blackbeetles got so sociable, and used to come out of the low
cupboards on each side of the fireplace where their homes were, and
try to make friends with the children.  At least, I suppose that
was what they wanted, but the children never would.

On the Fifth of November father and mother went to the theatre, and
the children were not happy, because the Prossers next door had
lots of fireworks and they had none.

They were not even allowed to have a bonfire in the garden.

'No more playing with fire, thank you,' was father's answer, when
they asked him.

When the baby had been put to bed the children sat sadly round the
fire in the nursery.

'I'm beastly bored,' said Robert.

'Let's talk about the Psammead,' said Anthea, who generally tried
to give the conversation a cheerful turn.

'What's the good of TALKING?' said Cyril.  'What I want is for
something to happen.  It's awfully stuffy for a chap not to be
allowed out in the evenings.  There's simply nothing to do when
you've got through your homers.'

Jane finished the last of her home-lessons and shut the book with
a bang.

'We've got the pleasure of memory,' said she.  'Just think of last
holidays.'

Last holidays, indeed, offered something to think of--for they had
been spent in the country at a white house between a sand-pit and
a gravel-pit, and things had happened.  The children had found a
Psammead, or sand-fairy, and it had let them have anything they
wished for--just exactly anything, with no bother about its not
being really for their good, or anything like that.  And if you
want to know what kind of things they wished for, and how their
wishes turned out you can read it all in a book called Five
Children and It (It was the Psammead).  If you've not read it,
perhaps I ought to tell you that the fifth child was the baby
brother, who was called the Lamb, because the first thing he ever
said was 'Baa!' and that the other children were not particularly
handsome, nor were they extra clever, nor extraordinarily good. 
But they were not bad sorts on the whole; in fact, they were rather
like you.

'I don't want to think about the pleasures of memory,' said Cyril;
'I want some more things to happen.'

'We're very much luckier than any one else, as it is,' said Jane. 
'Why, no one else ever found a Psammead.  We ought to be grateful.'

'Why shouldn't we GO ON being, though?' Cyril asked--'lucky, I
mean, not grateful.  Why's it all got to stop?'

'Perhaps something will happen,' said Anthea, comfortably.  'Do you
know, sometimes I think we are the sort of people that things DO
happen to.'

'It's like that in history,' said Jane: 'some kings are full of
interesting things, and others--nothing ever happens to them,
except their being born and crowned and buried, and sometimes not
that.'

'I think Panther's right,' said Cyril: 'I think we are the sort of
people things do happen to.  I have a sort of feeling things would
happen right enough if we could only give them a shove.  It just
wants something to start it.  That's all.'

'I wish they taught magic at school,' Jane sighed.  'I believe if
we could do a little magic it might make something happen.'

'I wonder how you begin?'  Robert looked round the room, but he got
no ideas from the faded green curtains, or the drab Venetian
blinds, or the worn brown oil-cloth on the floor.  Even the new
carpet suggested nothing, though its pattern was a very wonderful
one, and always seemed as though it were just going to make you
think of something.

'I could begin right enough,' said Anthea; 'I've read lots about
it.  But I believe it's wrong in the Bible.'

'It's only wrong in the Bible because people wanted to hurt other
people.  I don't see how things can be wrong unless they hurt
somebody, and we don't want to hurt anybody; and what's more, we
jolly well couldn't if we tried.  Let's get the Ingoldsby Legends. 
There's a thing about Abra-cadabra there,' said Cyril, yawning. 
'We may as well play at magic.  Let's be Knights Templars.  They
were awfully gone on magic.  They used to work spells or something
with a goat and a goose.  Father says so.'

'Well, that's all right,' said Robert, unkindly; 'you can play the
goat right enough, and Jane knows how to be a goose.'

'I'll get Ingoldsby,' said Anthea, hastily.  'You turn up the
hearthrug.'

So they traced strange figures on the linoleum, where the hearthrug
had kept it clean.  They traced them with chalk that Robert had
nicked from the top of the mathematical master's desk at school. 
You know, of course, that it is stealing to take a new stick of
chalk, but it is not wrong to take a broken piece, so long as you
only take one.  (I do not know the reason of this rule, nor who
made it.) And they chanted all the gloomiest songs they could think
of.  And, of course, nothing happened.  So then Anthea said, 'I'm
sure a magic fire ought to be made of sweet-smelling wood, and have
magic gums and essences and things in it.'

'I don't know any sweet-smelling wood, except cedar,' said Robert;
'but I've got some ends of cedar-wood lead pencil.'

So they burned the ends of lead pencil.  And still nothing
happened.

'Let's burn some of the eucalyptus oil we have for our colds,' said
Anthea.

And they did.  It certainly smelt very strong.  And they burned
lumps of camphor out of the big chest.  It was very bright, and
made a horrid black smoke, which looked very magical.  But still
nothing happened.  Then they got some clean tea-cloths from the
dresser drawer in the kitchen, and waved them over the magic
chalk-tracings, and sang 'The Hymn of the Moravian Nuns at
Bethlehem', which is very impressive.  And still nothing happened. 
So they waved more and more wildly, and Robert's tea-cloth caught
the golden egg and whisked it off the mantelpiece, and it fell into
the fender and rolled under the grate.

'Oh, crikey!' said more than one voice.

And every one instantly fell down flat on its front to look under
the grate, and there lay the egg, glowing in a nest of hot ashes.

'It's not smashed, anyhow,' said Robert, and he put his hand under
the grate and picked up the egg.  But the egg was much hotter than
any one would have believed it could possibly get in such a short
time, and Robert had to drop it with a cry of 'Bother!'  It fell on
the top bar of the grate, and bounced right into the glowing
red-hot heart of the fire.

'The tongs!' cried Anthea.  But, alas, no one could remember where
they were.  Every one had forgotten that the tongs had last been
used to fish up the doll's teapot from the bottom of the water-
butt, where the Lamb had dropped it.  So the nursery tongs were
resting between the water-butt and the dustbin, and cook refused to
lend the kitchen ones.

'Never mind,' said Robert, 'we'll get it out with the poker and the
shovel.'

'Oh, stop,' cried Anthea.  'Look at it!  Look! look! look!  I do
believe something IS going to happen!'

For the egg was now red-hot, and inside it something was moving. 
Next moment there was a soft cracking sound; the egg burst in two,
and out of it came a flame-coloured bird.  It rested a moment among
the flames, and as it rested there the four children could see it
growing bigger and bigger under their eyes.

Every mouth was a-gape, every eye a-goggle.

The bird rose in its nest of fire, stretched its wings, and flew
out into the room.  It flew round and round, and round again, and
where it passed the air was warm.  Then it perched on the fender. 
The children looked at each other.  Then Cyril put out a hand
towards the bird.  It put its head on one side and looked up at
him, as you may have seen a parrot do when it is just going to
speak, so that the children were hardly astonished at all when it
said, 'Be careful; I am not nearly cool yet.'

They were not astonished, but they were very, very much interested.

They looked at the bird, and it was certainly worth looking at. 
Its feathers were like gold.  It was about as large as a bantam,
only its beak was not at all bantam-shaped.  'I believe I know what
it is,' said Robert.  'I've seen a picture.'

He hurried away.  A hasty dash and scramble among the papers on
father's study table yielded, as the sum-books say, 'the desired
result'.  But when he came back into the room holding out a paper,
and crying, 'I say, look here,' the others all said 'Hush!' and he
hushed obediently and instantly, for the bird was speaking.

'Which of you,' it was saying, 'put the egg into the fire?'

'He did,' said three voices, and three fingers pointed at Robert.

The bird bowed; at least it was more like that than anything else.

'I am your grateful debtor,' it said with a high-bred air.

The children were all choking with wonder and curiosity--all except
Robert.  He held the paper in his hand, and he KNEW.  He said so. 
He said--

'_I_ know who you are.'

And he opened and displayed a printed paper, at the head of which
was a little picture of a bird sitting in a nest of flames.

'You are the Phoenix,' said Robert; and the bird was quite pleased.

'My fame has lived then for two thousand years,' it said.  'Allow
me to look at my portrait.'  It looked at the page which Robert,
kneeling down, spread out in the fender, and said--

'It's not a flattering likeness ...  And what are these
characters?' it asked, pointing to the printed part.

'Oh, that's all dullish; it's not much about YOU, you know,' said
Cyril, with unconscious politeness; 'but you're in lots of books.'

'With portraits?' asked the Phoenix.

'Well, no,' said Cyril; 'in fact, I don't think I ever saw any
portrait of you but that one, but I can read you something about
yourself, if you like.'

The Phoenix nodded, and Cyril went off and fetched Volume X of the
old Encyclopedia, and on page 246 he found the following:--

'Phoenix -  in ornithology, a fabulous bird of antiquity.'

'Antiquity is quite correct,' said the Phoenix, 'but
fabulous--well, do I look it?'

Every one shook its head.  Cyril went on--


'The ancients speak of this bird as single, or the only one of its
kind.'

'That's right enough,' said the Phoenix.

'They describe it as about the size of an eagle.'

'Eagles are of different sizes,' said the Phoenix; 'it's not at all
a good description.'

All the children were kneeling on the hearthrug, to be as near the
Phoenix as possible.

'You'll boil your brains,' it said.  'Look out, I'm nearly cool
now;' and with a whirr of golden wings it fluttered from the fender
to the table.  It was so nearly cool that there was only a very
faint smell of burning when it had settled itself on the
table-cloth.

'It's only a very little scorched,' said the Phoenix,
apologetically; 'it will come out in the wash.  Please go on
reading.'

The children gathered round the table.

'The size of an eagle,' Cyril went on, 'its head finely crested
with a beautiful plumage, its neck covered with feathers of a gold
colour, and the rest of its body purple; only the tail white, and
the eyes sparkling like stars.  They say that it lives about five
hundred years in the wilderness, and when advanced in age it builds
itself a pile of sweet wood and aromatic gums, fires it with the
wafting of its wings, and thus burns itself; and that from its
ashes arises a worm, which in time grows up to be a Phoenix.  Hence
the Phoenicians gave--'

'Never mind what they gave,' said the Phoenix, ruffling its golden
feathers.  'They never gave much, anyway; they always were people
who gave nothing for nothing.  That book ought to be destroyed. 
It's most inaccurate.  The rest of my body was never purple, and as
for my--tail--well, I simply ask you, IS it white?'

It turned round and gravely presented its golden tail to the
children.

'No.  it's not,' said everybody.

'No, and it never was,' said the Phoenix.  'And that about the worm
is just a vulgar insult.  The Phoenix has an egg, like all
respectable birds.  It makes a pile--that part's all right--and it
lays its egg, and it burns itself; and it goes to sleep and wakes
up in its egg, and comes out and goes on living again, and so on
for ever and ever.  I can't tell you how weary I got of it--such a
restless existence; no repose.'

'But how did your egg get HERE?' asked Anthea.

'Ah, that's my life-secret,' said the Phoenix.  'I couldn't tell it
to any one who wasn't really sympathetic.  I've always been a
misunderstood bird.  You can tell that by what they say about the
worm.  I might tell YOU,' it went on, looking at Robert with eyes
that were indeed starry.  'You put me on the fire--' Robert looked
uncomfortable.

'The rest of us made the fire of sweet-scented woods and gums,
though,' said Cyril.

'And--and it was an accident my putting you on the fire,' said
Robert, telling the truth with some difficulty, for he did not know
how the Phoenix might take it.  It took it in the most unexpected
manner.

'Your candid avowal,' it said, 'removes my last scruple.  I will
tell you my story.'

'And you won't vanish, or anything sudden will you?, asked Anthea,
anxiously.

'Why?' it asked, puffing out the golden feathers, 'do you wish me
to stay here?'

'Oh YES,' said every one, with unmistakable sincerity.

'Why?' asked the Phoenix again, looking modestly at the
table-cloth.

'Because,' said every one at once, and then stopped short; only
Jane added after a pause, 'you are the most beautiful person we've
ever seen.'
'You are a sensible child,' said the Phoenix, 'and I will NOT
vanish or anything sudden.  And I will tell you my tale.  I had
resided, as your book says, for many thousand years in the
wilderness, which is a large, quiet place with very little really
good society, and I was becoming weary of the monotony of my
existence.  But I acquired the habit of laying my egg and burning
myself every five hundred years--and you know how difficult it is
to break yourself of a habit.'

'Yes,' said Cyril; 'Jane used to bite her nails.'

'But I broke myself of it,' urged Jane, rather hurt, 'You know I
did.'

'Not till they put bitter aloes on them,' said Cyril.

'I doubt,' said the bird, gravely, 'whether even bitter aloes (the
aloe, by the way, has a bad habit of its own, which it might well
cure before seeking to cure others; I allude to its indolent
practice of flowering but once a century), I doubt whether even
bitter aloes could have cured ME.  But I WAS cured.  I awoke one
morning from a feverish dream--it was getting near the time for me
to lay that tiresome fire and lay that tedious egg upon it--and I
saw two people, a man and a woman.  They were sitting on a
carpet--and when I accosted them civilly they narrated to me their
life-story, which, as you have not yet heard it, I will now proceed
to relate.  They were a prince and princess, and the story of their
parents was one which I am sure you will like to hear.  In early
youth the mother of the princess happened to hear the story of a
certain enchanter, and in that story I am sure you will be
interested.  The enchanter--'

'Oh, please don't,' said Anthea.  'I can't understand all these
beginnings of stories, and you seem to be getting deeper and deeper
in them every minute.  Do tell us your OWN story.  That's what we
really want to hear.'

'Well,' said the Phoenix, seeming on the whole rather flattered,
'to cut about seventy long stories short (though _I_ had to listen to
them all--but to be sure in the wilderness there is plenty of
time), this prince and princess were so fond of each other that
they did not want any one else, and the enchanter--don't be
alarmed, I won't go into his history--had given them a magic carpet
(you've heard of a magic carpet?), and they had just sat on it and
told it to take them right away from every one--and it had brought
them to the wilderness.  And as they meant to stay there they had
no further use for the carpet, so they gave it to me.  That was
indeed the chance of a lifetime!'

'I don't see what you wanted with a carpet,' said Jane, 'when
you've got those lovely wings.'

'They ARE nice wings, aren't they?' said the Phoenix, simpering and
spreading them out.  'Well, I got the prince to lay out the carpet,
and I laid my egg on it; then I said to the carpet, "Now, my
excellent carpet, prove your worth.  Take that egg somewhere where
it can't be hatched for two thousand years, and where, when that
time's up, some one will light a fire of sweet wood and aromatic
gums, and put the egg in to hatch;" and you see it's all come out
exactly as I said.  The words were no sooner out of my beak than
egg and carpet disappeared.  The royal lovers assisted to arrange
my pile, and soothed my last moments.  I burnt myself up and knew
no more till I awoke on yonder altar.'

It pointed its claw at the grate.

'But the carpet,' said Robert, 'the magic carpet that takes you
anywhere you wish.  What became of that?'

'Oh, THAT?' said the Phoenix, carelessly--'I should say that that
is the carpet.  I remember the pattern perfectly.'

It pointed as it spoke to the floor, where lay the carpet which
mother had bought in the Kentish Town Road for twenty-two shillings
and ninepence.

At that instant father's latch-key was heard in the door.

'OH,' whispered Cyril, 'now we shall catch it for not being in
bed!'

'Wish yourself there,' said the Phoenix, in a hurried whisper, 'and
then wish the carpet back in its place.'

No sooner said than done.  It made one a little giddy, certainly,
and a little breathless; but when things seemed right way up again,
there the children were, in bed, and the lights were out.

They heard the soft voice of the Phoenix through the darkness.

'I shall sleep on the cornice above your curtains,' it said. 
'Please don't mention me to your kinsfolk.'

'Not much good,' said Robert, 'they'd never believe us.  I say,' he
called through the half-open door to the girls; 'talk about
adventures and things happening.  We ought to be able to get some
fun out of a magic carpet AND a Phoenix.'

'Rather,' said the girls, in bed.

'Children,' said father, on the stairs, 'go to sleep at once.  What
do you mean by talking at this time of night?'

No answer was expected to this question, but under the bedclothes
Cyril murmured one.

'Mean?' he said.  'Don't know what we mean.  I don't know what
anything means.'

'But we've got a magic carpet AND a Phoenix,' said Robert.

'You'll get something else if father comes in and catches you,'
said Cyril.  'Shut up, I tell you.'

Robert shut up.  But he knew as well as you do that the adventures
of that carpet and that Phoenix were only just beginning.

Father and mother had not the least idea of what had happened in
their absence.  This is often the case, even when there are no
magic carpets or Phoenixes in the house.

The next morning--but I am sure you would rather wait till the next
chapter before you hear about THAT.



CHAPTER 2
THE TOPLESS TOWER


The children had seen the Phoenix-egg hatched in the flames in
their own nursery grate, and had heard from it how the carpet on
their own nursery floor was really the wishing carpet, which would
take them anywhere they chose.  The carpet had transported them to
bed just at the right moment, and the Phoenix had gone to roost on
the cornice supporting the window-curtains of the boys' room.

'Excuse me,' said a gentle voice, and a courteous beak opened, very
kindly and delicately, the right eye of Cyril.  'I hear the slaves
below preparing food.  Awaken!  A word of explanation and
arrangement ...  I do wish you wouldn't--'

The Phoenix stopped speaking and fluttered away crossly to the
cornice-pole; for Cyril had hit out, as boys do when they are
awakened suddenly, and the Phoenix was not used to boys, and his
feelings, if not his wings, were hurt.

'Sorry,' said Cyril, coming awake all in a minute.  'Do come back!
What was it you were saying?  Something about bacon and rations?'

The Phoenix fluttered back to the brass rail at the foot of the
bed.

'I say--you ARE real,' said Cyril.  'How ripping!  And the carpet?'

'The carpet is as real as it ever was,' said the Phoenix, rather
contemptuously; 'but, of course, a carpet's only a carpet, whereas
a Phoenix is superlatively a Phoenix.'

'Yes, indeed,' said Cyril, 'I see it is.  Oh, what luck!  Wake up,
Bobs!  There's jolly well something to wake up for today.  And it's
Saturday, too.'

'I've been reflecting,' said the Phoenix, 'during the silent
watches of the night, and I could not avoid the conclusion that you
were quite insufficiently astonished at my appearance yesterday. 
The ancients were always VERY surprised.  Did you, by chance,
EXPECT my egg to hatch?'

'Not us,' Cyril said.

'And if we had,' said Anthea, who had come in in her nightie when
she heard the silvery voice of the Phoenix, 'we could never, never
have expected it to hatch anything so splendid as you.'

The bird smiled.  Perhaps you've never seen a bird smile?

'You see,' said Anthea, wrapping herself in the boys' counterpane,
for the morning was chill, 'we've had things happen to us before;'
and she told the story of the Psammead, or sand-fairy.

'Ah yes,' said the Phoenix; 'Psammeads were rare, even in my time. 
I remember I used to be called the Psammead of the Desert.  I was
always having compliments paid me; I can't think why.'

'Can YOU give wishes, then?' asked Jane, who had now come in too.

'Oh, dear me, no,' said the Phoenix, contemptuously, 'at least--but
I hear footsteps approaching.  I hasten to conceal myself.'  And it
did.

I think I said that this day was Saturday.  It was also cook's
birthday, and mother had allowed her and Eliza to go to the Crystal
Palace with a party of friends, so Jane and Anthea of course had to
help to make beds and to wash up the breakfast cups, and little
things like that.  Robert and Cyril intended to spend the morning
in conversation with the Phoenix, but the bird had its own ideas
about this.

'I must have an hour or two's quiet,' it said, 'I really must.  My
nerves will give way unless I can get a little rest.  You must
remember it's two thousand years since I had any conversation--I'm
out of practice, and I must take care of myself.  I've often been
told that mine is a valuable life.'  So it nestled down inside an
old hatbox of father's, which had been brought down from the
box-room some days before, when a helmet was suddenly needed for a
game of tournaments, with its golden head under its golden wing,
and went to sleep.  So then Robert and Cyril moved the table back
and were going to sit on the carpet and wish themselves somewhere
else.  But before they could decide on the place, Cyril said--

'I don't know.  Perhaps it's rather sneakish to begin without the
girls.'

'They'll be all the morning,' said Robert, impatiently.  And then
a thing inside him, which tiresome books sometimes call the 'inward
monitor', said, 'Why don't you help them, then?'

Cyril's 'inward monitor' happened to say the same thing at the same
moment, so the boys went and helped to wash up the tea-cups, and to
dust the drawing-room.  Robert was so interested that he proposed
to clean the front doorsteps--a thing he had never been allowed to
do.  Nor was he allowed to do it on this occasion.  One reason was
that it had already been done by cook.

When all the housework was finished, the girls dressed the happy,
wriggling baby in his blue highwayman coat and three-cornered hat,
and kept him amused while mother changed her dress and got ready to
take him over to granny's.  Mother always went to granny's every
Saturday, and generally some of the children went with her; but
today they were to keep house.  And their hearts were full of
joyous and delightful feelings every time they remembered that the
house they would have to keep had a Phoenix in it, AND a wishing
carpet.

You can always keep the Lamb good and happy for quite a long time
if you play the Noah's Ark game with him.  It is quite simple.  He
just sits on your lap and tells you what animal he is, and then you
say the little poetry piece about whatever animal he chooses to be.

Of course, some of the animals, like the zebra and the tiger,
haven't got any poetry, because they are so difficult to rhyme to. 
The Lamb knows quite well which are the poetry animals.

'I'm a baby bear!' said the Lamb, snugging down; and Anthea began:


     'I love my little baby bear,
     I love his nose and toes and hair;
     I like to hold him in my arm,
     And keep him VERY safe and warm.'


And when she said 'very', of course there was a real bear's hug.

Then came the eel, and the Lamb was tickled till he wriggled
exactly like a real one:


     'I love my little baby eel,
     He is so squidglety to feel;
     He'll be an eel when he is big--
     But now he's just--a--tiny SNIG!'


Perhaps you didn't know that a snig was a baby eel?  It is, though,
and the Lamb knew it.

'Hedgehog now-!' he said; and Anthea went on:


     'My baby hedgehog, how I like ye,
     Though your back's so prickly-spiky;
     Your front is very soft, I've found,
     So I must love you front ways round!'


And then she loved him front ways round, while he squealed with
pleasure.

It is a very baby game, and, of course, the rhymes are only meant
for very, very small people--not for people who are old enough to
read books, so I won't tell you any more of them.

By the time the Lamb had been a baby lion and a baby weazel, and a
baby rabbit and a baby rat, mother was ready; and she and the Lamb,
having been kissed by everybody and hugged as thoroughly as it is
possible to be when you're dressed for out-of-doors, were seen to
the tram by the boys.  When the boys came back, every one looked at
every one else and said--

'Now!'

They locked the front door and they locked the back door, and they
fastened all the windows.  They moved the table and chairs off the
carpet, and Anthea swept it.

'We must show it a LITTLE attention,' she said kindly.  'We'll give
it tea-leaves next time.  Carpets like tea-leaves.'

Then every one put on its out-door things, because as Cyril said,
they didn't know where they might be going, and it makes people
stare if you go out of doors in November in pinafores and without
hats.

Then Robert gently awoke the Phoenix, who yawned and stretched
itself, and allowed Robert to lift it on to the middle of the
carpet, where it instantly went to sleep again with its crested
head tucked under its golden wing as before.  Then every one sat
down on the carpet.

'Where shall we go?' was of course the question, and it was warmly
discussed.  Anthea wanted to go to Japan.  Robert and Cyril voted
for America, and Jane wished to go to the seaside.

'Because there are donkeys there,' said she.

'Not in November, silly,' said Cyril; and the discussion got warmer
and warmer, and still nothing was settled.

'I vote we let the Phoenix decide,' said Robert, at last.  So they
stroked it till it woke.  'We want to go somewhere abroad,' they
said, 'and we can't make up our minds where.'

'Let the carpet make up ITS mind, if it has one,' said the Phoenix.

'Just say you wish to go abroad.'

So they did; and the next moment the world seemed to spin upside
down, and when it was right way up again and they were ungiddy
enough to look about them, they were out of doors.

Out of doors--this is a feeble way to express where they were. 
They were out of--out of the earth, or off it.  In fact, they were
floating steadily, safely, splendidly, in the crisp clear air, with
the pale bright blue of the sky above them, and far down below the
pale bright sun-diamonded waves of the sea.  The carpet had
stiffened itself somehow, so that it was square and firm like a
raft, and it steered itself so beautifully and kept on its way so
flat and fearless that no one was at all afraid of tumbling off. 
In front of them lay land.

'The coast of France,' said the Phoenix, waking up and pointing
with its wing.  'Where do you wish to go?  I should always keep one
wish, of course--for emergencies--otherwise you may get into an
emergency from which you can't emerge at all.'

But the children were far too deeply interested to listen.

'I tell you what,' said Cyril: 'let's let the thing go on and on,
and when we see a place we really want to stop at--why, we'll just
stop.  Isn't this ripping?'

'It's like trains,' said Anthea, as they swept over the low-lying
coast-line and held a steady course above orderly fields and
straight roads bordered with poplar trees--'like express trains,
only in trains you never can see anything because of grown-ups
wanting the windows shut; and then they breathe on them, and it's
like ground glass, and nobody can see anything, and then they go to
sleep.'

'It's like tobogganing,' said Robert, 'so fast and smooth, only
there's no door-mat to stop short on--it goes on and on.'

'You darling Phoenix,' said Jane, 'it's all your doing.  Oh, look
at that ducky little church and the women with flappy cappy things
on their heads.'

'Don't mention it,' said the Phoenix, with sleepy politeness.

'OH!' said Cyril, summing up all the rapture that was in every
heart.  'Look at it all--look at it--and think of the Kentish Town
Road!'

Every one looked and every one thought.  And the glorious, gliding,
smooth, steady rush went on, and they looked down on strange and
beautiful things, and held their breath and let it go in deep
sighs, and said 'Oh!' and 'Ah!' till it was long past dinner-time.

It was Jane who suddenly said, 'I wish we'd brought that jam tart
and cold mutton with us.  It would have been jolly to have a picnic
in the air.'

The jam tart and cold mutton were, however, far away, sitting
quietly in the larder of the house in Camden Town which the
children were supposed to be keeping.  A mouse was at that moment
tasting the outside of the raspberry jam part of the tart (she had
nibbled a sort of gulf, or bay, through the pastry edge) to see
whether it was the sort of dinner she could ask her little
mouse-husband to sit down to.  She had had a very good dinner
herself.  It is an ill wind that blows nobody any good.

'We'll stop as soon as we see a nice place,' said Anthea.  'I've
got threepence, and you boys have the fourpence each that your
trams didn't cost the other day, so we can buy things to eat.  I
expect the Phoenix can speak French.'

The carpet was sailing along over rocks and rivers and trees and
towns and farms and fields.  It reminded everybody of a certain
time when all of them had had wings, and had flown up to the top of
a church tower, and had had a feast there of chicken and tongue and
new bread and soda-water.  And this again reminded them how hungry
they were.  And just as they were all being reminded of this very
strongly indeed, they saw ahead of them some ruined walls on a
hill, and strong and upright, and really, to look at, as good as
new--a great square tower.

'The top of that's just the exactly same size as the carpet,' said
Jane.  '_I_ think it would be good to go to the top of that, because
then none of the Abby-what's-its-names--I mean natives--would be
able to take the carpet away even if they wanted to.  And some of
us could go out and get things to eat--buy them honestly, I mean,
not take them out of larder windows.'

'I think it would be better if we went--' Anthea was beginning; but
Jane suddenly clenched her hands.

'I don't see why I should never do anything I want, just because
I'm the youngest.  I wish the carpet would fit itself in at the top
of that tower--so there!'

The carpet made a disconcerting bound, and next moment it was
hovering above the square top of the tower.  Then slowly and
carefully it began to sink under them.  It was like a lift going
down with you at the Army and Navy Stores.

'I don't think we ought to wish things without all agreeing to them
first,' said Robert, huffishly.  'Hullo!  What on earth?'

For unexpectedly and greyly something was coming up all round the
four sides of the carpet.  It was as if a wall were being built by
magic quickness.  It was a foot high--it was two feet high--three,
four, five.  It was shutting out the light--more and more.

Anthea looked up at the sky and the walls that now rose six feet
above them.

'We're dropping into the tower,' she screamed.  'THERE WASN'T ANY TOP 
TO IT.  So the carpet's going to fit itself in at the bottom.'

Robert sprang to his feet.

'We ought to have--Hullo! an owl's nest.'  He put his knee on a
jutting smooth piece of grey stone, and reached his hand into a
deep window slit--broad to the inside of the tower, and narrowing
like a funnel to the outside.

'Look sharp!' cried every one, but Robert did not look sharp
enough.  By the time he had drawn his hand out of the owl's
nest--there were no eggs there--the carpet had sunk eight feet
below him.

'Jump, you silly cuckoo!' cried Cyril, with brotherly anxiety.

But Robert couldn't turn round all in a minute into a jumping
position.  He wriggled and twisted and got on to the broad ledge,
and by the time he was ready to jump the walls of the tower had
risen up thirty feet above the others, who were still sinking with
the carpet, and Robert found himself in the embrasure of a window;
alone, for even the owls were not at home that day.  The wall was
smoothish; there was no climbing up, and as for climbing
down--Robert hid his face in his hands, and squirmed back and back
from the giddy verge, until the back part of him was wedged quite
tight in the narrowest part of the window slit.

He was safe now, of course, but the outside part of his window was
like a frame to a picture of part of the other side of the tower. 
It was very pretty, with moss growing between the stones and little
shiny gems; but between him and it there was the width of the
tower, and nothing in it but empty air.  The situation was
terrible.  Robert saw in a flash that the carpet was likely to
bring them into just the same sort of tight places that they used
to get into with the wishes the Psammead granted them.

And the others--imagine their feelings as the carpet sank slowly
and steadily to the very bottom of the tower, leaving Robert
clinging to the wall.  Robert did not even try to imagine their
feelings--he had quite enough to do with his own; but you can.

As soon as the carpet came to a stop on the ground at the bottom of
the inside of the tower it suddenly lost that raft-like stiffness
which had been such a comfort during the journey from Camden Town
to the topless tower, and spread itself limply over the loose
stones and little earthy mounds at the bottom of the tower, just
exactly like any ordinary carpet.  Also it shrank suddenly, so that
it seemed to draw away from under their feet, and they stepped
quickly off the edges and stood on the firm ground, while the
carpet drew itself in till it was its proper size, and no longer
fitted exactly into the inside of the tower, but left quite a big
space all round it.

Then across the carpet they looked at each other, and then every
chin was tilted up and every eye sought vainly to see where poor
Robert had got to.  Of course, they couldn't see him.

'I wish we hadn't come,' said Jane.

'You always do,' said Cyril, briefly.  'Look here, we can't leave
Robert up there.  I wish the carpet would fetch him down.'

The carpet seemed to awake from a dream and pull itself together. 
It stiffened itself briskly and floated up between the four walls
of the tower.  The children below craned their heads back, and
nearly broke their necks in doing it.  The carpet rose and rose. 
It hung poised darkly above them for an anxious moment or two; then
it dropped down again, threw itself on the uneven floor of the
tower, and as it did so it tumbled Robert out on the uneven floor
of the tower.

'Oh, glory!' said Robert, 'that was a squeak.  You don't know how
I felt.  I say, I've had about enough for a bit.  Let's wish
ourselves at home again and have a go at that jam tart and mutton. 
We can go out again afterwards.'

'Righto!' said every one, for the adventure had shaken the nerves
of all.  So they all got on to the carpet again, and said--

'I wish we were at home.'

And lo and behold, they were no more at home than before.  The
carpet never moved.  The Phoenix had taken the opportunity to go to
sleep.  Anthea woke it up gently.

'Look here,' she said.

'I'm looking,' said the Phoenix.

'We WISHED to be at home, and we're still here,' complained Jane.

'No,' said the Phoenix, looking about it at the high dark walls of
the tower.  'No; I quite see that.'

'But we wished to be at home,' said Cyril.

'No doubt,' said the bird, politely.

'And the carpet hasn't moved an inch,' said Robert.

'No,' said the Phoenix, 'I see it hasn't.'

'But I thought it was a wishing carpet?'

'So it is,' said the Phoenix.

'Then why--?' asked the children, altogether.

'I did tell you, you know,' said the Phoenix, 'only you are so fond
of listening to the music of your own voices.  It is, indeed, the
most lovely music to each of us, and therefore--'

'You did tell us WHAT?' interrupted an Exasperated.

'Why, that the carpet only gives you three wishes a day and YOU'VE
HAD THEM.'

There was a heartfelt silence.

'Then how are we going to get home?' said Cyril, at last.

'I haven't any idea,' replied the Phoenix, kindly.  'Can I fly out
and get you any little thing?'

'How could you carry the money to pay for it?'

'It isn't necessary.  Birds always take what they want.  It is not
regarded as stealing, except in the case of magpies.'

The children were glad to find they had been right in supposing
this to be the case, on the day when they had wings, and had
enjoyed somebody else's ripe plums.

'Yes; let the Phoenix get us something to eat, anyway,' Robert
urged--' ('If it will be so kind you mean,' corrected Anthea, in a
whisper); 'if it will be so kind, and we can be thinking while it's
gone.'

So the Phoenix fluttered up through the grey space of the tower and
vanished at the top, and it was not till it had quite gone that
Jane said--

'Suppose it never comes back.'

It was not a pleasant thought, and though Anthea at once said, 'Of
course it will come back; I'm certain it's a bird of its word,' a
further gloom was cast by the idea.  For, curiously enough, there
was no door to the tower, and all the windows were far, far too
high to be reached by the most adventurous climber.  It was cold,
too, and Anthea shivered.

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'it's like being at the bottom of a well.'

The children waited in a sad and hungry silence, and got little
stiff necks with holding their little heads back to look up the
inside of the tall grey tower, to see if the Phoenix were coming.

At last it came.  It looked very big as it fluttered down between
the walls, and as it neared them the children saw that its bigness
was caused by a basket of boiled chestnuts which it carried in one
claw.  In the other it held a piece of bread.  And in its beak was
a very large pear.  The pear was juicy, and as good as a very small
drink.  When the meal was over every one felt better, and the
question of how to get home was discussed without any
disagreeableness.  But no one could think of any way out of the
difficulty, or even out of the tower; for the Phoenix, though its
beak and claws had fortunately been strong enough to carry food for
them, was plainly not equal to flying through the air with four
well-nourished children.

'We must stay here, I suppose,' said Robert at last, 'and shout out
every now and then, and some one will hear us and bring ropes and
ladders, and rescue us like out of mines; and they'll get up a
subscription to send us home, like castaways.'

'Yes; but we shan't be home before mother is, and then father'll
take away the carpet and say it's dangerous or something,' said
Cyril.

'I DO wish we hadn't come,' said Jane.

And every one else said 'Shut up,' except Anthea, who suddenly
awoke the Phoenix and said--

'Look here, I believe YOU can help us.  Oh, I do wish you would!'

'I will help you as far as lies in my power,' said the Phoenix, at
once.  'What is it you want now?'

'Why, we want to get home,' said every one.

'Oh,' said the Phoenix.  'Ah, hum!  Yes.  Home, you said? 
Meaning?'

'Where we live--where we slept last night--where the altar is that
your egg was hatched on.'

'Oh, there!' said the Phoenix.  'Well, I'll do my best.'  It
fluttered on to the carpet and walked up and down for a few minutes
in deep thought.  Then it drew itself up proudly.

'I CAN help you,' it said.  'I am almost sure I can help you. 
Unless I am grossly deceived I can help you.  You won't mind my
leaving you for an hour or two?' and without waiting for a reply it
soared up through the dimness of the tower into the brightness
above.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, 'it said an hour or two.  But I've read
about captives and people shut up in dungeons and catacombs and
things awaiting release, and I know each moment is an eternity. 
Those people always do something to pass the desperate moments. 
It's no use our trying to tame spiders, because we shan't have
time.'

'I HOPE not,' said Jane, doubtfully.

'But we ought to scratch our names on the stones or something.'

'I say, talking of stones,' said Robert, 'you see that heap of
stones against the wall over in that corner.  Well, I'm certain
there's a hole in the wall there--and I believe it's a door.  Yes,
look here--the stones are round like an arch in the wall; and
here's the hole--it's all black inside.'

He had walked over to the heap as he spoke and climbed up to
it--dislodged the top stone of the heap and uncovered a little dark
space.

Next moment every one was helping to pull down the heap of stones,
and very soon every one threw off its jacket, for it was warm work.

'It IS a door,' said Cyril, wiping his face, 'and not a bad thing
either, if--'

He was going to add 'if anything happens to the Phoenix,' but he
didn't for fear of frightening Jane.  He was not an unkind boy when
he had leisure to think of such things.

The arched hole in the wall grew larger and larger.  It was very,
very black, even compared with the sort of twilight at the bottom
of the tower; it grew larger because the children kept pulling off
the stones and throwing them down into another heap.  The stones
must have been there a very long time, for they were covered with
moss, and some of them were stuck together by it.  So it was fairly
hard work, as Robert pointed out.

When the hole reached to about halfway between the top of the arch
and the tower, Robert and Cyril let themselves down cautiously on
the inside, and lit matches.  How thankful they felt then that they
had a sensible father, who did not forbid them to carry matches, as
some boys' fathers do.  The father of Robert and Cyril only
insisted on the matches being of the kind that strike only on the
box.

'It's not a door, it's a sort of tunnel,' Robert cried to the
girls, after the first match had flared up, flickered, and gone
out.  'Stand off--we'll push some more stones down!'

They did, amid deep excitement.  And now the stone heap was almost
gone--and before them the girls saw the dark archway leading to
unknown things.  All doubts and fears as to getting home were
forgotten in this thrilling moment.  It was like Monte Cristo--it
was like--

'I say,' cried Anthea, suddenly, 'come out!  There's always bad air
in places that have been shut up.  It makes your torches go out,
and then you die.  It's called fire-damp, I believe.  Come out, I
tell you.'

The urgency of her tone actually brought the boys out--and then
every one took up its jacket and fanned the dark arch with it, so
as to make the air fresh inside.  When Anthea thought the air
inside 'must be freshened by now,' Cyril led the way into the arch.

The girls followed, and Robert came last, because Jane refused to
tail the procession lest 'something' should come in after her, and
catch at her from behind.  Cyril advanced cautiously, lighting
match after match, and peerIng before him.

'It's a vaulting roof,' he said, 'and it's all stone--all right,
Panther, don't keep pulling at my jacket!  The air must be all
right because of the matches, silly, and there are--look out--there
are steps down.'

'Oh, don't let's go any farther,' said Jane, in an agony of
reluctance (a very painful thing, by the way, to be in).  'I'm sure
there are snakes, or dens of lions, or something.  Do let's go
back, and come some other time, with candles, and bellows for the
fire-damp.'

'Let me get in front of you, then,' said the stern voice of Robert,
from behind.  'This is exactly the place for buried treasure, and
I'm going on, anyway; you can stay behind if you like.'

And then, of course, Jane consented to go on.

So, very slowly and carefully, the children went down the
steps--there were seventeen of them--and at the bottom of the steps
were more passages branching four ways, and a sort of low arch on
the right-hand side made Cyril wonder what it could be, for it was
too low to be the beginning of another passage.

So he knelt down and lit a match, and stooping very low he peeped
in.

'There's SOMETHING,' he said, and reached out his hand.  It touched
something that felt more like a damp bag of marbles than anything
else that Cyril had ever touched.

'I believe it IS a buried treasure,' he cried.

And it was; for even as Anthea cried, 'Oh, hurry up,
Squirrel--fetch it out!' Cyril pulled out a rotting canvas
bag--about as big as the paper ones the greengrocer gives you with
Barcelona nuts in for sixpence.

'There's more of it, a lot more,' he said.

As he pulled the rotten bag gave way, and the gold coins ran and
span and jumped and bumped and chinked and clinked on the floor of
the dark passage.

I wonder what you would say if you suddenly came upon a buried
treasure?  What Cyril said was, 'Oh, bother--I've burnt my
fingers!' and as he spoke he dropped the match.  'AND IT WAS THE LAST!'
he added.

There was a moment of desperate silence.  Then Jane began to cry.

'Don't,' said Anthea, 'don't, Pussy--you'll exhaust the air if you
cry.  We can get out all right.'

'Yes,' said Jane, through her sobs, 'and find the Phoenix has come
back and gone away again--because it thought we'd gone home some
other way, and--Oh, I WISH we hadn't come.'

Every one stood quite still--only Anthea cuddled Jane up to her and
tried to wipe her eyes in the dark.

'D-DON'T,' said Jane; 'that's my EAR--I'm not crying with my ears.'

'Come, let's get on out,' said Robert; but that was not so easy,
for no one could remember exactly which way they had come.  It is
very difficult to remember things in the dark, unless you have
matches with you, and then of course it is quite different, even if
you don't strike one.

Every one had come to agree with Jane's constant wish--and despair
was making the darkness blacker than ever, when quite suddenly the
floor seemed to tip up--and a strong sensation of being in a
whirling lift came upon every one.  All eyes were closed--one's
eyes always are in the dark, don't you think?  When the whirling
feeling stopped, Cyril said 'Earthquakes!' and they all opened
their eyes.

They were in their own dingy breakfast-room at home, and oh, how
light and bright and safe and pleasant and altogether delightful it
seemed after that dark underground tunnel!  The carpet lay on the
floor, looking as calm as though it had never been for an excursion
in its life.  On the mantelpiece stood the Phoenix, waiting with an
air of modest yet sterling worth for the thanks of the children.

'But how DID you do it?' they asked, when every one had thanked the
Phoenix again and again.

'Oh, I just went and got a wish from your friend the Psammead.'

'But how DID you know where to find it?'

'I found that out from the carpet; these wishing creatures always
know all about each other--they're so clannish; like the Scots, you
know--all related.'

'But, the carpet can't talk, can it?'

'No.'

'Then how--'

'How did I get the Psammead's address?  I tell you I got it from
the carpet.'

'DID it speak then?'

'No,' said the Phoenix, thoughtfully, 'it didn't speak, but I
gathered my information from something in its manner.  I was always
a singularly observant bird.'

it was not till after the cold mutton and the jam tart, as well as
the tea and bread-and-butter, that any one found time to regret the
golden treasure which had been left scattered on the floor of the
underground passage, and which, indeed, no one had thought of till
now, since the moment when Cyril burnt his fingers at the flame of
the last match.

'What owls and goats we were!' said Robert.  'Look how we've always
wanted treasure--and now--'

'Never mind,' said Anthea, trying as usual to make the best of it. 
'We'll go back again and get it all, and then we'll give everybody
presents.'

More than a quarter of an hour passed most agreeably in arranging
what presents should be given to whom, and, when the claims of
generosity had been satisfied, the talk ran for fifty minutes on
what they would buy for themselves.

It was Cyril who broke in on Robert's almost too technical account
of the motor-car on which he meant to go to and from school--

'There!' he said.  'Dry up.  It's no good.  We can't ever go back. 
We don't know where it is.'

'Don't YOU know?' Jane asked the Phoenix, wistfully.

'Not in the least,' the Phoenix replied, in a tone of amiable
regret.

'Then we've lost the treasure,' said Cyril.  And they had.

'But we've got the carpet and the Phoenix,' said Anthea.

'Excuse me,' said the bird, with an air of wounded dignity, 'I do
SO HATE to seem to interfere, but surely you MUST mean the Phoenix
and the carpet?'



CHAPTER 3
THE QUEEN COOK


It was on a Saturday that the children made their first glorious
journey on the wishing carpet.  Unless you are too young to read at
all, you will know that the next day must have been Sunday.

Sunday at 18, Camden Terrace, Camden Town, was always a very pretty
day.  Father always brought home flowers on Saturday, so that the
breakfast-table was extra beautiful.  In November, of course, the
flowers were chrysanthemums, yellow and coppery coloured.  Then
there were always sausages on toast for breakfast, and these are
rapture, after six days of Kentish Town Road eggs at fourteen a
shilling.

On this particular Sunday there were fowls for dinner, a kind of
food that is generally kept for birthdays and grand occasions, and
there was an angel pudding, when rice and milk and oranges and
white icing do their best to make you happy.

After dinner father was very sleepy indeed, because he had been
working hard all the week; but he did not yield to the voice that
said, 'Go and have an hour's rest.'  He nursed the Lamb, who had a
horrid cough that cook said was whooping-cough as sure as eggs, and
he said--

'Come along, kiddies; I've got a ripping book from the library,
called The Golden Age, and I'll read it to you.'

Mother settled herself on the drawing-room sofa, and said she could
listen quite nicely with her eyes shut.  The Lamb snugged into the
'armchair corner' of daddy's arm, and the others got into a happy
heap on the hearth-rug.  At first, of course, there were too many
feet and knees and shoulders and elbows, but real comfort was
actually settling down on them, and the Phoenix and the carpet were
put away on the back top shelf of their minds (beautiful things
that could be taken out and played with later), when a surly solid
knock came at the drawing-room door.  It opened an angry inch, and
the cook's voice said, 'Please, m', may I speak to you a moment?'

Mother looked at father with a desperate expression.  Then she put
her pretty sparkly Sunday shoes down from the sofa, and stood up in
them and sighed.

'As good fish in the sea,' said father, cheerfully, and it was not
till much later that the children understood what he meant.

Mother went out into the passage, which is called 'the hall', where
the umbrella-stand is, and the picture of the 'Monarch of the Glen'
in a yellow shining frame, with brown spots on the Monarch from the
damp in the house before last, and there was cook, very red and
damp in the face, and with a clean apron tied on all crooked over
the dirty one that she had dished up those dear delightful chickens
in.  She stood there and she seemed to get redder and damper, and
she twisted the corner of her apron round her fingers, and she said
very shortly and fiercely--

'If you please ma'am, I should wish to leave at my day month.'
Mother leaned against the hatstand.  The children could see her
looking pale through the crack of the door, because she had been
very kind to the cook, and had given her a holiday only the day
before, and it seemed so very unkind of the cook to want to go like
this, and on a Sunday too.

'Why, what's the matter?' mother said.

'It's them children,' the cook replied, and somehow the children
all felt that they had known it from the first.  They did not
remember having done anything extra wrong, but it is so frightfully
easy to displease a cook.  'It's them children: there's that there
new carpet in their room, covered thick with mud, both sides,
beastly yellow mud, and sakes alive knows where they got it.  And
all that muck to clean up on a Sunday!  It's not my place, and it's
not my intentions, so I don't deceive you, ma'am, and but for them
limbs, which they is if ever there was, it's not a bad place,
though I says it, and I wouldn't wish to leave, but--'

'I'm very sorry,' said mother, gently.  'I will speak to the
children.  And you had better think it over, and if you REALLY wish
to go, tell me to-morrow.'

Next day mother had a quiet talk with cook, and cook said she
didn't mind if she stayed on a bit, just to see.

But meantime the question of the muddy carpet had been gone into
thoroughly by father and mother.  Jane's candid explanation that
the mud had come from the bottom of a foreign tower where there was
buried treasure was received with such chilling disbelief that the
others limited their defence to an expression of sorrow, and of a
determination 'not to do it again'.  But father said (and mother
agreed with him, because mothers have to agree with fathers, and
not because it was her own idea) that children who coated a carpet
on both sides with thick mud, and when they were asked for an
explanation could only talk silly nonsense--that meant Jane's
truthful statement--were not fit to have a carpet at all, and,
indeed, SHOULDN'T have one for a week!

So the carpet was brushed (with tea-leaves, too) which was the only
comfort Anthea could think of) and folded up and put away in the
cupboard at the top of the stairs, and daddy put the key in his
trousers pocket.  'Till Saturday,' said he.

'Never mind,' said Anthea, 'we've got the Phoenix.'

But, as it happened, they hadn't.  The Phoenix was nowhere to be
found, and everything had suddenly settled down from the rosy wild
beauty of magic happenings to the common damp brownness of ordinary
November life in Camden Town--and there was the nursery floor all
bare boards in the middle and brown oilcloth round the outside, and
the bareness and yellowness of the middle floor showed up the
blackbeetles with terrible distinctness, when the poor things came
out in the evening, as usual, to try to make friends with the
children.  But the children never would.

The Sunday ended in gloom, which even junket for supper in the blue
Dresden bowl could hardly lighten at all.  Next day the Lamb's
cough was worse.  It certainly seemed very whoopy, and the doctor
came in his brougham carriage.

Every one tried to bear up under the weight of the sorrow which it
was to know that the wishing carpet was locked up and the Phoenix
mislaid.  A good deal of time was spent in looking for the Phoenix.

'It's a bird of its word,' said Anthea.  'I'm sure it's not
deserted us.  But you know it had a most awfully long fly from
wherever it was to near Rochester and back, and I expect the poor
thing's feeling tired out and wants rest.  I am sure we may trust
it.'

The others tried to feel sure of this, too, but it was hard.

No one could be expected to feel very kindly towards the cook,
since it was entirely through her making such a fuss about a little
foreign mud that the carpet had been taken away.

'She might have told us,' said Jane, 'and Panther and I would have
cleaned it with tea-leaves.'

'She's a cantankerous cat,' said Robert.

'I shan't say what I think about her,' said Anthea, primly,
'because it would be evil speaking, lying, and slandering.'

'It's not lying to say she's a disagreeable pig, and a beastly
blue-nosed Bozwoz,' said Cyril, who had read The Eyes of Light, and
intended to talk like Tony as soon as he could teach Robert to talk
like Paul.

And all the children, even Anthea, agreed that even if she wasn't
a blue-nosed Bozwoz, they wished cook had never been born.

But I ask you to believe that they didn't do all the things on
purpose which so annoyed the cook during the following week, though
I daresay the things would not have happened if the cook had been
a favourite.  This is a mystery.  Explain it if you can.  The
things that had happened were as follows:

Sunday.--Discovery of foreign mud on both sides of the carpet.

Monday.--Liquorice put on to boil with aniseed balls in a saucepan.
Anthea did this, because she thought it would be good for the
Lamb's cough.  The whole thing forgotten, and bottom of saucepan
burned out.  It was the little saucepan lined with white that was
kept for the baby's milk.

Tuesday.--A dead mouse found in pantry.  Fish-slice taken to dig
grave with.  By regrettable accident fish-slice broken.  Defence:
'The cook oughtn't to keep dead mice in pantries.'

Wednesday.--Chopped suet left on kitchen table.  Robert added
chopped soap, but he says he thought the suet was soap too.

Thursday.--Broke the kitchen window by falling against it during a
perfectly fair game of bandits in the area.

Friday.--Stopped up grating of kitchen sink with putty and filled
sink with water to make a lake to sail paper boats in.  Went away
and left the tap running.  Kitchen hearthrug and cook's shoes
ruined.

On Saturday the carpet was restored.  There had been plenty of time
during the week to decide where it should be asked to go when they
did get it back.

Mother had gone over to granny's, and had not taken the Lamb
because he had a bad cough, which, cook repeatedly said, was
whooping-cough as sure as eggs is eggs.

'But we'll take him out, a ducky darling,' said Anthea.  'We'll
take him somewhere where you can't have whooping-cough.  Don't be
so silly, Robert.  If he DOES talk about it no one'll take any
notice.  He's always talking about things he's never seen.'

So they dressed the Lamb and themselves in out-of-doors clothes,
and the Lamb chuckled and coughed, and laughed and coughed again,
poor dear, and all the chairs and tables were moved off the carpet
by the boys, while Jane nursed the Lamb, and Anthea rushed through
the house in one last wild hunt for the missing Phoenix.

'It's no use waiting for it,' she said, reappearing breathless in
the breakfast-room.  'But I know it hasn't deserted us.  It's a
bird of its word.'

'Quite so,' said the gentle voice of the Phoenix from beneath the
table.

Every one fell on its knees and looked up, and there was the
Phoenix perched on a crossbar of wood that ran across under the
table, and had once supported a drawer, in the happy days before
the drawer had been used as a boat, and its bottom unfortunately
trodden out by Raggett's Really Reliable School Boots on the feet
of Robert.

'I've been here all the time,' said the Phoenix, yawning politely
behind its claw.  'If you wanted me you should have recited the ode
of invocation; it's seven thousand lines long, and written in very
pure and beautiful Greek.'

'Couldn't you tell it us in English?' asked Anthea.

'It's rather long, isn't it?' said Jane, jumping the Lamb on her
knee.

'Couldn't you make a short English version, like Tate and Brady?'

'Oh, come along, do,' said Robert, holding out his hand.  'Come
along, good old Phoenix.'

'Good old BEAUTIFUL Phoenix,' it corrected shyly.

'Good old BEAUTIFUL Phoenix, then.  Come along, come along,' said
Robert, impatiently, with his hand still held out.

The Phoenix fluttered at once on to his wrist.

'This amiable youth,' it said to the others, 'has miraculously been
able to put the whole meaning of the seven thousand lines of Greek
invocation into one English hexameter--a little misplaced some of
the words--but

'Oh, come along, come along, good old beautiful Phoenix!'

'Not perfect, I admit--but not bad for a boy of his age.'

'Well, now then,' said Robert, stepping back on to the carpet with
the golden Phoenix on his wrist.

'You look like the king's falconer,' said Jane, sitting down on the
carpet with the baby on her lap.

Robert tried to go on looking like it.  Cyril and Anthea stood on
the carpet.

'We shall have to get back before dinner,' said Cyril, 'or cook
will blow the gaff.'

'She hasn't sneaked since Sunday,' said Anthea.

'She--' Robert was beginning, when the door burst open and the
cook, fierce and furious, came in like a whirlwind and stood on the
corner of the carpet, with a broken basin in one hand and a threat
in the other, which was clenched.

'Look 'ere!' she cried, 'my only basin; and what the powers am I to
make the beefsteak and kidney pudding in that your ma ordered for
your dinners?  You don't deserve no dinners, so yer don't.'

'I'm awfully sorry, cook,' said Anthea gently; 'it was my fault,
and I forgot to tell you about it.  It got broken when we were
telling our fortunes with melted lead, you know, and I meant to
tell you.'

'Meant to tell me,' replied the cook; she was red with anger, and
really I don't wonder--'meant to tell!  Well, _I_ mean to tell, too. 
I've held my tongue this week through, because the missus she said
to me quiet like, "We mustn't expect old heads on young shoulders,"
but now I shan't hold it no longer.  There was the soap you put in
our pudding, and me and Eliza never so much as breathed it to your
ma--though well we might--and the saucepan, and the fish-slice,
and--My gracious cats alive! what 'ave you got that blessed child
dressed up in his outdoors for?'

'We aren't going to take him out,' said Anthea; 'at least--' She
stopped short, for though they weren't going to take him out in the
Kentish Town Road, they certainly intended to take him elsewhere. 
But not at all where cook meant when she said 'out'.  This confused
the truthful Anthea.

'Out!' said the cook, 'that I'll take care you don't;' and she
snatched the Lamb from the lap of Jane, while Anthea and Robert
caught her by the skirts and apron.  'Look here,' said Cyril, in
stern desperation, 'will you go away, and make your pudding in a
pie-dish, or a flower-pot, or a hot-water can, or something?'

'Not me,' said the cook, briefly; 'and leave this precious poppet
for you to give his deathercold to.'

'I warn you,' said Cyril, solemnly.  'Beware, ere yet it be too
late.'

' Late yourself the little popsey-wopsey,' said the cook, with
angry tenderness.  'They shan't take it out, no more they shan't. 
And--Where did you get that there yellow fowl?'  She pointed to the
Phoenix.

Even Anthea saw that unless the cook lost her situation the loss
would be theirs.

'I wish,' she said suddenly, 'we were on a sunny southern shore,
where there can't be any whooping-cough.'

She said it through the frightened howls of the Lamb, and the
sturdy scoldings of the cook, and instantly the
giddy-go-round-and-falling-lift feeling swept over the whole party,
and the cook sat down flat on the carpet, holding the screaming
Lamb tight to her stout print-covered self, and calling on St
Bridget to help her.  She was an Irishwoman.

The moment the tipsy-topsy-turvy feeling stopped, the cook opened
her eyes, gave one sounding screech and shut them again, and Anthea
took the opportunity to get the desperately howling Lamb into her
own arms.

'It's all right,' she said; 'own Panther's got you.  Look at the
trees, and the sand, and the shells, and the great big tortoises. 
Oh DEAR, how hot it is!'

It certainly was; for the trusty carpet had laid itself out on a
southern shore that was sunny and no mistake, as Robert remarked. 
The greenest of green slopes led up to glorious groves where
palm-trees and all the tropical flowers and fruits that you read of
in Westward Ho! and Fair Play were growing in rich profusion. 
Between the green, green slope and the blue, blue sea lay a stretch
of sand that looked like a carpet of jewelled cloth of gold, for it
was not greyish as our northern sand is, but yellow and
changing--opal-coloured like sunshine and rainbows.  And at the
very moment when the wild, whirling, blinding, deafening, tumbling
upside-downness of the carpet-moving stopped, the children had the
happiness of seeing three large live turtles waddle down to the
edge of the sea and disappear in the water.  And it was hotter than
you can possibly imagine, unless you think of ovens on a
baking-day.

Every one without an instant's hesitation tore off its
London-in-November outdoor clothes, and Anthea took off the Lamb's
highwayman blue coat and his three-cornered hat, and then his
jersey, and then the Lamb himself suddenly slipped out of his
little blue tight breeches and stood up happy and hot in his little
white shirt.

'I'm sure it's much warmer than the seaside in the summer,' said
Anthea.  'Mother always lets us go barefoot then.'

So the Lamb's shoes and socks and gaiters came off, and he stood
digging his happy naked pink toes into the golden smooth sand.

'I'm a little white duck-dickie,' said he--'a little white
duck-dickie what swims,' and splashed quacking into a sandy pool.

'Let him,' said Anthea; 'it can't hurt him.  Oh, how hot it is!'

The cook suddenly opened her eyes and screamed, shut them, screamed
again, opened her eyes once more and said--

'Why, drat my cats alive, what's all this?  It's a dream, I expect.

Well, it's the best I ever dreamed.  I'll look it up in the
dream-book to-morrow.  Seaside and trees and a carpet to sit on. 
I never did!'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'it isn't a dream; it's real.'

'Ho yes!' said the cook; 'they always says that in dreams.'

'It's REAL, I tell you,' Robert said, stamping his foot.  'I'm not
going to tell you how it's done, because that's our secret.'  He
winked heavily at each of the others in turn.  'But you wouldn't go
away and make that pudding, so we HAD to bring you, and I hope you
like it.'

'I do that, and no mistake,' said the cook unexpectedly; 'and it
being a dream it don't matter what I say; and I WILL say, if it's
my last word, that of all the aggravating little varmints--'
'Calm yourself, my good woman,' said the Phoenix.

'Good woman, indeed,' said the cook; 'good woman yourself' Then she
saw who it was that had spoken.  'Well, if I ever,' said she; 'this
is something like a dream!  Yellow fowls a-talking and all!  I've
heard of such, but never did I think to see the day.'

'Well, then,' said Cyril, impatiently, 'sit here and see the day
now.  It's a jolly fine day.  Here, you others--a council!'
They walked along the shore till they were out of earshot of the
cook, who still sat gazing about her with a happy, dreamy, vacant
smile.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'we must roll the carpet up and hide it,
so that we can get at it at any moment.  The Lamb can be getting
rid of his whooping-cough all the morning, and we can look about;
and if the savages on this island are cannibals, we'll hook it, and
take her back.  And if not, we'll LEAVE HER HERE.'

'Is that being kind to servants and animals, like the clergyman
said?' asked Jane.

'Nor she isn't kind,' retorted Cyril.

'Well--anyway,' said Anthea, 'the safest thing is to leave the
carpet there with her sitting on it.  Perhaps it'll be a lesson to
her, and anyway, if she thinks it's a dream it won't matter what
she says when she gets home.'

So the extra coats and hats and mufflers were piled on the carpet. 
Cyril shouldered the well and happy Lamb, the Phoenix perched on
Robert's wrist, and 'the party of explorers prepared to enter the
interior'.

The grassy slope was smooth, but under the trees there were tangled
creepers with bright, strange-shaped flowers, and it was not easy
to walk.

'We ought to have an explorer's axe,' said Robert.  'I shall ask
father to give me one for Christmas.'

There were curtains of creepers with scented blossoms hanging from
the trees, and brilliant birds darted about quite close to their
faces.

'Now, tell me honestly,' said the Phoenix, 'are there any birds
here handsomer than I am?  Don't be afraid of hurting my
feelings--I'm a modest bird, I hope.'

'Not one of them,' said Robert, with conviction, 'is a patch upon
you!'

'I was never a vain bird,' said the Phoenix, 'but I own that you
confirm my own impression.  I will take a flight.'  It circled in
the air for a moment, and, returning to Robert's wrist, went on,
'There is a path to the left.'

And there was.  So now the children went on through the wood more
quickly and comfortably, the girls picking flowers and the Lamb
inviting the 'pretty dickies' to observe that he himself was a
'little white real-water-wet duck!'

And all this time he hadn't whooping-coughed once.

The path turned and twisted, and, always threading their way amid
a tangle of flowers, the children suddenly passed a corner and
found themselves in a forest clearing, where there were a lot of
pointed huts--the huts, as they knew at once, of SAVAGES.

The boldest heart beat more quickly.  Suppose they WERE cannibals. 
It was a long way back to the carpet.

'Hadn't we better go back?' said Jane.  'Go NOW,' she said, and her
voice trembled a little.  'Suppose they eat us.'

'Nonsense, Pussy,' said Cyril, firmly.  'Look, there's a goat tied
up.  That shows they don't eat PEOPLE.'

'Let's go on and say we're missionaries,' Robert suggested.

'I shouldn't advise THAT,' said the Phoenix, very earnestly.

'Why not?'

'Well, for one thing, it isn't true,' replied the golden bird.

It was while they stood hesitating on the edge of the clearing that
a tall man suddenly came out of one of the huts.  He had hardly any
clothes, and his body all over was a dark and beautiful coppery
colour--just like the chrysanthemums father had brought home on
Saturday.  In his hand he held a spear.  The whites of his eyes and
the white of his teeth were the only light things about him, except
that where the sun shone on his shiny brown body it looked white,
too.  If you will look carefully at the next shiny savage you meet
with next to nothing on, you will see at once--if the sun happens
to be shining at the time--that I am right about this.

The savage looked at the children.  Concealment was impossible.  He
uttered a shout that was more like 'Oo goggery bag-wag' than
anything else the children had ever heard, and at once brown
coppery people leapt out of every hut, and swarmed like ants about
the clearing.  There was no time for discussion, and no one wanted
to discuss anything, anyhow.  Whether these coppery people were
cannibals or not now seemed to matter very little.

Without an instant's hesitation the four children turned and ran
back along the forest path; the only pause was Anthea's.  She stood
back to let Cyril pass, because he was carrying the Lamb, who
screamed with delight.  (He had not whooping-coughed a single once
since the carpet landed him on the island.)

'Gee-up, Squirrel; gee-gee,' he shouted, and Cyril did gee-up.  The
path was a shorter cut to the beach than the creeper-covered way by
which they had come, and almost directly they saw through the trees
the shining blue-and-gold-and-opal of sand and sea.

'Stick to it,' cried Cyril, breathlessly.

They did stick to it; they tore down the sands--they could hear
behind them as they ran the patter of feet which they knew, too
well, were copper-coloured.

The sands were golden and opal-coloured--and BARE.  There were
wreaths of tropic seaweed, there were rich tropic shells of the
kind you would not buy in the Kentish Town Road under at least
fifteen pence a pair.  There were turtles basking lumpily on the
water's edge--but no cook, no clothes, and no carpet.

'On, on!  Into the sea!' gasped Cyril.  'They MUST hate water. 
I've--heard--savages always--dirty.'

Their feet were splashing in the warm shallows before his
breathless words were ended.  The calm baby-waves were easy to go
through.  It is warm work running for your life in the tropics, and
the coolness of the water was delicious.  They were up to their
arm-pits now, and Jane was up to her chin.

'Look!' said the Phoenix.  'What are they pointing at?'

The children turned; and there, a little to the west was a head--a
head they knew, with a crooked cap upon it.  It was the head of the
cook.

For some reason or other the savages had stopped at the water's
edge and were all talking at the top of their voices, and all were
pointing copper-coloured fingers, stiff with interest and
excitement, at the head of the cook.

The children hurried towards her as quickly as the water would let
them.

'What on earth did you come out here for?' Robert shouted; 'and
where on earth's the carpet?'

'It's not on earth, bless you,' replied the cook, happily; 'it's
UNDER ME--in the water.  I got a bit warm setting there in the sun,
and I just says, "I wish I was in a cold bath"--just like that--and
next minute here I was!  It's all part of the dream.'

Every one at once saw how extremely fortunate it was that the
carpet had had the sense to take the cook to the nearest and
largest bath--the sea, and how terrible it would have been if the
carpet had taken itself and her to the stuffy little bath-room of
the house in Camden Town!

'Excuse me,' said the Phoenix's soft voice, breaking in on the
general sigh of relief, 'but I think these brown people want your
cook.'

'To--to eat?' whispered Jane, as well as she could through the
water which the plunging Lamb was dashing in her face with happy
fat hands and feet.

'Hardly,' rejoined the bird.  'Who wants cooks to EAT?  Cooks are
ENGAGED, not eaten.  They wish to engage her.'

'How can you understand what they say?' asked Cyril, doubtfully.

'It's as easy as kissing your claw,' replied the bird.  'I speak
and understand ALL languages, even that of your cook, which is
difficult and unpleasing.  It's quite easy, when you know how it's
done.  It just comes to you.  I should advise you to beach the
carpet and land the cargo--the cook, I mean.  You can take my word
for it, the copper-coloured ones will not harm you now.'

It is impossible not to take the word of a Phoenix when it tells
you to.  So the children at once got hold of the corners of the
carpet, and, pulling it from under the cook, towed it slowly in
through the shallowing water, and at last spread it on the sand. 
The cook, who had followed, instantly sat down on it, and at once
the copper-coloured natives, now strangely humble, formed a ring
round the carpet, and fell on their faces on the rainbow-and-gold
sand.  The tallest savage spoke in this position, which must have
been very awkward for him; and Jane noticed that it took him quite
a long time to get the sand out of his mouth afterwards.

'He says,' the Phoenix remarked after some time, 'that they wish to
engage your cook permanently.'

'Without a character?' asked Anthea, who had heard her mother speak
of such things.

'They do not wish to engage her as cook, but as queen; and queens
need not have characters.'

There was a breathless pause.

'WELL,' said Cyril, 'of all the choices!  But there's no accounting
for tastes.'

Every one laughed at the idea of the cook's being engaged as queen;
they could not help it.

'I do not advise laughter,' warned the Phoenix, ruffling out his
golden feathers, which were extremely wet.  'And it's not their own
choice.  It seems that there is an ancient prophecy of this
copper-coloured tribe that a great queen should some day arise out
of the sea with a white crown on her head, and--and--well, you see!
There's the crown!'

It pointed its claw at cook's cap; and a very dirty cap it was,
because it was the end of the week.

'That's the white crown,' it said; 'at least, it's nearly
white--very white indeed compared to the colour THEY are--and
anyway, it's quite white enough.'

Cyril addressed the cook.  'Look here!' said he, 'these brown
people want you to be their queen.  They're only savages, and they
don't know any better.  Now would you really like to stay? or, if
you'll promise not to be so jolly aggravating at home, and not to
tell any one a word about to-day, we'll take you back to Camden
Town.'

'No, you don't,' said the cook, in firm, undoubting tones.  'I've
always wanted to be the Queen, God bless her! and I always thought
what a good one I should make; and now I'm going to.  IF it's only
in a dream, it's well worth while.  And I don't go back to that
nasty underground kitchen, and me blamed for everything; that I
don't, not till the dream's finished and I wake up with that nasty
bell a rang-tanging in my ears--so I tell you.'

'Are you SURE,' Anthea anxiously asked the Phoenix, 'that she will
be quite safe here?'

'She will find the nest of a queen a very precious and soft thing,'
said the bird, solemnly.

'There--you hear,' said Cyril.  'You're in for a precious soft
thing, so mind you're a good queen, cook.  It's more than you'd any
right to expect, but long may you reign.'

Some of the cook's copper-coloured subjects now advanced from the
forest with long garlands of beautiful flowers, white and
sweet-scented, and hung them respectfully round the neck of their
new sovereign.

'What! all them lovely bokays for me!' exclaimed the enraptured
cook.  'Well, this here is something LIKE a dream, I must say.'

She sat up very straight on the carpet, and the copper-coloured
ones, themselves wreathed in garlands of the gayest flowers, madly
stuck parrot feathers in their hair and began to dance.  It was a
dance such as you have never seen; it made the children feel almost
sure that the cook was right, and that they were all in a dream. 
Small, strange-shaped drums were beaten, odd-sounding songs were
sung, and the dance got faster and faster and odder and odder, till
at last all the dancers fell on the sand tired out.

The new queen, with her white crown-cap all on one side, clapped
wildly.

'Brayvo!' she cried, 'brayvo!  It's better than the Albert Edward
Music-hall in the Kentish Town Road.  Go it again!'

But the Phoenix would not translate this request into the
copper-coloured language; and when the savages had recovered their
breath, they implored their queen to leave her white escort and
come with them to their huts.

'The finest shall be yours, O queen,' said they.

'Well--so long!' said the cook, getting heavily on to her feet,
when the Phoenix had translated this request.  'No more kitchens
and attics for me, thank you.  I'm off to my royal palace, I am;
and I only wish this here dream would keep on for ever and ever.'

She picked up the ends of the garlands that trailed round her feet,
and the children had one last glimpse of her striped stockings and
worn elastic-side boots before she disappeared into the shadow of
the forest, surrounded by her dusky retainers, singing songs of
rejoicing as they went.

'WELL!' said Cyril, 'I suppose she's all right, but they don't seem
to count us for much, one way or the other.'

'Oh,' said the Phoenix, 'they think you're merely dreams.  The
prophecy said that the queen would arise from the waves with a
white crown and surrounded by white dream-children.  That's about
what they think YOU are!'

'And what about dinner?' said Robert, abruptly.

'There won't be any dinner, with no cook and no pudding-basin,'
Anthea reminded him; 'but there's always bread-and-butter.'

'Let's get home,' said Cyril.

The Lamb was furiously unwishful to be dressed in his warm clothes
again, but Anthea and Jane managed it, by force disguised as
coaxing, and he never once whooping-coughed.

Then every one put on its own warm things and took its place on the
carpet.

A sound of uncouth singing still came from beyond the trees where
the copper-coloured natives were crooning songs of admiration and
respect to their white-crowned queen.  Then Anthea said 'Home,'
just as duchesses and other people do to their coachmen, and the
intelligent carpet in one whirling moment laid itself down in its
proper place on the nursery floor.  And at that very moment Eliza
opened the door and said--

'Cook's gone!  I can't find her anywhere, and there's no dinner
ready.  She hasn't taken her box nor yet her outdoor things.  She
just ran out to see the time, I shouldn't wonder--the kitchen clock
never did give her satisfaction--and she's got run over or fell
down in a fit as likely as not.  You'll have to put up with the
cold bacon for your dinners; and what on earth you've got your
outdoor things on for I don't know.  And then I'll slip out and see
if they know anything about her at the police-station.'

But nobody ever knew anything about the cook any more, except the
children, and, later, one other person.


Mother was so upset at losing the cook, and so anxious about her,
that Anthea felt most miserable, as though she had done something
very wrong indeed.  She woke several times in the night, and at
last decided that she would ask the Phoenix to let her tell her
mother all about it.  But there was no opportunity to do this next
day, because the Phoenix, as usual, had gone to sleep in some
out-of-the-way spot, after asking, as a special favour, not to be
disturbed for twenty-four hours.

The Lamb never whooping-coughed once all that Sunday, and mother
and father said what good medicine it was that the doctor had given
him.  But the children knew that it was the southern shore where
you can't have whooping-cough that had cured him.  The Lamb babbled
of coloured sand and water, but no one took any notice of that.  He
often talked of things that hadn't happened.

It was on Monday morning, very early indeed, that Anthea woke and
suddenly made up her mind.  She crept downstairs in her night-gown
(it was very chilly), sat down on the carpet, and with a beating
heart wished herself on the sunny shore where you can't have
whooping-cough, and next moment there she was.

The sand was splendidly warm.  She could feel it at once, even
through the carpet.  She folded the carpet, and put it over her
shoulders like a shawl, for she was determined not to be parted
from it for a single instant, no matter how hot it might be to
wear.

Then trembling a little, and trying to keep up her courage by
saying over and over, 'It is my DUTY, it IS my duty,' she went up
the forest path.

'Well, here you are again,' said the cook, directly she saw Anthea.

'This dream does keep on!'

The cook was dressed in a white robe; she had no shoes and
stockings and no cap and she was sitting under a screen of
palm-leaves, for it was afternoon in the island, and blazing hot. 
She wore a flower wreath on her hair, and copper-coloured boys were
fanning her with peacock's feathers.

'They've got the cap put away,' she said.  'They seem to think a
lot of it.  Never saw one before, I expect.'

'Are you happy?' asked Anthea, panting; the sight of the cook as
queen quite took her breath away.

'I believe you, my dear,' said the cook, heartily.  'Nothing to do
unless you want to.  But I'm getting rested now.  Tomorrow I'm
going to start cleaning out my hut, if the dream keeps on, and I
shall teach them cooking; they burns everything to a cinder now
unless they eats it raw.'

'But can you talk to them?'

'Lor' love a duck, yes!' the happy cook-queen replied; 'it's quite
easy to pick up.  I always thought I should be quick at foreign
languages.  I've taught them to understand "dinner," and "I want a
drink," and "You leave me be," already.'

'Then you don't want anything?' Anthea asked earnestly and
anxiously.

'Not me, miss; except if you'd only go away.  I'm afraid of me
waking up with that bell a-going if you keep on stopping here
a-talking to me.  Long as this here dream keeps up I'm as happy as
a queen.'

'Goodbye, then,' said Anthea, gaily, for her conscience was clear
now.

She hurried into the wood, threw herself on the ground, and said
'Home'--and there she was, rolled in the carpet on the nursery
floor.

'SHE'S all right, anyhow,' said Anthea, and went back to bed.  'I'm
glad somebody's pleased.  But mother will never believe me when I
tell her.'

The story is indeed a little difficult to believe.  Still, you
might try.



CHAPTER 4
TWO BAZAARS


Mother was really a great dear.  She was pretty and she was loving,
and most frightfully good when you were ill, and always kind, and
almost always just.  That is, she was just when she understood
things.  But of course she did not always understand things.  No
one understands everything, and mothers are not angels, though a
good many of them come pretty near it.  The children knew that
mother always WANTED to do what was best for them, even if she was
not clever enough to know exactly what was the best.  That was why
all of them, but much more particularly Anthea, felt rather
uncomfortable at keeping the great secret from her of the wishing
carpet and the Phoenix.  And Anthea, whose inside mind was made so
that she was able to be much more uncomfortable than the others,
had decided that she MUST tell her mother the truth, however little
likely it was that her mother would believe it.

'Then I shall have done what's right,' said she to the Phoenix;
'and if she doesn't believe me it won't be my fault--will it?'

'Not in the least,' said the golden bird.  'And she won't, so
you're quite safe.'

Anthea chose a time when she was doing her home-lessons--they were
Algebra and Latin, German, English, and Euclid--and she asked her
mother whether she might come and do them in the drawing-room--'so
as to be quiet,' she said to her mother; and to herself she said,
'And that's not the real reason.  I hope I shan't grow up a LIAR.'

Mother said, 'Of course, dearie,' and Anthea started swimming
through a sea of x's and y's and z's.  Mother was sitting at the
mahogany bureau writing letters.

'Mother dear,' said Anthea.

'Yes, love-a-duck,' said mother.

'About cook,' said Anthea.  '_I_ know where she is.'

'Do you, dear?' said mother.  'Well, I wouldn't take her back after
the way she has behaved.'

'It's not her fault,' said Anthea.  'May I tell you about it from
the beginning?'

Mother laid down her pen, and her nice face had a resigned
expression.  As you know, a resigned expression always makes you
want not to tell anybody anything.

'It's like this,' said Anthea, in a hurry: 'that egg, you know,
that came in the carpet; we put it in the fire and it hatched into
the Phoenix, and the carpet was a wishing carpet--and--'

'A very nice game, darling,' said mother, taking up her pen.  'Now
do be quiet.  I've got a lot of letters to write.  I'm going to
Bournemouth to-morrow with the Lamb--and there's that bazaar.'

Anthea went back to x y z, and mother's pen scratched busily.

'But, mother,' said Anthea, when mother put down the pen to lick an
envelope, 'the carpet takes us wherever we like--and--'

'I wish it would take you where you could get a few nice Eastern
things for my bazaar,' said mother.  'I promised them, and I've no
time to go to Liberty's now.'

'It shall,' said Anthea, 'but, mother--'

'Well, dear,' said mother, a little impatiently, for she had taken
up her pen again.

'The carpet took us to a place where you couldn't have
whooping-cough, and the Lamb hasn't whooped since, and we took cook
because she was so tiresome, and then she would stay and be queen
of the savages.  They thought her cap was a crown, and--'

'Darling one,' said mother, 'you know I love to hear the things you
make up--but I am most awfully busy.'

'But it's true,' said Anthea, desperately.

'You shouldn't say that, my sweet,' said mother, gently.  And then
Anthea knew it was hopeless.

'Are you going away for long?' asked Anthea.

'I've got a cold,' said mother, 'and daddy's anxious about it, and
the Lamb's cough.'

'He hasn't coughed since Saturday,' the Lamb's eldest sister
interrupted.

'I wish I could think so,' mother replied.  'And daddy's got to go
to Scotland.  I do hope you'll be good children.'

'We will, we will,' said Anthea, fervently.  'When's the bazaar?'

'On Saturday,' said mother, 'at the schools.  Oh, don't talk any
more, there's a treasure!  My head's going round, and I've
forgotten how to spell whooping-cough.'


Mother and the Lamb went away, and father went away, and there was
a new cook who looked so like a frightened rabbit that no one had
the heart to do anything to frighten her any more than seemed
natural to her.

The Phoenix begged to be excused.  It said it wanted a week's rest,
and asked that it might not be disturbed.  And it hid its golden
gleaming self, and nobody could find it.

So that when Wednesday afternoon brought an unexpected holiday, and
every one decided to go somewhere on the carpet, the journey had to
be undertaken without the Phoenix.  They were debarred from any
carpet excursions in the evening by a sudden promise to mother,
exacted in the agitation of parting, that they would not be out
after six at night, except on Saturday, when they were to go to the
bazaar, and were pledged to put on their best clothes, to wash
themselves to the uttermost, and to clean their nails--not with
scissors, which are scratchy and bad, but with flat-sharpened ends
of wooden matches, which do no harm to any one's nails.

'Let's go and see the Lamb,' said Jane.

But every one was agreed that if they appeared suddenly in
Bournemouth it would frighten mother out of her wits, if not into
a fit.  So they sat on the carpet, and thought and thought and
thought till they almost began to squint.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'I know.  Please carpet, take us somewhere
where we can see the Lamb and mother and no one can see us.'

'Except the Lamb,' said Jane, quickly.

And the next moment they found themselves recovering from the
upside-down movement--and there they were sitting on the carpet,
and the carpet was laid out over another thick soft carpet of brown
pine-needles.  There were green pine-trees overhead, and a swift
clear little stream was running as fast as ever it could between
steep banks--and there, sitting on the pine-needle carpet, was
mother, without her hat; and the sun was shining brightly, although
it was November--and there was the Lamb, as jolly as jolly and not
whooping at all.

'The carpet's deceived us,' said Robert, gloomily; 'mother will see
us directly she turns her head.'

But the faithful carpet had not deceived them.

Mother turned her dear head and looked straight at them, and DID NOT SEE 
THEM!

'We're invisible,' Cyril whispered: 'what awful larks!'

But to the girls it was not larks at all.  It was horrible to have
mother looking straight at them, and her face keeping the same,
just as though they weren't there.

'I don't like it,' said Jane.  'Mother never looked at us like that
before.  Just as if she didn't love us--as if we were somebody
else's children, and not very nice ones either--as if she didn't
care whether she saw us or not.'

'It is horrid,' said Anthea, almost in tears.

But at this moment the Lamb saw them, and plunged towards the
carpet, shrieking, 'Panty, own Panty--an' Pussy, an' Squiggle--an'
Bobs, oh, oh!'

Anthea caught him and kissed him, so did Jane; they could not help
it--he looked such a darling, with his blue three-cornered hat all
on one side, and his precious face all dirty--quite in the old
familiar way.

'I love you, Panty; I love you--and you, and you, and you,' cried
the Lamb.

It was a delicious moment.  Even the boys thumped their baby
brother joyously on the back.

Then Anthea glanced at mother--and mother's face was a pale
sea-green colour, and she was staring at the Lamb as if she thought
he had gone mad.  And, indeed, that was exactly what she did think.

'My Lamb, my precious!  Come to mother,' she cried, and jumped up
and ran to the baby.

She was so quick that the invisible children had to leap back, or
she would have felt them; and to feel what you can't see is the
worst sort of ghost-feeling.  Mother picked up the Lamb and hurried
away from the pinewood.

'Let's go home,' said Jane, after a miserable silence.  'It feels
just exactly as if mother didn't love us.'

But they couldn't bear to go home till they had seen mother meet
another lady, and knew that she was safe.  You cannot leave your
mother to go green in the face in a distant pinewood, far from all
human aid, and then go home on your wishing carpet as though
nothing had happened.

When mother seemed safe the children returned to the carpet, and
said 'Home'--and home they went.

'I don't care about being invisible myself,' said Cyril, 'at least,
not with my own family.  It would be different if you were a
prince, or a bandit, or a burglar.'

And now the thoughts of all four dwelt fondly on the dear greenish
face of mother.

'I wish she hadn't gone away,' said Jane; 'the house is simply
beastly without her.'

'I think we ought to do what she said,' Anthea put in.  'I saw
something in a book the other day about the wishes of the departed
being sacred.'

'That means when they've departed farther off,' said Cyril. 
'India's coral or Greenland's icy, don't you know; not Bournemouth. 
Besides, we don't know what her wishes are.'

'She SAID'--Anthea was very much inclined to cry--'she said, "Get
Indian things for my bazaar;" but I know she thought we couldn't,
and it was only play.'

'Let's get them all the same,' said Robert.  'We'll go the first
thing on Saturday morning.'

And on Saturday morning, the first thing, they went.

There was no finding the Phoenix, so they sat on the beautiful
wishing carpet, and said--

'We want Indian things for mother's bazaar.  Will you please take
us where people will give us heaps of Indian things?'

The docile carpet swirled their senses away, and restored them on
the outskirts of a gleaming white Indian town.  They knew it was
Indian at once, by the shape of the domes and roofs; and besides,
a man went by on an elephant, and two English soldiers went along
the road, talking like in Mr Kipling's books--so after that no one
could have any doubt as to where they were.  They rolled up the
carpet and Robert carried it, and they walked bodily into the town.

It was very warm, and once more they had to take off their
London-in-November coats, and carry them on their arms.

The streets were narrow and strange, and the clothes of the people
in the streets were stranger and the talk of the people was
strangest of all.

'I can't understand a word,' said Cyril.  'How on earth are we to
ask for things for our bazaar?'

'And they're poor people, too,' said Jane; 'I'm sure they are. 
What we want is a rajah or something.'

Robert was beginning to unroll the carpet, but the others stopped
him, imploring him not to waste a wish.

'We asked the carpet to take us where we could get Indian things
for bazaars,' said Anthea, 'and it will.'

Her faith was justified.

Just as she finished speaking a very brown gentleman in a turban
came up to them and bowed deeply.  He spoke, and they thrilled to
the sound of English words.

'My ranee, she think you very nice childs.  She asks do you lose
yourselves, and do you desire to sell carpet?  She see you from her
palkee.  You come see her--yes?'

They followed the stranger, who seemed to have a great many more
teeth in his smile than are usual, and he led them through crooked
streets to the ranee's palace.  I am not going to describe the
ranee's palace, because I really have never seen the palace of a
ranee, and Mr Kipling has.  So you can read about it in his books. 
But I know exactly what happened there.

The old ranee sat on a low-cushioned seat, and there were a lot of
other ladies with her--all in trousers and veils, and sparkling
with tinsel and gold and jewels.  And the brown, turbaned gentleman
stood behind a sort of carved screen, and interpreted what the
children said and what the queen said.  And when the queen asked to
buy the carpet, the children said 'No.'

'Why?' asked the ranee.

And Jane briefly said why, and the interpreter interpreted.  The
queen spoke, and then the interpreter said--

'My mistress says it is a good story, and you tell it all through
without thought of time.'

And they had to.  It made a long story, especially as it had all to
be told twice--once by Cyril and once by the interpreter.  Cyril
rather enjoyed himself.  He warmed to his work, and told the tale
of the Phoenix and the Carpet, and the Lone Tower, and the
Queen-Cook, in language that grew insensibly more and more Arabian
Nightsy, and the ranee and her ladies listened to the interpreter,
and rolled about on their fat cushions with laughter.

When the story was ended she spoke, and the interpreter explained
that she had said, 'Little one, thou art a heaven-born teller of
tales,' and she threw him a string of turquoises from round her
neck.  

'OH, how lovely!' cried Jane and Anthea.

Cyril bowed several times, and then cleared his throat and said--

'Thank her very, very much; but I would much rather she gave me
some of the cheap things in the bazaar.  Tell her I want them to
sell again, and give the money to buy clothes for poor people who
haven't any.'

'Tell him he has my leave to sell my gift and clothe the naked with
its price,' said the queen, when this was translated.

But Cyril said very firmly, 'No, thank you.  The things have got to
be sold to-day at our bazaar, and no one would buy a turquoise
necklace at an English bazaar.  They'd think it was sham, or else
they'd want to know where we got it.'

So then the queen sent out for little pretty things, and her
servants piled the carpet with them.

'I must needs lend you an elephant to carry them away,' she said,
laughing.

But Anthea said, 'If the queen will lend us a comb and let us wash
our hands and faces, she shall see a magic thing.  We and the
carpet and all these brass trays and pots and carved things and
stuffs and things will just vanish away like smoke.'

The queen clapped her hands at this idea, and lent the children a
sandal-wood comb inlaid with ivory lotus-flowers.  And they washed
their faces and hands in silver basins.
Then Cyril made a very polite farewell speech, and quite suddenly
he ended with the words--

'And I wish we were at the bazaar at our schools.'

And of course they were.  And the queen and her ladies were left
with their mouths open, gazing at the bare space on the inlaid
marble floor where the carpet and the children had been.

'That is magic, if ever magic was!' said the queen, delighted with
the incident; which, indeed, has given the ladies of that court
something to talk about on wet days ever since.

Cyril's stories had taken some time, so had the meal of strange
sweet foods that they had had while the little pretty things were
being bought, and the gas in the schoolroom was already lighted. 
Outside, the winter dusk was stealing down among the Camden Town
houses.

'I'm glad we got washed in India,' said Cyril.  'We should have
been awfully late if we'd had to go home and scrub.'

'Besides,' Robert said, 'it's much warmer washing in India.  I
shouldn't mind it so much if we lived there.'

The thoughtful carpet had dumped the children down in a dusky space
behind the point where the corners of two stalls met.  The floor
was littered with string and brown paper, and baskets and boxes
were heaped along the wall.

The children crept out under a stall covered with all sorts of
table-covers and mats and things, embroidered beautifully by idle
ladies with no real work to do.  They got out at the end,
displacing a sideboard-cloth adorned with a tasteful pattern of
blue geraniums.  The girls got out unobserved, so did Cyril; but
Robert, as he cautiously emerged, was actually walked on by Mrs
Biddle, who kept the stall.  Her large, solid foot stood firmly on
the small, solid hand of Robert and who can blame Robert if he DID
yell a little?

A crowd instantly collected.  Yells are very unusual at bazaars,
and every one was intensely interested.  It was several seconds
before the three free children could make Mrs Biddle understand
that what she was walking on was not a schoolroom floor, or even,
as she presently supposed, a dropped pin-cushion, but the living
hand of a suffering child.  When she became aware that she really
had hurt him, she grew very angry indeed.  When people have hurt
other people by accident, the one who does the hurting is always
much the angriest.  I wonder why.

'I'm very sorry, I'm sure,' said Mrs Biddle; but she spoke more in
anger than in sorrow.  'Come out! whatever do you mean by creeping
about under the stalls, like earwigs?'

'We were looking at the things in the corner.'

'Such nasty, prying ways,' said Mrs Biddle, 'will never make you
successful in life.  There's nothing there but packing and dust.'

'Oh, isn't there!' said Jane.  'That's all you know.'

'Little girl, don't be rude,' said Mrs Biddle, flushing violet.

'She doesn't mean to be; but there ARE some nice things there, all
the same,' said Cyril; who suddenly felt how impossible it was to
inform the listening crowd that all the treasures piled on the
carpet were mother's contributions to the bazaar.  No one would
believe it; and if they did, and wrote to thank mother, she would
think--well, goodness only knew what she would think.  The other
three children felt the same.

'I should like to see them,' said a very nice lady, whose friends
had disappointed her, and who hoped that these might be belated
contributions to her poorly furnished stall.

She looked inquiringly at Robert, who said, 'With pleasure, don't
mention it,' and dived back under Mrs Biddle's stall.

'I wonder you encourage such behaviour,' said Mrs Biddle.  'I
always speak my mind, as you know, Miss Peasmarsh; and, I must say,
I am surprised.'  She turned to the crowd.  'There is no
entertainment here,' she said sternly.  'A very naughty little boy
has accidentally hurt himself, but only slightly.  Will you please
disperse?  It will only encourage him in naughtiness if he finds
himself the centre of attraction.'

The crowd slowly dispersed.  Anthea, speechless with fury, heard a
nice curate say, 'Poor little beggar!' and loved the curate at once
and for ever.

Then Robert wriggled out from under the stall with some Benares
brass and some inlaid sandalwood boxes.

'Liberty!' cried Miss Peasmarsh.  'Then Charles has not forgotten,
after all.'

'Excuse me,' said Mrs Biddle, with fierce politeness, 'these
objects are deposited behind MY stall.  Some unknown donor who does
good by stealth, and would blush if he could hear you claim the
things.  Of course they are for me.'

'My stall touches yours at the corner,' said poor Miss Peasmarsh,
timidly, 'and my cousin did promise--'

The children sidled away from the unequal contest and mingled with
the crowd.  Their feelings were too deep for words--till at last
Robert said--

'That stiff-starched PIG!'

'And after all our trouble!  I'm hoarse with gassing to that
trousered lady in India.'

'The pig-lady's very, very nasty,' said Jane.

It was Anthea who said, in a hurried undertone, 'She isn't very
nice, and Miss Peasmarsh is pretty and nice too.  Who's got a
pencil?'

it was a long crawl, under three stalls, but Anthea did it.  A
large piece of pale blue paper lay among the rubbish in the corner.

She folded it to a square and wrote upon it, licking the pencil at
every word to make it mark quite blackly: 'All these Indian things
are for pretty, nice Miss Peasmarsh's stall.'  She thought of
adding, 'There is nothing for Mrs Biddle;' but she saw that this
might lead to suspicion, so she wrote hastily: 'From an unknown
donna,' and crept back among the boards and trestles to join the
others.

So that when Mrs Biddle appealed to the bazaar committee, and the
corner of the stall was lifted and shifted, so that stout clergymen
and heavy ladies could get to the corner without creeping under
stalls, the blue paper was discovered, and all the splendid,
shining Indian things were given over to Miss Peasmarsh, and she
sold them all, and got thirty-five pounds for them.

'I don't understand about that blue paper,' said Mrs Biddle.  'It
looks to me like the work of a lunatic.  And saying you were nice
and pretty!  It's not the work of a sane person.'

Anthea and Jane begged Miss Peasmarsh to let them help her to sell
the things, because it was their brother who had announced the good
news that the things had come.  Miss Peasmarsh was very willing,
for now her stall, that had been SO neglected, was surrounded by
people who wanted to buy, and she was glad to be helped.  The
children noted that Mrs Biddle had not more to do in the way of
selling than she could manage quite well.  I hope they were not
glad--for you should forgive your enemies, even if they walk on
your hands and then say it is all your naughty fault.  But I am
afraid they were not so sorry as they ought to have been.

It took some time to arrange the things on the stall.  The carpet
was spread over it, and the dark colours showed up the brass and
silver and ivory things.  It was a happy and busy afternoon, and
when Miss Peasmarsh and the girls had sold every single one of the
little pretty things from the Indian bazaar, far, far away, Anthea
and Jane went off with the boys to fish in the fishpond, and dive
into the bran-pie, and hear the cardboard band, and the phonograph,
and the chorus of singing birds that was done behind a screen with
glass tubes and glasses of water.

They had a beautiful tea, suddenly presented to them by the nice
curate, and Miss Peasmarsh joined them before they had had more
than three cakes each.  It was a merry party, and the curate was
extremely pleasant to every one, 'even to Miss Peasmarsh,' as Jane
said afterwards.

'We ought to get back to the stall,' said Anthea, when no one could
possibly eat any more, and the curate was talking in a low voice to
Miss Peas marsh about 'after Easter'.

'There's nothing to go back for,' said Miss Peasmarsh gaily;
'thanks to you dear children we've sold everything.'

'There--there's the carpet,' said Cyril.

'Oh,' said Miss Peasmarsh, radiantly, 'don't bother about the
carpet.  I've sold even that.  Mrs Biddle gave me ten shillings for
it.  She said it would do for her servant's bedroom.'

'Why,' said Jane, 'her servants don't HAVE carpets.  We had cook
from her, and she told us so.'

'No scandal about Queen Elizabeth, if YOU please,' said the curate,
cheerfully; and Miss Peasmarsh laughed, and looked at him as though
she had never dreamed that any one COULD be so amusing.  But the
others were struck dumb.  How could they say, 'The carpet is ours!'
For who brings carpets to bazaars?

The children were now thoroughly wretched.  But I am glad to say
that their wretchedness did not make them forget their manners, as
it does sometimes, even with grown-up people, who ought to know
ever so much better.

They said, 'Thank you very much for the jolly tea,' and 'Thanks for
being so jolly,' and 'Thanks awfully for giving us such a jolly
time;' for the curate had stood fish-ponds, and bran-pies, and
phonographs, and the chorus of singing birds, and had stood them
like a man.  The girls hugged Miss Peasmarsh, and as they went away
they heard the curate say--

'Jolly little kids, yes, but what about--you will let it be
directly after Easter.  Ah, do say you will--'

And Jane ran back and said, before Anthea could drag her away,
'What are you going to do after Easter?'

Miss Peasmarsh smiled and looked very pretty indeed.  And the
curate said--

'I hope I am going to take a trip to the Fortunate Islands.'

'I wish we could take you on the wishing carpet,' said Jane.

'Thank you,' said the curate, 'but I'm afraid I can't wait for
that.  I must go to the Fortunate Islands before they make me a
bishop.  I should have no time afterwards.'

'I've always thought I should marry a bishop,' said Jane: 'his
aprons would come in so useful.  Wouldn't YOU like to marry a
bishop, Miss Peasmarsh?'

It was then that they dragged her away.

As it was Robert's hand that Mrs Biddle had walked on, it was
decided that he had better not recall the incident to her mind, and
so make her angry again.  Anthea and Jane had helped to sell things
at the rival stall, so they were not likely to be popular.

A hasty council of four decided that Mrs Biddle would hate Cyril
less than she would hate the others, so the others mingled with the
crowd, and it was he who said to her--

'Mrs Biddle, WE meant to have that carpet.  Would you sell it to
us?  We would give you--'

'Certainly not,' said Mrs Biddle.  'Go away, little boy.'

There was that in her tone which showed Cyril, all too plainly, the
hopelessness of persuasion.  He found the others and said--

'It's no use; she's like a lioness robbed of its puppies.  We must
watch where it goes--and-- Anthea, I don't care what you say.  It's
our own carpet.  It wouldn't be burglary.  It would be a sort of
forlorn hope rescue party--heroic and daring and dashing, and not
wrong at all.'

The children still wandered among the gay crowd--but there was no
pleasure there for them any more.  The chorus of singing birds
sounded just like glass tubes being blown through water, and the
phonograph simply made a horrid noise, so that you could hardly
hear yourself speak.  And the people were buying things they
couldn't possibly want, and it all seemed very stupid.  And Mrs
Biddle had bought the wishing carpet for ten shillings.  And the
whole of life was sad and grey and dusty, and smelt of slight gas
escapes, and hot people, and cake and crumbs, and all the children
were very tired indeed.

They found a corner within sight of the carpet, and there they
waited miserably, till it was far beyond their proper bedtime.  And
when it was ten the people who had bought things went away, but the
people who had been selling stayed to count up their money.

'And to jaw about it,' said Robert.  'I'll never go to another
bazaar as long as ever I live.  My hand is swollen as big as a
pudding.  I expect the nails in her horrible boots were poisoned.'

Just then some one who seemed to have a right to interfere said--

'Everything is over now; you had better go home.'

So they went.  And then they waited on the pavement under the gas
lamp, where ragged children had been standing all the evening to
listen to the band, and their feet slipped about in the greasy mud
till Mrs Biddle came out and was driven away in a cab with the many
things she hadn't sold, and the few things she had bought--among
others the carpet.  The other stall-holders left their things at
the school till Monday morning, but Mrs Biddle was afraid some one
would steal some of them, so she took them in a cab.

The children, now too desperate to care for mud or appearances,
hung on behind the cab till it reached Mrs Biddle's house.  When
she and the carpet had gone in and the door was shut Anthea said--

'Don't let's burgle--I mean do daring and dashing rescue acts--till
we've given her a chance.  Let's ring and ask to see her.'

The others hated to do this, but at last they agreed, on condition
that Anthea would not make any silly fuss about the burglary
afterwards, if it really had to come to that.

So they knocked and rang, and a scared-looking parlourmaid opened
the front door.  While they were asking for Mrs Biddle they saw
her.  She was in the dining-room, and she had already pushed back
the table and spread out the carpet to see how it looked on the
floor.

'I knew she didn't want it for her servants' bedroom,' Jane
muttered.

Anthea walked straight past the uncomfortable parlourmaid, and the
others followed her.  Mrs Biddle had her back to them, and was
smoothing down the carpet with the same boot that had trampled on
the hand of Robert.  So that they were all in the room, and Cyril,
with great presence of mind, had shut the room door before she saw
them.

'Who is it, Jane?' she asked in a sour voice; and then turning
suddenly, she saw who it was.  Once more her face grew violet--a
deep, dark violet.  'You wicked daring little things!' she cried,
'how dare you come here?  At this time of night, too.  Be off, or
I'll send for the police.'

'Don't be angry,' said Anthea, soothingly, 'we only wanted to ask
you to let us have the carpet.  We have quite twelve shillings
between us, and--'

'How DARE you?' cried Mrs Biddle, and her voice shook with
angriness.

'You do look horrid,' said Jane suddenly.

Mrs Biddle actually stamped that booted foot of hers.  'You rude,
barefaced child!' she said.

Anthea almost shook Jane; but Jane pushed forward in spite of her.

'It really IS our nursery carpet,' she said, 'you ask ANY ONE if it
isn't.'

'Let's wish ourselves home,' said Cyril in a whisper.

'No go,' Robert whispered back, 'she'd be there too, and raving mad
as likely as not.  Horrid thing, I hate her!'

'I wish Mrs Biddle was in an angelic good temper,' cried Anthea,
suddenly.  'It's worth trying,' she said to herself.

Mrs Biddle's face grew from purple to violet, and from violet to
mauve, and from mauve to pink.  Then she smiled quite a jolly
smile.

'Why, so I am!' she said, 'what a funny idea!  Why shouldn't I be
in a good temper, my dears.'

Once more the carpet had done its work, and not on Mrs Biddle
alone.  The children felt suddenly good and happy.

'You're a jolly good sort,' said Cyril.  'I see that now.  I'm
sorry we vexed you at the bazaar to-day.'

'Not another word,' said the changed Mrs Biddle.  'Of course you
shall have the carpet, my dears, if you've taken such a fancy to
it.  No, no; I won't have more than the ten shillings I paid.'

'It does seem hard to ask you for it after you bought it at the
bazaar,' said Anthea; 'but it really IS our nursery carpet.  It got
to the bazaar by mistake, with some other things.'

'Did it really, now?  How vexing!' said Mrs Biddle, kindly.  'Well,
my dears, I can very well give the extra ten shillings; so you take
your carpet and we'll say no more about it.  Have a piece of cake
before you go!  I'm so sorry I stepped on your hand, my boy.  Is it
all right now?'

'Yes, thank you,' said Robert.  'I say, you ARE good.'

'Not at all,' said Mrs Biddle, heartily.  'I'm delighted to be able
to give any little pleasure to you dear children.'

And she helped them to roll up the carpet, and the boys carried it
away between them.

'You ARE a dear,' said Anthea, and she and Mrs Biddle kissed each
other heartily.


'WELL!' said Cyril as they went along the street.

'Yes,' said Robert, 'and the odd part is that you feel just as if
it was REAL--her being so jolly, I mean--and not only the carpet
making her nice.'

'Perhaps it IS real,' said Anthea, 'only it was covered up with
crossness and tiredness and things, and the carpet took them away.'

'I hope it'll keep them away,' said Jane; 'she isn't ugly at all
when she laughs.'

The carpet has done many wonders in its day; but the case of Mrs
Biddle is, I think, the most wonderful.  For from that day she was
never anything like so disagreeable as she was before, and she sent
a lovely silver tea-pot and a kind letter to Miss Peasmarsh when
the pretty lady married the nice curate; just after Easter it was,
and they went to Italy for their honeymoon.



CHAPTER 5
THE TEMPLE


'I wish we could find the Phoenix,' said Jane.  'It's much better
company than the carpet.'

'Beastly ungrateful, little kids are,' said Cyril.

'No, I'm not; only the carpet never says anything, and it's so
helpless.  It doesn't seem able to take care of itself.  It gets
sold, and taken into the sea, and things like that.  You wouldn't
catch the Phoenix getting sold.'

It was two days after the bazaar.  Every one was a little
cross--some days are like that, usually Mondays, by the way.  And
this was a Monday.

'I shouldn't wonder if your precious Phoenix had gone off for
good,' said Cyril; 'and I don't know that I blame it.  Look at the
weather!'

'It's not worth looking at,' said Robert.  And indeed it wasn't.

'The Phoenix hasn't gone--I'm sure it hasn't,' said Anthea.  'I'll
have another look for it.'

Anthea looked under tables and chairs, and in boxes and baskets, in
mother's work-bag and father's portmanteau, but still the Phoenix
showed not so much as the tip of one shining feather.

Then suddenly Robert remembered how the whole of the Greek
invocation song of seven thousand lines had been condensed by him
into one English hexameter, so he stood on the carpet and chanted--

  'Oh, come along, come along, you good old beautiful Phoenix,'

and almost at once there was a rustle of wings down the kitchen
stairs, and the Phoenix sailed in on wide gold wings.

'Where on earth HAVE you been?' asked Anthea.  'I've looked
everywhere for you.'

'Not EVERYWHERE,' replied the bird, 'because you did not look in
the place where I was.  Confess that that hallowed spot was
overlooked by you.'

'WHAT hallowed spot?' asked Cyril, a little impatiently, for time
was hastening on, and the wishing carpet still idle.

'The spot,' said the Phoenix, 'which I hallowed by my golden
presence was the Lutron.'

'The WHAT?'

'The bath--the place of washing.'

'I'm sure you weren't,' said Jane.  'I looked there three times and
moved all the towels.'

'I was concealed,' said the Phoenix, 'on the summit of a metal
column--enchanted, I should judge, for it felt warm to my golden
toes, as though the glorious sun of the desert shone ever upon it.'

'Oh, you mean the cylinder,' said Cyril: 'it HAS rather a
comforting feel, this weather.  And now where shall we go?'

And then, of course, the usual discussion broke out as to where
they should go and what they should do.  And naturally, every one
wanted to do something that the others did not care about.

'I am the eldest,' Cyril remarked, 'let's go to the North Pole.'

'This weather!  Likely!' Robert rejoined.  'Let's go to the
Equator.'

'I think the diamond mines of Golconda would be nice,' said Anthea;
'don't you agree, Jane?'

'No, I don't,' retorted Jane, 'I don't agree with you.  I don't
agree with anybody.'

The Phoenix raised a warning claw.

'If you cannot agree among yourselves, I fear I shall have to leave
you,' it said.

'Well, where shall we go?  You decide!' said all.

'If I were you,' said the bird, thoughtfully, 'I should give the
carpet a rest.  Besides, you'll lose the use of your legs if you go
everywhere by carpet.  Can't you take me out and explain your ugly
city to me?'

'We will if it clears up,' said Robert, without enthusiasm.  'Just
look at the rain.  And why should we give the carpet a rest?'

'Are you greedy and grasping, and heartless and selfish?' asked the
bird, sharply.

'NO!' said Robert, with indignation.

'Well then!' said the Phoenix.  'And as to the rain--well, I am not
fond of rain myself.  If the sun knew _I_ was here--he's very fond of
shining on me because I look so bright and golden.  He always says
I repay a little attention.  Haven't you some form of words
suitable for use in wet weather?'

'There's "Rain, rain, go away,"' said Anthea; 'but it never DOES
go.'

'Perhaps you don't say the invocation properly,' said the bird.

     'Rain, rain, go away,
     Come again another day,
     Little baby wants to play,'

said Anthea.

'That's quite wrong; and if you say it in that sort of dull way, I
can quite understand the rain not taking any notice.  You should
open the window and shout as loud as you can--

     'Rain, rain, go away,
     Come again another day;
     Now we want the sun, and so,
     Pretty rain, be kind and go!

'You should always speak politely to people when you want them to
do things, and especially when it's going away that you want them
to do.  And to-day you might add--

     'Shine, great sun, the lovely Phoe-
     Nix is here, and wants to be
     Shone on, splendid sun, by thee!'

'That's poetry!' said Cyril, decidedly.

'It's like it,' said the more cautious Robert.

'I was obliged to put in "lovely",' said the Phoenix, modestly, 'to
make the line long enough.'

'There are plenty of nasty words just that length,' said Jane; but
every one else said 'Hush!'  And then they opened the window and
shouted the seven lines as loud as they could, and the Phoenix said
all the words with them, except 'lovely', and when they came to
that it looked down and coughed bashfully.

The rain hesitated a moment and then went away.

'There's true politeness,' said the Phoenix, and the next moment it
was perched on the window-ledge, opening and shutting its radiant
wings and flapping out its golden feathers in such a flood of
glorious sunshine as you sometimes have at sunset in autumn time. 
People said afterwards that there had not been such sunshine in
December for years and years and years.

'And now,' said the bird, 'we will go out into the city, and you
shall take me to see one of my temples.'

'Your temples?'

'I gather from the carpet that I have many temples in this land.'

'I don't see how you CAN find anything out from it,' said Jane: 'it
never speaks.'

'All the same, you can pick up things from a carpet,' said the
bird; 'I've seen YOU do it.  And I have picked up several pieces of
information in this way.  That papyrus on which you showed me my
picture--I understand that it bears on it the name of the street of
your city in which my finest temple stands, with my image graved in
stone and in metal over against its portal.'

'You mean the fire insurance office,' said Robert.  'It's not
really a temple, and they don't--'

'Excuse me,' said the Phoenix, coldly, 'you are wholly misinformed.
It IS a temple, and they do.'

'Don't let's waste the sunshine,' said Anthea; 'we might argue as
we go along, to save time.'

So the Phoenix consented to make itself a nest in the breast of
Robert's Norfolk jacket, and they all went out into the splendid
sunshine.  The best way to the temple of the Phoenix seemed to be
to take the tram, and on the top of it the children talked, while
the Phoenix now and then put out a wary beak, cocked a cautious
eye, and contradicted what the children were saying.

It was a delicious ride, and the children felt how lucky they were
to have had the money to pay for it.  They went with the tram as
far as it went, and when it did not go any farther they stopped
too, and got off.  The tram stops at the end of the Gray's Inn
Road, and it was Cyril who thought that one might well find a short
cut to the Phoenix Office through the little streets and courts
that lie tightly packed between Fetter Lane and Ludgate Circus.  Of
course, he was quite mistaken, as Robert told him at the time, and
afterwards Robert did not forbear to remind his brother how he had
said so.  The streets there were small and stuffy and ugly, and
crowded with printers' boys and binders' girls coming out from
work; and these stared so hard at the pretty red coats and caps of
the sisters that they wished they had gone some other way.  And the
printers and binders made very personal remarks, advising Jane to
get her hair cut, and inquiring where Anthea had bought that hat. 
Jane and Anthea scorned to reply, and Cyril and Robert found that
they were hardly a match for the rough crowd.  They could think of
nothing nasty enough to say.  They turned a corner sharply, and
then Anthea pulled Jane into an archway, and then inside a door;
Cyril and Robert quickly followed, and the jeering crowd passed by
without seein them.

Anthea drew a long breath.

'How awful!' she said.  'I didn't know there were such people,
except in books.'

'It was a bit thick; but it's partly you girls' fault, coming out
in those flashy coats.'

'We thought we ought to, when we were going out with the Phoenix,'
said Jane; and the bird said, 'Quite right, too'--and incautiously
put out his head to give her a wink of encouragement.

And at the same instant a dirty hand reached through the grim
balustrade of the staircase beside them and clutched the Phoenix,
and a hoarse voice said--

'I say, Urb, blowed if this ain't our Poll parrot what we lost. 
Thank you very much, lidy, for bringin' 'im home to roost.'

The four turned swiftly.  Two large and ragged boys were crouched
amid the dark shadows of the stairs.  They were much larger than
Robert and Cyril, and one of them had snatched the Phoenix away and
was holding it high above their heads.

'Give me that bird,' said Cyril, sternly: 'it's ours.'

'Good arternoon, and thankin' you,' the boy went on, with maddening
mockery.  'Sorry I can't give yer tuppence for yer trouble--but
I've 'ad to spend my fortune advertising for my vallyable bird in
all the newspapers.  You can call for the reward next year.'

'Look out, Ike,' said his friend, a little anxiously; 'it 'ave a
beak on it.'

'It's other parties as'll have the Beak on to 'em presently,' said
Ike, darkly, 'if they come a-trying to lay claims on my Poll
parrot.  You just shut up, Urb.  Now then, you four little gells,
get out er this.'

'Little girls!' cried Robert.  'I'll little girl you!'

He sprang up three stairs and hit out.

There was a squawk--the most bird-like noise any one had ever heard
from the Phoenix--and a fluttering, and a laugh in the darkness,
and Ike said--

'There now, you've been and gone and strook my Poll parrot right in
the fevvers--strook 'im something crool, you 'ave.'

Robert stamped with fury.  Cyril felt himself growing pale with
rage, and with the effort of screwing up his brain to make it
clever enough to think of some way of being even with those boys. 
Anthea and Jane were as angry as the boys, but it made them want to
cry.  Yet it was Anthea who said--

'Do, PLEASE, let us have the bird.'

'Dew, PLEASE, get along and leave us an' our bird alone.'

'If you don't,' said Anthea, 'I shall fetch the police.'

'You better!' said he who was named Urb.  'Say, Ike, you twist the
bloomin' pigeon's neck; he ain't worth tuppence.'

'Oh, no,' cried Jane, 'don't hurt it.  Oh, don't; it is such a
pet.'

'I won't hurt it,' said Ike; 'I'm 'shamed of you, Urb, for to think
of such a thing.  Arf a shiner, miss, and the bird is yours for
life.'

'Half a WHAT?' asked Anthea.

'Arf a shiner, quid, thick 'un--half a sov, then.'

'I haven't got it--and, besides, it's OUR bird,' said Anthea.

'Oh, don't talk to him,' said Cyril and then Jane said suddenly--

'Phoenix--dear Phoenix, we can't do anything.  YOU must manage it.'

'With pleasure,' said the Phoenix--and Ike nearly dropped it in his
amazement.

'I say, it do talk, suthin' like,' said he.

'Youths,' said the Phoenix, 'sons of misfortune, hear my words.'

'My eyes!' said Ike.

'Look out, Ike,' said Urb, 'you'll throttle the joker--and I see at
wunst 'e was wuth 'is weight in flimsies.'00

'Hearken, O Eikonoclastes, despiser of sacred images--and thou,
Urbanus, dweller in the sordid city.  Forbear this adventure lest
a worse thing befall.'

'Luv' us!' said Ike, 'ain't it been taught its schoolin' just!'

'Restore me to my young acolytes and escape unscathed.  Retain
me--and--'

'They must ha' got all this up, case the Polly got pinched,' said
Ike.  'Lor' lumme, the artfulness of them young uns!'

'I say, slosh 'em in the geseech and get clear off with the swag's
wot I say,' urged Herbert.

'Right O,' said Isaac.

'Forbear,' repeated the Phoenix, sternly.  'Who pinched the click
off of the old bloke in Aldermanbury?' it added, in a changed tone.

'Who sneaked the nose-rag out of the young gell's 'and in Bell
Court?  Who--'

'Stow it,' said Ike.  'You! ugh! yah!--leave go of me.  Bash him
off, Urb; 'e'll have my bloomin' eyes outer my ed.'

There were howls, a scuffle, a flutter; Ike and Urb fled up the
stairs, and the Phoenix swept out through the doorway.  The
children followed and the Phoenix settled on Robert, 'like a
butterfly on a rose,' as Anthea said afterwards, and wriggled into
the breast of his Norfolk jacket, 'like an eel into mud,' as Cyril
later said.

'Why ever didn't you burn him?  You could have, couldn't you?'
asked Robert, when the hurried flight through the narrow courts had
ended in the safe wideness of Farringdon Street.

'I could have, of course,' said the bird, 'but I didn't think it
would be dignified to allow myself to get warm about a little thing
like that.  The Fates, after all, have not been illiberal to me. 
I have a good many friends among the London sparrows, and I have a
beak and claws.'

These happenings had somewhat shaken the adventurous temper of the
children, and the Phoenix had to exert its golden self to hearten
them up.

Presently the children came to a great house in Lombard Street, and
there, on each side of the door, was the image of the Phoenix
carved in stone, and set forth on shining brass were the words--

     PHOENIX FIRE OFFICE


'One moment,' said the bird.  'Fire?  For altars, I suppose?'

'_I_ don't know,' said Robert; he was beginning to feel shy, and that
always made him rather cross.

'Oh, yes, you do,' Cyril contradicted.  'When people's houses are
burnt down the Phoenix gives them new houses.  Father told me; I
asked him.'

'The house, then, like the Phoenix, rises from its ashes?  Well
have my priests dealt with the sons of men!'

'The sons of men pay, you know,' said Anthea; 'but it's only a
little every year.'

'That is to maintain my priests,' said the bird, 'who, in the hour
of affliction, heal sorrows and rebuild houses.  Lead on; inquire
for the High Priest.  I will not break upon them too suddenly in
all my glory.  Noble and honour-deserving are they who make as
nought the evil deeds of the lame-footed and unpleasing
Hephaestus.'

'I don't know what you're talking about, and I wish you wouldn't
muddle us with new names.  Fire just happens.  Nobody does it--not
as a deed, you know,' Cyril explained.  'If they did the Phoenix
wouldn't help them, because its a crime to set fire to things. 
Arsenic, or something they call it, because it's as bad as
poisoning people.  The Phoenix wouldn't help THEM--father told me
it wouldn't.'

'My priests do well,' said the Phoenix.  'Lead on.'

'I don't know what to say,' said Cyril; and the Others said the
same.

'Ask for the High Priest,' said the Phoenix.  'Say that you have a
secret to unfold that concerns my worship, and he will lead you to
the innermost sanctuary.'

So the children went in, all four of them, though they didn't like
it, and stood in a large and beautiful hall adorned with Doulton
tiles, like a large and beautiful bath with no water in it, and
stately pillars supporting the roof.  An unpleasing representation
of the Phoenix in brown pottery disfigured one wall.  There were
counters and desks of mahogany and brass, and clerks bent over the
desks and walked behind the counters.  There was a great clock over
an inner doorway.

'Inquire for the High Priest,' whispered the Phoenix.

An attentive clerk in decent black, who controlled his mouth but
not his eyebrows, now came towards them.  He leaned forward on the
counter, and the children thought he was going to say, 'What can I
have the pleasure of showing you?' like in a draper's; instead of
which the young man said--

'And what do YOU want?'

'We want to see the High Priest.'

'Get along with you,' said the young man.

An elder man, also decent in black coat, advanced.

'Perhaps it's Mr Blank' (not for worlds would I give the name). 
'He's a Masonic High Priest, you know.'

A porter was sent away to look for Mr Asterisk (I cannot give his
name), and the children were left there to look on and be looked on
by all the gentlemen at the mahogany desks.  Anthea and Jane
thought that they looked kind.  The boys thought they stared, and
that it was like their cheek.

The porter returned with the news that Mr Dot Dash Dot (I dare not
reveal his name) was out, but that Mr--

Here a really delightful gentleman appeared.  He had a beard and a
kind and merry eye, and each one of the four knew at once that this
was a man who had kiddies of his own and could understand what you
were talking about.  Yet it was a difficult thing to explain.

'What is it?' he asked.  'Mr'--he named the name which I will never
reveal--'is out.  Can I do anything?'

'Inner sanctuary,' murmured the Phoenix.

'I beg your pardon,' said the nice gentleman, who thought it was
Robert who had spoken.

'We have something to tell you,' said Cyril, 'but'--he glanced at
the porter, who was lingering much nearer than he need have
done--'this is a very public place.'

The nice gentleman laughed.

'Come upstairs then,' he said, and led the way up a wide and
beautiful staircase.  Anthea says the stairs were of white marble,
but I am not sure.  On the corner-post of the stairs, at the top,
was a beautiful image of the Phoenix in dark metal, and on the wall
at each side was a flat sort of image of it.

The nice gentleman led them into a room where the chairs, and even
the tables, were covered with reddish leather.  He looked at the
children inquiringly.

'Don't be frightened,' he said; 'tell me exactly what you want.'

'May I shut the door?' asked Cyril.

The gentleman looked surprised, but he shut the door.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, 'I know you'll be awfully surprised, and
you'll think it's not true and we are lunatics; but we aren't, and
it is.  Robert's got something inside his Norfolk--that's Robert,
he's my young brother.  Now don't be upset and have a fit or
anything sir.  Of course, I know when you called your shop the
"Phoenix" you never thought there was one; but there is--and
Robert's got it buttoned up against his chest!'

'If it's an old curio in the form of a Phoenix, I dare say the
Board--' said the nice gentleman, as Robert began to fumble with
his buttons.

'It's old enough,' said Anthea, 'going by what it says, but--'

'My goodness gracious!' said the gentleman, as the Phoenix, with
one last wriggle that melted into a flutter, got out of its nest in
the breast of Robert and stood up on the leather-covered table.

'What an extraordinarily fine bird!' he went on.  'I don't think I
ever saw one just like it.'

'I should think not,' said the Phoenix, with pardonable pride.  And
the gentleman jumped.

'Oh, it's been taught to speak!  Some sort of parrot, perhaps?'

'I am,' said the bird, simply, 'the Head of your House, and I have
come to my temple to receive your homage.  I am no parrot'--its
beak curved scornfully--'I am the one and only Phoenix, and I
demand the homage of my High Priest.'

'In the absence of our manager,' the gentleman began, exactly as
though he were addressing a valued customer--'in the absence of our
manager, I might perhaps be able--What am I saying?'  He turned
pale, and passed his hand across his brow.  'My dears,' he said,
'the weather is unusually warm for the time of year, and I don't
feel quite myself.  Do you know, for a moment I really thought that
that remarkable bird of yours had spoken and said it was the
Phoenix, and, what's more, that I'd believed it.'

'So it did, sir,' said Cyril, 'and so did you.'

'It really--Allow me.'

A bell was rung.  The porter appeared.

'Mackenzie,' said the gentleman, 'you see that golden bird?'

'Yes, sir.'

The other breathed a sigh of relief.

'It IS real, then?'

'Yes, sir, of course, sir.  You take it in your hand, sir,' said
the porter, sympathetically, and reached out his hand to the
Phoenix, who shrank back on toes curved with agitated indignation.

'Forbear!' it cried; 'how dare you seek to lay hands on me?'

The porter saluted.

'Beg pardon, sir,' he said, 'I thought you was a bird.'

'I AM a bird--THE bird--the Phoenix.'

'Of course you are, sir,' said the porter.  'I see that the first
minute, directly I got my breath, sir.'

'That will do,' said the gentleman.  'Ask Mr Wilson and Mr Sterry
to step up here for a moment, please.'

Mr Sterry and Mr Wilson were in their turn overcome by
amazement--quickly followed by conviction.  To the surprise of the
children every one in the office took the Phoenix at its word, and
after the first shock of surprise it seemed to be perfectly natural
to every one that the Phoenix should be alive, and that, passing
through London, it should call at its temple.

'We ought to have some sort of ceremony,' said the nicest
gentleman, anxiously.  'There isn't time to summon the directors
and shareholders--we might do that tomorrow, perhaps.  Yes, the
board-room would be best.  I shouldn't like it to feel we hadn't
done everything in our power to show our appreciation of its
condescension in looking in on us in this friendly way.'

The children could hardly believe their ears, for they had never
thought that any one but themselves would believe in the Phoenix. 
And yet every one did; all the men in the office were brought in by
twos and threes, and the moment the Phoenix opened its beak it
convinced the cleverest of them, as well as those who were not so
clever.  Cyril wondered how the story would look in the papers next
day.  He seemed to see the posters in the streets:

    PHOENIX FIRE OFFICE
    THE PHOENIX AT ITS TEMPLE
    MEETING TO WELCOME IT
    DELIGHT OF THE MANAGER AND EVERYBODY.

'Excuse our leaving you a moment,' said the nice gentleman, and he
went away with the others; and through the half-closed door the
children could hear the sound of many boots on stairs, the hum of
excited voices explaining, suggesting, arguing, the thumpy drag of
heavy furniture being moved about.

The Phoenix strutted up and down the leather-covered table, looking
over its shoulder at its pretty back.

'You see what a convincing manner I have,' it said proudly.

And now a new gentleman came in and said, bowing low--

'Everything is prepared--we have done our best at so short a
notice; the meeting--the ceremony--will be in the board-room.  Will
the Honourable Phoenix walk--it is only a few steps--or would it
like to be--would it like some sort of conveyance?'

'My Robert will bear me to the board-room, if that be the unlovely
name of my temple's inmost court,' replied the bird.

So they all followed the gentleman.  There was a big table in the
board-room, but it had been pushed right up under the long windows
at one side, and chairs were arranged in rows across the room--like
those you have at schools when there is a magic lantern on 'Our
Eastern Empire', or on 'The Way We Do in the Navy'.  The doors were
of carved wood, very beautiful, with a carved Phoenix above. 
Anthea noticed that the chairs in the front rows were of the kind
that her mother so loved to ask the price of in old furniture
shops, and never could buy, because the price was always nearly
twenty pounds each.  On the mantelpiece were some heavy bronze
candlesticks and a clock, and on the top of the clock was another
image of the Phoenix.

'Remove that effigy,' said the Phoenix to the gentlemen who were
there, and it was hastily taken down.  Then the Phoenix fluttered
to the middle of the mantelpiece and stood there, looking more
golden than ever.  Then every one in the house and the office came
in--from the cashier to the women who cooked the clerks' dinners in
the beautiful kitchen at the top of the house.  And every one bowed
to the Phoenix and then sat down in a chair.

'Gentlemen,' said the nicest gentleman, 'we have met here today--'

The Phoenix was turning its golden beak from side to side.

'I don't notice any incense,' it said, with an injured sniff.  A
hurried consultation ended in plates being fetched from the
kitchen.  Brown sugar, sealing-wax, and tobacco were placed on
these, and something from a square bottle was poured over it all. 
Then a match was applied.  It was the only incense that was handy
in the Phoenix office, and it certainly burned very briskly and
smoked a great deal.

'We have met here today,' said the gentleman again, 'on an occasion
unparalleled in the annals of this office.  Our respected Phoenix--'

'Head of the House,' said the Phoenix, in a hollow voice.

'I was coming to that.  Our respected Phoenix, the Head of this
ancient House, has at length done us the honour to come among us. 
I think I may say, gentlemen, that we are not insensible to this
honour, and that we welcome with no uncertain voice one whom we
have so long desired to see in our midst.'

Several of the younger clerks thought of saying 'Hear, hear,' but
they feared it might seem disrespectful to the bird.

'I will not take up your time,' the speaker went on, 'by
recapitulating the advantages to be derived from a proper use of
our system of fire insurance.  I know, and you know, gentlemen,
that our aim has ever been to be worthy of that eminent bird whose
name we bear, and who now adorns our mantelpiece with his presence.
Three cheers, gentlemen, for the winged Head of the House!'

The cheers rose, deafening.  When they had died away the Phoenix
was asked to say a few words.

It expressed in graceful phrases the pleasure it felt in finding
itself at last in its own temple.

'And,' it went on, 'You must not think me wanting in appreciation
of your very hearty and cordial reception when I ask that an ode
may be recited or a choric song sung.  It is what I have always
been accustomed to.'

The four children, dumb witnesses of this wonderful scene, glanced
a little nervously across the foam of white faces above the sea of
black coats.  It seemed to them that the Phoenix was really asking
a little too much.

'Time presses,' said the Phoenix, 'and the original ode of
invocation is long, as well as being Greek; and, besides, it's no
use invoking me when here I am; but is there not a song in your own
tongue for a great day such as this?'

Absently the manager began to sing, and one by one the rest
joined--

     'Absolute security!
     No liability!
     All kinds of property
     insured against fire.
     Terms most favourable,
     Expenses reasonable,
     Moderate rates for annual
     Insurance.'

'That one is NOT my favourite,' interrupted the Phoenix, 'and I
think you've forgotten part of it.'

The manager hastily began another--

     'O Golden Phoenix, fairest bird,
     The whole great world has often heard
     Of all the splendid things we do,
     Great Phoenix, just to honour you.'

'That's better,' said the bird.  
And every one sang--

     'Class one, for private dwelling-house,
     For household goods and shops allows;
     Provided these are built of brick
     Or stone, and tiled and slated thick.'

'Try another verse,' said the Phoenix, 'further on.'

And again arose the voices of all the clerks and employees and
managers and secretaries and cooks--
     'In Scotland our insurance yields
     The price of burnt-up stacks in fields.'

'Skip that verse,' said the Phoenix.

     'Thatched dwellings and their whole contents
     We deal with--also with their rents;
     Oh, glorious Phoenix, look and see
     That these are dealt with in class three.

     'The glories of your temple throng
     Too thick to go in any song;
     And we attend, O good and wise,
     To "days of grace" and merchandise.

     'When people's homes are burned away
     They never have a cent to pay
     If they have done as all should do,
     O Phoenix, and have honoured you.

     'So let us raise our voice and sing
     The praises of the Phoenix King.
     In classes one and two and three,
     Oh, trust to him, for kind is he!'

'I'm sure YOU'RE very kind,' said the Phoenix; 'and now we must be
going.  An thank you very much for a very pleasant time.  May you
all prosper as you deserve to do, for I am sure a nicer,
pleasanter-spoken lot of temple attendants I have never met, and
never wish to meet.  I wish you all good-day!'

It fluttered to the wrist of Robert and drew the four children from
the room.  The whole of the office staff followed down the wide
stairs and filed into their accustomed places, and the two most
important officials stood on the steps bowing till Robert had
buttoned the golden bird in his Norfolk bosom, and it and he and
the three other children were lost in the crowd.

The two most important gentlemen looked at each other earnestly and
strangely for a moment, and then retreated to those sacred inner
rooms, where they toil without ceasing for the good of the House.

And the moment they were all in their places--managers,
secretaries, clerks, and porters--they all started, and each looked
cautiously round to see if any one was looking at him.  For each
thought that he had fallen asleep for a few minutes, and had
dreamed a very odd dream about the Phoenix and the board-room. 
And, of course, no one mentioned it to any one else, because going
to sleep at your office is a thing you simply MUST NOT do.

The extraordinary confusion of the board-room, with the remains of
the incense in the plates, would have shown them at once that the
visit of the Phoenix had been no dream, but a radiant reality, but
no one went into the board-room again that day; and next day,
before the office was opened, it was all cleaned and put nice and
tidy by a lady whose business asking questions was not part of. 
That is why Cyril read the papers in vain on the next day and the
day after that; because no sensible person thinks his dreams worth
putting in the paper, and no one will ever own that he has been
asleep in the daytime.

The Phoenix was very pleased, but it decided to write an ode for
itself.  It thought the ones it had heard at its temple had been
too hastily composed.  Its own ode began--

     'For beauty and for modest worth
     The Phoenix has not its equal on earth.'

And when the children went to bed that night it was still trying to
cut down the last line to the proper length without taking out any
of what it wanted to say.

That is what makes poetry so difficult.



CHAPTER 6
DOING GOOD


'We shan't be able to go anywhere on the carpet for a whole week,
though,' said Robert.

'And I'm glad of it,' said Jane, unexpectedly.

'Glad?' said Cyril; 'GLAD?'

It was breakfast-time, and mother's letter, telling them how they
were all going for Christmas to their aunt's at Lyndhurst, and how
father and mother would meet them there, having been read by every
one, lay on the table, drinking hot bacon-fat with one corner and
eating marmalade with the other.

'Yes, glad,' said Jane.  'I don't want any more things to happen
just now.  I feel like you do when you've been to three parties in
a week--like we did at granny's once--and extras in between, toys
and chocs and things like that.  I want everything to be just real,
and no fancy things happening at all.'
'I don't like being obliged to keep things from mother,' said
Anthea.  'I don't know why, but it makes me feel selfish and mean.'

'If we could only get the mater to believe it, we might take her to
the jolliest places,' said Cyril, thoughtfully.  'As it is, we've
just got to be selfish and mean--if it is that--but I don't feel it
is.'

'I KNOW it isn't, but I FEEL it is,' said Anthea, 'and that's just
as bad.'

'It's worse,' said Robert; 'if you knew it and didn't feel it, it
wouldn't matter so much.'

'That's being a hardened criminal, father says,' put in Cyril, and
he picked up mother's letter and wiped its corners with his
handkerchief, to whose colour a trifle of bacon-fat and marmalade
made but little difference.

'We're going to-morrow, anyhow,' said Robert.  'Don't,' he added,
with a good-boy expression on his face--'don't let's be ungrateful
for our blessings; don't let's waste the day in saying how horrid
it is to keep secrets from mother, when we all know Anthea tried
all she knew to give her the secret, and she wouldn't take it. 
Let's get on the carpet and have a jolly good wish.  You'll have
time enough to repent of things all next week.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'let's.  It's not really wrong.'

'Well, look here,' said Anthea.  'You know there's something about
Christmas that makes you want to be good--however little you wish
it at other times.  Couldn't we wish the carpet to take us
somewhere where we should have the chance to do some good and kind
action?  It would be an adventure just the same,' she pleaded.

'I don't mind,' said Cyril.  'We shan't know where we're going, and
that'll be exciting.  No one knows what'll happen.  We'd best put
on our outers in case--'

'We might rescue a traveller buried in the snow, like St Bernard
dogs, with barrels round our necks,' said Jane, beginning to be
interested.

'Or we might arrive just in time to witness a will being
signed--more tea, please,' said Robert, 'and we should see the old
man hide it away in the secret cupboard; and then, after long
years, when the rightful heir was in despair, we should lead him to
the hidden panel and--'

'Yes,' interrupted Anthea; 'or we might be taken to some freezing
garret in a German town, where a poor little pale, sick child--'

'We haven't any German money,' interrupted Cyril, 'so THAT'S no go.
What I should like would be getting into the middle of a war and
getting hold of secret intelligence and taking it to the general,
and he would make me a lieutenant or a scout, or a hussar.'

When breakfast was cleared away, Anthea swept the carpet, and the
children sat down on it, together with the Phoenix, who had been
especially invited, as a Christmas treat, to come with them and
witness the good and kind action they were about to do.

Four children and one bird were ready, and the wish was wished.

Every one closed its eyes, so as to feel the topsy-turvy swirl of
the carpet's movement as little as possible.

When the eyes were opened again the children found themselves on
the carpet, and the carpet was in its proper place on the floor of
their own nursery at Camden Town.

'I say,' said Cyril, 'here's a go!'

'Do you think it's worn out?  The wishing part of it, I mean?'
Robert anxiously asked the Phoenix.

'It's not that,' said the Phoenix; 'but--well--what did you
wish--?'

'Oh! I see what it means,' said Robert, with deep disgust; 'it's
like the end of a fairy story in a Sunday magazine.  How perfectly
beastly!'

'You mean it means we can do kind and good actions where we are? 
I see.  I suppose it wants us to carry coals for the cook or make
clothes for the bare heathens.  Well, I simply won't.  And the last
day and everything.  Look here!' Cyril spoke loudly and firmly. 
'We want to go somewhere really interesting, where we have a chance
of doing something good and kind; we don't want to do it here, but
somewhere else.  See?  Now, then.'

The obedient carpet started instantly, and the four children and
one bird fell in a heap together, and as they fell were plunged in
perfect darkness.

'Are you all there?' said Anthea, breathlessly, through the black
dark.  Every one owned that it was there.

'Where are we?  Oh! how shivery and wet it is!  Ugh!--oh!--I've put
my hand in a puddle!'

'Has any one got any matches?' said Anthea, hopelessly.  She felt
sure that no one would have any.

It was then that Robert, with a radiant smile of triumph that was
quite wasted in the darkness, where, of course, no one could see
anything, drew out of his pocket a box of matches, struck a match
and lighted a candle--two candles.  And every one, with its mouth
open, blinked at the sudden light.

'Well done Bobs,' said his sisters, and even Cyril's natural
brotherly feelings could not check his admiration of Robert's
foresight.

'I've always carried them about ever since the lone tower day,'
said Robert, with modest pride.  'I knew we should want them some
day.  I kept the secret well, didn't I?'

'Oh, yes,' said Cyril, with fine scorn.  'I found them the Sunday
after, when I was feeling in your Norfolks for the knife you
borrowed off me.  But I thought you'd only sneaked them for Chinese
lanterns, or reading in bed by.'

'Bobs,' said Anthea, suddenly, 'do you know where we are?  This is
the underground passage, and look there--there's the money and the
money-bags, and everything.'

By this time the ten eyes had got used to the light of the candles,
and no one could help seeing that Anthea spoke the truth.

'It seems an odd place to do good and kind acts in, though,' said
Jane.  'There's no one to do them to.'

'Don't you be too sure,' said Cyril; 'just round the next turning
we might find a prisoner who has languished here for years and
years, and we could take him out on our carpet and restore him to
his sorrowing friends.'

'Of course we could,' said Robert, standing up and holding the
candle above his head to see further off; 'or we might find the
bones of a poor prisoner and take them to his friends to be buried
properly--that's always a kind action in books, though I never
could see what bones matter.'

'I wish you wouldn't,' said Jane.

'I know exactly where we shall find the bones, too,' Robert went
on.  'You see that dark arch just along the passage?  Well, just
inside there--'

'If you don't stop going on like that,' said Jane, firmly, 'I shall
scream, and then I'll faint--so now then!'

'And _I_ will, too,' said Anthea.

Robert was not pleased at being checked in his flight of fancy.

'You girls will never be great writers,' he said bitterly.  'They
just love to think of things in dungeons, and chains, and knobbly
bare human bones, and--'

Jane had opened her mouth to scream, but before she could decide
how you began when you wanted to faint, the golden voice of the
Phoenix spoke through the gloom.

'Peace!' it said; 'there are no bones here except the small but
useful sets that you have inside you.  And you did not invite me to
come out with you to hear you talk about bones, but to see you do
some good and kind action.'

'We can't do it here,' said Robert, sulkily.

'No,' rejoined the bird.  'The only thing we can do here, it seems,
is to try to frighten our little sisters.'

'He didn't, really, and I'm not so VERY little,' said Jane, rather
ungratefully.

Robert was silent.  It was Cyril who suggested that perhaps they
had better take the money and go.

'That wouldn't be a kind act, except to ourselves; and it wouldn't
be good, whatever way you look at it,' said Anthea, 'to take money
that's not ours.'

'We might take it and spend it all on benefits to the poor and
aged,' said Cyril.

'That wouldn't make it right to steal,' said Anthea, stoutly.

'I don't know,' said Cyril.  They were all standing up now. 
'Stealing is taking things that belong to some one else, and
there's no one else.'

'It can't be stealing if--'

'That's right,' said Robert, with ironical approval; 'stand here
all day arguing while the candles burn out.  You'll like it awfully
when it's all dark again--and bony.'

'Let's get out, then,' said Anthea.  'We can argue as we go.'  So
they rolled up the carpet and went.  But when they had crept along
to the place where the passage led into the topless tower they
found the way blocked by a great stone, which they could not move.

'There!' said Robert.  'I hope you're satisfied!'

'Everything has two ends,' said the Phoenix, softly; 'even a
quarrel or a secret passage.'

So they turned round and went back, and Robert was made to go first
with one of the candles, because he was the one who had begun to
talk about bones.  And Cyril carried the carpet.

'I wish you hadn't put bones into our heads,' said Jane, as they
went along.

'I didn't; you always had them.  More bones than brains,' said
Robert.

The passage was long, and there were arches and steps and turnings
and dark alcoves that the girls did not much like passing.  The
passage ended in a flight of steps.  Robert went up them.

Suddenly he staggered heavily back on to the following feet of
Jane, and everybody screamed, 'Oh! what is it?'

'I've only bashed my head in,' said Robert, when he had groaned for
some time; 'that's all.  Don't mention it; I like it.  The stairs
just go right slap into the ceiling, and it's a stone ceiling.  You
can't do good and kind actions underneath a paving-stone.'

'Stairs aren't made to lead just to paving-stones as a general
rule,' said the Phoenix.  'Put your shoulder to the wheel.'

'There isn't any wheel,' said the injured Robert, still rubbing his
head.

But Cyril had pushed past him to the top stair, and was already
shoving his hardest against the stone above.  Of course, it did not
give in the least.

'If it's a trap-door--' said Cyril.  And he stopped shoving and
began to feel about with his hands.

'Yes, there is a bolt.  I can't move it.'

By a happy chance Cyril had in his pocket the oil-can of his
father's bicycle; he put the carpet down at the foot of the stairs,
and he lay on his back, with his head on the top step and his feet
straggling down among his young relations, and he oiled the bolt
till the drops of rust and oil fell down on his face.  One even
went into his mouth--open, as he panted with the exertion of
keeping up this unnatural position.  Then he tried again, but still
the bolt would not move.  So now he tied his handkerchief--the one
with the bacon-fat and marmalade on it--to the bolt, and Robert's
handkerchief to that, in a reef knot, which cannot come undone
however much you pull, and, indeed, gets tighter and tighter the
more you pull it.  This must not be confused with a granny knot,
which comes undone if you look at it.  And then he and Robert
pulled, and the girls put their arms round their brothers and
pulled too, and suddenly the bolt gave way with a rusty scrunch,
and they all rolled together to the bottom of the stairs--all but
the Phoenix, which had taken to its wings when the pulling began.

Nobody was hurt much, because the rolled-up carpet broke their
fall; and now, indeed, the shoulders of the boys were used to some
purpose, for the stone allowed them to heave it up.  They felt it
give; dust fell freely on them.

'Now, then,' cried Robert, forgetting his head and his temper,
'push all together.  One, two, three!'

The stone was heaved up.  It swung up on a creaking, unwilling
hinge, and showed a growing oblong of dazzling daylight; and it
fell back with a bang against something that kept it upright. 
Every one climbed out, but there was not room for every one to
stand comfortably in the little paved house where they found
themselves, so when the Phoenix had fluttered up from the darkness
they let the stone down, and it closed like a trap-door, as indeed
it was.

You can have no idea how dusty and dirty the children were. 
Fortunately there was no one to see them but each other.  The place
they were in was a little shrine, built on the side of a road that
went winding up through yellow-green fields to the topless tower. 
Below them were fields and orchards, all bare boughs and brown
furrows, and little houses and gardens.  The shrine was a kind of
tiny chapel with no front wall--just a place for people to stop and
rest in and wish to be good.  So the Phoenix told them.  There was
an image that had once been brightly coloured, but the rain and
snow had beaten in through the open front of the shrine, and the
poor image was dull and weather-stained.  Under it was written: 'St
Jean de Luz.  Priez pour nous.'  It was a sad little place, very
neglected and lonely, and yet it was nice, Anthea thought, that
poor travellers should come to this little rest-house in the hurry
and worry of their journeyings and be quiet for a few minutes, and
think about being good.  The thought of St Jean de Luz--who had, no
doubt, in his time, been very good and kind--made Anthea want more
than ever to do something kind and good.

'Tell us,' she said to the Phoenix, 'what is the good and kind
action the carpet brought us here to do?'

'I think it would be kind to find the owners of the treasure and
tell them about it,' said Cyril.

'And give it them ALL?' said Jane.

'Yes.  But whose is it?'

'I should go to the first house and ask the name of the owner of
the castle,' said the golden bird, and really the idea seemed a
good one.

They dusted each other as well as they could and went down the
road.  A little way on they found a tiny spring, bubbling out of
the hillside and falling into a rough stone basin surrounded by
draggled hart's-tongue ferns, now hardly green at all.  Here the
children washed their hands and faces and dried them on their
pocket-handkerchiefs, which always, on these occasions, seem
unnaturally small.  Cyril's and Robert's handkerchiefs, indeed,
rather undid the effects of the wash.  But in spite of this the
party certainly looked cleaner than before.

The first house they came to was a little white house with green
shutters and a slate roof.  It stood in a prim little garden, and
down each side of the neat path were large stone vases for flowers
to grow in; but all the flowers were dead now.

Along one side of the house was a sort of wide veranda, built of
poles and trellis-work, and a vine crawled all over it.  It was
wider than our English verandas, and Anthea thought it must look
lovely when the green leaves and the grapes were there; but now
there were only dry, reddish-brown stalks and stems, with a few
withered leaves caught in them.

The children walked up to the front door.  It was green and narrow.
A chain with a handle hung beside it, and joined itself quite
openly to a rusty bell that hung under the porch.  Cyril had pulled
the bell and its noisy clang was dying away before the terrible
thought came to all.  Cyril spoke it.

'My hat!' he breathed.  'We don't know any French!'

At this moment the door opened.  A very tall, lean lady, with pale
ringlets like whitey-brown paper or oak shavings, stood before
them.  She had an ugly grey dress and a black silk apron.  Her eyes
were small and grey and not pretty, and the rims were red, as
though she had been crying.

She addressed the party in something that sounded like a foreign
language, and ended with something which they were sure was a
question.  Of course, no one could answer it.

'What does she say?' Robert asked, looking down into the hollow of
his jacket, where the Phoenix was nestling.  But before the Phoenix
could answer, the whitey-brown lady's face was lighted up by a most
charming smile.

'You--you ar-r-re fr-r-rom the England!' she cried.  'I love so
much the England.  Mais entrez--entrez donc tous!  Enter,
then--enter all.  One essuyes his feet on the carpet.'  She pointed
to the mat.

'We only wanted to ask--'

'I shall say you all that what you wish,' said the lady.  'Enter
only!'

So they all went in, wiping their feet on a very clean mat, and
putting the carpet in a safe corner of the veranda.

'The most beautiful days of my life,' said the lady, as she shut
the door, 'did pass themselves in England.  And since long time I
have not heard an English voice to repeal me the past.'

This warm welcome embarrassed every one, but most the boys, for the
floor of the hall was of such very clean red and white tiles, and
the floor of the sitting-room so very shiny--like a black
looking-glass--that each felt as though he had on far more boots
than usual, and far noisier.

There was a wood fire, very small and very bright, on the
hearth--neat little logs laid on brass fire-dogs.  Some portraits
of powdered ladies and gentlemen hung in oval frames on the pale
walls.  There were silver candlesticks on the mantelpiece, and
there were chairs and a table, very slim and polite, with slender
legs.  The room was extremely bare, but with a bright foreign
bareness that was very cheerful, in an odd way of its own.
At the end of the polished table a very un-English little boy sat
on a footstool in a high-backed, uncomfortable-looking chair.  He
wore black velvet, and the kind of collar--all frills and lacey--
that Robert would rather have died than wear; but then the little
French boy was much younger than Robert.

'Oh, how pretty!' said every one.  But no one meant the little
French boy, with the velvety short knickerbockers and the velvety
short hair.

What every one admired was a little, little Christmas-tree, very
green, and standing in a very red little flower-pot, and hung round
with very bright little things made of tinsel and coloured paper. 
There were tiny candles on the tree, but they were not lighted yet.

'But yes--is it not that it is genteel?' said the lady.  'Sit down
you then, and let us see.'

The children sat down in a row on the stiff chairs against the
wall, and the lady lighted a long, slim red taper at the wood
flame, and then she drew the curtains and lit the little candles,
and when they were all lighted the little French boy suddenly
shouted, 'Bravo, ma tante!  Oh, que c'est gentil,' and the English
children shouted 'Hooray!'

Then there was a struggle in the breast of Robert, and out
fluttered the Phoenix--spread his gold wings, flew to the top of
the Christmas-tree, and perched there.

'Ah! catch it, then,' cried the lady; 'it will itself burn--your
genteel parrakeet!'

'It won't,' said Robert, 'thank you.'

And the little French boy clapped his clean and tidy hands; but the
lady was so anxious that the Phoenix fluttered down and walked up
and down on the shiny walnut-wood table.  

'Is it that it talks?' asked the lady.

And the Phoenix replied in excellent French.  It said,
'Parfaitement, madame!'

'Oh, the pretty parrakeet,' said the lady.  'Can it say still of
other things?'

And the Phoenix replied, this time in English, 'Why are you sad so
near Christmas-time?'

The children looked at it with one gasp of horror and surprise, for
the youngest of them knew that it is far from manners to notice
that strangers have been crying, and much worse to ask them the
reason of their tears.  And, of course, the lady began to cry
again, very much indeed, after calling the Phoenix a bird without
a heart; and she could not find her handkerchief, so Anthea offered
hers, which was still very damp and no use at all.  She also hugged
the lady, and this seemed to be of more use than the handkerchief,
so that presently the lady stopped crying, and found her own
handkerchief and dried her eyes, and called Anthea a cherished angel.

'I am sorry we came just when you were so sad,' said Anthea, 'but
we really only wanted to ask you whose that castle is on the hill.'

'Oh, my little angel,' said the poor lady, sniffing, 'to-day and for
hundreds of years the castle is to us, to our family.  To-morrow it
must that I sell it to some strangers--and my little Henri, who
ignores all, he will not have never the lands paternal.  But what
will you?  His father, my brother--Mr the Marquis--has spent much
of money, and it the must, despite the sentiments of familial
respect, that I admit that my sainted father he also--'

'How would you feel if you found a lot of money--hundreds and
thousands of gold pieces?' asked Cyril.

The lady smiled sadly.

'Ah! one has already recounted to you the legend?' she said.  'It
is true that one says that it is long time; oh! but long time, one
of our ancestors has hid a treasure--of gold, and of gold, and of
gold--enough to enrich my little Henri for the life.  But all that,
my children, it is but the accounts of fays--'

'She means fairy stories,' whispered the Phoenix to Robert.  'Tell
her what you have found.'

So Robert told, while Anthea and Jane hugged the lady for fear she
should faint for joy, like people in books, and they hugged her
with the earnest, joyous hugs of unselfish delight.

'It's no use explaining how we got in,' said Robert, when he had
told of the finding of the treasure, 'because you would find it a
little difficult to understand, and much more difficult to believe.
But we can show you where the gold is and help you to fetch it
away.'

The lady looked doubtfully at Robert as she absently returned the
hugs of the girls.

'No, he's not making it up,' said Anthea; 'it's true, TRUE,
TRUE!--and we are so glad.'

'You would not be capable to torment an old woman?' she said; 'and
it is not possible that it be a dream.'

'It really IS true,' said Cyril; 'and I congratulate you very
much.'

His tone of studied politeness seemed to convince more than the
raptures of the others.

'If I do not dream,' she said, 'Henri come to Manon--and you--you
shall come all with me to Mr the Curate.  Is it not?'

Manon was a wrinkled old woman with a red and yellow handkerchief
twisted round her head.  She took Henri, who was already sleepy
with the excitement of his Christmas-tree and his visitors, and
when the lady had put on a stiff black cape and a wonderful black
silk bonnet and a pair of black wooden clogs over her black
cashmere house-boots, the whole party went down the road to a
little white house--very like the one they had left--where an old
priest, with a good face, welcomed them with a politeness so great
that it hid his astonishment.

The lady, with her French waving hands and her shrugging French
shoulders and her trembling French speech, told the story.  And now
the priest, who knew no English, shrugged HIS shoulders and waved
HIS hands and spoke also in French.

'He thinks,' whispered the Phoenix, 'that her troubles have turned
her brain.  What a pity you know no French!'

'I do know a lot of French,' whispered Robert, indignantly; 'but
it's all about the pencil of the gardener's son and the penknife of
the baker's niece--nothing that anyone ever wants to say.'

'If _I_ speak,' the bird whispered, 'he'll think HE'S mad, too.'

'Tell me what to say.'

'Say "C'est vrai, monsieur.  Venez donc voir,"' said the Phoenix;
and then Robert earned the undying respect of everybody by suddenly
saying, very loudly and distinctly--

'Say vray, mossoo; venny dong vwaw.'

The priest was disappointed when he found that Robert's French
began and ended with these useful words; but, at any rate, he saw
that if the lady was mad she was not the only one, and he put on a
big beavery hat, and got a candle and matches and a spade, and they
all went up the hill to the wayside shrine of St John of Luz.

'Now,' said Robert, 'I will go first and show you where it is.'

So they prised the stone up with a corner of the spade, and Robert
did go first, and they all followed and found the golden treasure
exactly as they had left it.  And every one was flushed with the
joy of performing such a wonderfully kind action.

Then the lady and the priest clasped hands and wept for joy, as
French people do, and knelt down and touched the money, and talked
very fast and both together, and the lady embraced all the children
three times each, and called them 'little garden angels,' and then
she and the priest shook each other by both hands again, and
talked, and talked, and talked, faster and more Frenchy than you
would have believed possible.  And the children were struck dumb
with joy and pleasure.

'Get away NOW,' said the Phoenix softly, breaking in on the radiant
dream.

So the children crept away, and out through the little shrine, and
the lady and the priest were so tearfully, talkatively happy that
they never noticed that the guardian angels had gone.

The 'garden angels' ran down the hill to the lady's little house,
where they had left the carpet on the veranda, and they spread it
out and said 'Home,' and no one saw them disappear, except little
Henri, who had flattened his nose into a white button against the
window-glass, and when he tried to tell his aunt she thought he had
been dreaming.  So that was all right.

'It is much the best thing we've done,' said Anthea, when they
talked it over at tea-time.  'In the future we'll only do kind
actions with the carpet.'

'Ahem!' said the Phoenix.

'I beg your pardon?' said Anthea.

'Oh, nothing,' said the bird.  'I was only thinking!'



CHAPTER 7
MEWS FROM PERSIA


When you hear that the four children found themselves at Waterloo
Station quite un-taken-care-of, and with no one to meet them, it
may make you think that their parents were neither kind nor
careful.  But if you think this you will be wrong.  The fact is,
mother arranged with Aunt Emma that she was to meet the children at
Waterloo, when they went back from their Christmas holiday at
Lyndhurst.  The train was fixed, but not the day.  Then mother
wrote to Aunt Emma, giving her careful instructions about the day
and the hour, and about luggage and cabs and things, and gave the
letter to Robert to post.  But the hounds happened to meet near
Rufus Stone that morning, and what is more, on the way to the meet
they met Robert, and Robert met them, and instantly forgot all
about posting Aunt Emma's letter, and never thought of it again
until he and the others had wandered three times up and down the
platform at Waterloo--which makes six in all--and had bumped
against old gentlemen, and stared in the faces of ladies, and been
shoved by people in a hurry, and 'by-your-leaved' by porters with
trucks, and were quite, quite sure that Aunt Emma was not there.
Then suddenly the true truth of what he had forgotten to do came
home to Robert, and he said, 'Oh, crikey!' and stood still with his
mouth open, and let a porter with a Gladstone bag in each hand and
a bundle of umbrellas under one arm blunder heavily into him, and
never so much as said, 'Where are you shoving to now?' or, 'Look
out where you're going, can't you?'  The heavier bag smote him at
the knee, and he staggered, but he said nothing.

When the others understood what was the matter I think they told
Robert what they thought of him.

'We must take the train to Croydon,' said Anthea, 'and find Aunt
Emma.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'and precious pleased those Jevonses would be to
see us and our traps.'

Aunt Emma, indeed, was staying with some Jevonses--very prim
people.  They were middle-aged and wore very smart blouses, and
they were fond of matinees and shopping, and they did not care
about children.

'I know MOTHER would be pleased to see us if we went back,' said
Jane.

'Yes, she would, but she'd think it was not right to show she was
pleased, because it's Bob's fault we're not met.  Don't I know the
sort of thing?' said Cyril.  'Besides, we've no tin.  No; we've got
enough for a growler among us, but not enough for tickets to the
New Forest.  We must just go home.  They won't be so savage when
they find we've really got home all right.  You know auntie was
only going to take us home in a cab.'

'I believe we ought to go to Croydon,' Anthea insisted.

'Aunt Emma would be out to a dead cert,' said Robert.  'Those
Jevonses go to the theatre every afternoon, I believe.  Besides,
there's the Phoenix at home, AND the carpet.  I votes we call a
four-wheeled cabman.'

A four-wheeled cabman was called--his cab was one of the
old-fashioned kind with straw in the bottom--and he was asked by
Anthea to drive them very carefully to their address.  This he did,
and the price he asked for doing so was exactly the value of the
gold coin grandpapa had given Cyril for Christmas.  This cast a
gloom; but Cyril would never have stooped to argue about a cab-
fare, for fear the cabman should think he was not accustomed to
take cabs whenever he wanted them.  For a reason that was something
like this he told the cabman to put the luggage on the steps, and
waited till the wheels of the growler had grittily retired before
he rang the bell.

'You see,' he said, with his hand on the handle, 'we don't want
cook and Eliza asking us before HIM how it is we've come home
alone, as if we were babies.'

Here he rang the bell; and the moment its answering clang was
heard, every one felt that it would be some time before that bell
was answered.  The sound of a bell is quite different, somehow,
when there is anyone inside the house who hears it.  I can't tell
you why that is--but so it is.

'I expect they're changing their dresses,' said Jane.

'Too late,' said Anthea, 'it must be past five.  I expect Eliza's
gone to post a letter, and cook's gone to see the time.'

Cyril rang again.  And the bell did its best to inform the
listening children that there was really no one human in the house.
They rang again and listened intently.  The hearts of all sank low.
It is a terrible thing to be locked out of your own house, on a
dark, muggy January evening.

'There is no gas on anywhere,' said Jane, in a broken voice.

'I expect they've left the gas on once too often, and the draught
blew it out, and they're suffocated in their beds.  Father always
said they would some day,' said Robert cheerfully.

'Let's go and fetch a policeman,' said Anthea, trembling.

'And be taken up for trying to be burglars--no, thank you,' said
Cyril.  'I heard father read out of the paper about a young man who
got into his own mother's house, and they got him made a burglar
only the other day.'

'I only hope the gas hasn't hurt the Phoenix,' said Anthea.  'It
said it wanted to stay in the bathroom cupboard, and I thought it
would be all right, because the servants never clean that out.  But
if it's gone and got out and been choked by gas--And besides,
directly we open the door we shall be choked, too.  I KNEW we ought
to have gone to Aunt Emma, at Croydon.  Oh, Squirrel, I wish we
had.  Let's go NOW.'

'Shut up,' said her brother, briefly.  'There's some one rattling
the latch inside.'  Every one listened with all its ears, and every
one stood back as far from the door as the steps would allow.

The latch rattled, and clicked.  Then the flap of the letter-box
lifted itself--every one saw it by the flickering light of the
gas-lamp that shone through the leafless lime-tree by the gate--a
golden eye seemed to wink at them through the letter-slit, and a
cautious beak whispered--

'Are you alone?'

'It's the Phoenix,' said every one, in a voice so joyous, and so
full of relief, as to be a sort of whispered shout.

'Hush!' said the voice from the letter-box slit.  'Your slaves have
gone a-merry-making.  The latch of this portal is too stiff for my
beak.  But at the side--the little window above the shelf whereon
your bread lies--it is not fastened.'

'Righto!' said Cyril.

And Anthea added, 'I wish you'd meet us there, dear Phoenix.'

The children crept round to the pantry window.  It is at the side
of the house, and there is a green gate labelled 'Tradesmen's
Entrance', which is always kept bolted.  But if you get one foot on
the fence between you and next door, and one on the handle of the
gate, you are over before you know where you are.  This, at least,
was the experience of Cyril and Robert, and even, if the truth must
be told, of Anthea and Jane.  So in almost no time all four were in
the narrow gravelled passage that runs between that house and the
next.

Then Robert made a back, and Cyril hoisted himself up and got his
knicker-bockered knee on the concrete window-sill.  He dived into
the pantry head first, as one dives into water, and his legs waved
in the air as he went, just as your legs do when you are first
beginning to learn to dive.  The soles of his boots--squarish muddy
patches--disappeared.

'Give me a leg up,' said Robert to his sisters.

'No, you don't,' said Jane firmly.  'I'm not going to be left
outside here with just Anthea, and have something creep up behind
us out of the dark.  Squirrel can go and open the back door.'

A light had sprung awake in the pantry.  Cyril always said the
Phoenix turned the gas on with its beak, and lighted it with a waft
of its wing; but he was excited at the time, and perhaps he really
did it himself with matches, and then forgot all about it.  He let
the others in by the back door.  And when it had been bolted again
the children went all over the house and lighted every single
gas-jet they could find.  For they couldn't help feeling that this
was just the dark dreary winter's evening when an armed burglar
might easily be expected to appear at any moment.  There is nothing
like light when you are afraid of burglars--or of anything else,
for that matter.

And when all the gas-jets were lighted it was quite clear that the
Phoenix had made no mistake, and that Eliza and cook were really
out, and that there was no one in the house except the four
children, and the Phoenix, and the carpet, and the blackbeetles who
lived in the cupboards on each side of the nursery fire-place. 
These last were very pleased that the children had come home again,
especially when Anthea had lighted the nursery fire.  But, as
usual, the children treated the loving little blackbeetles with
coldness and disdain.

I wonder whether you know how to light a fire?  I don't mean how to
strike a match and set fire to the corners of the paper in a fire
someone has laid ready, but how to lay and light a fire all by
yourself.  I will tell you how Anthea did it, and if ever you have
to light one yourself you may remember how it is done.  First, she
raked out the ashes of the fire that had burned there a week
ago--for Eliza had actually never done this, though she had had
plenty of time.  In doing this Anthea knocked her knuckle and made
it bleed.  Then she laid the largest and handsomest cinders in the
bottom of the grate.  Then she took a sheet of old newspaper (you
ought never to light a fire with to-day's newspaper--it will not
burn well, and there are other reasons against it), and tore it
into four quarters, and screwed each of these into a loose ball,
and put them on the cinders; then she got a bundle of wood and
broke the string, and stuck the sticks in so that their front ends
rested on the bars, and the back ends on the back of the paper
balls.  In doing this she cut her finger slightly with the string,
and when she broke it, two of the sticks jumped up and hit her on
the cheek.  Then she put more cinders and some bits of coal--no
dust.  She put most of that on her hands, but there seemed to be
enough left for her face.  Then she lighted the edges of the paper
balls, and waited till she heard the fizz-crack-crack-fizz of the
wood as it began to burn.  Then she went and washed her hands and
face under the tap in the back kitchen.

Of course, you need not bark your knuckles, or cut your finger, or
bruise your cheek with wood, or black yourself all over; but
otherwise, this is a very good way to light a fire in London.  In
the real country fires are lighted in a different and prettier way.

But it is always good to wash your hands and face afterwards,
wherever you are.

While Anthea was delighting the poor little blackbeetles with the
cheerful blaze, Jane had set the table for--I was going to say tea,
but the meal of which I am speaking was not exactly tea.  Let us
call it a tea-ish meal.  There was tea, certainly, for Anthea's
fire blazed and crackled so kindly that it really seemed to be
affectionately inviting the kettle to come and sit upon its lap. 
So the kettle was brought and tea made.  But no milk could be
found--so every one had six lumps of sugar to each cup instead. 
The things to eat, on the other hand, were nicer than usual.  The
boys looked about very carefully, and found in the pantry some cold
tongue, bread, butter, cheese, and part of a cold pudding--very
much nicer than cook ever made when they were at home.  And in the
kitchen cupboard was half a Christmassy cake, a pot of strawberry
jam, and about a pound of mixed candied fruit, with soft crumbly
slabs of delicious sugar in each cup of lemon, orange, or citron.

It was indeed, as Jane said, 'a banquet fit for an Arabian Knight.'

The Phoenix perched on Robert's chair, and listened kindly and
politely to all they had to tell it about their visit to Lyndhurst,
and underneath the table, by just stretching a toe down rather far,
the faithful carpet could be felt by all--even by Jane, whose legs
were very short.

'Your slaves will not return to-night,' said the Phoenix.  'They
sleep under the roof of the cook's stepmother's aunt, who is, I
gather, hostess to a large party to-night in honour of her
husband's cousin's sister-in-law's mother's ninetieth birthday.'

'I don't think they ought to have gone without leave,' said Anthea,
'however many relations they have, or however old they are; but I
suppose we ought to wash up.'

'It's not our business about the leave,' said Cyril, firmly, 'but
I simply won't wash up for them.  We got it, and we'll clear it
away; and then we'll go somewhere on the carpet.  It's not often we
get a chance of being out all night.  We can go right away to the
other side of the equator, to the tropical climes, and see the sun rise
over the great Pacific Ocean.'

'Right you are,' said Robert.  'I always did want to see the
Southern Cross and the stars as big as gas-lamps.'

'DON'T go,' said Anthea, very earnestly, 'because I COULDN'T.  I'm
SURE mother wouldn't like us to leave the house and I should hate
to be left here alone.'

'I'd stay with you,' said Jane loyally.

'I know you would,' said Anthea gratefully, 'but even with you I'd
much rather not.'

'Well,' said Cyril, trying to be kind and amiable, 'I don't want
you to do anything you think's wrong, BUT--'

He was silent; this silence said many things.

'I don't see,' Robert was beginning, when Anthea interrupted--

'I'm quite sure.  Sometimes you just think a thing's wrong, and
sometimes you KNOW.  And this is a KNOW time.'

The Phoenix turned kind golden eyes on her and opened a friendly
beak to say--

'When it is, as you say, a "know time", there is no more to be
said.  And your noble brothers would never leave you.'

'Of course not,' said Cyril rather quickly.  And Robert said so
too.

'I myself,' the Phoenix went on, 'am willing to help in any way
possible.  I will go personally--either by carpet or on the
wing--and fetch you anything you can think of to amuse you during
the evening.  In order to waste no time I could go while you wash
up.--Why,' it went on in a musing voice, 'does one wash up teacups
and wash down the stairs?'

'You couldn't wash stairs up, you know,' said Anthea, 'unless you
began at the bottom and went up feet first as you washed.  I wish
cook would try that way for a change.'

'I don't,' said Cyril, briefly.  'I should hate the look of her
elastic-side boots sticking up.'

'This is mere trifling,' said the Phoenix.  'Come, decide what I
shall fetch for you.  I can get you anything you like.'

But of course they couldn't decide.  Many things were suggested--a
rocking-horse, jewelled chessmen, an elephant, a bicycle, a
motor-car, books with pictures, musical instruments, and many other
things.  But a musical instrument is agreeable only to the player,
unless he has learned to play it really well; books are not
sociable, bicycles cannot be ridden without going out of doors, and
the same is true of motor-cars and elephants.  Only two people can
play chess at once with one set of chessmen (and anyway it's very
much too much like lessons for a game), and only one can ride on a
rocking-horse.  Suddenly, in the midst of the discussion, the
Phoenix spread its wings and fluttered to the floor, and from there
it spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'from the carpet, that it wants you to let it
go to its old home, where it was born and brought up, and it will
return within the hour laden with a number of the most beautiful
and delightful products of its native land.'

'What IS its native land?'

'I didn't gather.  But since you can't agree, and time is passing,
and the tea-things are not washed down--I mean washed up--'

'I votes we do,' said Robert.  'It'll stop all this jaw, anyway. 
And it's not bad to have surprises.  Perhaps it's a Turkey carpet,
and it might bring us Turkish delight.'

'Or a Turkish patrol,' said Robert.

'Or a Turkish bath,' said Anthea.

'Or a Turkish towel,' said Jane.

'Nonsense,' Robert urged, 'it said beautiful and delightful, and
towels and baths aren't THAT, however good they may be for you. 
Let it go.  I suppose it won't give us the slip,' he added, pushing
back his chair and standing up.

'Hush!' said the Phoenix; 'how can you?  Don't trample on its
feelings just because it's only a carpet.'

'But how can it do it--unless one of us is on it to do the
wishing?' asked Robert.  He spoke with a rising hope that it MIGHT
be necessary for one to go and why not Robert?  But the Phoenix
quickly threw cold water on his new-born dream.

'Why, you just write your wish on a paper, and pin it on the
carpet.'

So a leaf was torn from Anthea's arithmetic book, and on it Cyril
wrote in large round-hand the following:


We wish you to go to your dear native home, and bring back the most
beautiful and delightful productions of it you can--and not to be
gone long, please.
                    (Signed)  CYRIL.
                              ROBERT.
                              ANTHEA.
                              JANE.


Then the paper was laid on the carpet.

'Writing down, please,' said the Phoenix; 'the carpet can't read a
paper whose back is turned to it, any more than you can.'

It was pinned fast, and the table and chairs having been moved, the
carpet simply and suddenly vanished, rather like a patch of water
on a hearth under a fierce fire.  The edges got smaller and
smaller, and then it disappeared from sight.

'It may take it some time to collect the beautiful and delightful
things,' said the Phoenix.  'I should wash up--I mean wash down.'

So they did.  There was plenty of hot water left in the kettle, and
every one helped--even the Phoenix, who took up cups by their
handles with its clever claws and dipped them in the hot water, and
then stood them on the table ready for Anthea to dry them.  But the
bird was rather slow, because, as it said, though it was not above
any sort of honest work, messing about with dish-water was not
exactly what it had been brought up to.  Everything was nicely
washed up, and dried, and put in its proper place, and the
dish-cloth washed and hung on the edge of the copper to dry, and
the tea-cloth was hung on the line that goes across the scullery. 
(If you are a duchess's child, or a king's, or a person of high
social position's child, you will perhaps not know the difference
between a dish-cloth and a tea-cloth; but in that case your nurse
has been better instructed than you, and she will tell you all
about it.) And just as eight hands and one pair of claws were being
dried on the roller-towel behind the scullery door there came a
strange sound from the other side of the kitchen wall--the side
where the nursery was.  It was a very strange sound, indeed--most
odd, and unlike any other sounds the children had ever heard.  At
least, they had heard sounds as much like it as a toy engine's
whistle is like a steam siren's.

'The carpet's come back,' said Robert; and the others felt that he
was right.

'But what has it brought with it?' asked Jane.  'It sounds like
Leviathan, that great beast.'

'It couldn't have been made in India, and have brought elephants?
Even baby ones would be rather awful in that room,' said Cyril.  'I
vote we take it in turns to squint through the keyhole.'

They did--in the order of their ages.  The Phoenix, being the
eldest by some thousands of years, was entitled to the first peep. 
But--

'Excuse me,' it said, ruffling its golden feathers and sneezing
softly; 'looking through keyholes always gives me a cold in my
golden eyes.'

So Cyril looked.

'I see something grey moving,' said he.

'It's a zoological garden of some sort, I bet,' said Robert, when
he had taken his turn.  And the soft rustling, bustling, ruffling,
scuffling, shuffling, fluffling noise went on inside.

'_I_ can't see anything,' said Anthea, 'my eye tickles so.'

Then Jane's turn came, and she put her eye to the keyhole.

'It's a giant kitty-cat,' she said; 'and it's asleep all over the
floor.'

'Giant cats are tigers--father said so.'

'No, he didn't.  He said tigers were giant cats.  It's not at all
the same thing.'

'It's no use sending the carpet to fetch precious things for you if
you're afraid to look at them when they come,' said the Phoenix,
sensibly.  And Cyril, being the eldest, said--

'Come on,' and turned the handle.

The gas had been left full on after tea, and everything in the room
could be plainly seen by the ten eyes at the door.  At least, not
everything, for though the carpet was there it was invisible,
because it was completely covered by the hundred and ninety-nine
beautiful objects which it had brought from its birthplace.

'My hat!' Cyril remarked.  'I never thought about its being a
PERSIAN carpet.'

Yet it was now plain that it was so, for the beautiful objects
which it had brought back were cats--Persian cats, grey Persian
cats, and there were, as I have said, 199 of them, and they were
sitting on the carpet as close as they could get to each other. 
But the moment the children entered the room the cats rose and
stretched, and spread and overflowed from the carpet to the floor,
and in an instant the floor was a sea of moving, mewing
pussishness, and the children with one accord climbed to the table,
and gathered up their legs, and the people next door knocked on the
wall--and, indeed, no wonder, for the mews were Persian and
piercing.

'This is pretty poor sport,' said Cyril.  'What's the matter with
the bounders?'

'I imagine that they are hungry,' said the Phoenix.  'If you were
to feed them--'

'We haven't anything to feed them with,' said Anthea in despair,
and she stroked the nearest Persian back.  'Oh, pussies, do be
quiet--we can't hear ourselves think.'

She had to shout this entreaty, for the mews were growing
deafening, 'and it would take pounds' and pounds' worth of
cat's-meat.'

'Let's ask the carpet to take them away,' said Robert.  But the
girls said 'No.'

'They are so soft and pussy,' said Jane.

'And valuable,' said Anthea, hastily.  'We can sell them for lots
and lots of money.'

'Why not send the carpet to get food for them?' suggested the
Phoenix, and its golden voice came harsh and cracked with the
effort it had to be make to be heard above the increasing
fierceness of the Persian mews.

So it was written that the carpet should bring food for 199 Persian
cats, and the paper was pinned to the carpet as before.

The carpet seemed to gather itself together, and the cats dropped
off it, as raindrops do from your mackintosh when you shake it. 
And the carpet disappeared.

Unless you have had one-hundred and ninety-nine well-grown Persian
cats in one small room, all hungry, and all saying so in
unmistakable mews, you can form but a poor idea of the noise that now
deafened the children and the Phoenix.  The cats did not seem to have
been at all properly brought up.  They seemed to have no idea of its
being a mistake in manners to ask for meals in a strange house--let
alone to howl for them--and they mewed, and they mewed, and they
mewed, and they mewed, till the children poked their fingers into their
ears and waited in silent agony, wondering why the whole of Camden
Town did not come knocking at the door to ask what was the matter, and
only hoping that the food for the cats would come before the neighbours
did--and before all the secret of the carpet and the Phoenix had to
be given away beyond recall to an indignant neighbourhood.

The cats mewed and mewed and twisted their Persian forms in and out
and unfolded their Persian tails, and the children and the Phoenix
huddled together on the table.

The Phoenix, Robert noticed suddenly, was trembling.

'So many cats,' it said, 'and they might not know I was the
Phoenix.  These accidents happen so quickly.  It quite un-mans me.'

This was a danger of which the children had not thought.

'Creep in,' cried Robert, opening his jacket.

And the Phoenix crept in--only just in time, for green eyes had
glared, pink noses had sniffed, white whiskers had twitched, and as
Robert buttoned his coat he disappeared to the waist in a wave of
eager grey Persian fur.  And on the instant the good carpet slapped
itself down on the floor.  And it was covered with rats--three hundred
and ninety-eight of them, I believe, two for each cat.

'How horrible!' cried Anthea.  'Oh, take them away!'

'Take yourself away,' said the Phoenix, 'and me.'

'I wish we'd never had a carpet,' said Anthea, in tears.

They hustled and crowded out of the door, and shut it, and locked
it.  Cyril, with great presence of mind, lit a candle and turned
off the gas at the main.

'The rats'll have a better chance in the dark,' he said.

The mewing had ceased.  Every one listened in breathless silence. 
We all know that cats eat rats--it is one of the first things we
read in our little brown reading books; but all those cats eating
all those rats--it wouldn't bear thinking of.

Suddenly Robert sniffed, in the silence of the dark kitchen, where
the only candle was burning all on one side, because of the
draught.

'What a funny scent!' he said.

And as he spoke, a lantern flashed its light through the window of
the kitchen, a face peered in, and a voice said--

'What's all this row about?  You let me in.'

It was the voice of the police!

Robert tip-toed to the window, and spoke through the pane that had
been a little cracked since Cyril accidentally knocked it with a
walking-stick when he was playing at balancing it on his nose.  (It
was after they had been to a circus.)

'What do you mean?' he said.  'There's no row.  You listen;
everything's as quiet as quiet.'  And indeed it was.

The strange sweet scent grew stronger, and the Phoenix put out its
beak.

The policeman hesitated.

'They're MUSK-rats,' said the Phoenix.  'I suppose some cats eat
them--but never Persian ones.  What a mistake for a well-informed
carpet to make!  Oh, what a night we're having!'

'Do go away,' said Robert, nervously.  'We're
just going to bed--that's our bedroom candle; there isn't any row. 
Everything's as quiet as a mouse.'

A wild chorus of mews drowned his words, and with the mews were
mingled the shrieks of the musk-rats.  What had happened?  Had the
cats tasted them before deciding that they disliked the flavour?

'I'm a-coming in,' said the policeman.  'You've got a cat shut up
there.'

'A cat,' said Cyril.  'Oh, my only aunt!  A cat!'

'Come in, then,' said Robert.  'It's your own look out.  I advise
you not.  Wait a shake, and I'll undo the side gate.'

He undid the side gate, and the policeman, very cautiously, came
in.  And there in the kitchen, by the light of one candle, with the
mewing and the screaming going like a dozen steam sirens, twenty
waiting on motor-cars, and half a hundred squeaking pumps, four
agitated voices shouted to the policeman four mixed and wholly
different explanations of the very mixed events of the evening.

Did you ever try to explain the simplest thing to a policeman?



CHAPTER 8
THE CATS, THE COW, AND THE BURGLAR

The nursery was full of Persian cats and musk-rats that had been
brought there by the wishing carpet.  The cats were mewing and the
musk-rats were squeaking so that you could hardly hear yourself
speak.  In the kitchen were the four children, one candle, a
concealed Phoenix, and a very visible policeman.

'Now then, look here,' said the Policeman, very loudly, and he
pointed his lantern at each child in turn, 'what's the meaning of
this here yelling and caterwauling.  I tell you you've got a cat
here, and some one's a ill-treating of it.  What do you mean by it,
eh?'

It was five to one, counting the Phoenix; but the policeman, who
was one, was of unusually fine size, and the five, including the
Phoenix, were small.  The mews and the squeaks grew softer, and in
the comparative silence, Cyril said--

'It's true.  There are a few cats here.  But we've not hurt them. 
It's quite the opposite.  We've just fed them.'

'It don't sound like it,' said the policeman grimly.

'I daresay they're not REAL cats,' said Jane madly, perhaps they're
only dream-cats.'

'I'll dream-cat you, my lady,' was the brief response of the force.

'If you understood anything except people who do murders and
stealings and naughty things like that, I'd tell you all about it,'
said Robert; 'but I'm certain you don't.  You're not meant to shove
your oar into people's private cat-keepings.  You're only supposed
to interfere when people shout "murder" and "stop thief" in the
street.  So there!'

The policeman assured them that he should see about that; and at
this point the Phoenix, who had been making itself small on the
pot-shelf under the dresser, among the saucepan lids and the fish-
kettle, walked on tip-toed claws in a noiseless and modest manner,
and left the room unnoticed by any one.

'Oh, don't be so horrid,' Anthea was saying, gently and earnestly. 
'We LOVE cats--dear pussy-soft things.  We wouldn't hurt them for
worlds.  Would we, Pussy?'

And Jane answered that of course they wouldn't.  And still the
policeman seemed unmoved by their eloquence.

'Now, look here,' he said, 'I'm a-going to see what's in that room
beyond there, and--'

His voice was drowned in a wild burst of mewing and squeaking.  And
as soon as it died down all four children began to explain at once;
and though the squeaking and mewing were not at their very loudest,
yet there was quite enough of both to make it very hard for the
policeman to understand a single word of any of the four wholly
different explanations now poured out to him.

'Stow it,' he said at last.  'I'm a-goin' into the next room in the
execution of my duty.  I'm a-goin' to use my eyes--my ears have
gone off their chumps, what with you and them cats.'

And he pushed Robert aside, and strode through the door.

'Don't say I didn't warn you,' said Robert.

'It's tigers REALLY,' said Jane.  'Father said so.  I wouldn't go
in, if I were you.'

But the policeman was quite stony; nothing any one said seemed to
make any difference to him.  Some policemen are like this, I
believe.  He strode down the passage, and in another moment he
would have been in the room with all the cats and all the rats
(musk), but at that very instant a thin, sharp voice screamed from
the street outside--

'Murder--murder!  Stop thief!'

The policeman stopped, with one regulation boot heavily poised in
the air.

'Eh?' he said.

And again the shrieks sounded shrilly and piercingly from the dark
street outside.

'Come on,' said Robert.  'Come and look after cats while somebody's
being killed outside.'  For Robert had an inside feeling that told
him quite plainly WHO it was that was screaming.

'You young rip,' said the policeman, 'I'll settle up with you
bimeby.'

And he rushed out, and the children heard his boots going weightily
along the pavement, and the screams also going along, rather ahead
of the policeman; and both the murder-screams and the policeman's
boots faded away in the remote distance.

Then Robert smacked his knickerbocker loudly with his palm, and
said--

'Good old Phoenix!  I should know its golden voice anywhere.'

And then every one understood how cleverly the Phoenix had caught
at what Robert had said about the real work of a policeman being to
look after murderers and thieves, and not after cats, and all
hearts were filled with admiring affection.

'But he'll come back,' said Anthea, mournfully, 'as soon as it
finds the murderer is only a bright vision of a dream, and there
isn't one at all really.'

'No he won't,' said the soft voice of the clever Phoenix, as it
flew in.  'HE DOES NOT KNOW WHERE YOUR HOUSE IS.  I heard him own
as much to a fellow mercenary.  Oh! what a night we are having!
Lock the door, and let us rid ourselves of this intolerable smell
of the perfume peculiar to the musk-rat and to the house of the
trimmers of beards.  If you'll excuse me, I will go to bed.  I am
worn out.'

It was Cyril who wrote the paper that told the carpet to take away
the rats and bring milk, because there seemed to be no doubt in any
breast that, however Persian cats may be, they must like milk.

'Let's hope it won't be musk-milk,' said Anthea, in gloom, as she
pinned the paper face-downwards on the carpet.  'Is there such a
thing as a musk-cow?' she added anxiously, as the carpet shrivelled
and vanished.  'I do hope not.  Perhaps really it WOULD have been
wiser to let the carpet take the cats away.  It's getting quite
late, and we can't keep them all night.'

'Oh, can't we?' was the bitter rejoinder of Robert, who had been
fastening the side door.  'You might have consulted me,' he went
on.  'I'm not such an idiot as some people.'

'Why, whatever--'

'Don't you see?  We've jolly well GOT to keep the cats all
night--oh, get down, you furry beasts!--because we've had three
wishes out of the old carpet now, and we can't get any more till
to-morrow.'

The liveliness of Persian mews alone prevented the occurrence of a
dismal silence.

Anthea spoke first.

'Never mind,' she said.  'Do you know, I really do think they're
quieting down a bit.  Perhaps they heard us say milk.'

'They can't understand English,' said Jane.  'You forget they're
Persian cats, Panther.'

'Well,' said Anthea, rather sharply, for she was tired and anxious,
'who told you "milk" wasn't Persian for milk.  Lots of English
words are just the same in French--at least I know "miaw" is, and
"croquet", and "fiance".  Oh, pussies, do be quiet!  Let's stroke
them as hard as we can with both hands, and perhaps they'll stop.'

So every one stroked grey fur till their hands were tired, and as
soon as a cat had been stroked enough to make it stop mewing it was
pushed gently away, and another mewing mouser was approached by the
hands of the strokers.  And the noise was really more than half
purr when the carpet suddenly appeared in its proper place, and on
it, instead of rows of milk-cans, or even of milk-jugs, there was
a COW.  Not a Persian cow, either, nor, most fortunately, a
musk-cow, if there is such a thing, but a smooth, sleek,
dun-coloured Jersey cow, who blinked large soft eyes at the
gas-light and mooed in an amiable if rather inquiring manner.

Anthea had always been afraid of cows; but now she tried to be
brave.

'Anyway, it can't run after me,' she said to herself 'There isn't
room for it even to begin to run.'

The cow was perfectly placid.  She behaved like a strayed duchess
till some one brought a saucer for the milk, and some one else
tried to milk the cow into it.  Milking is very difficult.  You may
think it is easy, but it is not.  All the children were by this
time strung up to a pitch of heroism that would have been
impossible to them in their ordinary condition.  Robert and Cyril
held the cow by the horns; and Jane, when she was quite sure that
their end of the cow was quite secure, consented to stand by, ready
to hold the cow by the tail should occasion arise.  Anthea, holding
the saucer, now advanced towards the cow.  She remembered to have
heard that cows, when milked by strangers, are susceptible to the
soothing influence of the human voice.  So, clutching her saucer
very tight, she sought for words to whose soothing influence the
cow might be susceptible.  And her memory, troubled by the events
of the night, which seemed to go on and on for ever and ever,
refused to help her with any form of words suitable to address a
Jersey cow in.

'Poor pussy, then.  Lie down, then, good dog, lie down!' was all
that she could think of to say, and she said it.

And nobody laughed.  The situation, full of grey mewing cats, was
too serious for that.  Then Anthea, with a beating heart, tried to
milk the cow.  Next moment the cow had knocked the saucer out of
her hand and trampled on it with one foot, while with the other
three she had walked on a foot each of Robert, Cyril, and Jane.

Jane burst into tears.  'Oh, how much too horrid everything is!'
she cried.  'Come away.  Let's go to bed and leave the horrid cats
with the hateful cow.  Perhaps somebody will eat somebody else. 
And serve them right.'

They did not go to bed, but they had a shivering council in the
drawing-room, which smelt of soot--and, indeed, a heap of this lay
in the fender.  There had been no fire in the room since mother
went away, and all the chairs and tables were in the wrong places,
and the chrysanthemums were dead, and the water in the pot nearly
dried up.  Anthea wrapped the embroidered woolly sofa blanket round
Jane and herself, while Robert and Cyril had a struggle, silent and
brief, but fierce, for the larger share of the fur hearthrug.

'It is most truly awful,' said Anthea, 'and I am so tired.  Let's
let the cats loose.'

'And the cow, perhaps?' said Cyril.  'The police would find us at
once.  That cow would stand at the gate and mew--I mean moo--to
come in.  And so would the cats.  No; I see quite well what we've
got to do.  We must put them in baskets and leave them on people's
doorsteps, like orphan foundlings.'

'We've got three baskets, counting mother's work one,' said Jane
brightening.

'And there are nearly two hundred cats,' said Anthea, 'besides the
cow--and it would have to be a different-sized basket for her; and
then I don't know how you'd carry it, and you'd never find a
doorstep big enough to put it on.  Except the church one--and--'

'Oh, well,' said Cyril, 'if you simply MAKE difficulties--'

'I'm with you,' said Robert.  'Don't fuss about the cow, Panther. 
It's simply GOT to stay the night, and I'm sure I've read that the
cow is a remunerating creature, and that means it will sit still
and think for hours.  The carpet can take it away in the morning. 
And as for the baskets, we'll do them up in dusters, or
pillow-cases, or bath-towels.  Come on, Squirrel.  You girls can be
out of it if you like.'

His tone was full of contempt, but Jane and Anthea were too tired
and desperate to care; even being 'out of it', which at other times
they could not have borne, now seemed quite a comfort.  They
snuggled down in the sofa blanket, and Cyril threw the fur
hearthrug over them.

'Ah, he said, 'that's all women are fit for--to keep safe and warm,
while the men do the work and run dangers and risks and things.'

'I'm not,' said Anthea, 'you know I'm not.'  But Cyril was gone.

It was warm under the blanket and the hearthrug, and Jane snuggled
up close to her sister; and Anthea cuddled Jane closely and kindly,
and in a sort of dream they heard the rise of a wave of mewing as
Robert opened the door of the nursery.  They heard the booted
search for baskets in the back kitchen.  They heard the side door
open and close, and they knew that each brother had gone out with
at least one cat.  Anthea's last thought was that it would take at
least all night to get rid of one hundred and ninety-nine cats by
twos.  There would be ninety-nine journeys of two cats each, and one
cat over.

'I almost think we might keep the one cat over,' said Anthea.  'I
don't seem to care for cats just now, but I daresay I shall again
some day.'  And she fell asleep.  Jane also was sleeping.

It was Jane who awoke with a start, to find Anthea still asleep. 
As, in the act of awakening, she kicked her sister, she wondered
idly why they should have gone to bed in their boots; but the next
moment she remembered where they were.

There was a sound of muffled, shuffled feet on the stairs.  Like
the heroine of the classic poem, Jane 'thought it was the boys',
and as she felt quite wide awake, and not nearly so tired as
before, she crept gently from Anthea's side and followed the
footsteps.  They went down into the basement; the cats, who seemed
to have fallen into the sleep of exhaustion, awoke at the sound of
the approaching footsteps and mewed piteously.  Jane was at the
foot of the stairs before she saw it was not her brothers whose
coming had roused her and the cats, but a burglar.  She knew he was
a burglar at once, because he wore a fur cap and a red and black
charity-check comforter, and he had no business where he was.

If you had been stood in jane's shoes you would no doubt have run
away in them, appealing to the police and neighbours with horrid
screams.  But Jane knew better.  She had read a great many nice
stories about burglars, as well as some affecting pieces of poetry,
and she knew that no burglar will ever hurt a little girl if he
meets her when burgling.  Indeed, in all the cases Jane had read
of, his burglarishness was almost at once forgotten in the interest
he felt in the little girl's artless prattle.  So if Jane hesitated
for a moment before addressing the burglar, it was only because she
could not at once think of any remark sufficiently prattling and
artless to make a beginning with.  In the stories and the affecting
poetry the child could never speak plainly, though it always looked
old enough to in the pictures.  And Jane could not make up her mind
to lisp and 'talk baby', even to a burglar.  And while she
hesitated he softly opened the nursery door and went in.

Jane followed--just in time to see him sit down flat on the floor,
scattering cats as a stone thrown into a pool splashes water.

She closed the door softly and stood there, still wondering whether
she COULD bring herself to say, 'What's 'oo doing here, Mithter
Wobber?' and whether any other kind of talk would do.

Then she heard the burglar draw a long breath, and he spoke.

'It's a judgement,' he said, 'so help me bob if it ain't.  Oh,
'ere's a thing to 'appen to a chap!  Makes it come 'ome to you,
don't it neither?  Cats an' cats an' cats.  There couldn't be all
them cats.  Let alone the cow.  If she ain't the moral of the old
man's Daisy.  She's a dream out of when I was a lad--I don't mind
'er so much.  'Ere, Daisy, Daisy?'

The cow turned and looked at him.

'SHE'S all right,' he went on.  'Sort of company, too.  Though them
above knows how she got into this downstairs parlour.  But them
cats--oh, take 'em away, take 'em away!  I'll chuck the 'ole
show--Oh, take 'em away.'

'Burglar,' said Jane, close behind him, and he started
convulsively, and turned on her a blank face, whose pale lips
trembled.  'I can't take those cats away.'

'Lor' lumme!' exclaimed the man; 'if 'ere ain't another on 'em. 
Are you real, miss, or something I'll wake up from presently?'

'I am quite real,' said Jane, relieved to find that a lisp was not
needed to make the burglar understand her.  'And so,' she added,
'are the cats.'

'Then send for the police, send for the police, and I'll go quiet. 
If you ain't no realler than them cats, I'm done, spunchuck--out of
time.  Send for the police.  I'll go quiet.  One thing, there'd not
be room for 'arf them cats in no cell as ever _I_ see.'

He ran his fingers through his hair, which was short, and his eyes
wandered wildly round the roomful of cats.

'Burglar,' said Jane, kindly and softly, 'if you didn't like cats,
what did you come here for?'

'Send for the police,' was the unfortunate criminal's only reply. 
'I'd rather you would--honest, I'd rather.'

'I daren't,' said Jane, 'and besides, I've no one to send.  I hate
the police.  I wish he'd never been born.'

'You've a feeling 'art, miss,' said the burglar; 'but them cats is
really a little bit too thick.'

'Look here,' said Jane, 'I won't call the police.  And I am quite
a real little girl, though I talk older than the kind you've met
before when you've been doing your burglings.  And they are real
cats--and they want real milk--and--Didn't you say the cow was
like somebody's Daisy that you used to know?'

'Wish I may die if she ain't the very spit of her,' replied the
man.

'Well, then,' said Jane--and a thrill of joyful pride ran through
her--'perhaps you know how to milk cows?'

'Perhaps I does,' was the burglar's cautious rejoinder.

'Then,' said Jane, 'if you will ONLY milk ours--you don't know how
we shall always love you.'

The burglar replied that loving was all very well.

'If those cats only had a good long, wet, thirsty drink of milk,'
Jane went on with eager persuasion, 'they'd lie down and go to
sleep as likely as not, and then the police won't come back.  But
if they go on mewing like this he will, and then I don't know
what'll become of us, or you either.'

This argument seemed to decide the criminal.  Jane fetched the
wash-bowl from the sink, and he spat on his hands and prepared to
milk the cow.  At this instant boots were heard on the stairs.

'It's all up,' said the man, desperately, 'this 'ere's a plant. 
'ERE'S the police.'  He made as if to open the window and leap from
it.

'It's all right, I tell you,' whispered Jane, in anguish.  'I'll
say you're a friend of mine, or the good clergyman called in, or my
uncle, or ANYTHIING--only do, do, do milk the cow.  Oh, DON'T
go--oh--oh, thank goodness it's only the boys!'

It was; and their entrance had awakened Anthea, who, with her
brothers, now crowded through the doorway.  The man looked about
him like a rat looks round a trap.

'This is a friend of mine,' said Jane; 'he's just called in, and
he's going to milk the cow for us.  ISN'T it good and kind of him?'

She winked at the others, and though they did not understand they
played up loyally.

'How do?' said Cyril, 'Very glad to meet you.  Don't let us
interrupt the milking.'

'I shall 'ave a 'ead and a 'arf in the morning, and no bloomin'
error,' remarked the burglar; but he began to milk the cow.

Robert was winked at to stay and see that he did not leave off
milking or try to escape, and the others went to get things to put
the milk in; for it was now spurting and foaming in the wash-bowl,
and the cats had ceased from mewing and were crowding round the
cow, with expressions of hope and anticipation on their whiskered
faces.

'We can't get rid of any more cats,' said Cyril, as he and his
sisters piled a tray high with saucers and soup-plates and platters
and pie-dishes, 'the police nearly got us as it was.  Not the same
one--a much stronger sort.  He thought it really was a foundling
orphan we'd got.  If it hadn't been for me throwing the two bags of
cat slap in his eye and hauling Robert over a railing, and lying
like mice under a laurel-bush--Well, it's jolly lucky I'm a good
shot, that's all.  He pranced off when he'd got the cat-bags off
his face--thought we'd bolted.  And here we are.'

The gentle samishness of the milk swishing into the hand-bowl
seemed to have soothed the burglar very much.  He went on milking
in a sort of happy dream, while the children got a cap and ladled
the warm milk out into the pie-dishes and plates, and platters and
saucers, and set them down to the music of Persian purrs and
lappings.

'It makes me think of old times,' said the burglar, smearing his
ragged coat-cuff across his eyes--'about the apples in the orchard
at home, and the rats at threshing time, and the rabbits and the
ferrets, and how pretty it was seeing the pigs killed.'

Finding him in this softened mood, Jane said--

'I wish you'd tell us how you came to choose our house for your
burglaring to-night.  I am awfully glad you did.  You have been so
kind.  I don't know what we should have done without you,' she
added hastily.  'We all love you ever so.  Do tell us.'

The others added their affectionate entreaties, and at last the
burglar said--

'Well, it's my first job, and I didn't expect to be made so
welcome, and that's the truth, young gents and ladies.  And I don't
know but what it won't be my last.  For this 'ere cow, she reminds
me of my father, and I know 'ow 'e'd 'ave 'ided me if I'd laid
'ands on a 'a'penny as wasn't my own.'

'I'm sure he would,' Jane agreed kindly; 'but what made you come
here?'

'Well, miss,' said the burglar, 'you know best 'ow you come by them
cats, and why you don't like the police, so I'll give myself away
free, and trust to your noble 'earts.  (You'd best bale out a bit,
the pan's getting fullish.) I was a-selling oranges off of my
barrow--for I ain't a burglar by trade, though you 'ave used the
name so free--an' there was a lady bought three 'a'porth off me. 
An' while she was a-pickin' of them out--very careful indeed, and
I'm always glad when them sort gets a few over-ripe ones--there was
two other ladies talkin' over the fence.  An' one on 'em said to
the other on 'em just like this--

"'I've told both gells to come, and they can doss in with M'ria and
Jane, 'cause their boss and his missis is miles away and the kids
too.  So they can just lock up the 'ouse and leave the gas
a-burning, so's no one won't know, and get back bright an' early by
'leven o'clock.  And we'll make a night of it, Mrs Prosser, so we
will.  I'm just a-going to run out to pop the letter in the post."
And then the lady what had chosen the three ha'porth so careful,
she said: "Lor, Mrs Wigson, I wonder at you, and your hands all
over suds.  This good gentleman'll slip it into the post for yer,
I'll be bound, seeing I'm a customer of his." So they give me the
letter, and of course I read the direction what was written on it
afore I shoved it into the post.  And then when I'd sold my
barrowful, I was a-goin' 'ome with the chink in my pocket, and I'm
blowed if some bloomin' thievin' beggar didn't nick the lot whilst
I was just a-wettin' of my whistle, for callin' of oranges is dry
work.  Nicked the bloomin' lot 'e did--and me with not a farden to
take 'ome to my brother and his missus.'

'How awful!' said Anthea, with much sympathy.

'Horful indeed, miss, I believe yer,' the burglar rejoined, with
deep feeling.  'You don't know her temper when she's roused.  An'
I'm sure I 'ope you never may, neither.  And I'd 'ad all my oranges
off of 'em.  So it came back to me what was wrote on the
ongverlope, and I says to myself, "Why not, seein' as I've been
done myself, and if they keeps two slaveys there must be some
pickings?" An' so 'ere I am.  But them cats, they've brought me
back to the ways of honestness.  Never no more.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'these cats are very valuable--very
indeed.  And we will give them all to you, if only you will take
them away.'

'I see they're a breedy lot,' replied the burglar.  'But I don't
want no bother with the coppers.  Did you come by them honest now?
Straight?'

'They are all our very own,' said Anthea, 'we wanted them, but the
confidement--'

'Consignment,' whispered Cyril.

'was larger than we wanted, and they're an awful bother.  If you
got your barrow, and some sacks or baskets, your brother's missus
would be awfully pleased.  My father says Persian cats are worth
pounds and pounds each.'

'Well,' said the burglar--and he was certainly moved by her
remarks--'I see you're in a hole--and I don't mind lending a helping
'and.  I don't ask 'ow you come by them.  But I've got a pal--'e's
a mark on cats.  I'll fetch him along, and if he thinks they'd
fetch anything above their skins I don't mind doin' you a
kindness.'

'You won't go away and never come back,' said Jane, 'because I
don't think I COULD bear that.'

The burglar, quite touched by her emotion, swore sentimentally
that, alive or dead, he would come back.

Then he went, and Cyril and Robert sent the girls to bed and sat up
to wait for his return.  It soon seemed absurd to await him in a
state of wakefulness, but his stealthy tap on the window awoke them
readily enough.  For he did return, with the pal and the barrow and
the sacks.  The pal approved of the cats, now dormant in Persian
repletion, and they were bundled into the sacks, and taken away on
the barrow--mewing, indeed, but with mews too sleepy to attract
public attention.

'I'm a fence--that's what I am,' said the burglar gloomily.  'I
never thought I'd come down to this, and all acause er my kind
'eart.'

Cyril knew that a fence is a receiver of stolen goods, and he
replied briskly--

'I give you my sacred the cats aren't stolen.  What do you make the
time?'

'I ain't got the time on me,' said the pal--'but it was just about
chucking-out time as I come by the "Bull and Gate".  I shouldn't
wonder if it was nigh upon one now.'

When the cats had been removed, and the boys and the burglar had
parted with warm expressions of friendship, there remained only the
cow.

'She must stay all night,' said Robert.  'Cook'll have a fit when
she sees her.'

'All night?' said Cyril.  'Why--it's tomorrow morning if it's one. 
We can have another wish!'

So the carpet was urged, in a hastily written note, to remove the
cow to wherever she belonged, and to return to its proper place on
the nursery floor.  But the cow could not be got to move on to the
carpet.  So Robert got the clothes line out of the back kitchen,
and tied one end very firmly to the cow's horns, and the other end
to a bunched-up corner of the carpet, and said 'Fire away.'

And the carpet and cow vanished together, and the boys went to bed,
tired out and only too thankful that the evening at last was over.

Next morning the carpet lay calmly in its place, but one corner was
very badly torn.  It was the corner that the cow had been tied on
to.



CHAPTER 9
THE BURGLAR'S BRIDE


The morning after the adventure of the Persian cats, the musk-rats,
the common cow, and the uncommon burglar, all the children slept
till it was ten o'clock; and then it was only Cyril who woke; but
he attended to the others, so that by half past ten every one was
ready to help to get breakfast.  It was shivery cold, and there was
but little in the house that was really worth eating.

Robert had arranged a thoughtful little surprise for the absent
servants.  He had made a neat and delightful booby trap over the
kitchen door, and as soon as they heard the front door click open
and knew the servants had come back, all four children hid in the
cupboard under the stairs and listened with delight to the
entrance--the tumble, the splash, the scuffle, and the remarks of
the servants.  They heard the cook say it was a judgement on them
for leaving the place to itself; she seemed to think that a booby
trap was a kind of plant that was quite likely to grow, all by
itself, in a dwelling that was left shut up.  But the housemaid,
more acute, judged that someone must have been in the house--a view
confirmed by the sight of the breakfast things on the nursery
table.

The cupboard under the stairs was very tight and paraffiny,
however, and a silent struggle for a place on top ended in the door
bursting open and discharging Jane, who rolled like a football to
the feet of the servants.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, when the cook's hysterics had become
quieter, and the housemaid had time to say what she thought of
them, 'don't you begin jawing us.  We aren't going to stand it.  We
know too much.  You'll please make an extra special treacle roley
for dinner, and we'll have a tinned tongue.'

'I daresay,' said the housemaid, indignant, still in her outdoor
things and with her hat very much on one side.  'Don't you come
a-threatening me, Master Cyril, because I won't stand it, so I tell
you.  You tell your ma about us being out?  Much I care!  She'll be
sorry for me when she hears about my dear great-aunt by marriage as
brought me up from a child and was a mother to me.  She sent for
me, she did, she wasn't expected to last the night, from the spasms
going to her legs--and cook was that kind and careful she couldn't
let me go alone, so--'

'Don't,' said Anthea, in real distress.  'You know where liars go
to, Eliza--at least if you don't--'

'Liars indeed!' said Eliza, 'I won't demean myself talking to you.'

'How's Mrs Wigson?' said Robert, 'and DID you keep it up last
night?'

The mouth of the housemaid fell open.

'Did you doss with Maria or Emily?' asked Cyril.

'How did Mrs Prosser enjoy herself?' asked Jane.

'Forbear,' said Cyril, 'they've had enough.  Whether we tell or not
depends on your later life,' he went on, addressing the servants. 
'If you are decent to us we'll be decent to you.  You'd better make
that treacle roley--and if I were you, Eliza, I'd do a little
housework and cleaning, just for a change.'

The servants gave in once and for all.

'There's nothing like firmness,' Cyril went on, when the breakfast
things were cleared away and the children were alone in the
nursery.  'People are always talking of difficulties with servants.
It's quite simple, when you know the way.  We can do what we like
now and they won't peach.  I think we've broken THEIR proud spirit.
Let's go somewhere by carpet.'

'I wouldn't if I were you,' said the Phoenix, yawning, as it
swooped down from its roost on the curtain pole.  'I've given you
one or two hints, but now concealment is at an end, and I see I
must speak out.'

It perched on the back of a chair and swayed to and fro, like a
parrot on a swing.

'What's the matter now?' said Anthea.  She was not quite so gentle
as usual, because she was still weary from the excitement of last
night's cats.  'I'm tired of things happening.  I shan't go
anywhere on the carpet.  I'm going to darn my stockings.'

'Darn!' said the Phoenix, 'darn!  From those young lips these
strange expressions--'

'Mend, then,' said Anthea, 'with a needle and wool.'

The Phoenix opened and shut its wings thoughtfully.

'Your stockings,' it said, 'are much less important than they now
appear to you.  But the carpet--look at the bare worn patches, look
at the great rent at yonder corner.  The carpet has been your
faithful friend--your willing servant.  How have you requited its
devoted service?'

'Dear Phoenix,' Anthea urged, 'don't talk in that horrid lecturing
tone.  You make me feel as if I'd done something wrong.  And really
it is a wishing carpet, and we haven't done anything else to
it--only wishes.'

'Only wishes,' repeated the Phoenix, ruffling its neck feathers
angrily, 'and what sort of wishes?  Wishing people to be in a good
temper, for instance.  What carpet did you ever hear of that had
such a wish asked of it?  But this noble fabric, on which you
trample so recklessly' (every one removed its boots from the carpet
and stood on the linoleum), 'this carpet never flinched.  It did
what you asked, but the wear and tear must have been awful.  And
then last night--I don't blame you about the cats and the rats, for
those were its own choice; but what carpet could stand a heavy cow
hanging on to it at one corner?'

'I should think the cats and rats were worse,' said Robert, 'look
at all their claws.'

'Yes,' said the bird, 'eleven thousand nine hundred and forty of
them--I daresay you noticed?  I should be surprised if these had
not left their mark.'

'Good gracious,' said Jane, sitting down suddenly on the floor, and
patting the edge of the carpet softly; 'do you mean it's WEARING OUT?'

'Its life with you has not been a luxurious one,' said the Phoenix.

'French mud twice.  Sand of sunny shores twice.  Soaking in
southern seas once.  India once.  Goodness knows where in Persia
once.  musk-rat-land once.  And once, wherever the cow came from. 
Hold your carpet up to the light, and with cautious tenderness, if
YOU please.'

With cautious tenderness the boys held the carpet up to the light;
the girls looked, and a shiver of regret ran through them as they
saw how those eleven thoousand nine hundred and forty claws had run
through the carpet.  It was full of little holes: there were some
large ones, and more than one thin
place.  At one corner a strip of it was torn, and hung forlornly.

'We must mend it,' said Anthea; 'never mind about my stockings.  I
can sew them up in lumps with sewing cotton if there's no time to
do them properly.  I know it's awful and no girl would who
respected herself, and all that; but the poor dear carpet's more
important than my silly stockings.  Let's go out now this very
minute.'

So out they all went, and bought wool to mend the carpet; but there
is no shop in Camden Town where you can buy wishing-wool, no, nor
in Kentish Town either.  However, ordinary Scotch heather-mixture
fingering seemed good enough, and this they bought, and all that
-day Jane and Anthea darned and darned and darned.  The boys went
out for a walk in the afternoon, and the gentle Phoenix paced up
and down the table--for exercise, as it said--and talked to the
industrious girls about their carpet.

'It is not an ordinary, ignorant, innocent carpet from
Kidderminster,' it said, 'it is a carpet with a past--a Persian
past.  Do you know that in happier years, when that carpet was the
property of caliphs, viziers, kings, and sultans, it never lay on
a floor?'

'I thought the floor was the proper home of a carpet,' Jane
interrupted.

'Not of a MAGIC carpet,' said the Phoenix; 'why, if it had been
allowed to lie about on floors there wouldn't be much of it left
now.  No, indeed!  It has lived in chests of cedarwood, inlaid with
pearl and ivory, wrapped in priceless tissues of cloth of gold,
embroidered with gems of fabulous value.  It has reposed in the
sandal-wood caskets of princesses, and in the rose-attar-scented
treasure-houses of kings.  Never, never, had any one degraded it by
walking on it--except in the way of business, when wishes were
required, and then they always took their shoes off.  And YOU--'

'Oh, DON'T!' said Jane, very near tears.  'You know you'd never
have been hatched at all if it hadn't been for mother wanting a
carpet for us to walk on.'

'You needn't have walked so much or so hard!' said the bird, 'but
come, dry that crystal tear, and I will relate to you the story of
the Princess Zulieka, the Prince of Asia, and the magic carpet.'

'Relate away,' said Anthea--'I mean, please do.'

'The Princess Zulieka, fairest of royal ladies,' began the bird,
'had in her cradle been the subject of several enchantments.  Her
grandmother had been in her day--'

But what in her day Zulieka's grandmother had been was destined
never to be revealed, for Cyril and Robert suddenly burst into the
room, and on each brow were the traces of deep emotion.  On Cyril's
pale brow stood beads of agitation and perspiration, and on the
scarlet brow of Robert was a large black smear.

'What ails ye both?' asked the Phoenix, and it added tartly that
story-telling was quite impossible if people would come
interrupting like that.

'Oh, do shut up, for any sake!' said Cyril, sinking into a chair.

Robert smoothed the ruffled golden feathers, adding kindly--

'Squirrel doesn't mean to be a beast.  It's only that the MOST
AWFUL thing has happened, and stories don't seem to matter so much.
Don't be cross.  You won't be when you've heard what's happened.'

'Well, what HAS happened?' said the bird, still rather crossly; and
Anthea and Jane paused with long needles poised in air, and long
needlefuls of Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool drooping from
them.

'The most awful thing you can possibly think of,' said Cyril. 
'That nice chap--our own burglar--the police have got him, on
suspicion of stolen cats.  That's what his brother's missis told
me.'

'Oh, begin at the beginning!' cried Anthea impatiently.

'Well, then, we went out, and down by where the undertaker's is,
with the china flowers in the window--you know.  There was a crowd,
and of course we went to have a squint.  And it was two bobbies and
our burglar between them, and he was being dragged along; and he
said, "I tell you them cats was GIVE me.  I got 'em in exchange for
me milking a cow in a basement parlour up Camden Town way."

'And the people laughed.  Beasts!  And then one of the policemen
said perhaps he could give the name and address of the cow, and he
said, no, he couldn't; but he could take them there if they'd only
leave go of his coat collar, and give him a chance to get his
breath.  And the policeman said he could tell all that to the
magistrate in the morning.  He didn't see us, and so we came away.'

'Oh, Cyril, how COULD you?' said Anthea.

'Don't be a pudding-head,' Cyril advised.  'A fat lot of good it
would have done if we'd let him see us.  No one would have believed
a word we said.  They'd have thought we were kidding.  We did
better than let him see us.  We asked a boy where he lived and he
told us, and we went there, and it's a little greengrocer's shop,
and we bought some Brazil nuts.  Here they are.'  The girls waved
away the Brazil nuts with loathing and contempt.

'Well, we had to buy SOMETHING, and while we were making up our
minds what to buy we heard his brother's missis talking.  She said
when he came home with all them miaoulers she thought there was
more in it than met the eye.  But he WOULD go out this morning with
the two likeliest of them, one under each arm.  She said he sent
her out to buy blue ribbon to put round their beastly necks, and
she said if he got three months' hard it was her dying word that
he'd got the blue ribbon to thank for it; that, and his own silly
thieving ways, taking cats that anybody would know he couldn't have
come by in the way of business, instead of things that wouldn't
have been missed, which Lord knows there are plenty such, and--'

'Oh, STOP!' cried Jane.  And indeed it was time, for Cyril seemed
like a clock that had been wound up, and could not help going on. 
'Where is he now?'

'At the police-station,' said Robert, for Cyril was out of breath. 
'The boy told us they'd put him in the cells, and would bring him
up before the Beak in the morning.  I thought it was a jolly lark
last night--getting him to take the cats--but now--'

'The end of a lark,' said the Phoenix, 'is the Beak.'

'Let's go to him,' cried both the girls jumping up.  'Let's go and
tell the truth.  They MUST believe us.'

'They CAN'T,' said Cyril.  'Just think!  If any one came to you
with such a tale, you couldn't believe it, however much you tried. 
We should only mix things up worse for him.'

'There must be something we could do,' said Jane, sniffing very
much--'my own dear pet burglar!  I can't bear it.  And he was so
nice, the way he talked about his father, and how he was going to
be so extra honest.  Dear Phoenix, you MUST be able to help us. 
You're so good and kind and pretty and clever.  Do, do tell us what
to do.'

The Phoenix rubbed its beak thoughtfully with its claw.

'You might rescue him,' it said, 'and conceal him here, till the
law-supporters had forgotten about him.'

'That would be ages and ages,' said Cyril, 'and we couldn't conceal
him here.  Father might come home at any moment, and if he found
the burglar here HE wouldn't believe the true truth any more than
the police would.  That's the worst of the truth.  Nobody ever
believes it.  Couldn't we take him somewhere else?'

Jane clapped her hands.

'The sunny southern shore!' she cried, 'where the cook is being
queen.  He and she would be company for each other!'

And really the idea did not seem bad, if only he would consent to
go.

So, all talking at once, the children arranged to wait till
evening, and then to seek the dear burglar in his lonely cell.

Meantime Jane and Anthea darned away as hard as they could, to make
the carpet as strong as possible.  For all felt how terrible it
would be if the precious burglar, while being carried to the sunny
southern shore, were to tumble through a hole in the carpet, and be
lost for ever in the sunny southern sea.

The servants were tired after Mrs Wigson's party, so every one went
to bed early, and when the Phoenix reported that both servants were
snoring in a heartfelt and candid manner, the children got up--they
had never undressed; just putting their nightgowns on over their
things had been enough to deceive Eliza when she came to turn out
the gas.  So they were ready for anything, and they stood on the
carpet and said--

'I wish we were in our burglar's lonely cell.'  and instantly they
were.

I think every one had expected the cell to be the 'deepest dungeon
below the castle moat'.  I am sure no one had doubted that the
burglar, chained by heavy fetters to a ring in the damp stone wall,
would be tossing uneasily on a bed of straw, with a pitcher of
water and a mouldering crust, untasted, beside him.  Robert,
remembering the underground passage and the treasure, had brought
a candle and matches, but these were not needed.

The cell was a little white-washed room about twelve feet long and
six feet wide.  On one side of it was a sort of shelf sloping a
little towards the wall.  On this were two rugs, striped blue and
yellow, and a water-proof pillow.  Rolled in the rugs, and with his
head on the pillow, lay the burglar, fast asleep.  (He had had his
tea, though this the children did not know--it had come from the
coffee-shop round the corner, in very thick crockery.) The scene
was plainly revealed by the light of a gas-lamp in the passage
outside, which shone into the cell through a pane of thick glass
over the door.

'I shall gag him,' said Cyril, 'and Robert will hold him down. 
Anthea and Jane and the Phoenix can whisper soft nothings to him
while he gradually awakes.'

This plan did not have the success it deserved, because the
burglar, curiously enough, was much stronger, even in his sleep,
than Robert and Cyril, and at the first touch of their hands he
leapt up and shouted out something very loud indeed.

Instantly steps were heard outside.  Anthea threw her arms round
the burglar and whispered--

'It's us--the ones that gave you the cats.  We've come to save you,
only don't let on we're here.  Can't we hide somewhere?'

Heavy boots sounded on the flagged passage outside, and a firm
voice shouted--

'Here--you--stop that row, will you?'

'All right, governor,' replied the burglar, still with Anthea's
arms round him; 'I was only a-talking in my sleep.  No offence.'

It was an awful moment.  Would the boots and the voice come in. 
Yes!  No!  The voice said--

'Well, stow it, will you?'

And the boots went heavily away, along the passage and up some
sounding stone stairs.

'Now then,' whispered Anthea.

'How the blue Moses did you get in?' asked the burglar, in a hoarse
whisper of amazement.

'On the carpet,' said Jane, truly.

'Stow that,' said the burglar.  'One on you I could 'a' swallowed,
but four--AND a yellow fowl.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, sternly, 'you wouldn't have believed any
one if they'd told you beforehand about your finding a cow and all
those cats in our nursery.'

'That I wouldn't,' said the burglar, with whispered fervour, 'so
help me Bob, I wouldn't.'

'Well, then,' Cyril went on, ignoring this appeal to his brother,
'just try to believe what we tell you and act accordingly.  It
can't do you any HARM, you know,' he went on in hoarse whispered
earnestness.  'You can't be very much worse off than you are now,
you know.  But if you'll just trust to us we'll get you out of this
right enough.  No one saw us come in.  The question is, where would
you like to go?'

'I'd like to go to Boolong,' was the instant reply of the burglar. 
'I've always wanted to go on that there trip, but I've never 'ad
the ready at the right time of the year.'

'Boolong is a town like London,' said Cyril, well meaning, but
inaccurate, 'how could you get a living there?'

The burglar scratched his head in deep doubt.

'It's 'ard to get a 'onest living anywheres nowadays,' he said, and
his voice was sad.

'Yes, isn't it?' said Jane, sympathetically; 'but how about a sunny
southern shore, where there's nothing to do at all unless you want
to.'

'That's my billet, miss,' replied the burglar.  'I never did care
about work--not like some people, always fussing about.'

'Did you never like any sort of work?' asked Anthea, severely.

'Lor', lumme, yes,' he answered, 'gardening was my 'obby, so it
was.  But father died afore 'e could bind me to a nurseryman, an'-
-'

'We'll take you to the sunny southern shore,' said Jane; 'you've no
idea what the flowers are like.'

'Our old cook's there,' said Anthea.  'She's queen--'

'Oh, chuck it,' the burglar whispered, clutching at his head with
both hands.  'I knowed the first minute I see them cats and that
cow as it was a judgement on me.  I don't know now whether I'm
a-standing on my hat or my boots, so help me I don't.  If you CAN
get me out, get me, and if you can't, get along with you for
goodness' sake, and give me a chanst to think about what'll be most
likely to go down with the Beak in the morning.'

'Come on to the carpet, then,' said Anthea, gently shoving.  The
others quietly pulled, and the moment the feet of the burglar were
planted on the carpet Anthea wished:

'I wish we were all on the sunny southern shore where cook is.'

And instantly they were.  There were the rainbow sands, the tropic
glories of leaf and flower, and there, of course, was the cook,
crowned with white flowers, and with all the wrinkles of crossness
and tiredness and hard work wiped out of her face.

'Why, cook, you're quite pretty!' Anthea said, as soon as she had
got her breath after the tumble-rush-whirl of the carpet.  The
burglar stood rubbing his eyes in the brilliant tropic sunlight,
and gazing wildly round him on the vivid hues of the tropic land.

'Penny plain and tuppence coloured!' he exclaimed pensively, 'and
well worth any tuppence, however hard-earned.'

The cook was seated on a grassy mound with her court of
copper-coloured savages around her.  The burglar pointed a grimy
finger at these.

'Are they tame?' he asked anxiously.  'Do they bite or scratch, or
do anything to yer with poisoned arrows or oyster shells or that?'

'Don't you be so timid,' said the cook.  'Look'e 'ere, this 'ere's
only a dream what you've come into, an' as it's only a dream
there's no nonsense about what a young lady like me ought to say or
not, so I'll say you're the best-looking fellow I've seen this many
a day.  And the dream goes on and on, seemingly, as long as you
behaves.  The things what you has to eat and drink tastes just as
good as real ones, and--'

'Look 'ere,' said the burglar, 'I've come 'ere straight outer the
pleece station.  These 'ere kids'll tell you it ain't no blame er
mine.'

'Well, you WERE a burglar, you know,' said the truthful Anthea
gently.

'Only because I was druv to it by dishonest blokes, as well you
knows, miss,' rejoined the criminal.  'Blowed if this ain't the
'ottest January as I've known for years.'

'Wouldn't you like a bath?' asked the queen, 'and some white
clothes like me?'

'I should only look a juggins in 'em, miss, thanking you all the
same,' was the reply; 'but a bath I wouldn't resist, and my shirt
was only clean on week before last.'

Cyril and Robert led him to a rocky pool, where he bathed
luxuriously.  Then, in shirt and trousers he sat on the sand and
spoke.

'That cook, or queen, or whatever you call her--her with the white
bokay on her 'ed--she's my sort.  Wonder if she'd keep company!'

'I should ask her.'

'I was always a quick hitter,' the man went on; 'it's a word and a
blow with me.  I will.'

In shirt and trousers, and crowned with a scented flowery wreath
which Cyril hastily wove as they returned to the court of the
queen, the burglar stood before the cook and spoke.

'Look 'ere, miss,' he said.  'You an' me being' all forlorn-like,
both on us, in this 'ere dream, or whatever you calls it, I'd like
to tell you straight as I likes yer looks.'

The cook smiled and looked down bashfully.

'I'm a single man--what you might call a batcheldore.  I'm mild in
my 'abits, which these kids'll tell you the same, and I'd like to
'ave the pleasure of walkin' out with you next Sunday.'

'Lor!' said the queen cook, ''ow sudden you are, mister.'

'Walking out means you're going to be married,' said Anthea.  'Why
not get married and have done with it?  _I_ would.'

'I don't mind if I do,' said the burglar.  But the cook said--

'No, miss.  Not me, not even in a dream.  I don't say anythink
ag'in the young chap's looks, but I always swore I'd be married in
church, if at all--and, anyway, I don't believe these here savages
would know how to keep a registering office, even if I was to show
them.  No, mister, thanking you kindly, if you can't bring a
clergyman into the dream I'll live and die like what I am.'

'Will you marry her if we get a clergyman?' asked the match-making
Anthea.

'I'm agreeable, miss, I m sure,' said he, pulling his wreath
straight.  ''Ow this 'ere bokay do tiddle a chap's ears to be
sure!'

So, very hurriedly, the carpet was spread out, and instructed to
fetch a clergyman.  The instructions were written on the inside of
Cyril's cap with a piece of billiard chalk Robert had got from the
marker at the hotel at Lyndhurst.  The carpet disappeared, and more
quickly than you would have thought possible it came back, bearing
on its bosom the Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop.

The Reverend Septimus was rather a nice young man, but very much
mazed and muddled, because when he saw a strange carpet laid out at
his feet, in his own study, he naturally walked on it to examine it
more closely.  And he happened to stand on one of the thin places
that Jane and Anthea had darned, so that he was half on wishing
carpet and half on plain Scotch heather-mixture fingering, which
has no magic properties at all.

The effect of this was that he was only half there--so that the
children could just see through him, as though he had been a ghost.
And as for him, he saw the sunny southern shore, the cook and the
burglar and the children quite plainly; but through them all he
saw, quite plainly also, his study at home, with the books and the
pictures and the marble clock that had been presented to him when
he left his last situation.

He seemed to himself to be in a sort of insane fit, so that it did
not matter what he did--and he married the burglar to the cook. 
The cook said that she would rather have had a solider kind of a
clergyman, one that you couldn't see through so plain, but perhaps
this was real enough for a dream.

And of course the clergyman, though misty, was really real, and
able to marry people, and he did.  When the ceremony was over the
clergyman wandered about the island collecting botanical specimens,
for he was a great botanist, and the ruling passion was strong even
in an insane fit.

There was a splendid wedding feast.  Can you fancy Jane and Anthea,
and Robert and Cyril, dancing merrily in a ring, hand-in-hand with
copper-coloured savages, round the happy couple, the queen cook and
the burglar consort?  There were more flowers gathered and thrown
than you have ever even dreamed of, and before the children took
carpet for home the now married-and-settled burglar made a speech.

'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, 'and savages of both kinds, only
I know you can't understand what I'm a saying of, but we'll let
that pass.  If this is a dream, I'm on.  If it ain't, I'm onner
than ever.  If it's betwixt and between--well, I'm honest, and I
can't say more.  I don't want no more 'igh London society--I've got
some one to put my arm around of; and I've got the whole lot of
this 'ere island for my allotment, and if I don't grow some
broccoli as'll open the judge's eye at the cottage flower shows,
well, strike me pink!  All I ask is, as these young gents and
ladies'll bring some parsley seed into the dream, and a penn'orth
of radish seed, and threepenn'orth of onion, and I wouldn't mind
goin' to fourpence or fippence for mixed kale, only I ain't got a
brown, so I don't deceive you.  And there's one thing more, you
might take away the parson.  I don't like things what I can see
'alf through, so here's how!'  He drained a coconut-shell of palm
wine.

It was now past midnight--though it was tea-time on the island.

With all good wishes the children took their leave.  They also
collected the clergyman and took him back to his study and his
presentation clock.

The Phoenix kindly carried the seeds next day to the burglar and
his bride, and returned with the most satisfactory news of the
happy pair.

'He's made a wooden spade and started on his allotment,' it said,
'and she is weaving him a shirt and trousers of the most radiant
whiteness.'

The police never knew how the burglar got away.  In Kentish Town
Police Station his escape is still spoken of with bated breath as
the Persian mystery.

As for the Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop, he felt that he had had a
very insane fit indeed, and he was sure it was due to over-study. 
So he planned a little dissipation, and took his two maiden aunts
to Paris, where they enjoyed a dazzling round of museums and
picture galleries, and came back feeling that they had indeed seen
life.  He never told his aunts or any one else about the marriage
on the island--because no one likes it to be generally known if he
has had insane fits, however interesting and unusual.



CHAPTER 10
THE HOLE IN THE CARPET


     Hooray! hooray! hooray!
     Mother comes home to-day;
     Mother comes home to-day,
     Hooray! hooray! hooray!'

Jane sang this simple song directly after breakfast, and the
Phoenix shed crystal tears of affectionate sympathy.

'How beautiful,' it said, 'is filial devotion!'

'She won't be home till past bedtime, though,' said Robert.  'We
might have one more carpet-day.'

He was glad that mother was coming home--quite glad, very glad; but
at the same time that gladness was rudely contradicted by a quite
strong feeling of sorrow, because now they could not go out all day
on the carpet.

'I do wish we could go and get something nice for mother, only
she'd want to know where we got it,' said Anthea.  'And she'd
never, never believe it, the truth.  People never do, somehow, if
it's at all interesting.'

'I'll tell you what,' said Robert.  'Suppose we wished the carpet
to take us somewhere where we could find a purse with money in
it--then we could buy her something.'

'Suppose it took us somewhere foreign, and the purse was covered
with strange Eastern devices, embroidered in rich silks, and full
of money that wasn't money at all here, only foreign curiosities,
then we couldn't spend it, and people would bother about where we
got it, and we shouldn't know how on earth to get out of it at
all.'

Cyril moved the table off the carpet as he spoke, and its leg
caught in one of Anthea's darns and ripped away most of it, as well
as a large slit in the carpet.

'Well, now you HAVE done it,' said Robert.

But Anthea was a really first-class sister.  She did not say a word
till she had got out the Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool and
the darning-needle and the thimble and the scissors, and by that
time she had been able to get the better of her natural wish to be
thoroughly disagreeable, and was able to say quite kindly--

'Never mind, Squirrel, I'll soon mend it.'

Cyril thumped her on the back.  He understood exactly how she had
felt, and he was not an ungrateful brother.

'Respecting the purse containing coins,' the Phoenix said,
scratching its invisible ear thoughtfully with its shining claw,
'it might be as well, perhaps, to state clearly the amount which
you wish to find, as well as the country where you wish to find it,
and the nature of the coins which you prefer.  It would be indeed
a cold moment when you should find a purse containing but three
oboloi.'

'How much is an oboloi?'

'An obol is about twopence halfpenny,' the Phoenix replied.

'Yes,' said Jane, 'and if you find a purse I suppose it is only
because some one has lost it, and you ought to take it to the
policeman.'

'The situation,' remarked the Phoenix, 'does indeed bristle with
difficulties.'

'What about a buried treasure,' said Cyril, 'and every one was dead
that it belonged to?'

'Mother wouldn't believe THAT,' said more than one voice.

'Suppose,' said Robert--'suppose we asked to be taken where we
could find a purse and give it back to the person it belonged to,
and they would give us something for finding it?'

'We aren't allowed to take money from strangers.  You know we
aren't, Bobs,' said Anthea, making a knot at the end of a needleful
of Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool (which is very wrong, and
you must never do it when you are darning).

'No, THAT wouldn't do,' said Cyril.  'Let's chuck it and go to the
North Pole, or somewhere really interesting.'

'No,' said the girls together, 'there must be SOME way.'

'Wait a sec,' Anthea added.  'I've got an idea coming.  Don't
speak.'

There was a silence as she paused with the darning-needle in the
air!  Suddenly she spoke:

'I see.  Let's tell the carpet to take us somewhere where we can
get the money for mother's present, and--and--and get it some way
that she'll believe in and not think wrong.'

'Well, I must say you are learning the way to get the most out of
the carpet,' said Cyril.  He spoke more heartily and kindly than
usual, because he remembered how Anthea had refrained from snarking
him about tearing the carpet.

'Yes,' said the Phoenix, 'you certainly are.  And you have to
remember that if you take a thing out it doesn't stay in.'

No one paid any attention to this remark at the time, but
afterwards every one thought of it.

'Do hurry up, Panther,' said Robert; and that was why Anthea did
hurry up, and why the big darn in the middle of the carpet was all
open and webby like a fishing net, not tight and close like woven
cloth, which is what a good, well-behaved darn should be.

Then every one put on its outdoor things, the Phoenix fluttered on
to the mantelpiece and arranged its golden feathers in the glass,
and all was ready.  Every one got on to the carpet.

'Please go slowly, dear carpet,' Anthea began; we like to see where
we're going.'  And then she added the difficult wish that had been
decided on.

Next moment the carpet, stiff and raftlike, was sailing over the
roofs of Kentish Town.

'I wish--No, I don't mean that.  I mean it's a PITY we aren't
higher up,' said Anthea, as the edge of the carpet grazed a
chimney-pot.

'That's right.  Be careful,' said the Phoenix, in warning tones. 
'If you wish when you're on a wishing carpet, you DO wish, and
there's an end of it.'

So for a short time no one spoke, and the carpet sailed on in calm
magnificence over St Pancras and King's Cross stations and over the
crowded streets of Clerkenwell.

'We're going out Greenwich way,' said Cyril, as they crossed the
streak of rough, tumbled water that was the Thames.  'We might go
and have a look at the Palace.'

On and on the carpet swept, still keeping much nearer to the
chimney-pots than the children found at all comfortable.  And then,
just over New Cross, a terrible thing happened.

Jane and Robert were in the middle of the carpet.  Part of them was
on the carpet, and part of them--the heaviest part--was on the
great central darn.

'It's all very misty,' said Jane; 'it looks partly like out of
doors and partly like in the nursery at home.  I feel as if I was
going to have measles; everything looked awfully rum then,
remember.'  

'I feel just exactly the same,' Robert said.

'It's the hole,' said the Phoenix; 'it's not measles whatever that
possession may be.'

And at that both Robert and Jane suddenly, and at once, made a
bound to try and get on to the safer part of the carpet, and the
darn gave way and their boots went up, and the heavy heads and
bodies of them went down through the hole, and they landed in a
position something between sitting and sprawling on the flat leads
on the top of a high, grey, gloomy, respectable house whose address
was 705, Amersham Road, New Cross.

The carpet seemed to awaken to new energy as soon as it had got rid
of their weight, and it rose high in the air.  The others lay down
flat and peeped over the edge of the rising carpet.

'Are you hurt?' cried Cyril, and Robert shouted 'No,' and next
moment the carpet had sped away, and Jane and Robert were hidden
from the sight of the others by a stack of smoky chimneys.

'Oh, how awful!' said Anthea.

'It might have been worse,' said the Phoenix.  'What would have
been the sentiments of the survivors if that darn had given way
when we were crossing the river?'

'Yes, there's that,' said Cyril, recovering himself.  'They'll be
all right.  They'll howl till some one gets them down, or drop
tiles into the front garden to attract attention of passersby. 
Bobs has got my one-and-fivepence--lucky you forgot to mend that
hole in my pocket, Panther, or he wouldn't have had it.  They can
tram it home.'

But Anthea would not be comforted.

'It's all my fault,' she said.  'I KNEW the proper way to darn, and
I didn't do it.  It's all my fault.  Let's go home and patch the
carpet with your Etons--something really strong--and send it to
fetch them.'

'All right,' said Cyril; 'but your Sunday jacket is stronger than
my Etons.  We must just chuck mother's present, that's all.  I
wish--'

'Stop!' cried the Phoenix; 'the carpet is dropping to earth.'

And indeed it was.

It sank swiftly, yet steadily, and landed on the pavement of the
Deptford Road.  It tipped a little as it landed, so that Cyril and
Anthea naturally walked off it, and in an instant it had rolled
itself up and hidden behind a gate-post.  It did this so quickly
that not a single person in the Deptford Road noticed it.  The
Phoenix rustled its way into the breast of Cyril's coat, and almost
at the same moment a well-known voice remarked--

'Well, I never!  What on earth are you doing here?'

They were face to face with their pet uncle--their Uncle Reginald.

'We DID think of going to Greenwich Palace and talking about
Nelson,' said Cyril, telling as much of the truth as he thought his
uncle could believe.

'And where are the others?' asked Uncle Reginald.

'I don't exactly know,' Cyril replied, this time quite truthfully.

'Well,' said Uncle Reginald, 'I must fly.  I've a case in the
County Court.  That's the worst of being a beastly solicitor.  One
can't take the chances of life when one gets them.  If only I could
come with you to the Painted Hall and give you lunch at the "Ship"
afterwards!  But, alas! it may not be.'

The uncle felt in his pocket.

'_I_ mustn't enjoy myself,' he said, 'but that's no reason why you
shouldn't.  Here, divide this by four, and the product ought to
give you some desired result.  Take care of yourselves.  Adieu.'

And waving a cheery farewell with his neat umbrella, the good and
high-hatted uncle passed away, leaving Cyril and Anthea to exchange
eloquent glances over the shining golden sovereign that lay in
Cyril's hand.

'Well!' said Anthea.

'Well!' said Cyril.

'Well!' said the Phoenix.

'Good old carpet!' said Cyril, joyously.

'It WAS clever of it--so adequate and yet so simple,' said the
Phoenix, with calm approval.

'Oh, come on home and let's mend the carpet.  I am a beast.  I'd
forgotten the others just for a minute,' said the
conscience-stricken Anthea.

They unrolled the carpet quickly and slyly--they did not want to
attract public attention--and the moment their feet were on the
carpet Anthea wished to be at home, and instantly they were.

The kindness of their excellent uncle had made it unnecessary for
them to go to such extremes as Cyril's Etons or Anthea's Sunday
jacket for the patching of the carpet.

Anthea set to work at once to draw the edges of the broken darn
together, and Cyril hastily went out and bought a large piece of
the marble-patterned American oil-cloth which careful house-wives
use to cover dressers and kitchen tables.  It was the strongest
thing he could think of.

Then they set to work to line the carpet throughout with the
oil-cloth.  The nursery felt very odd and empty without the others,
and Cyril did not feel so sure as he had done about their being
able to 'tram it' home.  So he tried to help Anthea, which was very
good of him, but not much use to her.

The Phoenix watched them for a time, but it was plainly growing
more and more restless.  It fluffed up its splendid feathers, and
stood first on one gilded claw and then on the other, and at last
it said--

'I can bear it no longer.  This suspense!  My Robert--who set my
egg to hatch--in the bosom of whose Norfolk raiment I have nestled
so often and so pleasantly!  I think, if you'll excuse me--'

'Yes--DO,' cried Anthea, 'I wish we'd thought of asking you
before.'

Cyril opened the window.  The Phoenix flapped its sunbright wings
and vanished.

'So THAT'S all right,' said Cyril, taking up his needle and
instantly pricking his hand in a new place.


Of course I know that what you have really wanted to know about all
this time is not what Anthea and Cyril did, but what happened to
Jane and Robert after they fell through the carpet on to the leads
of the house which was called number 705, Amersham Road.

But I had to tell you the other first.  That is one of the most
annoying things about stories, you cannot tell all the different
parts of them at the same time.

Robert's first remark when he found himself seated on the damp,
cold, sooty leads was--

'Here's a go!'

Jane's first act was tears.

'Dry up, Pussy; don't be a little duffer,' said her brother,
kindly, 'it'll be all right.'

And then he looked about, just as Cyril had known he would, for
something to throw down, so as to attract the attention of the
wayfarers far below in the street.  He could not find anything. 
Curiously enough, there were no stones on the leads, not even a
loose tile.  The roof was of slate, and every single slate knew its
place and kept it.  But, as so often happens, in looking for one
thing he found another.  There was a trap-door leading down into
the house.

And that trap-door was not fastened.

'Stop snivelling and come here, Jane,' he cried, encouragingly. 
'Lend a hand to heave this up.  If we can get into the house, we
might sneak down without meeting any one, with luck.  Come on.'

They heaved up the door till it stood straight up, and, as they
bent to look into the hole below, the door fell back with a hollow
clang on the leads behind, and with its noise was mingled a
blood-curdling scream from underneath.

'Discovered!' hissed Robert.  'Oh, my cats alive!'

They were indeed discovered.

They found themselves looking down into an attic, which was also a
lumber-room.  It had boxes and broken chairs, old fenders and
picture-frames, and rag-bags hanging from nails.

In the middle of the floor was a box, open, half full of clothes. 
Other clothes lay on the floor in neat piles.  In the middle of the
piles of clothes sat a lady, very fat indeed, with her feet
sticking out straight in front of her.  And it was she who had
screamed, and who, in fact, was still screaming.

'Don't!' cried Jane, 'please don't!  We won't hurt you.'

'Where are the rest of your gang?' asked the lady, stopping short
in the middle of a scream.

'The others have gone on, on the wishing carpet,' said Jane
truthfully.

'The wishing carpet?' said the lady.

'Yes,' said Jane, before Robert could say 'You shut up!'  'You must
have read about it.  The Phoenix is with them.'

Then the lady got up, and picking her way carefully between the
piles of clothes she got to the door and through it.  She shut it
behind her, and the two children could hear her calling 'Septimus!
Septimus!' in a loud yet frightened way.

'Now,' said Robert quickly; 'I'll drop first.'

He hung by his hands and dropped through the trap-door.

'Now you.  Hang by your hands.  I'll catch you.  Oh, there's no
time for jaw.  Drop, I say.'

Jane dropped.

Robert tried to catch her, and even before they had finished the
breathless roll among the piles of clothes, which was what his
catching ended in, he whispered--

'We'll hide--behind those fenders and things; they'll think we've
gone along the roofs.  Then, when all is calm, we'll creep down the
stairs and take our chance.'

They hastily hid.  A corner of an iron bedstead stuck into Robert's
side, and Jane had only standing room for one foot--but they bore
it--and when the lady came back, not with Septimus, but with
another lady, they held their breath and their hearts beat thickly.

'Gone!' said the first lady; 'poor little things--quite mad, my
dear--and at large!  We must lock this room and send for the
police.'

'Let me look out,' said the second lady, who was, if possible,
older and thinner and primmer than the first.  So the two ladies
dragged a box under the trap-door and put another box on the top of
it, and then they both climbed up very carefully and put their two
trim, tidy heads out of the trap-door to look for the 'mad
children'.

'Now,' whispered Robert, getting the bedstead leg out of his side.

They managed to creep out from their hiding-place and out through
the door before the two ladies had done looking out of the
trap-door on to the empty leads.

Robert and Jane tiptoed down the stairs--one flight, two flights. 
Then they looked over the banisters.  Horror! a servant was coming
up with a loaded scuttle.

The children with one consent crept swiftly through the first open
door.

The room was a study, calm and gentlemanly, with rows of books, a
writing table, and a pair of embroidered slippers warming
themselves in the fender.  The children hid behind the
window-curtains.  As they passed the table they saw on it a
missionary-box with its bottom label torn off, open and empty.

'Oh, how awful!' whispered Jane.  'We shall never get away alive.'

'Hush!' said Robert, not a moment too soon, for there were steps on
the stairs, and next instant the two ladies came into the room. 
They did not see the children, but they saw the empty missionary
box.

'I knew it,' said one.  'Selina, it WAS a gang.  I was certain of
it from the first.  The children were not mad.  They were sent to
distract our attention while their confederates robbed the house.'

'I am afraid you are right,' said Selina; 'and WHERE ARE THEY NOW?'

'Downstairs, no doubt, collecting the silver milk-jug and
sugar-basin and the punch-ladle that was Uncle Joe's, and Aunt
Jerusha's teaspoons.  I shall go down.'

'Oh, don't be so rash and heroic,' said Selina.  'Amelia, we must
call the police from the window.  Lock the door.  I WILL--I will--'

The words ended in a yell as Selina, rushing to the window, came
face to face with the hidden children.

'Oh, don't!' said Jane; 'how can you be so unkind?  We AREN'T
burglars, and we haven't any gang, and we didn't open your
missionary-box.  We opened our own once, but we didn't have to use
the money, so our consciences made us put it back and--DON'T!  Oh,
I wish you wouldn't--'

Miss Selina had seized Jane and Miss Amelia captured Robert.  The
children found themselves held fast by strong, slim hands, pink at
the wrists and white at the knuckles.

'We've got YOU, at any rate,' said Miss Amelia.  'Selina, your
captive is smaller than mine.  You open the window at once and call
"Murder!" as loud as you can.

Selina obeyed; but when she had opened the window, instead of
calling 'Murder!' she called 'Septimus!' because at that very
moment she saw her nephew coming in at the gate.

In another minute he had let himself in with his latch-key and had
mounted the stairs.  As he came into the room Jane and Robert each
uttered a shriek of joy so loud and so sudden that the ladies
leaped with surprise, and nearly let them go.

'It's our own clergyman,' cried Jane.

'Don't you remember us?' asked Robert.  'You married our burglar
for us--don't you remember?'

'I KNEW it was a gang,' said Amelia.  'Septimus, these abandoned
children are members of a desperate burgling gang who are robbing
the house.  They have already forced the missionary-box and
purloined its contents.'

The Reverend Septimus passed his hand wearily over his brow.

'I feel a little faint,' he said, 'running upstairs so quickly.'

'We never touched the beastly box,' said Robert.

'Then your confederates did,' said Miss Selina.

'No, no,' said the curate, hastily.  '_I_ opened the box myself. 
This morning I found I had not enough small change for the Mothers'
Independent Unity Measles and Croup Insurance payments.  I suppose
this is NOT a dream, is it?'

'Dream?  No, indeed.  Search the house.  I insist upon it.'

The curate, still pale and trembling, searched the house, which, of
course, was blamelessly free of burglars.

When he came back he sank wearily into his chair.

'Aren't you going to let us go?' asked Robert, with furious
indignation, for there is something in being held by a strong lady
that sets the blood of a boy boiling in his veins with anger and
despair.  'We've never done anything to you.  It's all the carpet. 
It dropped us on the leads.  WE couldn't help it.  You know how it
carried you over to the island, and you had to marry the burglar to
the cook.'

'Oh, my head!' said the curate.

'Never mind your head just now,' said Robert; 'try to be honest and
honourable, and do your duty in that state of life!'

'This is a judgement on me for something, I suppose,' said the
Reverend Septimus, wearily, 'but I really cannot at the moment
remember what.'

'Send for the police,' said Miss Selina.

'Send for a doctor,' said the curate.

'Do you think they ARE mad, then,' said Miss Amelia.

'I think I am,' said the curate.

Jane had been crying ever since her capture.  Now she said--
'You aren't now, but perhaps you will be, if--And it would serve
you jolly well right, too.'

'Aunt Selina,' said the curate, 'and Aunt Amelia, believe me, this
is only an insane dream.  You will realize it soon.  It has
happened to me before.  But do not let us be unjust, even in a
dream.  Do not hold the children; they have done no harm.  As I
said before, it was I who opened the box.'

The strong, bony hands unwillingly loosened their grasp.  Robert
shook himself and stood in sulky resentment.  But Jane ran to the
curate and embraced him so suddenly that he had not time to defend
himself.

'You're a dear,' she said.  'It IS like a dream just at first, but
you get used to it.  Now DO let us go.  There's a good, kind,
honourable clergyman.'

'I don't know,' said the Reverend Septimus; 'it's a difficult
problem.  It is such a very unusual dream.  Perhaps it's only a
sort of other life--quite real enough for you to be mad in.  And if
you're mad, there might be a dream-asylum where you'd be kindly
treated, and in time restored, cured, to your sorrowing relatives. 
It is very hard to see your duty plainly, even in ordinary life,
and these dream-circumstances are so complicated--'

'If it's a dream,' said Robert, 'you will wake up directly, and
then you'd be sorry if you'd sent us into a dream-asylum, because
you might never get into the same dream again and let us out, and
so we might stay there for ever, and then what about our sorrowing
relatives who aren't in the dreams at all?'

But all the curate could now say was, 'Oh, my head!'

And Jane and Robert felt quite ill with helplessness and
hopelessness.  A really conscientious curate is a very difficult
thing to manage.

And then, just as the hopelessness and the helplessness were
getting to be almost more than they could bear, the two children
suddenly felt that extraordinary shrinking feeling that you always
have when you are just going to vanish.  And the next moment they
had vanished, and the Reverend Septimus was left alone with his
aunts.

'I knew it was a dream,' he cried, wildly.  'I've had something
like it before.  Did you dream it too, Aunt Selina, and you, Aunt
Amelia?  I dreamed that you did, you know.'

Aunt Selina looked at him and then at Aunt Amelia.  Then she said
boldly--

'What do you mean?  WE haven't been dreaming anything.  You must
have dropped off in your chair.'

The curate heaved a sigh of relief.

'Oh, if it's only _I_,' he said; 'if we'd all dreamed it I could
never have believed it, never!'

Afterwards Aunt Selina said to the other aunt--

'Yes, I know it was an untruth, and I shall doubtless be punished
for it in due course.  But I could see the poor dear fellow's brain
giving way before my very eyes.  He couldn't have stood the strain
of three dreams.  It WAS odd, wasn't it?  All three of us dreaming
the same thing at the same moment.  We must never tell dear Seppy. 
But I shall send an account of it to the Psychical Society, with
stars instead of names, you know.'

And she did.  And you can read all about it in one of the society's
fat Blue-books.

Of course, you understand what had happened?  The intelligent
Phoenix had simply gone straight off to the Psammead, and had
wished Robert and Jane at home.  And, of course, they were at home
at once.  Cyril and Anthea had not half finished mending the
carpet.

When the joyful emotions of reunion had calmed down a little, they
all went out and spent what was left of Uncle Reginald's sovereign
in presents for mother.  They bought her a pink silk handkerchief,
a pair of blue and white vases, a bottle of scent, a packet of
Christmas candles, and a cake of soap shaped and coloured like a
tomato, and one that was so like an orange that almost any one you
had given it to would have tried to peel it--if they liked
oranges, of course.  Also they bought a cake with icing on, and the
rest of the money they spent on flowers to put in the vases.

When they had arranged all the things on a table, with the candles
stuck up on a plate ready to light the moment mother's cab was
heard, they washed themselves thoroughly and put on tidier clothes.

Then Robert said, 'Good old Psammead,' and the others said so too.

'But, really, it's just as much good old Phoenix,' said Robert. 
'Suppose it hadn't thought of getting the wish!'

'Ah!' said the Phoenix, 'it is perhaps fortunate for you that I am
such a competent bird.'

'There's mother's cab,' cried Anthea, and the Phoenix hid and they
lighted the candles, and next moment mother was home again.

She liked her presents very much, and found their story of Uncle
Reginald and the sovereign easy and even pleasant to believe.

'Good old carpet,' were Cyril's last sleepy words.

'What there is of it,' said the Phoenix, from the cornice-pole.



CHAPTER 11
THE BEGINNING OF THE END


'Well, I MUST say,' mother said, looking at the wishing carpet as
it lay, all darned and mended and backed with shiny American cloth,
on the floor of the nursery--'I MUST say I've never in my life
bought such a bad bargain as that carpet.'

A soft 'Oh!' of contradiction sprang to the lips of Cyril, Robert,
Jane, and Anthea.  Mother looked at them quickly, and said--

'Well, of course, I see you've mended it very nicely, and that was
sweet of you, dears.'

'The boys helped too,' said the dears, honourably.

'But, still--twenty-two and ninepence!  It ought to have lasted for
years.  It's simply dreadful now.  Well, never mind, darlings,
you've done your best.  I think we'll have coconut matting next
time.  A carpet doesn't have an easy life of it in this room, does
it?'

'It's not our fault, mother, is it, that our boots are the really
reliable kind?'  Robert asked the question more in sorrow than in
anger.

'No, dear, we can't help our boots,' said mother, cheerfully, 'but
we might change them when we come in, perhaps.  It's just an idea
of mine.  I wouldn't dream of scolding on the very first morning
after I've come home.  Oh, my Lamb, how could you?'

This conversation was at breakfast, and the Lamb had been
beautifully good until every one was looking at the carpet, and
then it was for him but the work of a moment to turn a glass dish
of syrupy blackberry jam upside down on his young head.  It was the
work of a good many minutes and several persons to get the jam off
him again, and this interesting work took people's minds off the
carpet, and nothing more was said just then about its badness as a
bargain and about what mother hoped for from coconut matting.

When the Lamb was clean again he had to be taken care of while
mother rumpled her hair and inked her fingers and made her head
ache over the difficult and twisted house-keeping accounts which
cook gave her on dirty bits of paper, and which were supposed to
explain how it was that cook had only fivepence-half-penny and a
lot of unpaid bills left out of all the money mother had sent her
for house-keeping.  Mother was very clever, but even she could not
quite understand the cook's accounts.

The Lamb was very glad to have his brothers and sisters to play
with him.  He had not forgotten them a bit, and he made them play
all the old exhausting games: 'Whirling Worlds', where you swing
the baby round and round by his hands; and 'Leg and Wing', where
you swing him from side to side by one ankle and one wrist.  There
was also climbing Vesuvius.  In this game the baby walks up you,
and when he is standing on your shoulders, you shout as loud as you
can, which is the rumbling of the burning mountain, and then tumble
him gently on to the floor, and roll him there, which is the
destruction of Pompeii.

'All the same, I wish we could decide what we'd better say next
time mother says anything about the carpet,' said Cyril,
breathlessly ceasing to be a burning mountain.

'Well, you talk and decide,' said Anthea; 'here, you lovely ducky
Lamb.  Come to Panther and play Noah's Ark.'

The Lamb came with his pretty hair all tumbled and his face all
dusty from the destruction of Pompeii, and instantly became a baby
snake, hissing and wriggling and creeping in Anthea's arms, as she
said--


     'I love my little baby snake,
     He hisses when he is awake,
     He creeps with such a wriggly creep,
     He wriggles even in his sleep.'


'Crocky,' said the Lamb, and showed all his little teeth.  So
Anthea went on--


     'I love my little crocodile,
     I love his truthful toothful smile;
     It is so wonderful and wide,
     I like to see it--FROM OUTSIDE.'


'Well, you see,' Cyril was saying; 'it's just the old bother. 
Mother can't believe the real true truth about the carpet, and--'

'You speak sooth, O Cyril,' remarked the Phoenix, coming out from
the cupboard where the blackbeetles lived, and the torn books, and
the broken slates, and odd pieces of toys that had lost the rest of
themselves.  'Now hear the wisdom of Phoenix, the son of the
Phoenix--'

'There is a society called that,' said Cyril.

'Where is it?  And what is a society?' asked the bird.

'It's a sort of joined-together lot of people--a sort of
brotherhood--a kind of--well, something very like your temple, you
know, only quite different.'

'I take your meaning,' said the Phoenix.  'I would fain see these
calling themselves Sons of the Phoenix'

'But what about your words of wisdom?'

'Wisdom is always welcome,' said the Phoenix.

'Pretty Polly!' remarked the Lamb, reaching his hands towards the
golden speaker.

The Phoenix modestly retreated behind Robert, and Anthea hastened
to distract the attention of the Lamb by murmuring--


     "I love my little baby rabbit;
     But oh! he has a dreadful habit
     Of paddling out among the rocks
     And soaking both his bunny socks.'


'I don't think you'd care about the sons of the Phoenix, really,'
said Robert.  'I have heard that they don't do anything fiery. 
They only drink a great deal.  Much more than other people, because
they drink lemonade and fizzy things, and the more you drink of
those the more good you get.'

'In your mind, perhaps,' said Jane; 'but it wouldn't be good in
your body.  You'd get too balloony.'

The Phoenix yawned.

'Look here,' said Anthea; 'I really have an idea.  This isn't like
a common carpet.  It's very magic indeed.  Don't you think, if we
put Tatcho on it, and then gave it a rest, the magic part of it
might grow, like hair is supposed to do?'

'It might,' said Robert; 'but I should think paraffin would do as
well--at any rate as far as the smell goes, and that seems to be
the great thing about Tatcho.'

But with all its faults Anthea's idea was something to do, and they
did it.

It was Cyril who fetched the Tatcho bottle from father's
washhand-stand.  But the bottle had not much in it.

'We mustn't take it all,' Jane said, 'in case father's hair began
to come off suddenly.  If he hadn't anything to put on it, it might
all drop off before Eliza had time to get round to the chemist's
for another bottle.  It would be dreadful to have a bald father,
and it would all be our fault.'

'And wigs are very expensive, I believe,' said Anthea.  'Look here,
leave enough in the bottle to wet father's head all over with in
case any emergency emerges--and let's make up with paraffin.  I
expect it's the smell that does the good really--and the smell's
exactly the same.'

So a small teaspoonful of the Tatcho was put on the edges of the
worst darn in the carpet and rubbed carefully into the roots of the
hairs of it, and all the parts that there was not enough Tatcho for
had paraffin rubbed into them with a piece of flannel.  Then the
flannel was burned.  It made a gay flame, which delighted the
Phoenix and the Lamb.

'How often,' said mother, opening the door--'how often am I to tell
you that you are NOT to play with paraffin?  What have you been
doing?'

'We have burnt a paraffiny rag,' Anthea answered.

It was no use telling mother what they had done to the carpet.  She
did not know it was a magic carpet, and no one wants to be laughed
at for trying to mend an ordinary carpet with lamp-oil.

'Well, don't do it again,' said mother.  'And now, away with
melancholy!  Father has sent a telegram.  Look!'  She held it out,
and the children, holding it by its yielding corners, read--


'Box for kiddies at Garrick.  Stalls for us, Haymarket.  Meet
Charing Cross, 6.30.'


'That means,' said mother, 'that you're going to see "The Water
Babies" all by your happy selves, and father and I will take you
and fetch you.  Give me the Lamb, dear, and you and Jane put clean
lace in your red evening frocks, and I shouldn't wonder if you
found they wanted ironing.  This paraffin smell is ghastly.  Run
and get out your frocks.'

The frocks did want ironing--wanted it rather badly, as it
happened; for, being of tomato-Coloured Liberty silk, they had been
found very useful for tableaux vivants when a red dress was
required for Cardinal Richelieu.  They were very nice tableaux,
these, and I wish I could tell you about them; but one cannot tell
everything in a story.  You would have been specially interested in
hearing about the tableau of the Princes in the Tower, when one of
the pillows burst, and the youthful Princes were so covered with
feathers that the picture might very well have been called
'Michaelmas Eve; or, Plucking the Geese'.

Ironing the dresses and sewing the lace in occupied some time, and
no one was dull, because there was the theatre to look forward to,
and also the possible growth of hairs on the carpet, for which
every one kept looking anxiously.  By four o'clock Jane was almost
sure that several hairs were beginning to grow.

The Phoenix perched on the fender, and its conversation, as usual,
was entertaining and instructive--like school prizes are said to
be.  But it seemed a little absent-minded, and even a little sad.

'Don't you feel well, Phoenix, dear?' asked Anthea, stooping to
take an iron off the fire.

'I am not sick,' replied the golden bird, with a gloomy shake of
the head; 'but I am getting old.'

'Why, you've hardly been hatched any time at all.'

'Time,' remarked the Phoenix, 'is measured by heartbeats.  I'm sure
the palpitations I've had since I've known you are enough to blanch
the feathers of any bird.'

'But I thought you lived 500 years,' said Robert, and you've hardly
begun this set of years.  Think of all the time that's before you.'

'Time,' said the Phoenix, 'is, as you are probably aware, merely a
convenient fiction.  There is no such thing as time.  I have lived
in these two months at a pace which generously counterbalances 500
years of life in the desert.  I am old, I am weary.  I feel as if
I ought to lay my egg, and lay me down to my fiery sleep.  But
unless I'm careful I shall be hatched again instantly, and that is
a misfortune which I really do not think I COULD endure.  But do
not let me intrude these desperate personal reflections on your
youthful happiness.  What is the show at the theatre to-night?
Wrestlers?  Gladiators?  A combat of cameleopards and unicorns?'

'I don't think so,' said Cyril; 'it's called "The Water Babies",
and if it's like the book there isn't any gladiating in it.  There
are chimney-sweeps and professors, and a lobster and an otter and
a salmon, and children living in the water.'

'It sounds chilly.'  The Phoenix shivered, and went to sit on the
tongs.

'I don't suppose there will be REAL water,' said Jane.  'And
theatres are very warm and pretty, with a lot of gold and lamps. 
Wouldn't you like to come with us?'

'_I_ was just going to say that,' said Robert, in injured tones,
'only I know how rude it is to interrupt.  Do come, Phoenix, old
chap; it will cheer you up.  It'll make you laugh like any thing. 
Mr Bourchier always makes ripping plays.  You ought to have seen
"Shock-headed Peter" last year.'

'Your words are strange,' said the Phoenix, 'but I will come with
you.  The revels of this Bourchier, of whom you speak, may help me
to forget the weight of my years.'
So that evening the Phoenix snugged inside the waistcoat of
Robert's Etons--a very tight fit it seemed both to Robert and to
the Phoenix--and was taken to the play.

Robert had to pretend to be cold at the glittering, many-mirrored
restaurant where they ate dinner, with father in evening dress,
with a very shiny white shirt-front, and mother looking lovely in
her grey evening dress, that changes into pink and green when she
moves.  Robert pretended that he was too cold to take off his
great-coat, and so sat sweltering through what would otherwise have
been a most thrilling meal.  He felt that he was a blot on the
smart beauty of the family, and he hoped the Phoenix knew what he
was suffering for its sake.  Of course, we are all pleased to
suffer for the sake of others, but we like them to know it unless
we are the very best and noblest kind of people, and Robert was
just ordinary.

Father was full of jokes and fun, and every one laughed all the
time, even with their mouths full, which is not manners.  Robert
thought father would not have been quite so funny about his keeping
his over-coat on if father had known all the truth.  And there
Robert was probably right.

When dinner was finished to the last grape and the last paddle in
the finger glasses--for it was a really truly grown-up dinner--the
children were taken to the theatre, guided to a box close to the
stage, and left.

Father's parting words were: 'Now, don't you stir out of this box,
whatever you do.  I shall be back before the end of the play.  Be
good and you will be happy.  Is this zone torrid enough for the
abandonment of great-coats, Bobs?  No?  Well, then, I should say
you were sickening for something--mumps or measles or thrush or
teething.  Goodbye.'

He went, and Robert was at last able to remove his coat, mop his
perspiring brow, and release the crushed and dishevelled Phoenix. 
Robert had to arrange his damp hair at the looking-glass at the
back of the box, and the Phoenix had to preen its disordered
feathers for some time before either of them was fit to be seen.

They were very, very early.  When the lights went up fully, the
Phoenix, balancing itself on the gilded back of a chair, swayed in
ecstasy.

'How fair a scene is this!' it murmured; 'how far fairer than my
temple!  Or have I guessed aright?  Have you brought me hither to
lift up my heart with emotions of joyous surprise?  Tell me, my
Robert, is it not that this, THIS is my true temple, and the other
was but a humble shrine frequented by outcasts?'

'I don't know about outcasts,' said Robert, 'but you can call this
your temple if you like.  Hush! the music is beginning.'

I am not going to tell you about the play.  As I said before, one
can't tell everything, and no doubt you saw 'The Water Babies'
yourselves.  If you did not it was a shame, or, rather, a pity.

What I must tell you is that, though Cyril and Jane and Robert and
Anthea enjoyed it as much as any children possibly could, the
pleasure of the Phoenix was far, far greater than theirs.

'This is indeed my temple,' it said again and again.  'What radiant
rites!  And all to do honour to me!'

The songs in the play it took to be hymns in its honour.  The
choruses were choric songs in its praise.  The electric lights, it
said, were magic torches lighted for its sake, and it was so
charmed with the footlights that the children could hardly persuade
it to sit still.  But when the limelight was shown it could contain
its approval no longer.  It flapped its golden wings, and cried in
a voice that could be heard all over the theatre:

'Well done, my servants!  Ye have my favour and my countenance!'

Little Tom on the stage stopped short in what he was saying.  A
deep breath was drawn by hundreds of lungs, every eye in the house
turned to the box where the luckless children cringed, and most
people hissed, or said 'Shish!' or 'Turn them out!'

Then the play went on, and an attendant presently came to the box
and spoke wrathfully.

'It wasn't us, indeed it wasn't,' said Anthea, earnestly; 'it was
the bird.'

The man said well, then, they must keep their bird very quiet. 
'Disturbing every one like this,' he said.

'It won't do it again,' said Robert, glancing imploringly at the
golden bird; 'I'm sure it won't.'

'You have my leave to depart,' said the Phoenix gently.

'Well, he is a beauty, and no mistake,' said the attendant, 'only
I'd cover him up during the acts.  It upsets the performance.'

And he went.

'Don't speak again, there's a dear,' said Anthea; 'you wouldn't
like to interfere with your own temple, would you?'

So now the Phoenix was quiet, but it kept whispering to the
children.  It wanted to know why there was no altar, no fire, no
incense, and became so excited and fretful and tiresome that four
at least of the party of five wished deeply that it had been left
at home.

What happened next was entirely the fault of the Phoenix.  It was
not in the least the fault of the theatre people, and no one could
ever understand afterwards how it did happen.  No one, that is,
except the guilty bird itself and the four children.  The Phoenix
was balancing itself on the gilt back of the chair, swaying
backwards and forwards and up and down, as you may see your own
domestic parrot do.  I mean the grey one with the red tail.  All
eyes were on the stage, where the lobster was delighting the
audience with that gem of a song, 'If you can't walk straight, walk
sideways!' when the Phoenix murmured warmly--

'No altar, no fire, no incense!' and then, before any of the
children could even begin to think of stopping it, it spread its
bright wings and swept round the theatre, brushing its gleaming
feathers against delicate hangings and gilded woodwork.

It seemed to have made but one circular wing-sweep, such as you may
see a gull make over grey water on a stormy day.  Next moment it
was perched again on the chair-back--and all round the theatre,
where it had passed, little sparks shone like tinsel seeds, then
little smoke wreaths curled up like growing plants--little flames
opened like flower-buds.  People whispered--then people shrieked.

'Fire!  Fire!'  The curtain went down--the lights went up.

'Fire!' cried every one, and made for the doors.

'A magnificent idea!' said the Phoenix, complacently.  'An enormous
altar--fire supplied free of charge.  Doesn't the incense smell
delicious?'

The only smell was the stifling smell of smoke, of burning silk, or
scorching varnish.

The little flames had opened now into great flame-flowers.  The
people in the theatre were shouting and pressing towards the doors.

'Oh, how COULD you!' cried Jane.  'Let's get out.'

'Father said stay here,' said Anthea, very pale, and trying to
speak in her ordinary voice.

'He didn't mean stay and be roasted,' said Robert.  'No boys on
burning decks for me, thank you.'

'Not much,' said Cyril, and he opened the door of the box.

But a fierce waft of smoke and hot air made him shut it again.  It
was not possible to get out that way.

They looked over the front of the box.  Could they climb down?

It would be possible, certainly; but would they be much better off?

'Look at the people,' moaned Anthea; 'we couldn't get through.'

And, indeed, the crowd round the doors looked as thick as flies in
the jam-making season.

'I wish we'd never seen the Phoenix,' cried Jane.

Even at that awful moment Robert looked round to see if the bird
had overheard a speech which, however natural, was hardly polite or
grateful.

The Phoenix was gone.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'I've read about fires in papers; I'm sure
it's all right.  Let's wait here, as father said.'

'We can't do anything else,' said Anthea bitterly.

'Look here,' said Robert, 'I'm NOT frightened--no, I'm not.  The
Phoenix has never been a skunk yet, and I'm certain it'll see us
through somehow.  I believe in the Phoenix!'

'The Phoenix thanks you, O Robert,' said a golden voice at his
feet, and there was the Phoenix itself, on the Wishing Carpet.

'Quick!' it said.  'Stand on those portions of the carpet which are
truly antique and authentic--and--'

A sudden jet of flame stopped its words.  Alas! the Phoenix had
unconsciously warmed to its subject, and in the unintentional heat
of the moment had set fire to the paraffin with which that morning
the children had anointed the carpet.  It burned merrily.  The
children tried in vain to stamp it out.  They had to stand back and
let it burn itself out.  When the paraffin had burned away it was
found that it had taken with it all the darns of Scotch
heather-mixture fingering.  Only the fabric of the old carpet was
left--and that was full of holes.

'Come,' said the Phoenix, 'I'm cool now.'

The four children got on to what was left of the carpet.  Very
careful they were not to leave a leg or a hand hanging over one of
the holes.  It was very hot--the theatre was a pit of fire.  Every
one else had got out.

Jane had to sit on Anthea's lap.

'Home!' said Cyril, and instantly the cool draught from under the
nursery door played upon their legs as they sat.  They were all on
the carpet still, and the carpet was lying in its proper place on
the nursery floor, as calm and unmoved as though it had never been
to the theatre or taken part in a fire in its life.

Four long breaths of deep relief were instantly breathed.  The
draught which they had never liked before was for the moment quite
pleasant.  And they were safe.  And every one else was safe.  The
theatre had been quite empty when they left.  Every one was sure of
that.

They presently found themselves all talking at once.  Somehow none
of their adventures had given them so much to talk about.  None
other had seemed so real.

'Did you notice--?' they said, and 'Do you remember--?'

When suddenly Anthea's face turned pale under the dirt which it had
collected on it during the fire.

'Oh,' she cried, 'mother and father!  Oh, how awful!  They'll think
we're burned to cinders.  Oh, let's go this minute and tell them we
aren't.'

'We should only miss them,' said the sensible Cyril.

'Well--YOU go then,' said Anthea, 'or I will.  Only do wash your
face first.  Mother will be sure to think you are burnt to a cinder
if she sees you as black as that, and she'll faint or be ill or
something.  Oh, I wish we'd never got to know that Phoenix.'

'Hush!' said Robert; 'it's no use being rude to the bird.  I
suppose it can't help its nature.  Perhaps we'd better wash too. 
Now I come to think of it my hands are rather--'

No one had noticed the Phoenix since it had bidden them to step on
the carpet.  And no one noticed that no one had noticed.

All were partially clean, and Cyril was just plunging into his
great-coat to go and look for his parents--he, and not unjustly,
called it looking for a needle in a bundle of hay--when the sound
of father's latchkey in the front door sent every one bounding up
the stairs.

'Are you all safe?' cried mother's voice; 'are you all safe?' and
the next moment she was kneeling on the linoleum of the hall,
trying to kiss four damp children at once, and laughing and crying
by turns, while father stood looking on and saying he was blessed
or something.

'But how did you guess we'd come home,' said Cyril, later, when
every one was calm enough for talking.

'Well, it was rather a rum thing.  We heard the Garrick was on
fire, and of course we went straight there,' said father, briskly. 
'We couldn't find you, of course--and we couldn't get in--but the
firemen told us every one was safely out.  And then I heard a voice
at my ear say, "Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane"--and something
touched me on the shoulder.  It was a great yellow pigeon, and it
got in the way of my seeing who'd spoken.  It fluttered off, and
then some one said in the other ear, "They're safe at home"; and
when I turned again, to see who it was speaking, hanged if there
wasn't that confounded pigeon on my other shoulder.  Dazed by the
fire, I suppose.  Your mother said it was the voice of--'

'I said it was the bird that spoke,' said mother, 'and so it was. 
Or at least I thought so then.  It wasn't a pigeon.  It was an
orange-coloured cockatoo.  I don't care who it was that spoke.  It
was true and you're safe.'

Mother began to cry again, and father said bed was a good place
after the pleasures of the stage.

So every one went there.

Robert had a talk to the Phoenix that night.

'Oh, very well,' said the bird, when Robert had said what he felt,
'didn't you know that I had power over fire?  Do not distress
yourself.  I, like my high priests in Lombard Street, can undo the
work of flames.  Kindly open the casement.'

It flew out.

That was why the papers said next day that the fire at the theatre
had done less damage than had been anticipated.  As a matter of
fact it had done none, for the Phoenix spent the night in putting
things straight.  How the management accounted for this, and how
many of the theatre officials still believe that they were mad on
that night will never be known.


Next day mother saw the burnt holes in the carpet.

'It caught where it was paraffiny,' said Anthea.

'I must get rid of that carpet at once,' said mother.

But what the children said in sad whispers to each other, as they
pondered over last night's events, was--

'We must get rid of that Phoenix.'



CHAPTER 12
THE END OF THE END


'Egg, toast, tea, milk, tea-cup and saucer, egg-spoon, knife,
butter--that's all, I think,' remarked Anthea, as she put the last
touches to mother's breakfast-tray, and went, very carefully up the
stairs, feeling for every step with her toes, and holding on to the
tray with all her fingers.  She crept into mother's room and set
the tray on a chair.  Then she pulled one of the blinds up very
softly.

'Is your head better, mammy dear?' she asked, in the soft little
voice that she kept expressly for mother's headaches.  'I've
brought your brekkie, and I've put the little cloth with
clover-leaves on it, the one I made you.'

'That's very nice,' said mother sleepily.

Anthea knew exactly what to do for mothers with headaches who had
breakfast in bed.  She fetched warm water and put just enough eau
de Cologne in it, and bathed mother's face and hands with the
sweet-scented water.  Then mother was able to think about
breakfast.

'But what's the matter with my girl?' she asked, when her eyes got
used to the light.

'Oh, I'm so sorry you're ill,' Anthea said.  'It's that horrible
fire and you being so frightened.  Father said so.  And we all feel
as if it was our faults.  I can't explain, but--'

'It wasn't your fault a bit, you darling goosie,' mother said. 
'How could it be?'

'That's just what I can't tell you,' said Anthea.  'I haven't got
a futile brain like you and father, to think of ways of explaining
everything.'

Mother laughed.

'My futile brain--or did you mean fertile?--anyway, it feels very
stiff and sore this morning--but I shall be quite all right by and
by.  And don't be a silly little pet girl.  The fire wasn't your
faults.  No; I don't want the egg, dear.  I'll go to sleep again,
I think.  Don't you worry.  And tell cook not to bother me about
meals.  You can order what you like for lunch.'

Anthea closed the door very mousily, and instantly went downstairs
and ordered what she liked for lunch.  She ordered a pair of
turkeys, a large plum-pudding, cheese-cakes, and almonds and
raisins.

Cook told her to go along, do.  And she might as well not have
ordered anything, for when lunch came it was just hashed mutton and
semolina pudding, and cook had forgotten the sippets for the mutton
hash and the semolina pudding was burnt.

When Anthea rejoined the others she found them all plunged in the
gloom where she was herself.  For every one knew that the days of
the carpet were now numbered.  Indeed, so worn was it that you
could almost have numbered its threads.

So that now, after nearly a month of magic happenings, the time was
at hand when life would have to go on in the dull, ordinary way and
Jane, Robert, Anthea, and Cyril would be just in the same position
as the other children who live in Camden Town, the children whom
these four had so often pitied, and perhaps a little despised.

'We shall be just like them,' Cyril said.

'Except,' said Robert, 'that we shall have more things to remember
and be sorry we haven't got.'

'Mother's going to send away the carpet as soon as she's well
enough to see about that coconut matting.  Fancy us with
coconut-matting--us!  And we've walked under live coconut-trees on
the island where you can't have whooping-cough.'

'Pretty island,' said the Lamb; 'paint-box sands and sea all shiny
sparkly.'

His brothers and sisters had often wondered whether he remembered
that island.  Now they knew that he did.

'Yes,' said Cyril; 'no more cheap return trips by carpet for
us--that's a dead cert.'

They were all talking about the carpet, but what they were all
thinking about was the Phoenix.

The golden bird had been so kind, so friendly, so polite, so
instructive--and now it had set fire to a theatre and made mother
ill.

Nobody blamed the bird.  It had acted in a perfectly natural
manner.  But every one saw that it must not be asked to prolong its
visit.  Indeed, in plain English it must be asked to go!

The four children felt like base spies and treacherous friends; and
each in its mind was saying who ought not to be the one to tell the
Phoenix that there could no longer be a place for it in that happy
home in Camden Town.  Each child was quite sure that one of them
ought to speak out in a fair and manly way, but nobody wanted to be
the one.

They could not talk the whole thing over as they would have liked
to do, because the Phoenix itself was in the cupboard, among the
blackbeetles and the odd shoes and the broken chessmen.

But Anthea tried.

'It's very horrid.  I do hate thinking things about people, and not
being able to say the things you're thinking because of the way
they would feel when they thought what things you were thinking,
and wondered what they'd done to make you think things like that,
and why you were thinking them.'

Anthea was so anxious that the Phoenix should not understand what
she said that she made a speech completely baffling to all.  It was
not till she pointed to the cupboard in which all believed the
Phoenix to be that Cyril understood.

'Yes,' he said, while Jane and Robert were trying to tell each
other how deeply they didn't understand what Anthea were saying;
'but after recent eventfulnesses a new leaf has to be turned over,
and, after all, mother is more important than the feelings of any
of the lower forms of creation, however unnatural.'

'How beautifully you do do it,' said Anthea, absently beginning to
build a card-house for the Lamb--'mixing up what you're saying, I
mean.  We ought to practise doing it so as to be ready for
mysterious occasions.  We're talking about THAT,' she said to Jane
and Robert, frowning, and nodding towards the cupboard where the
Phoenix was.  Then Robert and Jane understood, and each opened its
mouth to speak.

'Wait a minute,' said Anthea quickly; 'the game is to twist up what
you want to say so that no one can understand what you're saying
except the people you want to understand it, and sometimes not
them.'

'The ancient philosophers,' said a golden voice, 'Well understood
the art of which you speak.'

Of course it was the Phoenix, who had not been in the cupboard at
all, but had been cocking a golden eye at them from the cornice
during the whole conversation.

'Pretty dickie!' remarked the Lamb.  'CANARY dickie!'

'Poor misguided infant,' said the Phoenix.

There was a painful pause; the four could not but think it likely
that the Phoenix had understood their very veiled allusions,
accompanied as they had been by gestures indicating the cupboard. 
For the Phoenix was not wanting in intelligence.

'We were just saying--' Cyril began, and I hope he was not going to
say anything but the truth.  Whatever it was he did not say it, for
the Phoenix interrupted him, and all breathed more freely as it
spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'that you have some tidings of a fatal nature
to communicate to our degraded black brothers who run to and fro
for ever yonder.'  It pointed a claw at the cupboard, where the
blackbeetles lived.

'Canary TALK,' said the Lamb joyously; 'go and show mammy.'

He wriggled off Anthea's lap.

'Mammy's asleep,' said Jane, hastily.  'Come and be wild beasts in
a cage under the table.'

But the Lamb caught his feet and hands, and even his head, so often
and so deeply in the holes of the carpet that the cage, or table,
had to be moved on to the linoleum, and the carpet lay bare to
sight with all its horrid holes.

'Ah,' said the bird, 'it isn't long for this world.'

'No,' said Robert; 'everything comes to an end.  It's awful.'

'Sometimes the end is peace,' remarked the Phoenix.  'I imagine
that unless it comes soon the end of your carpet will be pieces.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, respectfully kicking what was left of the
carpet.  The movement of its bright colours caught the eye of the
Lamb, who went down on all fours instantly and began to pull at the
red and blue threads.

'Aggedydaggedygaggedy,' murmured the Lamb; 'daggedy ag ag ag!'

And before any one could have winked (even if they had wanted to,
and it would not have been of the slightest use) the middle of the
floor showed bare, an island of boards surrounded by a sea of
linoleum.  The magic carpet was gone, AND SO WAS THE LAMB!

There was a horrible silence.  The Lamb--the baby, all alone--had
been wafted away on that untrustworthy carpet, so full of holes and
magic.  And no one could know where he was.  And no one could
follow him because there was now no carpet to follow on.

Jane burst into tears, but Anthea, though pale and frantic, was
dry-eyed.

'It MUST be a dream,' she said.

'That's what the clergyman said,' remarked Robert forlornly; 'but
it wasn't, and it isn't.'

'But the Lamb never wished,' said Cyril; 'he was only talking
Bosh.'

'The carpet understands all speech,' said the Phoenix, 'even Bosh. 
I know not this Boshland, but be assured that its tongue is not
unknown to the carpet.'

'Do you mean, then,' said Anthea, in white terror, 'that when he
was saying "Agglety dag," or whatever it was, that he meant
something by it?'

'All speech has meaning,' said the Phoenix.

'There I think you're wrong,' said Cyril; 'even people who talk
English sometimes say things that don't mean anything in
particular.'

'Oh, never mind that now,' moaned Anthea; 'you think "Aggety dag"
meant something to him and the carpet?'

'Beyond doubt it held the same meaning to the carpet as to the
luckless infant,' the Phoenix said calmly.

'And WHAT did it mean?  Oh WHAT?'

'Unfortunately,' the bird rejoined, 'I never studied Bosh.'

Jane sobbed noisily, but the others were calm with what is
sometimes called the calmness of despair.  The Lamb was gone--the
Lamb, their own precious baby brother--who had never in his happy
little life been for a moment out of the sight of eyes that loved
him--he was gone.  He had gone alone into the great world with no
other companion and protector than a carpet with holes in it.  The
children had never really understood before what an enormously big
place the world is.  And the Lamb might be anywhere in it!

'And it's no use going to look for him.'  Cyril, in flat and
wretched tones, only said what the others were thinking.

'Do you wish him to return?' the Phoenix asked; it seemed to speak
with some surprise.

'Of course we do!' cried everybody.

'Isn't he more trouble than he's worth?' asked the bird doubtfully.

'No, no.  Oh, we do want him back!  We do!'

'Then,' said the wearer of gold plumage, 'if you'll excuse me, I'll
just pop out and see what I can do.'

Cyril flung open the window, and the Phoenix popped out.

'Oh, if only mother goes on sleeping!  Oh, suppose she wakes up and
wants the Lamb!  Oh, suppose the servants come!  Stop crying, Jane.
It's no earthly good.  No, I'm not crying myself--at least I wasn't
till you said so, and I shouldn't anyway if--if there was any
mortal thing we could do.  Oh, oh, oh!'

Cyril and Robert were boys, and boys never cry, of course.  Still,
the position was a terrible one, and I do not wonder that they made
faces in their efforts to behave in a really manly way.

And at this awful moment mother's bell rang.

A breathless stillness held the children.  Then Anthea dried her
eyes.  She looked round her and caught up the poker.  She held it
out to Cyril.

'Hit my hand hard,' she said; 'I must show mother some reason for
my eyes being like they are.  Harder,' she cried as Cyril gently
tapped her with the iron handle.  And Cyril, agitated and
trembling, nerved himself to hit harder, and hit very much harder
than he intended.

Anthea screamed.

'Oh, Panther, I didn't mean to hurt, really,' cried Cyril,
clattering the poker back into the fender.

'It's--all--right,' said Anthea breathlessly, clasping the hurt
hand with the one that wasn't hurt; 'it's--getting--red.'

It was--a round red and blue bump was rising on the back of it.
'Now, Robert,' she said, trying to breathe more evenly, 'you go
out--oh, I don't know where--on to the dustbin--anywhere--and I
shall tell mother you and the Lamb are out.'

Anthea was now ready to deceive her mother for as long as ever she
could.  Deceit is very wrong, we know, but it seemed to Anthea that
it was her plain duty to keep her mother from being frightened
about the Lamb as long as possible.  And the Phoenix might help.

'It always has helped,' Robert said; 'it got us out of the tower,
and even when it made the fire in the theatre it got us out all
right.  I'm certain it will manage somehow.'

Mother's bell rang again.

'Oh, Eliza's never answered it,' cried Anthea; 'she never does. 
Oh, I must go.'

And she went.

Her heart beat bumpingly as she climbed the stairs.  Mother would
be certain to notice her eyes--well, her hand would account for
that.  But the Lamb--

'No, I must NOT think of the Lamb, she said to herself, and bit her
tongue till her eyes watered again, so as to give herself something
else to think of.  Her arms and legs and back, and even her
tear-reddened face, felt stiff with her resolution not to let
mother be worried if she could help it.

She opened the door softly.

'Yes, mother?' she said.

'Dearest,' said mother, 'the Lamb--'

Anthea tried to be brave.  She tried to say that the Lamb and
Robert were out.  Perhaps she tried too hard.  Anyway, when she
opened her mouth no words came.  So she stood with it open.  It
seemed easier to keep from crying with one's mouth in that unusual
position.

'The Lamb,' mother went on; 'he was very good at first, but he's
pulled the toilet-cover off the dressing-table with all the brushes
and pots and things, and now he's so quiet I'm sure he's in some
dreadful mischief.  And I can't see him from here, and if I'd got
out of bed to see I'm sure I should have fainted.'

'Do you mean he's HERE?' said Anthea.

'Of course he's here,' said mother, a little impatiently.  'Where
did you think he was?'

Anthea went round the foot of the big mahogany bed.  There was a
pause.

'He's not here NOW,' she said.

That he had been there was plain, from the toilet-cover on the
floor, the scattered pots and bottles, the wandering brushes and
combs, all involved in the tangle of ribbons and laces which an
open drawer had yielded to the baby's inquisitive fingers.

'He must have crept out, then,' said mother; 'do keep him with you,
there's a darling.  If I don't get some sleep I shall be a wreck
when father comes home.'

Anthea closed the door softly.  Then she tore downstairs and burst
into the nursery, crying--

'He must have wished he was with mother.  He's been there all the
time.  "Aggety dag--"'

The unusual word was frozen on her lip, as people say in books.

For there, on the floor, lay the carpet, and on the carpet,
surrounded by his brothers and by Jane, sat the Lamb.  He had
covered his face and clothes with vaseline and violet powder, but
he was easily recognizable in spite of this disguise.

'You are right,' said the Phoenix, who was also present; 'it is
evident that, as you say, "Aggety dag" is Bosh for "I want to be
where my mother is," and so the faithful carpet understood it.'

'But how,' said Anthea, catching up the Lamb and hugging him--'how
did he get back here?'

'Oh,' said the Phoenix, 'I flew to the Psammead and wished that
your infant brother were restored to your midst, and immediately it
was so.'

'Oh, I am glad, I am glad!' cried Anthea, still hugging the baby. 
'Oh, you darling!  Shut up, Jane!  I don't care HOW much he comes
off on me!  Cyril!  You and Robert roll that carpet up and put it
in the beetle-cupboard.  He might say "Aggety dag" again, and it
might mean something quite different next time.  Now, my Lamb,
Panther'll clean you a little.  Come on.'

'I hope the beetles won't go wishing,' said Cyril, as they rolled
up the carpet.


Two days later mother was well enough to go out, and that evening
the coconut matting came home.  The children had talked and talked,
and thought and thought, but they had not found any polite way of
telling the Phoenix that they did not want it to stay any longer.

The days had been days spent by the children in embarrassment, and
by the Phoenix in sleep.

And, now the matting was laid down, the Phoenix awoke and fluttered
down on to it.

It shook its crested head.

'I like not this carpet,' it said; 'it is harsh and unyielding, and
it hurts my golden feet.'

'We've jolly well got to get used to its hurting OUR golden feet,'
said Cyril.

'This, then,' said the bird, 'supersedes the Wishing Carpet.'

'Yes,' said Robert, 'if you mean that it's instead of it.'

'And the magic web?' inquired the Phoenix, with sudden eagerness.

'It's the rag-and-bottle man's day to-morrow,' said Anthea, in a
low voice; 'he will take it away.'

The Phoenix fluttered up to its favourite perch on the chair-back.

'Hear me!' it cried, 'oh youthful children of men, and restrain
your tears of misery and despair, for what must be must be, and I
would not remember you, thousands of years hence, as base ingrates
and crawling worms compact of low selfishness.'

'I should hope not, indeed,' said Cyril.

'Weep not,' the bird went on; 'I really do beg that you won't weep.

I will not seek to break the news to you gently.  Let the blow fall
at once.  The time has come when I must leave you.'

All four children breathed forth a long sigh of relief.

'We needn't have bothered so about how to break the news to it,'
whispered Cyril.

'Ah, sigh not so,' said the bird, gently.  'All meetings end in
partings.  I must leave you.  I have sought to prepare you for
this.  Ah, do not give way!'

'Must you really go--so soon?' murmured Anthea.  It was what she
had often heard her mother say to calling ladies in the afternoon.

'I must, really; thank you so much, dear,' replied the bird, just
as though it had been one of the ladies.

'I am weary,' it went on.  'I desire to rest--after all the
happenings of this last moon I do desire really to rest, and I ask
of you one last boon.'

'Any little thing we can do,' said Robert.

Now that it had really come to parting with the Phoenix, whose
favourite he had always been, Robert did feel almost as miserable
as the Phoenix thought they all did.

'I ask but the relic designed for the rag-and-bottle man.  Give me
what is left of the carpet and let me go.'

'Dare we?' said Anthea.  'Would mother mind?'

'I have dared greatly for your sakes,' remarked the bird.

'Well, then, we will,' said Robert.

The Phoenix fluffed out its feathers joyously.

'Nor shall you regret it, children of golden hearts,' it said. 
'Quick--spread the carpet and leave me alone; but first pile high
the fire.  Then, while I am immersed in the sacred preliminary
rites, do ye prepare sweet-smelling woods and spices for the last
act of parting.'

The children spread out what was left of the carpet.  And, after
all, though this was just what they would have wished to have
happened, all hearts were sad.  Then they put half a scuttle of
coal on the fire and went out, closing the door on the
Phoenix--left, at last, alone with the carpet.

'One of us must keep watch,' said Robert, excitedly, as soon as
they were all out of the room, 'and the others can go and buy sweet
woods and spices.  Get the very best that money can buy, and plenty
of them.  Don't let's stand to a threepence or so.  I want it to
have a jolly good send-off.  It's the only thing that'll make us
feel less horrid inside.'

It was felt that Robert, as the pet of the Phoenix, ought to have
the last melancholy pleasure of choosing the materials for its
funeral pyre.

'I'll keep watch if you like,' said Cyril.  'I don't mind.  And,
besides, it's raining hard, and my boots let in the wet.  You might
call and see if my other ones are "really reliable" again yet.'

So they left Cyril, standing like a Roman sentinel outside the door
inside which the Phoenix was getting ready for the great change,
and they all went out to buy the precious things for the last sad
rites.

'Robert is right,' Anthea said; 'this is no time for being careful
about our money.  Let's go to the stationer's first, and buy a
whole packet of lead-pencils.  They're cheaper if you buy them by
the packet.'

This was a thing that they had always wanted to do, but it needed
the great excitement of a funeral pyre and a parting from a beloved
Phoenix to screw them up to the extravagance.

The people at the stationer's said that the pencils were real
cedar-wood, so I hope they were, for stationers should always speak
the truth.  At any rate they cost one-and-fourpence.  Also they
spent sevenpence three-farthings on a little sandal-wood box inlaid
with ivory.

'Because,' said Anthea, 'I know sandalwood smells sweet, and when
it's burned it smells very sweet indeed.'

'Ivory doesn't smell at all,' said Robert, 'but I expect when you
burn it it smells most awful vile, like bones.'

At the grocer's they bought all the spices they could remember the
names of--shell-like mace, cloves like blunt nails, peppercorns,
the long and the round kind; ginger, the dry sort, of course; and
the beautiful bloom-covered shells of fragrant cinnamon.  Allspice
too, and caraway seeds (caraway seeds that smelt most deadly when
the time came for burning them).

Camphor and oil of lavender were bought at the chemist's, and also
a little scent sachet labelled 'Violettes de Parme'.

They took the things home and found Cyril still on guard.  When
they had knocked and the golden voice of the Phoenix had said 'Come
in,' they went in.

There lay the carpet--or what was left of it--and on it lay an egg,
exactly like the one out of which the Phoenix had been hatched.

The Phoenix was walking round and round the egg, clucking with joy
and pride.

'I've laid it, you see,' it said, 'and as fine an egg as ever I
laid in all my born days.'

Every one said yes, it was indeed a beauty.

The things which the children had bought were now taken out of
their papers and arranged on the table, and when the Phoenix had
been persuaded to leave its egg for a moment and look at the
materials for its last fire it was quite overcome.

'Never, never have I had a finer pyre than this will be.  You shall
not regret it,' it said, wiping away a golden tear.  'Write
quickly: "Go and tell the Psammead to fulfil the last wish of the
Phoenix, and return instantly".'

But Robert wished to be polite and he wrote--

'Please go and ask the Psammead to be so kind as to fulfil the
Phoenix's last wish, and come straight back, if you please.'
The paper was pinned to the carpet, which vanished and returned in
the flash of an eye.

Then another paper was written ordering the carpet to take the egg
somewhere where it wouldn't be hatched for another two thousand
years.  The Phoenix tore itself away from its cherished egg, which
it watched with yearning tenderness till, the paper being pinned
on, the carpet hastily rolled itself up round the egg, and both
vanished for ever from the nursery of the house in Camden Town.

'Oh, dear! oh, dear! oh, dear!' said everybody.

'Bear up,' said the bird; 'do you think _I_ don't suffer, being
parted from my precious new-laid egg like this?  Come, conquer your
emotions and build my fire.'

'OH!' cried Robert, suddenly, and wholly breaking down, 'I can't
BEAR you to go!'

The Phoenix perched on his shoulder and rubbed its beak softly
against his ear.

'The sorrows of youth soon appear but as dreams,' it said. 
'Farewell, Robert of my heart.  I have loved you well.'

The fire had burnt to a red glow.  One by one the spices and sweet
woods were laid on it.  Some smelt nice and some--the caraway seeds
and the Violettes de Parme sachet among them--smelt worse than you
would think possible.

'Farewell, farewell, farewell, farewell!' said the Phoenix, in a
far-away voice.

'Oh, GOOD-BYE,' said every one, and now all were in tears.

The bright bird fluttered seven times round the room and settled in
the hot heart of the fire.  The sweet gums and spices and woods
flared and flickered around it, but its golden feathers did not
burn.  It seemed to grow red-hot to the very inside heart of
it--and then before the eight eyes of its friends it fell together,
a heap of white ashes, and the flames of the cedar pencils and the
sandal-wood box met and joined above it.


'Whatever have you done with the carpet?' asked mother next day.

'We gave it to some one who wanted it very much.  The name began
with a P,' said Jane.

The others instantly hushed her.

'Oh, well, it wasn't worth twopence,' said mother.

'The person who began with P said we shouldn't lose by it,' Jane
went on before she could be stopped.

'I daresay!' said mother, laughing.

But that very night a great box came, addressed to the children by
all their names.  Eliza never could remember the name of the
carrier who brought it.  It wasn't Carter Paterson or the Parcels
Delivery.

It was instantly opened.  It was a big wooden box, and it had to be
opened with a hammer and the kitchen poker; the long nails came
squeaking out, and boards scrunched as they were wrenched off. 
Inside the box was soft paper, with beautiful Chinese patterns on
it--blue and green and red and violet.  And under the paper--well,
almost everything lovely that you can think of.  Everything of
reasonable size, I mean; for, of course, there were no motors or
flying machines or thoroughbred chargers.  But there really was
almost everything else.  Everything that the children had always
wanted--toys and games and books, and chocolate and candied
cherries and paint-boxes and photographic cameras, and all the
presents they had always wanted to give to father and mother and
the Lamb, only they had never had the money for them.  At the very
bottom of the box was a tiny golden feather.  No one saw it but
Robert, and he picked it up and hid it in the breast of his jacket,
which had been so often the nesting-place of the golden bird.  When
he went to bed the feather was gone.  It was the last he ever saw
of the Phoenix.

Pinned to the lovely fur cloak that mother had always wanted was a
paper, and it said--

'In return for the carpet.  With gratitude.--P.'

You may guess how father and mother talked it over.  They decided
at last the person who had had the carpet, and whom, curiously
enough, the children were quite unable to describe, must be an
insane millionaire who amused himself by playing at being a
rag-and-bone man.  But the children knew better.

They knew that this was the fulfilment, by the powerful Psammead,
of the last wish of the Phoenix, and that this glorious and
delightful boxful of treasures was really the very, very, very end
of the Phoenix and the Carpet.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext of The Phoenix and the Carpet by Nesbit 

