Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Roadmender, by Michael Fairless
Pen name of Margaret Fairless Barber


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Roadmender

by Michael Fairless [Margaret Fairless Barber]

November, 1996  [Etext #705]


Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Roadmender, by Michael Fairless
*****This file should be named rmend10.txt or rmend10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, rmend11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, rmend10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Roadmender by Michael Fairless
Scanned and proofed by David Price
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





The Roadmender




I HAVE attained my ideal:  I am a roadmender, some say 
stonebreaker.  Both titles are correct, but the one is more 
pregnant than the other.  All day I sit by the roadside on a 
stretch of grass under a high hedge of saplings and a tangle of 
traveller's joy, woodbine, sweetbrier, and late roses.  Opposite me 
is a white gate, seldom used, if one may judge from the trail of 
honeysuckle growing tranquilly along it:  I know now that whenever 
and wherever I die my soul will pass out through this white gate; 
and then, thank God, I shall not have need to undo that trail.

In our youth we discussed our ideals freely:  I wonder how many 
beside myself have attained, or would understand my attaining.  
After all, what do we ask of life, here or indeed hereafter, but 
leave to serve, to live, to commune with our fellowmen and with 
ourselves; and from the lap of earth to look up into the face of 
God?  All these gifts are mine as I sit by the winding white road 
and serve the footsteps of my fellows.  There is no room in my life 
for avarice or anxiety; I who serve at the altar live of the altar:  
I lack nothing but have nothing over; and when the winter of life 
comes I shall join the company of weary old men who sit on the 
sunny side of the workhouse wall and wait for the tender mercies of 
God.

Just now it is the summer of things; there is life and music 
everywhere - in the stones themselves, and I live to-day beating 
out the rhythmical hammer-song of The Ring.  There is real physical 
joy in the rise and swing of the arm, in the jar of a fair stroke, 
the split and scatter of the quartz:  I am learning to be 
ambidextrous, for why should Esau sell his birthright when there is 
enough for both?  Then the rest-hour comes, bringing the luxurious 
ache of tired but not weary limbs; and I lie outstretched and renew 
my strength, sometimes with my face deep-nestled in the cool green 
grass, sometimes on my back looking up into the blue sky which no 
wise man would wish to fathom.

The birds have no fear of me; am I not also of the brown brethren 
in my sober fustian livery?  They share my meals - at least the 
little dun-coated Franciscans do; the blackbirds and thrushes care 
not a whit for such simple food as crumbs, but with legs well apart 
and claws tense with purchase they disinter poor brother worm, 
having first mocked him with sound of rain.  The robin that lives 
by the gate regards my heap of stones as subject to his special 
inspection.  He sits atop and practises the trill of his summer 
song until it shrills above and through the metallic clang of my 
strokes; and when I pause he cocks his tail, with a humorous 
twinkle of his round eye which means - "What! shirking, big 
brother?" - and I fall, ashamed, to my mending of roads.

The other day, as I lay with my face in the grass, I heard a gentle 
rustle, and raised my head to find a hedge-snake watching me 
fearless, unwinking.  I stretched out my hand, picked it up 
unresisting, and put it in my coat like the husbandman of old.  Was 
he so ill-rewarded, I wonder, with the kiss that reveals secrets?  
My snake slept in peace while I hammered away with an odd 
quickening of heart as I thought how to me, as to Melampus, had 
come the messenger - had come, but to ears deafened by centuries of 
misrule, blindness, and oppression; so that, with all my longing, I 
am shut out of the wondrous world where walked Melampus and the 
Saint.  To me there is no suggestion of evil in the little silent 
creatures, harmless, or deadly only with the Death which is Life.  
The beasts who turn upon us, as a rule maul and tear 
unreflectingly; with the snake there is the swift, silent strike, 
the tiny, tiny wound, then sleep and a forgetting.

My brown friend, with its message unspoken, slid away into the 
grass at sundown to tell its tale in unstopped ears; and I, my task 
done, went home across the fields to the solitary cottage where I 
lodge.  It is old and decrepit - two rooms, with a quasi-attic over 
them reached by a ladder from the kitchen and reached only by me.  
It is furnished with the luxuries of life, a truckle bed, table, 
chair, and huge earthenware pan which I fill from the ice-cold well 
at the back of the cottage.  Morning and night I serve with the 
Gibeonites, their curse my blessing, as no doubt it was theirs when 
their hearts were purged by service.  Morning and night I send down 
the moss-grown bucket with its urgent message from a dry and dusty 
world; the chain tightens through my hand as the liquid treasure 
responds to the messenger, and then with creak and jangle - the 
welcome of labouring earth - the bucket slowly nears the top and 
disperses the treasure in the waiting vessels.  The Gibeonites were 
servants in the house of God, ministers of the sacrament of service 
even as the High Priest himself; and I, sharing their high office 
of servitude, thank God that the ground was accursed for my sake, 
for surely that curse was the womb of all unborn blessing.

The old widow with whom I lodge has been deaf for the last twenty 
years.  She speaks in the strained high voice which protests 
against her own infirmity, and her eyes have the pathetic look of 
those who search in silence.  For many years she lived alone with 
her son, who laboured on the farm two miles away.  He met his death 
rescuing a carthorse from its burning stable; and the farmer gave 
the cottage rent free and a weekly half-crown for life to the poor 
old woman whose dearest terror was the workhouse.  With my shilling 
a week rent, and sharing of supplies, we live in the lines of 
comfort.  Of death she has no fears, for in the long chest in the 
kitchen lie a web of coarse white linen, two pennies covered with 
the same to keep down tired eyelids, decent white stockings, and a 
white cotton sun-bonnet - a decorous death-suit truly - and enough 
money in the little bag for self-respecting burial.  The farmer 
buried his servant handsomely - good man, he knew the love of 
reticent grief for a 'kind' burial - and one day Harry's mother is 
to lie beside him in the little churchyard which has been a 
cornfield, and may some day be one again.



CHAPTER II



ON Sundays my feet take ever the same way.  First my temple 
service, and then five miles tramp over the tender, dewy fields, 
with their ineffable earthy smell, until I reach the little church 
at the foot of the grey-green down.  Here, every Sunday, a young 
priest from a neighbouring village says Mass for the tiny hamlet, 
where all are very old or very young - for the heyday of life has 
no part under the long shadow of the hills, but is away at sea or 
in service.  There is a beautiful seemliness in the extreme youth 
of the priest who serves these aged children of God.  He bends to 
communicate them with the reverent tenderness of a son, and reads 
with the careful intonation of far-seeing love.  To the old people 
he is the son of their old age, God-sent to guide their tottering 
footsteps along the highway of foolish wayfarers; and he, with his 
youth and strength, wishes no better task.  Service ended, we greet 
each other friendly - for men should not be strange in the acre of 
God; and I pass through the little hamlet and out and up on the 
grey down beyond.  Here, at the last gate, I pause for breakfast; 
and then up and on with quickening pulse, and evergreen memory of 
the weary war-worn Greeks who broke rank to greet the great blue 
Mother-way that led to home.  I stand on the summit hatless, the 
wind in my hair, the smack of salt on my cheek, all round me 
rolling stretches of cloud-shadowed down, no sound but the shrill 
mourn of the peewit and the gathering of the sea.

The hours pass, the shadows lengthen, the sheep-bells clang; and I 
lie in my niche under the stunted hawthorn watching the to and fro 
of the sea, and AEolus shepherding his white sheep across the blue.  
I love the sea with its impenetrable fathoms, its wash and 
undertow, and rasp of shingle sucked anew.  I love it for its 
secret dead in the Caverns of Peace, of which account must be given 
when the books are opened and earth and heaven have fled away.  Yet 
in my love there is a paradox, for as I watch the restless, 
ineffective waves I think of the measureless, reflective depths of 
the still and silent Sea of Glass, of the dead, small and great, 
rich or poor, with the works which follow them, and of the Voice as 
the voice of many waters, when the multitude of one mind rends 
heaven with alleluia:  and I lie so still that I almost feel the 
kiss of White Peace on my mouth.  Later still, when the flare of 
the sinking sun has died away and the stars rise out of a veil of 
purple cloud, I take my way home, down the slopes, through the 
hamlet, and across miles of sleeping fields; over which night has 
thrown her shifting web of mist - home to the little attic, the 
deep, cool well, the kindly wrinkled face with its listening eyes - 
peace in my heart and thankfulness for the rhythm of the road.

Monday brings the joy of work, second only to the Sabbath of rest, 
and I settle to my heap by the white gate.  Soon I hear the distant 
stamp of horsehoofs, heralding the grind and roll of the wheels 
which reaches me later - a heavy flour-waggon with a team of four 
great gentle horses, gay with brass trappings and scarlet ear-caps.  
On the top of the craftily piled sacks lies the white-clad 
waggoner, a pink in his mouth which he mumbles meditatively, and 
the reins looped over the inactive whip - why should he drive a 
willing team that knows the journey and responds as strenuously to 
a cheery chirrup as to the well-directed lash?  We greet and pass 
the time of day, and as he mounts the rise he calls back a warning 
of coming rain.  I am already white with dust as he with flour, 
sacramental dust, the outward and visible sign of the stir and beat 
of the heart of labouring life.

Next to pass down the road is an anxious ruffled hen, her speckled 
breast astir with maternal troubles.  She walks delicately, lifting 
her feet high and glancing furtively from side to side with comb 
low dressed.  The sight of man, the heartless egg-collector, from 
whose haunts she has fled, wrings from her a startled cluck, and 
she makes for the white gate, climbs through, and disappears.  I 
know her feelings too well to intrude.  Many times already has she 
hidden herself, amassed four or five precious treasures, brooding 
over them with anxious hope; and then, after a brief desertion to 
seek the necessary food, she has returned to find her efforts at 
concealment vain, her treasures gone.  At last, with the courage of 
despair she has resolved to brave the terrors of the unknown and 
seek a haunt beyond the tyranny of man.  I will watch over her from 
afar, and when her mother-hope is fulfilled I will marshal her and 
her brood back to the farm where she belongs; for what end I care 
not to think, it is of the mystery which lies at the heart of 
things; and we are all God's beasts, says St Augustine.

Here is my stone-song, a paraphrase of the Treasure Motif.

[Music score which cannot be reproduced.  It is F# dotted crotchet, 
F# quaver, F# quaver, F# dotted crotchet, D crotchet, E crotchet.  
This bar is then repeated once more.]

What a wonderful work Wagner has done for humanity in translating 
the toil of life into the readable script of music!  For those who 
seek the tale of other worlds his magic is silent; but earth-
travail under his wand becomes instinct with rhythmic song to an 
accompaniment of the elements, and the blare and crash of the 
bottomless pit itself.  The Pilgrim's March is the sad sound of 
footsore men; the San Graal the tremulous yearning of servitude for 
richer, deeper bondage.  The yellow, thirsty flames lick up the 
willing sacrifice, the water wails the secret of the river and the 
sea; the birds and beasts, the shepherd with his pipe, the 
underground life in rocks and caverns, all cry their message to 
this nineteenth-century toiling, labouring world - and to me as I 
mend my road.

Two tramps come and fling themselves by me as I eat my noonday 
meal.  The one, red-eyed, furtive, lies on his side with restless, 
clutching hands that tear and twist and torture the living grass, 
while his lips mutter incoherently.  The other sits stooped, bare-
footed, legs wide apart, his face grey, almost as grey as his 
stubbly beard; and it is not long since Death looked him in the 
eyes.  He tells me querulously of a two hundred miles tramp since 
early spring, of search for work, casual jobs with more kicks than 
halfpence, and a brief but blissful sojourn in a hospital bed, from 
which he was dismissed with sentence passed upon him.  For himself, 
he is determined to die on the road under a hedge, where a man can 
see and breathe.  His anxiety is all for his fellow; HE has said he 
will "do for a man"; he wants to "swing," to get out of his "dog's 
life."  I watch him as he lies, this Ishmael and would-be Lamech.  
Ignorance, hunger, terror, the exhaustion of past generations, have 
done their work.  The man is mad, and would kill his fellowman.

Presently we part, and the two go, dogged and footsore, down the 
road which is to lead them into the great silence.



CHAPTER III



YESTERDAY was a day of encounters.

First, early in the morning, a young girl came down the road on a 
bicycle.  Her dressguard was loose, and she stopped to ask for a 
piece of string.  When I had tied it for her she looked at me, at 
my worn dusty clothes and burnt face; and then she took a Niphetos 
rose from her belt and laid it shyly in my dirty disfigured palm.  
I bared my head, and stood hat in hand looking after her as she 
rode away up the hill.  Then I took my treasure and put it in a 
nest of cool dewy grass under the hedge.  ECCE ANCILLA DOMINI.

My next visitor was a fellow-worker on his way to a job at the 
cross-roads.  He stood gazing meditatively at my heap of stones.

"Ow long 'ave yer bin at this job that y'ere in such a hurry?"

I stayed my hammer to answer - "Four months."

"Seen better days?"

"Never," I said emphatically, and punctuated the remark with a 
stone split neatly in four.

The man surveyed me in silence for a moment; then he said slowly, 
"Mean ter say yer like crackin' these blamed stones to fill 'oles 
some other fool's made?"

I nodded.

"Well, that beats everything.  Now, I 'AVE seen better days; worked 
in a big brewery over near Maidstone - a town that, and something 
doing; and now, 'ere I am, 'ammering me 'eart out on these blasted 
stones for a bit o' bread and a pipe o' baccy once a week - it 
ain't good enough."  He pulled a blackened clay from his pocket and 
began slowly filling it with rank tobacco; then he lit it carefully 
behind his battered hat, put the spent match back in his pocket, 
rose to his feet, hitched his braces, and, with a silent nod to me, 
went on to his job.

Why do we give these tired children, whose minds move slowly, whose 
eyes are holden that they cannot read the Book, whose hearts are 
full of sore resentment against they know not what, such work as 
this to do - hammering their hearts out for a bit of bread?  All 
the pathos of unreasoning labour rings in these few words.  We fit 
the collar on unwilling necks; and when their service is over we 
bid them go out free; but we break the good Mosaic law and send 
them away empty.  What wonder there is so little willing service, 
so few ears ready to be thrust through against the master's door.

The swift stride of civilisation is leaving behind individual 
effort, and turning man into the Daemon of a machine.  To and fro 
in front of the long loom, lifting a lever at either end, paces he 
who once with painstaking intelligence drove the shuttle.  THEN he 
tasted the joy of completed work, that which his eye had looked 
upon, and his hands had handled; now his work is as little finished 
as the web of Penelope.  Once the reaper grasped the golden corn 
stems, and with dexterous sweep of sickle set free the treasure of 
the earth.  Once the creatures of the field were known to him, and 
his eye caught the flare of scarlet and blue as the frail poppies 
and sturdy corn-cockles laid down their beauty at his feet; now he 
sits serene on Juggernaut's car, its guiding Daemon, and the field 
is silent to him.

As with the web and the grain so with the wood and stone in the 
treasure-house of our needs.  The ground was accursed FOR OUR SAKE 
that in the sweat of our brow we might eat bread.  Now the many 
live in the brain-sweat of the few; and it must be so, for as 
little as great King Cnut could stay the sea until it had reached 
the appointed place, so little can we raise a barrier to the wave 
of progress, and say, "Thus far and no further shalt thou come."

What then?  This at least; if we live in an age of mechanism let us 
see to it that we are a race of intelligent mechanics; and if man 
is to be the Daemon of a machine let him know the setting of the 
knives, the rise of the piston, the part that each wheel and rod 
plays in the economy of the whole, the part that he himself plays, 
co-operating with it.  Then, when he has lived and served 
intelligently, let us give him of our flocks and of our floor that 
he may learn to rest in the lengthening shadows until he is called 
to his work above.

So I sat, hammering out my thoughts, and with them the conviction 
that stonebreaking should be allotted to minor poets or vagrant 
children of nature like myself, never to such tired folk as my poor 
mate at the cross-roads and his fellows.

At noon, when I stopped for my meal, the sun was baking the hard 
white road in a pitiless glare.  Several waggons and carts passed, 
the horses sweating and straining, with drooping, fly-tormented 
ears.  The men for the most part nodded slumberously on the shaft, 
seeking the little shelter the cart afforded; but one shuffled in 
the white dust, with an occasional chirrup and friendly pressure on 
the tired horse's neck.

Then an old woman and a small child appeared in sight, both with 
enormous sun-bonnets and carrying baskets.  As they came up with me 
the woman stopped and swept her face with her hand, while the 
child, depositing the basket in the dust with great care, wiped her 
little sticky fingers on her pinafore.  Then the shady hedge 
beckoned them and they came and sat down near me.  The woman looked 
about seventy, tall, angular, dauntless, good for another ten years 
of hard work.  The little maid - her only grandchild, she told me - 
was just four, her father away soldiering, and the mother died in 
childbed, so for four years the child had known no other guardian 
or playmate than the old woman.  She was not the least shy, but had 
the strange self-possession which comes from associating with one 
who has travelled far on life's journey.

"I couldn't leave her alone in the house," said her grandmother, 
"and she wouldn't leave the kitten for fear it should be lonesome" 
- with a humorous, tender glance at the child - "but it's a long 
tramp in the heat for the little one, and we've another mile to 
go."

"Will you let her bide here till you come back?" I said.  "She'll 
be all right by me."

The old lady hesitated.

"Will 'ee stay by him, dearie?" she said.

The small child nodded, drew from her miniature pocket a piece of 
sweetstuff, extracted from the basket a small black cat, and 
settled in for the afternoon.  Her grandmother rose, took her 
basket, and, with a nod and "Thank 'ee kindly, mister," went off 
down the road.

I went back to my work a little depressed - why had I not white 
hair? - for a few minutes had shown me that I was not old enough 
for the child despite my forty years.  She was quite happy with the 
little black cat, which lay in the small lap blinking its yellow 
eyes at the sun; and presently an old man came by, lame and bent, 
with gnarled twisted hands, leaning heavily on his stick.

He greeted me in a high, piping voice, limped across to the child, 
and sat down.  "Your little maid, mister?" he said.

I explained.

"Ah," he said, "I've left a little darlin' like this at 'ome.  It's 
'ard on us old folks when we're one too many; but the little mouths 
must be filled, and my son, 'e said 'e didn't see they could keep 
me on the arf-crown, with another child on the way; so I'm tramping 
to N-, to the House; but it's a 'ard pinch, leavin' the little 
ones."

I looked at him - a typical countryman, with white hair, mild blue 
eyes, and a rosy, childish, unwrinkled face.

"I'm eighty-four," he went on, "and terrible bad with the 
rheumatics and my chest.  Maybe it'll not be long before the Lord 
remembers me."

The child crept close and put a sticky little hand confidingly into 
the tired old palm.  The two looked strangely alike, for the world 
seems much the same to those who leave it behind as to those who 
have but taken the first step on its circular pathway.

"'Ook at my kitty," she said, pointing to the small creature in her 
lap.  Then, as the old man touched it with trembling fingers she 
went on - "'Oo isn't my grandad; he's away in the sky, but I'll 
kiss 'oo."

I worked on, hearing at intervals the old piping voice and the 
child-treble, much of a note; and thinking of the blessings 
vouchsafed to the simple old age which crowns a harmless working-
life spent in the fields.  The two under the hedge had everything 
in common and were boundlessly content together, the sting of the 
knowledge of good and evil past for the one, and for the other 
still to come; while I stood on the battlefield of the world, the 
flesh, and the devil, though, thank God, with my face to the foe.

The old man sat resting:  I had promised him a lift with my friend 
the driver of the flour-cart, and he was almost due when the 
child's grandmother came down the road.

When she saw my other visitor she stood amazed.

"What, Richard Hunton, that worked with my old man years ago up at 
Ditton, whatever are you doin' all these miles from your own 
place?"

"Is it Eliza Jakes?"

He looked at her dazed, doubtful.

"An' who else should it be?  Where's your memory gone, Richard 
Hunton, and you not such a great age either?  Where are you 
stayin'?"

Shame overcame him; his lips trembled, his mild blue eyes filled 
with tears.  I told the tale as I had heard it, and Mrs Jakes's 
indignation was good to see.

"Not keep you on 'alf a crown!  Send you to the House!  May the 
Lord forgive them!  You wouldn't eat no more than a fair-sized cat, 
and not long for this world either, that's plain to see.  No, 
Richard Hunton, you don't go to the House while I'm above ground; 
it'd make my good man turn to think of it.  You'll come 'ome with 
me and the little 'un there.  I've my washin', and a bit put by for 
a rainy day, and a bed to spare, and the Lord and the parson will 
see I don't come to want."

She stopped breathless, her defensive motherhood in arms.

The old man said quaveringly, in the pathetic, grudging phrase of 
the poor, which veils their gratitude while it testifies their 
independence, "Maybe I might as well."  He rose with difficulty, 
picked up his bundle and stick, the small child replaced the kitten 
in its basket, and thrust her hand in her new friend's.

"Then 'oo IS grandad tum back," she said.

Mrs Jakes had been fumbling in her pocket, and extracted a penny, 
which she pressed on me.

"It's little enough, mister," she said.

Then, as I tried to return it:  "Nay, I've enough, and yours is 
poor paid work."

I hope I shall always be able to keep that penny; and as I watched 
the three going down the dusty white road, with the child in the 
middle, I thanked God for the Brotherhood of the Poor.



CHAPTER IV



YESTERDAY a funeral passed, from the work-house at N-, a quaint 
sepulture without solemnities.  The rough, ungarnished coffin of 
stained deal lay bare and unsightly on the floor of an old market-
cart; a woman sat beside, steadying it with her feet.  The husband 
drove; and the most depressed of the three was the horse, a broken-
kneed, flea-bitten grey.  It was pathetic, this bringing home in 
death of the old father whom, while he lived, they had been too 
poor to house; it was at no small sacrifice that they had spared 
him that terror of old age, a pauper's grave, and brought him to 
lie by his wife in our quiet churchyard.  They felt no emotion, 
this husband and wife, only a dull sense of filial duty done, 
respectability preserved; and above and through all, the bitter but 
necessary counting the cost of this last bed.

It is strange how pagan many of us are in our beliefs.  True, the 
funeral libations have made way for the comfortable bake-meats; 
still, to the large majority Death is Pluto, king of the dark 
Unknown whence no traveller returns, rather than Azrael, brother 
and friend, lord of this mansion of life.  Strange how men shun him 
as he waits in the shadow, watching our puny straining after 
immortality, sending his comrade sleep to prepare us for himself.  
When the hour strikes he comes - very gently, very tenderly, if we 
will but have it so - folds the tired hands together, takes the 
way-worn feet in his broad strong palm; and lifting us in his 
wonderful arms he bears us swiftly down the valley and across the 
waters of Remembrance.

Very pleasant art thou, O Brother Death, thy love is wonderful, 
passing the love of women.

* * * * * *

To-day I have lived in a whirl of dust.  To-morrow is the great 
annual Cattle Fair at E-, and through the long hot hours the beasts 
from all the district round have streamed in broken procession 
along my road, to change hands or to die.  Surely the lordship over 
creation implies wise and gentle rule for intelligent use, not the 
pursuit of a mere immediate end, without any thought of community 
in the great sacrament of life.

For the most part mystery has ceased for this working Western 
world, and with it reverence.  Coventry Patmore says:  "God clothes 
Himself actually and literally with His whole creation.  Herbs take 
up and assimilate minerals, beasts assimilate herbs, and God, in 
the Incarnation and its proper Sacrament, assimilates us, who, says 
St Augustine, 'are God's beasts.'"  It is man in his blind self-
seeking who separates woof from weft in the living garment of God, 
and loses the more as he neglects the outward and visible signs of 
a world-wide grace.

In olden days the herd led his flock, going first in the post of 
danger to defend the creatures he had weaned from their natural 
habits for his various uses.  Now that good relationship has ceased 
for us to exist, man drives the beasts before him, means to his 
end, but with no harmony between end and means.  All day long the 
droves of sheep pass me on their lame and patient way, no longer 
freely and instinctively following a protector and forerunner, but 
DRIVEN, impelled by force and resistless will - the same will which 
once went before without force.  They are all trimmed as much as 
possible to one pattern, and all make the same sad plaint.  It is a 
day on which to thank God for the unknown tongue.  The drover and 
his lad in dusty blue coats plod along stolidly, deaf and blind to 
all but the way before them; no longer wielding the crook, 
instrument of deliverance, or at most of gentle compulsion, but 
armed with a heavy stick and mechanically dealing blows on the 
short thick fleeces; without evil intent because without thought - 
it is the ritual of the trade.

Of all the poor dumb pilgrims of the road the bullocks are the most 
terrible to see.  They are not patient, but go most unwillingly 
with lowered head and furtive sideways motion, in their eyes a 
horror of great fear.  The sleek cattle, knee deep in pasture, 
massed at the gate, and stared mild-eyed and with inquiring bellow 
at the retreating drove; but these passed without answer on to the 
Unknown, and for them it spelt death.

Behind a squadron of sleek, well-fed cart-horses, formed in fours, 
with straw braid in mane and tail, came the ponies, for the most 
part a merry company.  Long strings of rusty, shaggy two-year-olds, 
unbroken, unkempt, the short Down grass still sweet on their 
tongues; full of fun, frolic, and wickedness, biting and pulling, 
casting longing eyes at the hedgerows.  The boys appear to 
recognise them as kindred spirits, and are curiously forbearing and 
patient.  Soon both ponies and boys vanish in a white whirl, and a 
long line of carts, which had evidently waited for the dust to 
subside, comes slowly up the incline.  For the most part they carry 
the pigs and fowls, carriage folk of the road.  The latter are hot, 
crowded, and dusty under the open netting; the former for the most 
part cheerfully remonstrative.

I drew a breath of relief as the noise of wheels died away and my 
road sank into silence.  The hedgerows are no longer green but 
white and choked with dust, a sight to move good sister Rain to 
welcome tears.  The birds seem to have fled before the noisy 
confusion.  I wonder whether my snake has seen and smiled at the 
clumsy ruling of the lord he so little heeds?  I turned aside 
through the gate to plunge face and hands into the cool of the 
sheltered grass that side the hedge, and then rested my eyes on the 
stretch of green I had lacked all day.  The rabbits had apparently 
played and browsed unmindful of the stir, and were still flirting 
their white tails along the hedgerows; a lark rose, another and 
another, and I went back to my road.  Peace still reigned, for the 
shadows were lengthening, and there would be little more traffic 
for the fair.  I turned to my work, grateful for the stillness, and 
saw on the white stretch of road a lone old man and a pig.  Surely 
I knew that tall figure in the quaint grey smock, surely I knew the 
face, furrowed like nature's face in springtime, and crowned by a 
round, soft hat?  And the pig, the black pig walking decorously 
free?  Ay, I knew them.

In the early spring I took a whole holiday and a long tramp; and 
towards afternoon, tired and thirsty, sought water at a little 
lonely cottage whose windows peered and blinked under overhanging 
brows of thatch.  I had, not the water I asked for, but milk and a 
bowl of sweet porridge for which I paid only thanks; and stayed for 
a chat with my kindly hosts.  They were a quaint old couple of the 
kind rarely met with nowadays.  They enjoyed a little pension from 
the Squire and a garden in which vegetables and flowers lived side 
by side in friendliest fashion.  Bees worked and sang over the 
thyme and marjoram, blooming early in a sunny nook; and in a homely 
sty lived a solemn black pig, a pig with a history.

It was no common utilitarian pig, but the honoured guest of the old 
couple, and it knew it.  A year before, their youngest and only 
surviving child, then a man of five-and-twenty, had brought his 
mother the result of his savings in the shape of a fine young pig:  
a week later he lay dead of the typhoid that scourged Maidstone.  
Hence the pig was sacred, cared for and loved by this Darby and 
Joan.

"Ee be mos' like a child to me and the mother, an' mos' as sensible 
as a Christian, ee be," the old man had said; and I could hardly 
credit my eyes when I saw the tall bent figure side by side with 
the black pig, coming along my road on such a day.

I hailed the old man, and both turned aside; but he gazed at me 
without remembrance.

I spoke of the pig and its history.  He nodded wearily.  "Ay, ay, 
lad, you've got it; 'tis poor Dick's pig right enow."

"But you're never going to take it to E - ?"

"Ay, but I be, and comin' back alone, if the Lord be marciful.  The 
missus has been terrible bad this two mouths and more; Squire's in 
foreign parts; and food-stuffs such as the old woman wants is hard 
buying for poor folks.  The stocking's empty, now 'tis the pig must 
go, and I believe he'd be glad for to do the missus a turn; she 
were terrible good to him, were the missus, and fond, too.  I 
dursn't tell her he was to go; she'd sooner starve than lose poor 
Dick's pig.  Well, we'd best be movin'; 'tis a fairish step."

The pig followed comprehending and docile, and as the quaint couple 
passed from sight I thought I heard Brother Death stir in the 
shadow.  He is a strong angel and of great pity.



CHAPTER V



THERE is always a little fire of wood on the open hearth in the 
kitchen when I get home at night; the old lady says it is "company" 
for her, and sits in the lonely twilight, her knotted hands lying 
quiet on her lap, her listening eyes fixed on the burning sticks.

I wonder sometimes whether she hears music in the leap and lick of 
the fiery tongues, music such as he of Bayreuth draws from the 
violins till the hot energy of the fire spirit is on us, embodied 
in sound.

Surely she hears some voice, that lonely old woman on whom is set 
the seal of great silence?

It is a great truth tenderly said that God builds the nest for the 
blind bird; and may it not be that He opens closed eyes and unstops 
deaf ears to sights and sounds from which others by these very 
senses are debarred?

Here the best of us see through a mist of tears men as trees 
walking; it is only in the land which is very far off and yet very 
near that we shall have fulness of sight and see the King in His 
beauty; and I cannot think that any listening ears listen in vain.

The coppice at our back is full of birds, for it is far from the 
road and they nest there undisturbed year after year.  Through the 
still night I heard the nightingales calling, calling, until I 
could bear it no longer and went softly out into the luminous dark.

The little wood was manifold with sound, I heard my little brothers 
who move by night rustling in grass and tree.  A hedgehog crossed 
my path with a dull squeak, the bats shrilled high to the stars, a 
white owl swept past me crying his hunting note, a beetle boomed 
suddenly in my face; and above and through it all the nightingales 
sang - and sang!

The night wind bent the listening trees, and the stars yearned 
earthward to hear the song of deathless love.  Louder and louder 
the wonderful notes rose and fell in a passion of melody; and then 
sank to rest on that low thrilling call which it is said Death once 
heard, and stayed his hand.

They will scarcely sing again this year, these nightingales, for 
they are late on the wing as it is.  It seems as if on such nights 
they sang as the swan sings, knowing it to be the last time - with 
the lavish note of one who bids an eternal farewell.

At last there was silence.  Sitting under the big beech tree, the 
giant of the coppice, I rested my tired self in the lap of mother 
earth, breathed of her breath and listened to her voice in the 
quickening silence until my flesh came again as the flesh of a 
little child, for it is true recreation to sit at the footstool of 
God wrapped in a fold of His living robe, the while night smoothes 
our tired face with her healing hands.

The grey dawn awoke and stole with trailing robes across earth's 
floor.  At her footsteps the birds roused from sleep and cried a 
greeting; the sky flushed and paled conscious of coming splendour; 
and overhead a file of swans passed with broad strong flight to the 
reeded waters of the sequestered pool.

Another hour of silence while the light throbbed and flamed in the 
east; then the larks rose harmonious from a neighbouring field, the 
rabbits scurried with ears alert to their morning meal, the day had 
begun.

I passed through the coppice and out into the fields beyond.  The 
dew lay heavy on leaf and blade and gossamer, a cool fresh wind 
swept clear over dale and down from the sea, and the clover field 
rippled like a silvery lake in the breeze.

There is something inexpressibly beautiful in the unused day, 
something beautiful in the fact that it is still untouched, 
unsoiled; and town and country share alike in this loveliness.  At 
half-past three on a June morning even London has not assumed her 
responsibilities, but smiles and glows lighthearted and smokeless 
under the caresses of the morning sun.

Five o'clock.  The bell rings out crisp and clear from the 
monastery where the Bedesmen of St Hugh watch and pray for the 
souls on this labouring forgetful earth.  Every hour the note of 
comfort and warning cries across the land, tells the Sanctus, the 
Angelus, and the Hours of the Passion, and calls to remembrance and 
prayer.

When the wind is north, the sound carries as far as my road, and 
companies me through the day; and if to His dumb children God in 
His mercy reckons work as prayer, most certainly those who have 
forged through the ages an unbroken chain of supplication and 
thanksgiving will be counted among the stalwart labourers of the 
house of the Lord.

Sun and bell together are my only clock:  it is time for my water 
drawing; and gathering a pile of mushrooms, children of the night, 
I hasten home.

The cottage is dear to me in its quaint untidiness and want of 
rectitude, dear because we are to be its last denizens, last of the 
long line of toilers who have sweated and sown that others might 
reap, and have passed away leaving no trace.

I once saw a tall cross in a seaboard churchyard, inscribed, "To 
the memory of the unknown dead who have perished in these waters."  
There might be one in every village sleeping-place to the 
unhonoured many who made fruitful the land with sweat and tears.  
It is a consolation to think that when we look back on this stretch 
of life's road from beyond the first milestone, which, it is 
instructive to remember, is always a grave, we may hope to see the 
work of this world with open eyes, and to judge of it with a due 
sense of proportion.

A bee with laden honey-bag hummed and buzzed in the hedge as I got 
ready for work, importuning the flowers for that which he could not 
carry, and finally giving up the attempt in despair fell asleep on 
a buttercup, the best place for his weary little velvet body.  In 
five minutes - they may have been five hours to him - he awoke a 
new bee, sensible and clear-sighted, and flew blithely away to the 
hive with his sufficiency - an example this weary world would be 
wise to follow.

My road has been lonely to-day.  A parson came by in the afternoon, 
a stranger in the neighbourhood, for he asked his way.  He talked 
awhile, and with kindly rebuke said it was sad to see a man of my 
education brought so low, which shows how the outside appearance 
may mislead the prejudiced observer.  "Was it misfortune?"  "Nay, 
the best of good luck," I answered, gaily.

The good man with beautiful readiness sat down on a heap of stones 
and bade me say on.  "Read me a sermon in stone," he said, simply; 
and I stayed my hand to read.

He listened with courteous intelligence.

"You hold a roadmender has a vocation?" he asked.

"As the monk or the artist, for, like both, he is universal.  The 
world is his home; he serves all men alike, ay, and for him the 
beasts have equal honour with the men.  His soul is 'bound up in 
the bundle of life' with all other souls, he sees his father, his 
mother, his brethren in the children of the road.  For him there is 
nothing unclean, nothing common; the very stones cry out that they 
serve."

Parson nodded his head.

"It is all true," he said; "beautifully true.  But need such a view 
of life necessitate the work of roadmending?  Surely all men should 
be roadmenders."

O wise parson, so to read the lesson of the road!

"It is true," I answered; "but some of us find our salvation in the 
actual work, and earn our bread better in this than in any other 
way.  No man is dependent on our earning, all men on our work.  We 
are 'rich beyond the dreams of avarice' because we have all that we 
need, and yet we taste the life and poverty of the very poor.  We 
are, if you will, uncloistered monks, preaching friars who speak 
not with the tongue, disciples who hear the wise words of a silent 
master."

"Robert Louis Stevenson was a roadmender," said the wise parson.

"Ay, and with more than his pen," I answered.  "I wonder was he 
ever so truly great, so entirely the man we know and love, as when 
he inspired the chiefs to make a highway in the wilderness.  Surely 
no more fitting monument could exist to his memory than the Road of 
Gratitude, cut, laid, and kept by the pure-blooded tribe kings of 
Samoa."

Parson nodded.

"He knew that the people who make no roads are ruled out from 
intelligent participation in the world's brotherhood."  He filled 
his pipe, thinking the while, then he held out his pouch to me.

"Try some of this baccy," he said; "Sherwood of Magdalen sent it me 
from some outlandish place."

I accepted gratefully.  It was such tobacco as falls to the lot of 
few roadmenders.

He rose to go.

"I wish I could come and break stones," he said, a little 
wistfully.

"Nay," said I, "few men have such weary roadmending as yours, and 
perhaps you need my road less than most men, and less than most 
parsons."

We shook hands, and he went down the road and out of my life.

He little guessed that I knew Sherwood, ay, and knew him too, for 
had not Sherwood told me of the man he delighted to honour.

Ah, well!  I am no Browning Junior, and Sherwood's name is not 
Sherwood.



CHAPTER VI



A WHILE ago I took a holiday; mouched, played truant from my road.  
Jem the waggoner hailed me as he passed - he was going to the mill 
- would I ride with him and come back atop of the full sacks?

I hid my hammer in the hedge, climbed into the great waggon white 
and fragrant with the clean sweet meal, and flung myself down on 
the empty flour bags.  The looped-back tarpaulin framed the long 
vista of my road with the downs beyond; and I lay in the cool dark, 
caressed by the fresh breeze in its thoroughfare, soothed by the 
strong monotonous tramp of the great grey team and the music of the 
jangling harness.

Jem walked at the leaders' heads; it is his rule when the waggon is 
empty, a rule no "company" will make him break.  At first I 
regretted it, but soon discovered I learnt to know him better so, 
as he plodded along, his thickset figure slightly bent, his hands 
in his pockets, his whip under one arm, whistling hymn tunes in a 
low minor, while the great horses answered to his voice without 
touch of lash or guiding rein.

I lay as in a blissful dream and watched my road unfold.  The sun 
set the pine-boles aflare where the hedge is sparse, and stretched 
the long shadows of the besom poplars in slanting bars across the 
white highway; the roadside gardens smiled friendly with their 
trim-cut laurels and rows of stately sunflowers - a seemly 
proximity this, Daphne and Clytie, sisters in experience, wrapped 
in the warm caress of the god whose wooing they need no longer 
fear.  Here and there we passed little groups of women and children 
off to work in the early cornfields, and Jem paused in his fond 
repetition of "The Lord my pasture shall prepare" to give them 
good-day.

It is like Life, this travelling backwards - that which has been, 
alone visible - like Life, which is after all, retrospective with a 
steady moving on into the Unknown, Unseen, until Faith is lost in 
Sight and experience is no longer the touchstone of humanity.  The 
face of the son of Adam is set on the road his brothers have 
travelled, marking their landmarks, tracing their journeyings; but 
with the eyes of a child of God he looks forward, straining to 
catch a glimpse of the jewelled walls of his future home, the city 
"Eternal in the Heavens."

Presently we left my road for the deep shade of a narrow country 
way where the great oaks and beeches meet overhead and no hedge-
clipper sets his hand to stay nature's profusion; and so by 
pleasant lanes scarce the waggon's width across, now shady, now 
sunny, here bordered by thickset coverts, there giving on fruitful 
fields, we came at length to the mill.

I left Jem to his business with the miller and wandered down the 
flowery meadow to listen to the merry clack of the stream and the 
voice of the waters on the weir.  The great wheel was at rest, as I 
love best to see it in the later afternoon; the splash and churn of 
the water belong rather to the morning hours.  It is the chief 
mistake we make in portioning out our day that we banish rest to 
the night-time, which is for sleep and recreating, instead of 
setting apart the later afternoon and quiet twilight hours for the 
stretching of weary limbs and repose of tired mind after a day's 
toil that should begin and end at five.

The little stone bridge over the mill-stream is almost on a level 
with the clear running water, and I lay there and gazed at the huge 
wheel which, under multitudinous forms and uses, is one of the 
world's wonders, because one of the few things we imitative 
children have not learnt from nature.  Is it perchance a memory out 
of that past when Adam walked clear-eyed in Paradise and talked 
with the Lord in the cool of the day?  Did he see then the flaming 
wheels instinct with service, wondrous messengers of the Most High 
vouchsafed in vision to the later prophets?

Maybe he did, and going forth from before the avenging sword of his 
own forging to the bitterness of an accursed earth, took with him 
this bright memory of perfect, ceaseless service, and so fashioned 
our labouring wheel - pathetic link with the time of his innocency.  
It is one of many unanswered questions, good to ask because it has 
no answer, only the suggestion of a train of thought:  perhaps we 
are never so receptive as when with folded hands we say simply, 
"This is a great mystery."  I watched and wondered until Jem 
called, and I had to leave the rippling weir and the water's side, 
and the wheel with its untold secret.

The miller's wife gave me tea and a crust of home-made bread, and 
the miller's little maid sat on my knee while I told the sad tale 
of a little pink cloud separated from its parents and teazed and 
hunted by mischievous little airs.  To-morrow, if I mistake not, 
her garden will be wet with its tears, and, let us hope, point a 
moral; for the tale had its origin in a frenzied chicken driven 
from the side of an anxious mother, and pursued by a sturdy, 
relentless figure in a white sun-bonnet.

The little maid trotted off, greatly sobered, to look somewhat 
prematurely for the cloud's tears; and I climbed to my place at the 
top of the piled-up sacks, and thence watched twilight pass to 
starlight through my narrow peep, and, so watching, slept until 
Jem's voice hailed me from Dreamland, and I went, only half awake, 
across the dark fields home.

Autumn is here and it is already late.  He has painted the hedges 
russet and gold, scarlet and black, and a tangle of grey; now he 
has damp brown leaves in his hair and frost in his finger-tips.

It is a season of contrasts; at first all is stir and bustle, the 
ingathering of man and beast; barn and rickyard stand filled with 
golden treasure; at the farm the sound of threshing; in wood and 
copse the squirrels busied 'twixt tree and storehouse, while the 
ripe nuts fall with thud of thunder rain.  When the harvesting is 
over, the fruit gathered, the last rick thatched, there comes a 
pause.  Earth strips off her bright colours and shows a bare and 
furrowed face; the dead leaves fall gently and sadly through the 
calm, sweet air; grey mists drape the fields and hedges.  The 
migratory birds have left, save a few late swallows; and as I sit 
at work in the soft, still rain, I can hear the blackbird's 
melancholy trill and the thin pipe of the redbreast's winter song - 
the air is full of the sound of farewell.

Forethought and preparation for the Future which shall be; 
farewell, because of the Future which may never be - for us; "Man, 
thou hast goods laid up for many years, and it is well; but, 
remember, this night THY soul may be required"; is the unvoiced 
lesson of autumn.  There is growing up among us a great fear; it 
stares at us white, wide-eyed, from the faces of men and women 
alike - the fear of pain, mental and bodily pain.  For the last 
twenty years we have waged war with suffering - a noble war when 
fought in the interest of the many, but fraught with great danger 
to each individual man.  It is the fear which should not be, rather 
than the 'hope which is in us,' that leads men in these days to 
drape Death in a flowery mantle, to lay stress on the shortness of 
parting, the speedy reunion, to postpone their good-byes until the 
last moment, or avoid saying them altogether; and this fear is a 
poor, ignoble thing, unworthy of those who are as gods, knowing 
good and evil.  We are still paying the price of that knowledge; 
suffering in both kinds is a substantial part of it, and brings its 
own healing.  Let us pay like men, our face to the open heaven, 
neither whimpering like children in the dark, nor lulled to 
unnecessary oblivion by some lethal drug; for it is manly, not 
morbid, to dare to taste the pungent savour of pain, the lingering 
sadness of farewell which emphasises the aftermath of life; it 
should have its place in all our preparation as a part of our 
inheritance we dare not be without.

There is an old couple in our village who are past work.  The 
married daughter has made shift to take her mother and the parish 
half-crown, but there is neither room nor food for the father, and 
he must go to N-.  If husband and wife went together, they would be 
separated at the workhouse door.  The parting had to come; it came 
yesterday.  I saw them stumbling lamely down the road on their last 
journey together, walking side by side without touch or speech, 
seeing and heeding nothing but a blank future.  As they passed me 
the old man said gruffly, "'Tis far eno'; better be gettin' back"; 
but the woman shook her head, and they breasted the hill together.  
At the top they paused, shook hands, and separated; one went on, 
the other turned back; and as the old woman limped blindly by I 
turned away, for there are sights a man dare not look upon.  She 
passed; and I heard a child's shrill voice say, "I come to look for 
you, gran"; and I thanked God that there need be no utter 
loneliness in the world while it holds a little child.

Now it is my turn, and I must leave the wayside to serve in the 
sheepfolds during the winter months.  It is scarcely a farewell, 
for my road is ubiquitous, eternal; there are green ways in 
Paradise and golden streets in the beautiful City of God.  
Nevertheless, my heart is heavy; for, viewed by the light of the 
waning year, roadmending seems a great and wonderful work which I 
have poorly conceived of and meanly performed:  yet I have learnt 
to understand dimly the truths of three great paradoxes - the 
blessing of a curse, the voice of silence, the companionship of 
solitude - and so take my leave of this stretch of road, and of you 
who have fared along the white highway through the medium of a 
printed page.

Farewell!  It is a roadmender's word; I cry you Godspeed to the 
next milestone - and beyond.



OUT OF THE SHADOW



CHAPTER I



I AM no longer a roadmender; the stretch of white highway which 
leads to the end of the world will know me no more; the fields and 
hedgerows, grass and leaf stiff with the crisp rime of winter's 
breath, lie beyond my horizon; the ewes in the folding, their 
mysterious eyes quick with the consciousness of coming motherhood, 
answer another's voice and hand; while I lie here, not in the 
lonely companionship of my expectations, but where the shadow is 
bright with kindly faces and gentle hands, until one kinder and 
gentler still carries me down the stairway into the larger room.

But now the veil was held aside and one went by crowned with the 
majesty of years, wearing the ermine of an unstained rule, the 
purple of her people's loyalty.  Nations stood with bated breath to 
see her pass in the starlit mist of her children's tears; a monarch 
- greatest of her time; an empress - conquered men called mother; a 
woman - Englishmen cried queen; still the crowned captive of her 
people's heart - the prisoner of love.

The night-goers passed under my window in silence, neither song nor 
shout broke the welcome dark; next morning the workmen who went by 
were strangely quiet.


'VICTORIA DEI GRATIA BRITANNIARUM REGINA.'


Did they think of how that legend would disappear, and of all it 
meant, as they paid their pennies at the coffee-stall?  The feet 
rarely know the true value and work of the head; but all Englishmen 
have been and will be quick to acknowledge and revere Victoria by 
the grace of God a wise woman, a great and loving mother.

Years ago, I, standing at a level crossing, saw her pass.  The 
train slowed down and she caught sight of the gatekeeper's little 
girl who had climbed the barrier.  Such a smile as she gave her!  
And then I caught a quick startled gesture as she slipped from my 
vision; I thought afterwards it was that she feared the child might 
fall.  Mother first, then Queen; even so rest came to her - not in 
one of the royal palaces, but in her own home, surrounded by the 
immediate circle of her nearest and dearest, while the world kept 
watch and ward.

I, a shy lover of the fields and woods, longed always, should a 
painless passing be vouchsafed me, to make my bed on the fragrant 
pine needles in the aloneness of a great forest; to lie once again 
as I had lain many a time, bathed in the bitter sweetness of the 
sun-blessed pines, lapped in the manifold silence; my ear attuned 
to the wind of Heaven with its call from the Cities of Peace.  In 
sterner mood, when Love's hand held a scourge, I craved rather the 
stress of the moorland with its bleaker mind imperative of 
sacrifice.  To rest again under the lee of Rippon Tor swept by the 
strong peat-smelling breeze; to stare untired at the long cloud-
shadowed reaches, and watch the mist-wraiths huddle and shrink 
round the stones of blood; until my sacrifice too was accomplished, 
and my soul had fled.  A wild waste moor; a vast void sky; and 
naught between heaven and earth but man, his sin-glazed eyes 
seeking afar the distant light of his own heart.

With years came counsels more profound, and the knowledge that man 
was no mere dweller in the woods to follow the footsteps of the 
piping god, but an integral part of an organised whole, in which 
Pan too has his fulfilment.  The wise Venetians knew; and read 
pantheism into Christianity when they set these words round 
Ezekiel's living creatures in the altar vault of St Mark's:-


QUAEQUE SUB OBSCURIS DE CRISTO DICTA FIGURIS HIS APERIRE DATUR ET 
IN HIS, DEUS IPSE NOTATUR.


"Thou shalt have none other gods but me."  If man had been able to 
keep this one commandment perfectly the other nine would never have 
been written; instead he has comprehensively disregarded it, and 
perhaps never more than now in the twentieth century.  Ah, well! 
this world, in spite of all its sinning, is still the Garden of 
Eden where the Lord walked with man, not in the cool of evening, 
but in the heat and stress of the immediate working day.  There is 
no angel now with flaming sword to keep the way of the Tree of 
Life, but tapers alight morning by morning in the Hostel of God to 
point us to it; and we, who are as gods knowing good and evil, 
partake of that fruit "whereof whoso eateth shall never die"; the 
greatest gift or the most awful penalty - Eternal Life.

I then, with my craving for tree and sky, held that a great capital 
with its stir of life and death, of toil and strife and pleasure, 
was an ill place for a sick man to wait in; a place to shrink from 
as a child shrinks from the rude blow of one out of authority.  Yet 
here, far from moor and forest, hillside and hedgerow, in the 
family sitting-room of the English-speaking peoples, the London 
much misunderstood, I find the fulfilment by antithesis of all 
desire.  For the loneliness of the moorland, there is the warmth 
and companionship of London's swift beating heart.  For silence 
there is sound - the sound and stir of service - for the most part 
far in excess of its earthly equivalent.  Against the fragrant 
incense of the pines I set the honest sweat of the man whose 
lifetime is the measure of his working day.  "He that loveth not 
his brother whom he hath seen, how shall he love God whom he hath 
not seen?" wrote Blessed John, who himself loved so much that he 
beheld the Lamb as it had been slain from the beginning when Adam 
fell, and the City of God with light most precious.  The burden of 
corporate sin, the sword of corporate sorrow, the joy of corporate 
righteousness; thus we become citizens in the Kingdom of God, and 
companions of all his creatures.  "It is not good that the man 
should be alone," said the Lord God.

I live now as it were in two worlds, the world of sight, and the 
world of sound; and they scarcely ever touch each other.  I hear 
the grind of heavy traffic, the struggle of horses on the frost-
breathed ground, the decorous jolt of omnibuses, the jangle of cab 
bells, the sharp warning of bicycles at the corner, the swift 
rattle of costers' carts as they go south at night with their 
shouting, goading crew.  All these things I hear, and more; but I 
see no road, only the silent river of my heart with its tale of 
wonder and years, and the white beat of seagulls' wings in strong 
inquiring flight.

Sometimes there is naught to see on the waterway but a solitary 
black hull, a very Stygian ferry-boat, manned by a solitary figure, 
and moving slowly up under the impulse of the far-reaching sweeps.  
Then the great barges pass with their coffined treasure, drawn by a 
small self-righteous steam-tug.  Later, lightened of their load, 
and waiting on wind and tide, I see them swooping by like birds set 
free; tawny sails that mind me of red-roofed Whitby with its 
northern fleet; black sails as of some heedless Theseus; white 
sails that sweep out of the morning mist "like restless 
gossameres."  They make the bridge, which is just within my vision, 
and then away past Westminster and Blackfriars where St Paul's 
great dome lifts the cross high over a self-seeking city; past 
Southwark where England's poet illuminates in the scroll of divine 
wisdom the sign of the Tabard; past the Tower with its haunting 
ghosts of history; past Greenwich, fairy city, caught in the meshes 
of riverside mist; and then the salt and speer of the sea, the 
companying with great ships, the fresh burden.

At night I see them again, silent, mysterious; searching the 
darkness with unwinking yellow stare, led by a great green light.  
They creep up under the bridge which spans the river with its 
watching eyes, and vanish, crying back a warning note as they make 
the upper reach, or strident hail, as a chain of kindred phantoms 
passes, ploughing a contrary tide.

Throughout the long watches of the night I follow them; and in the 
early morning they slide by, their eyes pale in the twilight; while 
the stars flicker and fade, and the gas lamps die down into a dull 
yellow blotch against the glory and glow of a new day.



CHAPTER II



FEBRUARY is here, February fill-dyke; the month of purification, of 
cleansing rains and pulsing bounding streams, and white mist 
clinging insistent to field and hedgerow so that when her veil is 
withdrawn greenness may make us glad.

The river has been uniformly grey of late, with no wind to ruffle 
its surface or to speed the barges dropping slowly and sullenly 
down with the tide through a blurring haze.  I watched one 
yesterday, its useless sails half-furled and no sign of life save 
the man at the helm.  It drifted stealthily past, and a little 
behind, flying low, came a solitary seagull, grey as the river's 
haze - a following bird.

Once again I lay on my back in the bottom of the tarry old fishing 
smack, blue sky above and no sound but the knock, knock of the 
waves, and the thud and curl of falling foam as the old boat's 
blunt nose breasted the coming sea.  Then Daddy Whiddon spoke.

"A follerin' burrd," he said.

I got up, and looked across the blue field we were ploughing into 
white furrows.  Far away a tiny sail scarred the great solitude, 
and astern came a gull flying slowly close to the water's breast.

Daddy Whiddon waved his pipe towards it.

"A follerin' burrd," he said, again; and again I waited; questions 
were not grateful to him.

"There be a carpse there, sure enough, a carpse driftin' and 
shiftin' on the floor of the sea.  There be those as can't rest, 
poor sawls, and her'll be mun, her'll be mun, and the sperrit of 
her is with the burrd."

The clumsy boom swung across as we changed our course, and the 
water ran from us in smooth reaches on either side:  the bird flew 
steadily on.

"What will the spirit do?" I said.

The old man looked at me gravely.

"Her'll rest in the Lard's time, in the Lard's gude time - but now 
her'll just be follerin' on with the burrd."

The gull was flying close to us now, and a cold wind swept the 
sunny sea.  I shivered:  Daddy looked at me curiously.

"There be reason enough to be cawld if us did but knaw it, but I he 
mos' used to 'em, poor sawls."  He shaded his keen old blue eyes, 
and looked away across the water.  His face kindled.  "There be a 
skule comin', and by my sawl 'tis mackerel they be drivin'."

I watched eagerly, and saw the dark line rise and fall in the 
trough of the sea, and, away behind, the stir and rush of tumbling 
porpoises as they chased their prey.

Again we changed our tack, and each taking an oar, pulled lustily 
for the beach.

"Please God her'll break inshore," said Daddy Whiddon; and he 
shouted the news to the idle waiting men who hailed us.

In a moment all was stir, for the fishing had been slack.  Two 
boats put out with the lithe brown seine.  The dark line had 
turned, but the school was still behind, churning the water in 
clumsy haste; they were coming in.

Then the brit broke in silvery leaping waves on the shelving beach.  
The threefold hunt was over; the porpoises turned out to sea in 
search of fresh quarry; and the seine, dragged by ready hands, came 
slowly, stubbornly in with its quivering treasure of fish.  They 
had sought a haven and found none; the brit lay dying in flickering 
iridescent heaps as the bare-legged babies of the village gathered 
them up; and far away over the water I saw a single grey speck; it 
was the following bird.


The curtain of river haze falls back; barge and bird are alike 
gone, and the lamplighter has lit the first gas-lamp on the far 
side of the bridge.  Every night I watch him come, his progress 
marked by the great yellow eyes that wake the dark.  Sometimes he 
walks quickly; sometimes he loiters on the bridge to chat, or stare 
at the dark water; but he always comes, leaving his watchful 
deterrent train behind him to police the night.

Once Demeter in the black anguish of her desolation searched for 
lost Persephone by the light of Hecate's torch; and searching all 
in vain, spurned beneath her empty feet an earth barren of her 
smile; froze with set brows the merry brooks and streams; and smote 
forest, and plain, and fruitful field, with the breath of her last 
despair, until even Iambe's laughing jest was still.  And then when 
the desolation was complete, across the wasted valley where the 
starveling cattle scarcely longed to browse, came the dreadful 
chariot - and Persephone.  The day of the prisoner of Hades had 
dawned; and as the sun flamed slowly up to light her thwarted eyes 
the world sprang into blossom at her feet.

We can never be too Pagan when we are truly Christian, and the old 
myths are eternal truths held fast in the Church's net.  Prometheus 
fetched fire from Heaven, to be slain forever in the fetching; and 
lo, a Greater than Prometheus came to fire the cresset of the 
Cross.  Demeter waits now patiently enough.  Persephone waits, too, 
in the faith of the sun she cannot see:  and every lamp lit carries 
on the crusade which has for its goal a sunless, moonless, city 
whose light is the Light of the world.


"Lume e lassu, che visibile face
lo creatore a quella creatura,
che solo in lui vedere ha la sua pace."


Immediately outside my window is a lime tree - a little black 
skeleton of abundant branches - in which sparrows congregate to 
chirp and bicker.  Farther away I have a glimpse of graceful 
planes, children of moonlight and mist; their dainty robes, still 
more or less unsullied, gleam ghostly in the gaslight athwart the 
dark.  They make a brave show even in winter with their feathery 
branches and swinging tassels, whereas my little tree stands stark 
and uncompromising, with its horde of sooty sparrows cockney to the 
last tail feather, and a pathetic inability to look anything but 
black.  Rain comes with strong caressing fingers, and the branches 
seem no whit the cleaner for her care; but then their glistening 
blackness mirrors back the succeeding sunlight, as a muddy pavement 
will sometimes lap our feet in a sea of gold.  The little wet 
sparrows are for the moment equally transformed, for the sun turns 
their dun-coloured coats to a ruddy bronze, and cries Chrysostom as 
it kisses each shiny beak.  They are dumb Chrysostoms; but they 
preach a golden gospel, for the sparrows are to London what the 
rainbow was to eight saved souls out of a waste of waters - a 
perpetual sign of the remembering mercies of God.

Last night there was a sudden clatter of hoofs, a shout, and then 
silence.  A runaway cab-horse, a dark night, a wide crossing, and a 
heavy burden:  so death came to a poor woman.  People from the 
house went out to help; and I heard of her, the centre of an 
unknowing curious crowd, as she lay bonnetless in the mud of the 
road, her head on the kerb.  A rude but painless death:  the misery 
lay in her life; for this woman - worn, white-haired, and wrinkled 
- had but fifty years to set against such a condition.  The 
policeman reported her respectable, hard-working, living apart from 
her husband with a sister; but although they shared rooms, they 
"did not speak," and the sister refused all responsibility; so the 
parish buried the dead woman, and thus ended an uneventful tragedy.

Was it her own fault?  If so, the greater pathos.  The lonely souls 
that hold out timid hands to an unheeding world have their meed of 
interior comfort even here, while the sons of consolation wait on 
the thresh-hold for their footfall:  but God help the soul that 
bars its own door!  It is kicking against the pricks of Divine 
ordinance, the ordinance of a triune God; whether it be the dweller 
in crowded street or tenement who is proud to say, "I keep myself 
to myself," or Seneca writing in pitiful complacency, "Whenever I 
have gone among men, I have returned home less of a man."  Whatever 
the next world holds in store, we are bidden in this to seek and 
serve God in our fellow-men, and in the creatures of His making 
whom He calls by name.

It was once my privilege to know an old organ-grinder named 
Gawdine.  He was a hard swearer, a hard drinker, a hard liver, and 
he fortified himself body and soul against the world:  he even 
drank alone, which is an evil sign.

One day to Gawdine sober came a little dirty child, who clung to 
his empty trouser leg - he had lost a limb years before - with a 
persistent unintelligible request.  He shook the little chap off 
with a blow and a curse; and the child was trotting dismally away, 
when it suddenly turned, ran back, and held up a dirty face for a 
kiss.

Two days later Gawdine fell under a passing dray which inflicted 
terrible internal injuries on him.  They patched him up in 
hospital, and he went back to his organ-grinding, taking with him 
two friends - a pain which fell suddenly upon him to rack and rend 
with an anguish of crucifixion, and the memory of a child's 
upturned face.  Outwardly he was the same save that he changed the 
tunes of his organ, out of long-hoarded savings, for the jigs and 
reels which children hold dear, and stood patiently playing them in 
child-crowded alleys, where pennies are not as plentiful as 
elsewhere.

He continued to drink; it did not come within his new code to stop, 
since he could "carry his liquor well;" but he rarely, if ever, 
swore.  He told me this tale through the throes of his anguish as 
he lay crouched on a mattress on the floor; and as the grip of the 
pain took him he tore and bit at his hands until they were maimed 
and bleeding, to keep the ready curses off his lips.

He told the story, but he gave no reason, offered no explanation:  
he has been dead now many a year, and thus would I write his 
epitaph:-

He saw the face of a little child and looked on God.



CHAPTER III



"TWO began, in a low voice, 'Why, the fact is, you see, Miss, this 
here ought to have been a RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in 
by mistake.'"

As I look round this room I feel sure Two, and Five, and Seven, 
have all been at work on it, and made no mistakes, for round the 
walls runs a frieze of squat standard rose-trees, red as red can 
be, and just like those that Alice saw in the Queen's garden.  In 
between them are Chaucer's name-children, prim little daisies, 
peering wideawake from green grass.  This same grass has a history 
which I have heard.  In the original stencil for the frieze it was 
purely conventional like the rest, and met in spikey curves round 
each tree; the painter, however, who was doing the work, was a 
lover of the fields; and feeling that such grass was a travesty, he 
added on his own account dainty little tussocks, and softened the 
hard line into a tufted carpet, the grass growing irregularly, bent 
at will by the wind.

The result from the standpoint of conventional art is indeed 
disastrous; but my sympathy and gratitude are with the painter.  I 
see, as he saw, the far-reaching robe of living ineffable green, of 
whose brilliance the eye never has too much, and in whose weft no 
two threads are alike; and shrink as he did from the 
conventionalising of that windswept glory.

The sea has its crested waves of recognisable form; the river its 
eddy and swirl and separate vortices; but the grass!  The wind 
bloweth where it listeth and the grass bows as the wind blows - 
"thou canst not tell whither it goeth."  It takes no pattern, it 
obeys no recognised law; it is like a beautiful creature of a 
thousand wayward moods, and its voice is like nothing else in the 
wide world.  It bids you rest and bury your tired face in the green 
coolness, and breathe of its breath and of the breath of the good 
earth from which man was taken and to which he will one day return.  
Then, if you lend your ear and are silent minded, you may hear 
wondrous things of the deep places of the earth; of life in mineral 
and stone as well as in pulsing sap; of a green world as the stars 
saw it before man trod it under foot - of the emerald which has its 
place with the rest in the City of God.


"What if earth
Be but the shadow of heaven, and things therein,
Each to each other like, more than on earth to thought?"


It is a natural part of civilisation's lust of re-arrangement that 
we should be so ready to conventionalise the beauty of this world 
into decorative patterns for our pilgrim tents.  It is a phase, and 
will melt into other phases; but it tends to the increase of 
artificiality, and exists not only in art but in everything.  It is 
no new thing for jaded sentiment to crave the spur of the 
unnatural, to prefer the clever imitation, to live in a Devachan 
where the surroundings appear that which we would have them to be; 
but it is an interesting record of the pulse of the present day 
that 'An Englishwoman's Love Letters' should have taken society by 
storm in the way it certainly has.

It is a delightful book to leave about, with its vellum binding, 
dainty ribbons, and the hallmark of a great publisher's name.  But 
when we seek within we find love with its thousand voices and 
wayward moods, its shy graces and seemly reticences, love which has 
its throne and robe of state as well as the garment of the beggar 
maid, love which is before time was, which knew the world when the 
stars took up their courses, presented to us in gushing 
outpourings, the appropriate language of a woman's heart to the 
boor she delights to honour.

"It is woman who is the glory of man," says the author of 'The 
House of Wisdom and Love,' "REGINA MUNDI, greater, because so far 
the less; and man is her head, but only as he serves his queen."  
Set this sober aphorism against the school girl love-making which 
kisses a man's feet and gaily refuses him the barren honour of 
having loved her first.

There is scant need for the apologia which precedes the letters; a 
few pages dispels the fear that we are prying into another's soul.  
As for the authorship, there is a woman's influence, an artist's 
poorly concealed bias in the foreign letters; and for the rest a 
man's blunders - so much easier to see in another than to avoid 
oneself - writ large from cover to cover.  King Cophetua, who sends 
"profoundly grateful remembrances," has most surely written the 
letters he would wish to receive.

"Mrs Meynell!" cries one reviewer, triumphantly.  Nay, the saints 
be good to us, what has Mrs Meynell in common with the 
"Englishwoman's" language, style, or most unconvincing passion?  
Men can write as from a woman's heart when they are minded to do so 
in desperate earnestness - there is Clarissa Harlowe and 
Stevenson's Kirstie, and many more to prove it; but when a man 
writes as the author of the "Love Letters" writes, I feel, as did 
the painter of the frieze, that pattern-making has gone too far and 
included that which, like the grass, should be spared such a 
convention.

"I quite agree with you," said the Duchess, "and the moral of that 
is - 'Be what you would seem to be' - or, if you'd like to put it 
more simply - 'never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what 
it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was 
not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to 
be otherwise.'"  And so by way of the Queen's garden I come back to 
my room again.

My heart's affections are still centred on my old attic, with 
boarded floor and white-washed walls, where the sun blazoned a 
frieze of red and gold until he travelled too far towards the 
north, the moon streamed in to paint the trees in inky wavering 
shadows, and the stars flashed their glory to me across the years.  
But now sun and moon greet me only indirectly, and under the red 
roses hang pictures, some of them the dear companions of my days.  
Opposite me is the Arundel print of the Presentation, painted by 
the gentle "Brother of the Angels."  Priest Simeon, a stately 
figure in green and gold, great with prophecy, gazes adoringly at 
the Bambino he holds with fatherly care.  Our Lady, in robe of red 
and veil of shadowed purple, is instinct with light despite the 
sombre colouring, as she stretches out hungering, awe-struck hands 
for her soul's delight.  St Joseph, dignified guardian and 
servitor, stands behind, holding the Sacrifice of the Poor to 
redeem the First-begotten.

St Peter Martyr and the Dominican nun, gazing in rapt contemplation 
at the scene, are not one whit surprised to find themselves in the 
presence of eternal mysteries.  In the Entombment, which hangs on 
the opposite wall, St Dominic comes round the corner full of 
grievous amaze and tenderest sympathy, but with no sense of shock 
or intrusion, for was he not "famigliar di Cristo"?  And so he 
takes it all in; the stone bed empty and waiting; the Beloved 
cradled for the last time on His mother's knees to be washed, 
lapped round, and laid to rest as if He were again the Babe of 
Bethlehem.  He sees the Magdalen anointing the Sacred Feet; Blessed 
John caring for the living and the Dead; and he, Dominic - hound of 
the Lord - having his real, living share in the anguish and hope, 
the bedding of the dearest Dead, who did but leave this earth that 
He might manifest Himself more completely.

Underneath, with a leap across the centuries, is Rossetti's 
picture; Dante this time the onlooker, Beatrice, in her pale 
beauty, the death-kissed one.  The same idea under different 
representations; the one conceived in childlike simplicity, the 
other recalling, even in the photograph, its wealth of colour and 
imagining; the one a world-wide ideal, the other an individual 
expression of it.

Beatrice was to Dante the inclusion of belief.  She was more to him 
than he himself knew, far more to him after her death than before.  
And, therefore, the analogy between the pictures has at core a 
common reality.  "It is expedient for you that I go away," is 
constantly being said to us as we cling earthlike to the outward 
expression, rather than to the inward manifestation - and blessed 
are those who hear and understand, for it is spoken only to such as 
have been with Him from the beginning.  The eternal mysteries come 
into time for us individually under widely differing forms.  The 
tiny child mothers its doll, croons to it, spends herself upon it, 
why she cannot tell you; and we who are here in our extreme youth, 
never to be men and women grown in this world, nurse our ideal, 
exchange it, refashion it, call it by many names; and at last in 
here or hereafter we find in its naked truth the Child in the 
manger, even as the Wise Men found Him when they came from the East 
to seek a great King.  There is but one necessary condition of this 
finding; we must follow the particular manifestation of light given 
us, never resting until it rests - over the place of the Child.  
And there is but one insurmountable hindrance, the extinction of or 
drawing back from the light truly apprehended by us.  We forget 
this, and judge other men by the light of our own soul.

I think the old bishop must have understood it.  He is my friend of 
friends as he lies opposite my window in his alabaster sleep, clad 
in pontifical robes, with unshod feet, a little island of white 
peace in a many-coloured marble sea.  The faithful sculptor has 
given every line and wrinkle, the heavy eyelids and sunken face of 
tired old age, but withal the smile of a contented child.

I do not even know my bishop's name, only that the work is of the 
thirteenth century; but he is good to company with through the day, 
for he has known darkness and light and the minds of many men; most 
surely, too, he has known that God fulfils Himself in strange ways, 
so with the shadow of his feet upon the polished floor he rests in 
peace.



CHAPTER IV



ON Sunday my little tree was limned in white and the sparrows were 
craving shelter at my window from the blizzard.  Now the mild thin 
air brings a breath of spring in its wake and the daffodils in the 
garden wait the kisses of the sun.  Hand-in-hand with memory I slip 
away down the years, and remember a day when I awoke at earliest 
dawn, for across my sleep I had heard the lusty golden-throated 
trumpeters heralding the spring.

The air was sharp-set; a delicate rime frosted roof and road; the 
sea lay hazy and still like a great pearl.  Then as the sky stirred 
with flush upon flush of warm rosy light, it passed from misty 
pearl to opal with heart of flame, from opal to gleaming sapphire.  
The earth called, the fields called, the river called - that pied 
piper to whose music a man cannot stop his ears.  It was with me as 
with the Canterbury pilgrims:-


"So priketh hem nature in hir corages;
Than longen folk to gon on pilgrimages."


Half an hour later I was away by the early train that carries the 
branch mails and a few workmen, and was delivered at the little 
wayside station with the letters.  The kind air went singing past 
as I swung along the reverberating road between the high tree-
crowned banks which we call hedges in merry Devon, with all the 
world to myself and the Brethren.  A great blackbird flew out with 
a loud "chook, chook," and the red of the haw on his yellow bill.  
A robin trilled from a low rose-bush; two wrens searched diligently 
on a fallen tree for breakfast, quite unconcerned when I rested a 
moment beside them; and a shrewmouse slipped across the road 
followed directly by its mate.  March violets bloomed under the 
sheltered hedge with here and there a pale primrose; a frosted 
bramble spray still held its autumn tints clinging to the semblance 
of the past; and great branches of snowy blackthorn broke the 
barren hedgeway as if spring made a mock of winter's snows.

Light of heart and foot with the new wine of the year I sped on 
again, stray daffodils lighting the wayside, until I heard the 
voice of the stream and reached the field gate which leads to the 
lower meadows.  There before me lay spring's pageant; green pennons 
waving, dainty maids curtseying, and a host of joyous yellow 
trumpeters proclaiming 'Victory' to an awakened earth.  They range 
in serried ranks right down to the river, so that a man must walk 
warily to reach the water's edge where they stand gazing down at 
themselves in fairest semblance like their most tragic progenitor, 
and, rising from the bright grass in their thousands, stretch away 
until they melt in a golden cloud at the far end of the misty mead.  
Through the field gate and across the road I see them, starring the 
steep earth bank that leads to the upper copse, gleaming like pale 
flames against the dark tree-boles.  There they have but frail 
tenure; here, in the meadows, they reign supreme.

At the upper end of the field the river provides yet closer 
sanctuary for these children of the spring.  Held in its embracing 
arms lies an island long and narrow, some thirty feet by twelve, a 
veritable untrod Eldorado, glorious in gold from end to end, a 
fringe of reeds by the water's edge, and save for that - daffodils.  
A great oak stands at the meadow's neck, an oak with gnarled and 
wandering roots where a man may rest, for it is bare of daffodils 
save for a group of three, and a solitary one apart growing close 
to the old tree's side.  I sat down by my lonely little sister, 
blue sky overhead, green grass at my feet decked, like the pastures 
of the Blessed, in glorious sheen; a sea of triumphant, golden 
heads tossing blithely back as the wind swept down to play with 
them at his pleasure.

It was all mine to have and to hold without severing a single 
slender stem or harbouring a thought of covetousness; mine, as the 
whole earth was mine, to appropriate to myself without the burden 
and bane of worldly possession.  "Thou sayest that I am - a King," 
said the Lord before Pilate, and "My kingdom is not of this world."  
We who are made kings after His likeness possess all things, not 
after this world's fashion but in proportion to our poverty; and 
when we cease to toil and spin, are arrayed as the lilies, in a 
glory transcending Solomon's.  Bride Poverty - she who climbed the 
Cross with Christ - stretched out eager hands to free us from our 
chains, but we flee from her, and lay up treasure against her 
importunity, while Amytas on his seaweed bed weeps tears of pure 
pity for crave-mouth Caesar of great possessions.

Presently another of spring's lovers cried across the water 
"Cuckoo, cuckoo," and the voice of the stream sang joyously in 
unison.  It is free from burden, this merry little river, and 
neither weir nor mill bars its quick way to the sea as it completes 
the eternal circle, lavishing gifts of coolness and refreshment on 
the children of the meadows.

It has its birth on the great lone moor, cradled in a wonderful 
peat-smelling bog, with a many-hued coverlet of soft mosses - pale 
gold, orange, emerald, tawny, olive and white, with the red stain 
of sun-dew and tufted cotton-grass.  Under the old grey rocks which 
watch it rise, yellow-eyed tormantil stars the turf, and bids 
"Godspeed" to the little child of earth and sky.  Thus the journey 
begins; and with ever-increasing strength the stream carves a way 
through the dear brown peat, wears a fresh wrinkle on the patient 
stones, and patters merrily under a clapper bridge which spanned 
its breadth when the mistletoe reigned and Bottor, the grim rock 
idol, exacted the toll of human life that made him great.  On and 
on goes the stream, for it may not stay; leaving of its freshness 
with the great osmunda that stretches eager roots towards the 
running water; flowing awhile with a brother stream, to part again 
east and west as each takes up his separate burden of service - my 
friend to cherish the lower meadows in their flowery joyance - and 
so by the great sea-gate back to sky and earth again.

The river of God is full of water.  The streets of the City are 
pure gold.  Verily, here also having nothing we possess all things.


The air was keen and still as I walked back in the early evening, 
and a daffodil light was in the sky as if Heaven mirrored back 
earth's radiance.  Near the station some children flitted past, 
like little white miller moths homing through the dusk.  As I 
climbed the hill the moon rode high in a golden field - it was 
daffodils to the last.



CHAPTER V



THE seagulls from the upper reaches pass down the river in sober 
steady flight seeking the open sea.  I shall miss the swoop and 
circle of silver wings in the sunlight and the plaintive call which 
sounds so strangely away from rock and shore, but it is good to 
know that they have gone from mudbank and murky town back to the 
free airs of their inheritance, to the shadow of sun-swept cliffs 
and the curling crest of the wind-beaten waves, to brood again over 
the great ocean of a world's tears.

My little tree is gemmed with buds, shy, immature, but full of 
promise.  The sparrows busied with nest-building in the 
neighbouring pipes and gutters use it for a vantage ground, and 
crowd there in numbers, each little beak sealed with long golden 
straw or downy feather.

The river is heavy with hay barges, the last fruits of winter's 
storehouse; the lengthening days slowly and steadily oust the dark; 
the air is loud with a growing clamour of life:  spring is not only 
proclaimed, but on this Feast she is crowned, and despite the 
warring wind the days bring their meed of sunshine.  We stand for a 
moment at the meeting of the ways, the handclasp of Winter and 
Spring, of Sleep and Wakening, of Life and Death; and there is 
between them not even the thin line which Rabbi Jochanan on his 
death-bed beheld as all that divided hell from heaven.

"SPHAERA CUJUS CENTRUM UBIQUE, CIRCUMFERENTIA NULLIBUS," was said 
of Mercury, that messenger of the gods who marshalled reluctant 
spirits to the Underworld; and for Mercury we may write Life with 
Death as its great sacrament of brotherhood and release, to be 
dreaded only as we dread to partake unworthily of great benefits.  
Like all sacraments it has its rightful time and due solemnities; 
the horror and sin of suicide lie in the presumption of free will, 
the forestalling of a gift, - the sin of Eve in Paradise, who took 
that which might only be given at the hand of the Lord.  It has too 
its physical pains, but they are those of a woman in travail, and 
we remember them no more for joy that a child-man is born into the 
world naked and not ashamed:  beholding ourselves as we are we 
shall see also the leaves of the Tree of Life set for the healing 
of the nations.

We are slowly, very slowly, abandoning our belief in sudden and 
violent transitions for a surer and fuller acceptance of the 
doctrine of evolution; but most of us still draw a sharp line of 
demarcation between this world and the next, and expect a radical 
change in ourselves and our surroundings, a break in the chain of 
continuity entirely contrary to the teaching of nature and 
experience.  In the same way we cling to the specious untruth that 
we can begin over and over again in this world, forgetting that 
while our sorrow and repentance bring sacramental gifts of grace 
and strength, God Himself cannot, by His own limitation, rewrite 
the Past.  We are in our sorrow that which we have made ourselves 
in our sin; our temptations are there as well as the way of escape.  
We are in the image of God.  We create our world, our undying 
selves, our heaven, or our hell.  "QUI CREAVIT TE SINE TE NON 
SALVABIT TE SINE TE."  It is stupendous, magnificent, and most 
appalling.  A man does not change as he crosses the threshold of 
the larger room.  His personality remains the same, although the 
expression of it may be altered.  Here we have material bodies in a 
material world - there, perhaps, ether bodies in an ether world.  
There is no indecency in reasonable speculation and curiosity about 
the life to come.  One end of the thread is between our fingers, 
but we are haunted for the most part by the snap of Atropos' 
shears.

Socrates faced death with the magnificent calm bred of dignified 
familiarity.  He had built for himself a desired heaven of colour, 
light, and precious stones - the philosophic formula of those who 
set the spiritual above the material, and worship truth in the 
beauty of holiness.  He is not troubled by doubts or regrets, for 
the path of the just lies plain before his face.  He forbids 
mourning and lamentations as out of place, obeys minutely and 
cheerily the directions of his executioner, and passes with 
unaffected dignity to the apprehension of that larger truth for 
which he had constantly prepared himself.  His friends may bury him 
provided they will remember they are not burying Socrates; and that 
all things may be done decently and in order, a cock must go to 
AEsculapius.

Long before, in the days of the Captivity, there lived in godless, 
blood-shedding Nineveh an exiled Jew whose father had fallen from 
the faith.  He was a simple man, child-like and direct; living the 
careful, kindly life of an orthodox Jew, suffering many 
persecutions for conscience' sake, and in constant danger of death.  
He narrates the story of his life and of the blindness which fell 
on him, with gentle placidity, and checks the exuberance of his 
more emotional wife with the assurance of untroubled faith.  
Finally, when his pious expectations are fulfilled, his sight 
restored, and his son prosperously established beside him, he 
breaks into a prayer of rejoicing which reveals the secret of his 
confident content.  He made use of two great faculties:  the sense 
of proportion, which enabled him to apprise life and its accidents 
justly, and the gift of in-seeing, which led Socrates after him, 
and Blessed John in lonely exile on Patmos, to look through the 
things temporal to the hidden meanings of eternity.

"Let my soul bless God the great King," he cries; and looks away 
past the present distress; past the Restoration which was to end in 
fresh scattering and confusion; past the dream of gold, and 
porphyry, and marble defaced by the eagles and emblems of the 
conqueror; until his eyes are held by the Jerusalem of God, "built 
up with sapphires, and emeralds, and precious stones," with 
battlements of pure gold, and the cry of 'Alleluia' in her streets.

Many years later, when he was very aged, he called his son to him 
and gave him as heritage his own simple rule of life, adding but 
one request:  "Keep thou the law and the commandments, and shew 
thyself merciful and just, that it may go well with thee. . . . 
Consider what alms doeth, and how righteousness doth deliver. . . . 
And bury me decently, and thy mother with me."  Having so said, he 
went his way quietly and contentedly to the Jerusalem of his heart.

It is the simple note of familiarity that is wanting in us; that by 
which we link world with world.  Once, years ago, I sat by the 
bedside of a dying man in a wretched garret in the East End.  He 
was entirely ignorant, entirely quiescent, and entirely 
uninterested.  The minister of a neighbouring chapel came to see 
him and spoke to him at some length of the need for repentance and 
the joys of heaven.  After he had gone my friend lay staring 
restlessly at the mass of decrepit broken chimney pots which made 
his horizon.  At last he spoke, and there was a new note in his 
voice:-

"Ee said as 'ow there were golding streets in them parts.  I ain't 
no ways particler wot they're made of, but it'll feel natral like 
if there's chimleys too."

The sun stretched a sudden finger and painted the chimney pots red 
and gold against the smoke-dimmed sky, and with his face alight 
with surprised relief my friend died.

We are one with the earth, one in sin, one in redemption.  It is 
the fringe of the garment of God.  "If I may but touch the hem," 
said a certain woman.

On the great Death-day which shadows the early spring with a shadow 
of which it may be said UMBRA DEI EST LUX, the earth brought gifts 
of grief, the fruit of the curse, barren thorns, hollow reed, and 
the wood of the cross; the sea made offering of Tyrian purple; the 
sky veiled her face in great darkness, while the nation of priests 
crucified for the last time their Paschal lamb.  "I will hear, 
saith the Lord; I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the 
earth, and the earth shall hear the corn and wine and oil, and they 
shall hear Jezreel, and I will sow her unto me in the earth; and I 
will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I will 
say unto them which were not my people, 'Thou art my people,' and 
they shall say 'Thou art my God.'"

The second Adam stood in the garden with quickening feet, and all 
the earth pulsed and sang for joy of the new hope and the new life 
quickening within her, to be hers through the pains of travail, the 
pangs of dissolution.  The Tree of Life bears Bread and Wine - food 
of the wayfaring man.  The day of divisions is past, the day of 
unity has dawned.  One has risen from the dead, and in the Valley 
of Achor stands wide the Door of Hope - the Sacrament of Death.


Scio Domine, et vere scio . . . quia non sum dignus accedere ad 
tantum mysterium propter nimia peccata mea et infinitas 
negligentias meas.  Sed scio . . . quia tu potes me facere dignum.



CHAPTER VI



"ANYTUS and Meletus can kill me, but they cannot hurt me," said 
Socrates; and Governor Sancho, with all the itch of newly-acquired 
authority, could not make the young weaver of steel-heads for 
lances sleep in prison.  In the Vision of Er the souls passed 
straight forward under the throne of necessity, and out into the 
plains of forgetfulness, where they must severally drink of the 
river of unmindfulness whose waters cannot be held in any vessel.  
The throne, the plain, and the river are still here, but in the 
distance rise the great lone heavenward hills, and the wise among 
us no longer ask of the gods Lethe, but rather remembrance.  
Necessity can set me helpless on my back, but she cannot keep me 
there; nor can four walls limit my vision.  I pass out from under 
her throne into the garden of God a free man, to my ultimate 
beatitude or my exceeding shame.  All day long this world lies open 
to me; ay, and other worlds also, if I will but have it so; and 
when night comes I pass into the kingdom and power of the dark.

I lie through the long hours and watch my bridge, which is set with 
lights across the gloom; watch the traffic which is for me but so 
many passing lamps telling their tale by varying height and 
brightness.  I hear under my window the sprint of over-tired 
horses, the rattle of uncertain wheels as the street-sellers hasten 
south; the jangle of cab bells as the theatre-goers take their 
homeward way; the gruff altercation of weary men, the unmelodious 
song and clamorous laugh of women whose merriment is wearier still.  
Then comes a time of stillness when the light in the sky waxes and 
wanes, when the cloud-drifts obscure the stars, and I gaze out into 
blackness set with watching eyes.  No sound comes from without but 
the voice of the night-wind and the cry of the hour.  The clock on 
the mantelpiece ticks imperatively, for a check has fallen on the 
familiarity which breeds a disregard of common things, and a reason 
has to be sought for each sound which claims a hearing.  The pause 
is wonderful while it lasts, but it is not for long.  The working 
world awakes, the poorer brethren take up the burden of service; 
the dawn lights the sky; remembrance cries an end to forgetting.

Sometimes in the country on a night in early summer you may shut 
the cottage door to step out into an immense darkness which palls 
heaven and earth.  Going forward into the embrace of the great 
gloom, you are as a babe swaddled by the hands of night into 
helpless quiescence.  Your feet tread an unseen path, your hands 
grasp at a void, or shrink from the contact they cannot realise; 
your eyes are holden; your voice would die in your throat did you 
seek to rend the veil of that impenetrable silence.

Shut in by the intangible dark, we are brought up against those 
worlds within worlds blotted out by our concrete daily life.  The 
working of the great microcosm at which we peer dimly through the 
little window of science; the wonderful, breathing earth; the 
pulsing, throbbing sap; the growing fragrance shut in the calyx of 
to-morrow's flower; the heart-beat of a sleeping world that we 
dream that we know; and around, above, and interpenetrating all, 
the world of dreams, of angels and of spirits.

It was this world which Jacob saw on the first night of his exile, 
and again when he wrestled in Peniel until the break of day.  It 
was this world which Elisha saw with open eyes; which Job knew when 
darkness fell on him; which Ezekiel gazed into from his place among 
the captives; which Daniel beheld as he stood alone by the great 
river, the river Hiddekel.

For the moment we have left behind the realm of question and 
explanation, of power over matter and the exercise of bodily 
faculties; and passed into darkness alight with visions we cannot 
see, into silence alive with voices we cannot hear.  Like helpless 
men we set our all on the one thing left us, and lift up our 
hearts, knowing that we are but a mere speck among a myriad worlds, 
yet greater than the sum of them; having our roots in the dark 
places of the earth, but our branches in the sweet airs of heaven.

It is the material counterpart of the 'Night of the Soul.'  We have 
left our house and set forth in the darkness which paralyses those 
faculties that make us men in the world of men.  But surely the 
great mystics, with all their insight and heavenly love, fell short 
when they sought freedom in complete separateness from creation 
instead of in perfect unity with it.  The Greeks knew better when 
they flung Ariadne's crown among the stars, and wrote Demeter's 
grief on a barren earth, and Persephone's joy in the fruitful 
field.  For the earth is gathered up in man; he is the whole which 
is greater than the sum of its parts.  Standing in the image of 
God, and clothed in the garment of God, he lifts up priestly hands 
and presents the sacrifice of redeemed earth before the throne of 
the All-Father.  "Dust and ashes and a house of devils," he cries; 
and there comes back for answer, "REX CONCUPISCET DECOREM TUAM."

The Angel of Death has broad wings of silence and mystery with 
which he shadows the valley where we need fear no evil, and where 
the voice which speaks to us is as the "voice of doves, tabering 
upon their breasts."  It is a place of healing and preparation, of 
peace and refreshing after the sharply-defined outlines of a garish 
day.  Walking there we learn to use those natural faculties of the 
soul which are hampered by the familiarity of bodily progress, to 
apprehend the truths which we have intellectually accepted.  It is 
the place of secrets where the humility which embraces all 
attainable knowledge cries "I know not"; and while we proclaim from 
the house-tops that which we have learnt, the manner of our 
learning lies hid for each one of us in the sanctuary of our souls.

The Egyptians, in their ancient wisdom, act in the desert a great 
androsphinx, image of mystery and silence, staring from under level 
brows across the arid sands of the sea-way.  The Greeks borrowed 
and debased the image, turning the inscrutable into a semi-woman 
who asked a foolish riddle, and hurled herself down in petulant 
pride when OEdipus answered aright.  So we, marring the office of 
silence, question its mystery; thwart ourselves with riddles of our 
own suggesting; and turn away, leaving our offering but half 
consumed on the altar of the unknown god.  It was not the theft of 
fire that brought the vengeance of heaven upon Prometheus, but the 
mocking sacrifice.  Orpheus lost Eurydice because he must see her 
face before the appointed time.  Persephone ate of the pomegranate 
and hungered in gloom for the day of light which should have been 
endless.

The universe is full of miracle and mystery; the darkness and 
silence are set for a sign we dare not despise.  The pall of night 
lifts, leaving us engulphed in the light of immensity under a 
tossing heaven of stars.  The dawn breaks, but it does not surprise 
us, for we have watched from the valley and seen the pale twilight.  
Through the wondrous Sabbath of faithful souls, the long day of 
rosemary and rue, the light brightens in the East; and we pass on 
towards it with quiet feet and opening eyes, bearing with us all of 
the redeemed earth that we have made our own, until we are 
fulfilled in the sunrise of the great Easter Day, and the peoples 
come from north and south and east and west to the City which lieth 
foursquare - the Beatific Vision of God.


Vere Ierusalem est illa civitas
Cuius pax iugis et summa iucunditas;
Ubi non praevenit rem desiderium,
Nec desiderio minus est praemium.



AT THE WHITE GATE



CHAPTER I



A GREAT joy has come to me; one of those unexpected gifts which 
life loves to bestow after we have learnt to loose our grip of her.  
I am back in my own place very near my road - the white gate lies 
within my distant vision; near the lean grey Downs which keep watch 
and ward between the country and the sea; very near, nay, in the 
lap of Mother Earth, for as I write I am lying on a green carpet, 
powdered yellow and white with the sun's own flowers; overhead a 
great sycamore where the bees toil and sing; and sighing shimmering 
poplars golden grey against the blue.  The day of Persephone has 
dawned for me, and I, set free like Demeter's child, gladden my 
eyes with this foretaste of coming radiance, and rest my tired 
sense with the scent and sound of home.  Away down the meadow I 
hear the early scythe song, and the warm air is fragrant with the 
fallen grass.  It has its own message for me as I lie here, I who 
have obtained yet one more mercy, and the burden of it is life, not 
death.

I remember when, taking a grace from my road, I helped to mow 
Farmer Marler's ten-acre field, rich in ripe upstanding grass.  The 
mechanism of the ancient reaper had given way under the strain of 
the home meadows, and if this crop was to be saved it must be by 
hand.  I have kept the record of those days of joyous labour under 
a June sky.  Men were hard to get in our village; old Dodden, who 
was over seventy, volunteered his services - he had done yeoman 
work with the scythe in his youth - and two of the farm hands with 
their master completed our strength.

We took our places under a five o'clock morning sky, and the larks 
cried down to us as we stood knee-deep in the fragrant dew-steeped 
grass, each man with his gleaming scythe poised ready for its 
sweeping swing.  Old Dodden led by right of age and ripe 
experience; bent like a sickle, brown and dry as a nut, his face a 
tracery of innumerable wrinkles, he has never ailed a day, and the 
cunning of his craft was still with him.  At first we worked 
stiffly, unreadily, but soon the monotonous motion possessed us 
with its insistent rhythm, and the grass bowed to each sibilant 
swish and fell in sweet-smelling swathes at our feet.  Now and then 
a startled rabbit scurried through the miniature forest to vanish 
with white flick of tail in the tangled hedge; here and there a 
mother lark was discovered sitting motionless, immovable upon her 
little brood; but save for these infrequent incidents we paced 
steadily on with no speech save the cry of the hone on the steel 
and the swish of the falling swathes.  The sun rose high in the 
heaven and burnt on bent neck and bare and aching arms, the blood 
beat and drummed in my veins with the unwonted posture and 
exercise; I worked as a man who sees and hears in a mist.  Once, as 
I paused to whet my scythe, my eye caught the line of the 
untroubled hills strong and still in the broad sunshine; then to 
work again in the labouring, fertile valley.

Rest time came, and wiping the sweat from brow and blade we sought 
the welcome shadow of the hedge and the cool sweet oatmeal water 
with which the wise reaper quenches his thirst.  Farmer Marler 
hastened off to see with master-eye that all went well elsewhere; 
the farm men slept tranquilly, stretched at full length, clasped 
hands for pillow; and old Dodden, sitting with crooked fingers 
interlaced to check their trembling betrayal of old age, told how 
in his youth he had "swep" a four-acre field single-handed in three 
days - an almost impossible feat - and of the first reaping machine 
in these parts, and how it brought, to his thinking, the ruin of 
agricultural morals with it.  "'Tis again nature," he said, "the 
Lard gave us the land an' the seed, but 'Ee said that a man should 
sweat.  Where's the sweat drivin' round wi' two horses cuttin' the 
straw down an' gatherin' it again, wi' scarce a hand's turn i' the 
day's work?"

Old Dodden's high-pitched quavering voice rose and fell, mournful 
as he surveyed the present, vehement as he recorded the heroic 
past.  He spoke of the rural exodus and shook his head mournfully.  
"We old 'uns were content wi' earth and the open sky like our 
feythers before us, but wi' the children 'tis first machines to 
save doin' a hand's turn o' honest work, an' then land an' sky 
ain't big enough seemin'ly, nor grand enough; it must be town an' a 
paved street, an' they sweat their lives out atwixt four walls an' 
call it seein' life - 'tis death an' worse comes to the most of 
'em.  Ay, 'tis better to stay by the land, as the Lard said, till 
time comes to lie under it."  I looked away across the field where 
the hot air throbbed and quivered, and the fallen grass, robbed 
already of its freshness, lay prone at the feet of its upstanding 
fellows.  It is quite useless to argue with old Dodden; he only 
shakes his head and says firmly, "An old man, seventy-five come 
Martinmass knows more o' life than a young chap, stands ter 
reason"; besides, his epitome of the town life he knows nothing of 
was a just one as far as it went; and his own son is the sweeper of 
a Holborn crossing, and many other things that he should not be; 
but that is the parson's secret and mine.

We took rank again and swept steadily on through the hot still 
hours into the evening shadows, until the sinking sun set a GLORIA 
to the psalm of another working day.  Only a third of the field lay 
mown, for we were not skilled labourers to cut our acre a day; I 
saw it again that night under the moonlight and the starlight, 
wrapped in a shroud of summer's mist.

The women joined us on the third day to begin haymaking, and the 
air was fragrant of tossed and sun-dried grass.  One of them walked 
apart from the rest, without interest or freedom of movement; her 
face, sealed and impassive, was aged beyond the vigour of her 
years.  I knew the woman by sight, and her history by hearsay.  We 
have a code of morals here - not indeed peculiar to this place or 
people - that a wedding is 'respectable' if it precedes child-birth 
by a bare month, tolerable, and to be recognised, should it succeed 
the same by less than a year (provided the pair are not living in 
the same village); but the child that has never been 'fathered' and 
the wife without a ring are 'anathema,' and such in one was 
Elizabeth Banks.  She went away a maid and came back a year ago 
with a child and without a name.  Her mother was dead, her father 
and the village would have none of her:  the homing instinct is 
very strong, or she would scarcely have returned, knowing the 
traditions of the place.  Old Dodden, seeing her, grumbled to me in 
the rest-time. - "Can't think what the farmer wants wi' Lizzie 
Banks in 'is field."  "She must live," I said, "and by all showing 
her life is a hard one."  "She 'ad the makin' of 'er bed," he went 
on, obstinately.  "What for do she bring her disgrace home, wi' a 
fatherless brat for all folks to see?  We don't want them sort in 
our village.  The Lord's hand is heavy, an' a brat's a curse that 
cannot be hid."

When tea-time came I crossed the field to look for a missing hone, 
and saw Elizabeth Banks far from the other women, busied with a 
bundle under the hedge.  I passed close on my search, and lo! the 
bundle was a little boy.  He lay smiling and stretching, fighting 
the air with his small pink fists, while the wind played with his 
curls.  "A curse that cannot be hid," old Dodden had said.  The 
mother knelt a moment, devouring him with her eyes, then snatched 
him to her with aching greed and covered him with kisses.  I saw 
the poor, plain face illumined, transfigured, alive with a mother's 
love, and remembered how the word came once to a Hebrew prophet:-


Say unto your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah.


The evening sky was clouding fast, the sound of rain was in the 
air; Farmer Marler shook his head as he looked at the grass lying 
in ordered rows.  I was the last to leave, and as I lingered at the 
gate drinking in the scent of the field and the cool of the coming 
rain, the first drops fell on my upturned face and kissed the poor 
dry swathes at my feet, and I was glad.

David, child of the fields and the sheepfolds, his kingship laid 
aside, sees through the parted curtain of the years the advent of 
his greater Son, and cries in his psalm of the hilltops, his last 
prophetic prayer:-


He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass.


Even so He came, and shall still come.  Three days ago the field, 
in its pageant of fresh beauty, with shimmering blades and tossing 
banners, greeted sun and shower alike with joy for the furtherance 
of its life and purpose; now, laid low, it hears the young grass 
whisper the splendour of its coming green; and the poor swathes are 
glad at the telling, but full of grief for their own apparent 
failure.  Then in great pity comes the rain, the rain of summer, 
gentle, refreshing, penetrating, and the swathes are comforted, for 
they know that standing to greet or prostrate to suffer, the 
consolations of the former and the latter rain are still their own, 
with tender touch and cool caress.  Then, once more parched by the 
sun, they are borne away to the new service their apparent failure 
has fitted them for; and perhaps as they wait in the dark for the 
unknown that is still to come they hear sometimes the call of the 
distant rain, and at the sound the dry sap stirs afresh - they are 
not forgotten and can wait.

"SAY UNTO YOUR SISTERS RUHAMAH," cries the prophet.

"HE SHALL COME DOWN LIKE RAIN ON THE MOWN GRASS," sang the poet of 
the sheepfolds.

"MY WAYS ARE NOT YOUR WAYS, SAITH THE LORD."


I remember how I went home along the damp sweet-scented lanes 
through the grey mist of the rain, thinking of the mown field and 
Elizabeth Banks and many, many more; and that night, when the sky 
had cleared and the nightingale sang, I looked out at the moon 
riding at anchor, a silver boat in a still blue sea ablaze with the 
headlights of the stars, and the saying of the herdsman of Tekoa 
came to me - as it has come oftentimes since:-


Seek Him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the 
shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with 
night; that calleth for the waters of the sea and poureth them out 
upon the face of earth; the Lord is His name.



CHAPTER II



THIS garden is an epitome of peace; sun and wind, rain, flowers, 
and birds gather me into the blessedness of their active harmony.  
The world holds no wish for me, now that I have come home to die 
with my own people, for verify I think that the sap of grass and 
trees must run in my veins, so steady is their pull upon my heart-
strings.  London claimed all my philosophy, but the country gives 
all, and asks of me only the warm receptivity of a child in its 
mother's arms.

When I lie in my cool light room on the garden level, I look across 
the bright grass - IL VERDE SMALTO - to a great red rose bush in 
lavish disarray against the dark cypress.  Near by, amid a tangle 
of many-hued corn-flowers I see the promise of coming lilies, the 
sudden crimson of a solitary paeony; and in lowlier state against 
the poor parched earth glow the golden cups of the eschseholtzias.  
Beyond the low hedge lies pasture bright with buttercups, where the 
cattle feed.  Farther off, where the scythe has been busy, are 
sheep, clean and shorn, with merry, well-grown lambs; and in the 
farthest field I can see the great horses moving in slow steady 
pace as the farmer turns his furrow.

The birds are noisy comrades and old friends, from the lark which 
chants the dew-steeped morning, to the nightingale that breaks the 
silence of the most wonderful nights.  I hear the wisdom of the 
rooks in the great elms; the lifting lilt of the linnet, and the 
robin's quaint little summer song.  The starlings chatter 
ceaselessly, their queer strident voices harsh against the 
melodious gossip of the other birds; the martins shrill softly as 
they swoop to and fro busied with their nesting under the caves; 
thrush and blackbird vie in friendly rivalry like the Meister-
singer of old; sometimes I hear the drawling cry of a peacock 
strayed from the great house, or the laugh of the woodpecker; and 
at night the hunting note of the owl reaches me as he sweeps by in 
search of prey.

To-day I am out again; and the great sycamore showers honey and 
flowers on me as I lie beneath it.  Sometimes a bee falls like an 
over-ripe fruit, and waits awhile to clean his pollen-coated legs 
ere he flies home to discharge his burden.  He is too busy to be 
friendly, but his great velvety cousin is much more sociable, and 
stays for a gentle rub between his noisy shimmering wings, and a 
nap in the hollow of my hand, for he is an idle friendly soul with 
plenty of time at his own disposal and no responsibilities.  
Looking across I can watch the martins at work; they have a 
starling and a sparrow for near neighbours in the wooden gutter.  
One nest is already complete all but the coping, the other two are 
a-building:  I wonder whether I or they will be first to go south 
through the mist.

This great tree is a world in itself, and the denizens appear full 
of curiosity as to the Gulliver who has taken up his abode beneath 
it.  Pale green caterpillars and spiders of all sizes come spinning 
down to visit me, and have to be persuaded with infinite difficulty 
to ascend their threads again.  There are flies with beautiful 
iridescent wings, beetles of all shapes, some of them like tiny 
jewels in the sunlight.  Their nomenclature is a sealed book to me; 
of their life and habits I know nothing; yet this is but a little 
corner of the cosmos I am leaving, and I feel not so much desire 
for the beauty to come, as a great longing to open my eyes a little 
wider during the time which remains to me in this beautiful world 
of God's making, where each moment tells its own tale of active, 
progressive life in which there is no undoing.  Nature knows naught 
of the web of Penelope, that acme of anxious pathetic waiting, but 
goes steadily on in ever widening circle towards the fulfilment of 
the mystery of God.

There are, I take it, two master-keys to the secrets of the 
universe, viewed SUB SPECIE AETERNITATIS, the Incarnation of God, 
and the Personality of Man; with these it is true for us as for the 
pantheistic little man of contemptible speech, that "all things are 
ours," yea, even unto the third heaven.

I have lost my voracious appetite for books; their language is less 
plain than scent and song and the wind in the trees; and for me the 
clue to the next world lies in the wisdom of earth rather than in 
the learning of men.  "LIBERA ME AB FUSCINA HOPHNI," prayed the 
good Bishop fearful of religious greed.  I know too much, not too 
little; it is realisation that I lack, wherefore I desire these 
last days to confirm in myself the sustaining goodness of God, the 
love which is our continuing city, the New Jerusalem whose length, 
breadth, and height are all one.  It is a time of exceeding peace.  
There is a place waiting for me under the firs in the quiet 
churchyard; thanks to my poverty I have no worldly anxieties or 
personal dispositions; and I am rich in friends, many of them 
unknown to me, who lavishly supply my needs and make it ideal to 
live on the charity of one's fellow-men.  I am most gladly in debt 
to all the world; and to Earth, my mother, for her great beauty.

I can never remember the time when I did not love her, this mother 
of mine with her wonderful garments and ordered loveliness, her 
tender care and patient bearing of man's burden.  In the earliest 
days of my lonely childhood I used to lie chin on hand amid the 
milkmaids, red sorrel, and heavy spear-grass listening to her many 
voices, and above all to the voice of the little brook which ran 
through the meadows where I used to play:  I think it has run 
through my whole life also, to lose itself at last, not in the 
great sea but in the river that maketh glad the City of God.  
Valley and plain, mountain and fruitful field; the lark's song and 
the speedwell in the grass; surely a man need not sigh for greater 
loveliness until he has read something more of this living letter, 
and knelt before that earth of which he is the only confusion.

It is a grave matter that the word religion holds such away among 
us, making the very gap seem to yawn again which the Incarnation 
once and for ever filled full.  We have banished the protecting 
gods that ruled in river and mountain, tree and grove; we have 
gainsayed for the most part folk-lore and myth, superstition and 
fairy-tale, evil only in their abuse.  We have done away with 
mystery, or named it deceit.  All this we have done in an 
enlightened age, but despite this policy of destruction we have 
left ourselves a belief, the grandest and most simple the world has 
ever known, which sanctifies the water that is shed by every 
passing cloud; and gathers up in its great central act vineyard and 
cornfield, proclaiming them to be that Life of the world without 
which a man is dead while he liveth.  Further, it is a belief whose 
foundations are the most heavenly mystery of the Trinity, but whose 
centre is a little Child:  it sets a price upon the head of the 
sparrow, and reckons the riches of this world at their true value; 
it points to a way of holiness where the fool shall not err, and 
the sage may find the realisation of his far-seeking; and yet, 
despite its inclusiveness, it is a belief which cannot save the 
birds from destruction, the silent mountains from advertisement, or 
the stream from pollution, in an avowedly Christian land.  John 
Ruskin scolded and fought and did yeoman service, somewhat hindered 
by his over-good conceit of himself; but it is not the worship of 
beauty we need so much as the beauty of holiness.  Little by little 
the barrier grows and 'religion' becomes a RULE of life, not life 
itself, although the Bride stands ready to interpret, likened in 
her loveliness to the chief treasures of her handmaid-Earth.  There 
is more truth in the believing cry, "Come from thy white cliffs, O 
Pan!" than in the religion that measures a man's life by the letter 
of the Ten Commandments, and erects itself as judge and ruler over 
him, instead of throwing open the gate of the garden where God 
walks with man from morning until morning.

As I write the sun is setting; in the pale radiance of the sky 
above his glory there dawns the evening star; and earth like a 
tired child turns her face to the bosom of the night.



CHAPTER III



ONCE again I have paid a rare visit to my tree to find many things 
changed since my last sojourn there.  The bees are silent, for the 
honey-laden flowers of the sycamore are gone and in their place 
hang dainty two-fold keys.  The poplar has lost its metallic 
shimmer, the chestnut its tall white candles; and the sound of the 
wind in the fully-leaved branches is like the sighing of the sea.  
The martins' nests are finished, and one is occupied by a shrill-
voiced brood; but for the most part the birds' parental cares are 
over, and the nestlings in bold flight no longer flutter on 
inefficient wings across the lawn with clamorous, open bill.  The 
robins show promise of their ruddy vests, the slim young thrush is 
diligently practising maturer notes, and soon Maid June will have 
fled.

It is such a wonderful world that I cannot find it in my heart to 
sigh for fresh beauty amid these glories of the Lord on which I 
look, seeing men as trees walking, in my material impotence which 
awaits the final anointing.  The marigolds with their orange suns, 
the lilies' white flame, the corncockle's blue crown of many 
flowers, the honeysuckle's horn of fragrance - I can paraphrase 
them, name, class, dissect them; and then, save for the purposes of 
human intercourse, I stand where I stood before, my world bounded 
by my capacity, the secret of colour and fragrance still kept.  It 
is difficult to believe that the second lesson will not be the 
sequence of the first, and death prove a "feast of opening eyes" to 
all these wonders, instead of the heavy-lidded slumber to which we 
so often liken it.  "Earth to earth?"  Yes, "dust thou art, and 
unto dust thou shalt return," but what of the rest?  What of the 
folded grave clothes, and the Forty Days?  If the next state be, as 
it well might, space of four dimensions, and the first veil which 
will lift for me be the material one, then the "other" world which 
is hidden from our grosser material organism will lie open, and 
declare still further to my widening eyes and unstopped ears the 
glory and purpose of the manifold garment of God.  Knowledge will 
give place to understanding in that second chamber of the House of 
Wisdom and Love.  Revelation is always measured by capacity:  "Open 
thy mouth wide," and it shall be filled with a satisfaction that in 
itself is desire.

There is a child here, a happy quiet little creature holding gently 
to its two months of life.  Sometimes they lay it beside me, I the 
more helpless of the two - perhaps the more ignorant - and equally 
dependent for the supply of my smallest need.  I feel indecently 
large as I survey its minute perfections and the tiny balled fist 
lying in my great palm.  The little creature fixes me with the wise 
wide stare of a soul in advance of its medium of expression; and I, 
gazing back at the mystery in those eyes, feel the thrill of 
contact between my worn and sustained self and the innocence of a 
little white child.  It is wonderful to watch a woman's rapturous 
familiarity with these newcomers.  A man's love has far more awe in 
it, and the passionate animal instinct of defence is wanting in 
him.  "A woman shall be saved through the child-bearing," said St 
Paul; not necessarily her own, but by participation in the great 
act of motherhood which is the crown and glory of her sex.  She is 
the "prisoner of love," caught in a net of her own weaving; held 
fast by little hands which rule by impotence, pursued by feet the 
swifter for their faltering.

It seems incredible that this is what a woman will barter for the 
right to "live her own life" - surely the most empty of desires.  
Man - VIR, woman - FEMINA, go to make up THE man - HOMO.  There can 
be no comparison, no rivalry between them; they are the complement 
of each other, and a little child shall lead them.  It is easy to 
understand that desire to shelter under the dear mantle of 
motherhood which has led to one of the abuses of modern Romanism.  
I met an old peasant couple at Bornhofen who had tramped many weary 
miles to the famous shrine of Our Lady to plead for their only son.  
They had a few pence saved for a candle, and afterwards when they 
told me their tale the old woman heaved a sigh of relief, "Es wird 
bald gut gehen:  Die da, Sie versteht," and I saw her later paying 
a farewell visit to the great understanding Mother whom she could 
trust.  Superstitious misapprehension if you will, but also the 
recognition of a divine principle.

It was Behmen, I believe, who cried with the breath of inspiration, 
"Only when I know God shall I know myself"; and so man remains the 
last of all the riddles, to be solved it may be only in Heaven's 
perfection and the light of the Beatific Vision.  "Know thyself" is 
a vain legend, the more so when emphasised by a skull; and so I 
company with a friend and a stranger, and looking across at the 
white gate I wonder concerning the quiet pastures and still waters 
that lie beyond, even as Brother Ambrose wondered long years ago in 
the monastery by the forest.


The Brother Ambrose was ever a saintly man approved of God and 
beloved by the Brethren.  To him one night, as he lay abed in the 
dormitory, came the word of the Lord, saying, "Come, and I will 
show thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife."  And Brother Ambrose arose 
and was carried to a great and high mountain, even as in the Vision 
of Blessed John.  'Twas a still night of many stars, and Brother 
Ambrose, looking up, saw a radiant path in the heavens; and lo! the 
stars gathered themselves together on either side until they stood 
as walls of light, and the four winds lapped him about as in a 
mantle and bore him towards the wondrous gleaming roadway.  Then 
between the stars came the Holy City with roof and pinnacle aflame, 
and walls aglow with such colours as no earthly limner dreams of, 
and much gold.  Brother Ambrose beheld the Gates of Pearl, and by 
every gate an angel with wings of snow and fire, and a face no man 
dare look on because of its exceeding radiance.

Then as Brother Ambrose stretched out his arms because of his great 
longing, a little grey cloud came out of the north and hung between 
the walls of light, so that he no longer beheld the Vision, but 
only heard a sound as of a great multitude crying 'Alleluia'; and 
suddenly the winds came about him again, and lo! he found himself 
in his bed in the dormitory, and it was midnight, for the bell was 
ringing to Matins; and he rose and went down with the rest.  But 
when the Brethren left the choir Brother Ambrose stayed fast in his 
place, hearing and seeing nothing because of the Vision of God; and 
at Lauds they found him and told the Prior.

He questioned Brother Ambrose of the matter, and when he heard the 
Vision bade him limn the Holy City even as he had seen it; and the 
Precentor gave him uterine vellum and much fine gold and what 
colours he asked for the work.  Then Brother Ambrose limned a 
wondrous fair city of gold with turrets and spires; and he inlaid 
blue for the sapphire, and green for the emerald, and vermilion 
where the city seemed aflame with the glory of God; but the angels 
he could not limn, nor could he set the rest of the colours as he 
saw them, nor the wall of stars on either hand; and Brother Ambrose 
fell sick because of the exceeding great longing he had to limn the 
Holy City, and was very sad; but the Prior bade him thank God, and 
remember the infirmity of the flesh, which, like the little grey 
cloud, veiled Jerusalem to his sight.


As I write the monastery bell hard by rings out across the lark's 
song.  They still have time for visions behind those guarding 
walls, but for most of us it is not so.  We let slip the ideal for 
what we call the real, and the golden dreams vanish while we clutch 
at phantoms:  we speed along life's pathway, counting to the full 
the sixty minutes of every hour, yet the race is not to the swift 
nor the battle to the strong.  Lying here in this quiet backwater 
it is hard to believe that the world without is turbulent with 
storm and stress and the ebb and flow of uncertain tides.  The 
little yellow cat rolling on its back among the daisies, the staid 
tortoise making a stately meal off the buttercups near me, these 
are great events in this haven of peace.  And yet, looking back to 
the working days, I know how much goodness and loving kindness 
there is under the froth and foam.  If we do not know ourselves we 
most certainly do not know our brethren:  that revelation awaits 
us, it may be, first in Heaven.  To have faith is to create; to 
have hope is to call down blessing; to have love is to work 
miracles.  Above all let us see visions, visions of colour and 
light, of green fields and broad rivers, of palaces laid with fair 
colours, and gardens where a place is found for rosemary and rue.

It is our prerogative to be dreamers, but there will always be men 
ready to offer us death for our dreams.  And if it must be so let 
us choose death; it is gain, not loss, and the gloomy portal when 
we reach it is but a white gate, the white gate maybe we have known 
all our lives barred by the tendrils of the woodbine.



CHAPTER IV



RAIN, rain, rain:  the little flagged path outside my window is a 
streaming way, where the coming raindrops meet again the grey 
clouds whose storehouse they have but just now left.  The grass 
grows greener as I watch it, the burnt patches fade, a thousand 
thirsty beads are uplifted for the cooling draught.

The great thrush that robs the raspberry canes is busy; yesterday 
he had little but dust for his guerdon, but now fresh, juicy fruit 
repays him as he swings to and fro on the pliant branches.  The 
blackbirds and starlings find the worms an easy prey - poor brother 
worm ever ready for sacrifice.  I can hear the soft expectant 
chatter of the family of martins under the roof; there will be good 
hunting, and they know it, for the flies are out when the rain is 
over, and there are clamorous mouths awaiting.  My little brown 
brothers, the sparrows, remain my chief delight.  Of all the birds 
these nestle closest to my heart, be they grimy little cockneys or 
their trim and dainty country cousins.  They come day by day for 
their meed of crumbs spread for them outside my window, and at this 
season they eat leisurely and with good appetite, for there are no 
hungry babies pestering to be fed.  Very early in the morning I 
hear the whirr and rustle of eager wings, and the tap, tap, of 
little beaks upon the stone.  The sound carries me back, for it was 
the first to greet me when I rose to draw water and gather kindling 
in my roadmender days; and if I slip back another decade they 
survey me, reproving my laziness, from the foot of the narrow bed 
in my little attic overseas.

Looking along the roadway that we have travelled we see the 
landmarks, great and small, which have determined the direction of 
our feet.  For some those of childhood stand out above all the 
rest; but I remember few notable ones, and those few the emphatic 
chord of the universe, rather than any commerce with my fellows.  
There was the night of my great disappointment, when I was borne 
from my comfortable bed to see the wonders of the moon's eclipse.  
Disappointment was so great that it sealed my lips; but, once back 
on my pillow, I sobbed for grief that I had seen a wonder so far 
below my expectation.  Then there was a night at Whitby, when the 
wind made speech impossible, and the seas rushed up and over the 
great lighthouse like the hungry spirits of the deep.  I like 
better to remember the scent of the first cowslip field under the 
warm side of the hedge, when I sang to myself for pure joy of their 
colour and fragrance.  Again, there were the bluebells in the 
deserted quarry like the backwash of a southern sea, and below them 
the miniature forest of sheltering bracken with its quaint 
conceits; and, crowned above all, the day I stood on Watcombe Down, 
and looked across a stretch of golden gorse and new-turned blood-
red field, the green of the headland, and beyond, the sapphire sea.

Time sped, and there came a day when I first set foot on German 
soil and felt the throb of its paternity, the beat of our common 
Life.  England is my mother, and most dearly do I love her swelling 
breasts and wind-swept, salt-strewn hair.  Scotland gave me my 
name, with its haunting derivation handed down by brave men; but 
Germany has always been to me the Fatherland PAR EXCELLENCE.  True, 
my love is limited to the southern provinces, with their medieval 
memories; for the progressive guttural north I have little 
sympathy, but the Rhine claimed me from the first, calling, 
calling, with that wonderful voice which speaks of death and life, 
of chivalry and greed of gold.  If you would have the river's 
company you should wander, a happy solitary, along its banks, 
watching its gleaming current in the early morning, its golden 
glory as it answers the farewell of parting day.  Then, in the 
silence of the night, you can hear the wash and eddy calling one to 
another, count the heart-beats of the great bearer of burdens, and 
watch in the moonlight the sisters of the mist as they lament with 
wringing hands the days that are gone.

The forests, too, are ready with story hid in the fastness of their 
solitude, and it is a joy to think that those great pines, pointing 
ever upwards, go for the most part to carry the sails of great 
ships seeking afar under open sky.  The forest holds other wonders 
still.  It seems but last night that I wandered down the road which 
led to the little unheeded village where I had made my temporary 
home.  The warm-scented breath of the pines and the stillness of 
the night wrapped me in great content; the summer lightning leapt 
in a lambent arch across the east, and the stars, seen dimly 
through the sombre tree crests, were outrivalled by the glow-worms 
which shone in countless points of light from bank and hedge; even 
two charcoal-burners, who passed with friendly greeting, had 
wreathed their hats with the living flame.  The tiny shifting lamps 
were everywhere; pale yellow, purely white, or green as the 
underside of a northern wave.  By day but an ugly, repellent worm; 
but darkness comes, and lo, a star alight.  Nature is full for us 
of seeming inconsistencies and glad surprises.  The world's asleep, 
say you; on your ear falls the nightingale's song and the stir of 
living creatures in bush and brake.  The mantle of night falls, and 
all unattended the wind leaps up and scatters the clouds which veil 
the constant stars; or in the hour of the great dark, dawn parts 
the curtain with the long foregleam of the coming day.  It is hard 
to turn one's back on night with her kiss of peace for tired eye-
lids, the kiss which is not sleep but its neglected forerunner.  I 
made my way at last down to the vine-girt bridge asleep under the 
stars and up the winding stairs of the old grey tower; and a 
stone's-throw away the Rhine slipped quietly past in the midsummer 
moonlight.  Switzerland came in its turn, unearthly in its white 
loveliness and glory of lake and sky.  But perhaps the landmark 
which stands out most clearly is the solitary blue gentian which I 
found in the short slippery grass of the Rigi, gazing up at the sky 
whose blue could not hope to excel it.  It was my first; and what 
need of another, for finding one I had gazed into the mystery of 
all.  This side the Pass, snow and the blue of heaven; later I 
entered Italy through fields of many-hued lilies, her past glories 
blazoned in the flowers of the field.

Now it is a strangely uneventful road that leads to my White Gate.  
Each day questions me as it passes; each day makes answer for me 
"not yet."  There is no material preparation to be made for this 
journey of mine into a far country - a simple fact which adds to 
the 'unknowableness' of the other side.  Do I travel alone, or am I 
one of a great company, swift yet unhurried in their passage?  The 
voices of Penelope's suitors shrilled on the ears of Ulysses, as 
they journeyed to the nether-world, like nocturnal birds and bats 
in the inarticulateness of their speech.  They had abused the gift, 
and fled self-condemned.  Maybe silence commends itself as most 
suitable for the wayfarers towards the sunrise - silence because 
they seek the Word - but for those hastening towards the confusion 
they have wrought there falls already the sharp oncoming of the 
curse.

While we are still here the language of worship seems far, and yet 
lies very nigh; for what better note can our frail tongues lisp 
than the voice of wind and sea, river and stream, those grateful 
servants giving all and asking nothing, the soft whisper of snow 
and rain eager to replenish, or the thunder proclaiming a majesty 
too great for utterance?  Here, too, stands the angel with the 
censer gathering up the fragrance of teeming earth and forest-tree, 
of flower and fruit, and sweetly pungent herb distilled by sun and 
rain for joyful use.  Here, too, come acolytes lighting the dark 
with tapers - sun, moon, and stars - gifts of the Lord that His 
sanctuary may stand ever served.

It lies here ready to our hand, this life of adoration which we 
needs must live hand in hand with earth, for has she not borne the 
curse with us?  But beyond the white gate and the trail of woodbine 
falls the silence greater than speech, darkness greater than light, 
a pause of "a little while"; and then the touch of that healing 
garment as we pass to the King in His beauty, in a land from which 
there is no return.

At the gateway then I cry you farewell.





Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Roadmender, by Michael Fairless

