The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barnaby Rudge, by Charles Dickens
#25 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Barnaby Rudge

by Charles Dickens

May, 1997  [Etext #917]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barnaby Rudge, by Charles Dickens
*****This file should be named rudge10.txt or rudge10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, rudge11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, rudge10a.txt.


This Etext was created by
Donald Lainson
charlie@idirect.com


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This Etext was created by
Donald Lainson
charlie@idirect.com

I've left in archaic forms such as 'to-morrow' or 'to-day' 
as they occured in my copy.	 Also please be aware if spell-checking,
that within dialog many 'mispelled' words exist, i.e. 'wery' for 
'very', as intended by the author.





BARNABY RUDGE - A TALE OF THE RIOTS OF 'EIGHTY

by

Charles Dickens



PREFACE


The late Mr Waterton having, some time ago, expressed his opinion 
that ravens are gradually becoming extinct in England, I offered 
the few following words about my experience of these birds.

The raven in this story is a compound of two great originals, of 
whom I was, at different times, the proud possessor.  The first was 
in the bloom of his youth, when he was discovered in a modest 
retirement in London, by a friend of mine, and given to me.  He had 
from the first, as Sir Hugh Evans says of Anne Page, 'good gifts', 
which he improved by study and attention in a most exemplary 
manner.  He slept in a stable--generally on horseback--and so 
terrified a Newfoundland dog by his preternatural sagacity, that he 
has been known, by the mere superiority of his genius, to walk off 
unmolested with the dog's dinner, from before his face.  He was 
rapidly rising in acquirements and virtues, when, in an evil hour, 
his stable was newly painted.  He observed the workmen closely, 
saw that they were careful of the paint, and immediately burned to 
possess it.  On their going to dinner, he ate up all they had left 
behind, consisting of a pound or two of white lead; and this 
youthful indiscretion terminated in death.

While I was yet inconsolable for his loss, another friend of mine 
in Yorkshire discovered an older and more gifted raven at a village 
public-house, which he prevailed upon the landlord to part with for 
a consideration, and sent up to me.  The first act of this Sage, 
was, to administer to the effects of his predecessor, by 
disinterring all the cheese and halfpence he had buried in the 
garden--a work of immense labour and research, to which he devoted 
all the energies of his mind.  When he had achieved this task, he 
applied himself to the acquisition of stable language, in which he 
soon became such an adept, that he would perch outside my window 
and drive imaginary horses with great skill, all day.  Perhaps 
even I never saw him at his best, for his former master sent his 
duty with him, 'and if I wished the bird to come out very strong, 
would I be so good as to show him a drunken man'--which I never 
did, having (unfortunately) none but sober people at hand.

But I could hardly have respected him more, whatever the 
stimulating influences of this sight might have been.  He had not 
the least respect, I am sorry to say, for me in return, or for 
anybody but the cook; to whom he was attached--but only, I fear, as 
a Policeman might have been.  Once, I met him unexpectedly, about 
half-a-mile from my house, walking down the middle of a public 
street, attended by a pretty large crowd, and spontaneously 
exhibiting the whole of his accomplishments.  His gravity under 
those trying circumstances, I can never forget, nor the 
extraordinary gallantry with which, refusing to be brought home, he 
defended himself behind a pump, until overpowered by numbers.  It 
may have been that he was too bright a genius to live long, or it 
may have been that he took some pernicious substance into his bill, 
and thence into his maw--which is not improbable, seeing that he 
new-pointed the greater part of the garden-wall by digging out the 
mortar, broke countless squares of glass by scraping away the putty 
all round the frames, and tore up and swallowed, in splinters, the 
greater part of a wooden staircase of six steps and a landing--but 
after some three years he too was taken ill, and died before the 
kitchen fire.  He kept his eye to the last upon the meat as it 
roasted, and suddenly.  turned over on his back with a sepulchral 
cry of 'Cuckoo!'  Since then I have been ravenless.

No account of the Gordon Riots having been to my knowledge 
introduced into any Work of Fiction, and the subject presenting 
very extraordinary and remarkable features, I was led to project 
this Tale.

It is unnecessary to say, that those shameful tumults, while they 
reflect indelible disgrace upon the time in which they occurred, 
and all who had act or part in them, teach a good lesson.  That 
what we falsely call a religious cry is easily raised by men who 
have no religion, and who in their daily practice set at nought the 
commonest principles of right and wrong; that it is begotten of 
intolerance and persecution; that it is senseless, besotted, 
inveterate and unmerciful; all History teaches us.  But perhaps we 
do not know it in our hearts too well, to profit by even so humble 
an example as the 'No Popery' riots of Seventeen Hundred and Eighty.

However imperfectly those disturbances are set forth in the 
following pages, they are impartially painted by one who has no 
sympathy with the Romish Church, though he acknowledges, as most 
men do, some esteemed friends among the followers of its creed.

In the description of the principal outrages, reference has been 
had to the best authorities of that time, such as they are; the 
account given in this Tale, of all the main features of the Riots, 
is substantially correct.

Mr Dennis's allusions to the flourishing condition of his trade in 
those days, have their foundation in Truth, and not in the 
Author's fancy.  Any file of old Newspapers, or odd volume of the 
Annual Register, will prove this with terrible ease.

Even the case of Mary Jones, dwelt upon with so much pleasure by 
the same character, is no effort of invention.  The facts were 
stated, exactly as they are stated here, in the House of Commons.  
Whether they afforded as much entertainment to the merry gentlemen 
assembled there, as some other most affecting circumstances of a 
similar nature mentioned by Sir Samuel Romilly, is not recorded.

That the case of Mary Jones may speak the more emphatically for 
itself, I subjoin it, as related by SIR WILLIAM MEREDITH in a 
speech in Parliament, 'on Frequent Executions', made in 1777.

'Under this act,' the Shop-lifting Act, 'one Mary Jones was 
executed, whose case I shall just mention; it was at the time when 
press warrants were issued, on the alarm about Falkland Islands.  
The woman's husband was pressed, their goods seized for some debts 
of his, and she, with two small children, turned into the streets 
a-begging.  It is a circumstance not to be forgotten, that she was 
very young (under nineteen), and most remarkably handsome.  She 
went to a linen-draper's shop, took some coarse linen off the 
counter, and slipped it under her cloak; the shopman saw her, and 
she laid it down: for this she was hanged.  Her defence was (I have 
the trial in my pocket), "that she had lived in credit, and wanted 
for nothing, till a press-gang came and stole her husband from her; 
but since then, she had no bed to lie on; nothing to give her 
children to eat; and they were almost naked; and perhaps she might 
have done something wrong, for she hardly knew what she did."  The 
parish officers testified the truth of this story; but it seems, 
there had been a good deal of shop-lifting about Ludgate; an 
example was thought necessary; and this woman was hanged for the 
comfort and satisfaction of shopkeepers in Ludgate Street.  When 
brought to receive sentence, she behaved in such a frantic manner, 
as proved her mind to he in a distracted and desponding state; and 
the child was sucking at her breast when she set out for Tyburn.'



Chapter 1


In the year 1775, there stood upon the borders of Epping Forest, 
at a distance of about twelve miles from London--measuring from the 
Standard in Cornhill,' or rather from the spot on or near to which 
the Standard used to be in days of yore--a house of public 
entertainment called the Maypole; which fact was demonstrated to 
all such travellers as could neither read nor write (and at that 
time a vast number both of travellers and stay-at-homes were in 
this condition) by the emblem reared on the roadside over against 
the house, which, if not of those goodly proportions that Maypoles 
were wont to present in olden times, was a fair young ash, thirty 
feet in height, and straight as any arrow that ever English yeoman 
drew.

The Maypole--by which term from henceforth is meant the house, and 
not its sign--the Maypole was an old building, with more gable ends 
than a lazy man would care to count on a sunny day; huge zig-zag 
chimneys, out of which it seemed as though even smoke could not 
choose but come in more than naturally fantastic shapes, imparted 
to it in its tortuous progress; and vast stables, gloomy, ruinous, 
and empty.  The place was said to have been built in the days of 
King Henry the Eighth; and there was a legend, not only that Queen 
Elizabeth had slept there one night while upon a hunting excursion, 
to wit, in a certain oak-panelled room with a deep bay window, but 
that next morning, while standing on a mounting block before the 
door with one foot in the stirrup, the virgin monarch had then and 
there boxed and cuffed an unlucky page for some neglect of duty.  
The matter-of-fact and doubtful folks, of whom there were a few 
among the Maypole customers, as unluckily there always are in every 
little community, were inclined to look upon this tradition as 
rather apocryphal; but, whenever the landlord of that ancient 
hostelry appealed to the mounting block itself as evidence, and 
triumphantly pointed out that there it stood in the same place to 
that very day, the doubters never failed to be put down by a large 
majority, and all true believers exulted as in a victory.

Whether these, and many other stories of the like nature, were true 
or untrue, the Maypole was really an old house, a very old house, 
perhaps as old as it claimed to be, and perhaps older, which will 
sometimes happen with houses of an uncertain, as with ladies of a 
certain, age.  Its windows were old diamond-pane lattices, its 
floors were sunken and uneven, its ceilings blackened by the hand 
of time, and heavy with massive beams.  Over the doorway was an 
ancient porch, quaintly and grotesquely carved; and here on summer 
evenings the more favoured customers smoked and drank--ay, and 
sang many a good song too, sometimes--reposing on two grim-looking 
high-backed settles, which, like the twin dragons of some fairy 
tale, guarded the entrance to the mansion.

In the chimneys of the disused rooms, swallows had built their 
nests for many a long year, and from earliest spring to latest 
autumn whole colonies of sparrows chirped and twittered in the 
eaves.  There were more pigeons about the dreary stable-yard and 
out-buildings than anybody but the landlord could reckon up.  The 
wheeling and circling flights of runts, fantails, tumblers, and 
pouters, were perhaps not quite consistent with the grave and sober 
character of the building, but the monotonous cooing, which never 
ceased to be raised by some among them all day long, suited it 
exactly, and seemed to lull it to rest.  With its overhanging 
stories, drowsy little panes of glass, and front bulging out and 
projecting over the pathway, the old house looked as if it were 
nodding in its sleep.  Indeed, it needed no very great stretch of 
fancy to detect in it other resemblances to humanity.  The bricks 
of which it was built had originally been a deep dark red, but had 
grown yellow and discoloured like an old man's skin; the sturdy 
timbers had decayed like teeth; and here and there the ivy, like a 
warm garment to comfort it in its age, wrapt its green leaves 
closely round the time-worn walls.

It was a hale and hearty age though, still: and in the summer or 
autumn evenings, when the glow of the setting sun fell upon the oak 
and chestnut trees of the adjacent forest, the old house, partaking 
of its lustre, seemed their fit companion, and to have many good 
years of life in him yet.

The evening with which we have to do, was neither a summer nor an 
autumn one, but the twilight of a day in March, when the wind 
howled dismally among the bare branches of the trees, and rumbling 
in the wide chimneys and driving the rain against the windows of 
the Maypole Inn, gave such of its frequenters as chanced to be 
there at the moment an undeniable reason for prolonging their stay, 
and caused the landlord to prophesy that the night would certainly 
clear at eleven o'clock precisely,--which by a remarkable 
coincidence was the hour at which he always closed his house.

The name of him upon whom the spirit of prophecy thus descended was 
John Willet, a burly, large-headed man with a fat face, which 
betokened profound obstinacy and slowness of apprehension, 
combined with a very strong reliance upon his own merits.  It was 
John Willet's ordinary boast in his more placid moods that if he 
were slow he was sure; which assertion could, in one sense at 
least, be by no means gainsaid, seeing that he was in everything 
unquestionably the reverse of fast, and withal one of the most 
dogged and positive fellows in existence--always sure that what he 
thought or said or did was right, and holding it as a thing quite 
settled and ordained by the laws of nature and Providence, that 
anybody who said or did or thought otherwise must be inevitably and 
of necessity wrong.

Mr Willet walked slowly up to the window, flattened his fat nose 
against the cold glass, and shading his eyes that his sight might 
not be affected by the ruddy glow of the fire, looked abroad.  Then 
he walked slowly back to his old seat in the chimney-corner, and, 
composing himself in it with a slight shiver, such as a man might 
give way to and so acquire an additional relish for the warm blaze, 
said, looking round upon his guests:

'It'll clear at eleven o'clock.  No sooner and no later.  Not 
before and not arterwards.'

'How do you make out that?' said a little man in the opposite 
corner.  'The moon is past the full, and she rises at nine.'

John looked sedately and solemnly at his questioner until he had 
brought his mind to bear upon the whole of his observation, and 
then made answer, in a tone which seemed to imply that the moon was 
peculiarly his business and nobody else's:

'Never you mind about the moon.  Don't you trouble yourself about 
her.  You let the moon alone, and I'll let you alone.'

'No offence I hope?' said the little man.

Again John waited leisurely until the observation had thoroughly 
penetrated to his brain, and then replying, 'No offence as YET,' 
applied a light to his pipe and smoked in placid silence; now and 
then casting a sidelong look at a man wrapped in a loose riding-
coat with huge cuffs ornamented with tarnished silver lace and 
large metal buttons, who sat apart from the regular frequenters of 
the house, and wearing a hat flapped over his face, which was still 
further shaded by the hand on which his forehead rested, looked 
unsociable enough.

There was another guest, who sat, booted and spurred, at some 
distance from the fire also, and whose thoughts--to judge from his 
folded arms and knitted brows, and from the untasted liquor before 
him--were occupied with other matters than the topics under 
discussion or the persons who discussed them.  This was a young man 
of about eight-and-twenty, rather above the middle height, and 
though of somewhat slight figure, gracefully and strongly made.  He 
wore his own dark hair, and was accoutred in a riding dress, which 
together with his large boots (resembling in shape and fashion 
those worn by our Life Guardsmen at the present day), showed 
indisputable traces of the bad condition of the roads.  But travel-
stained though he was, he was well and even richly attired, and 
without being overdressed looked a gallant gentleman.

Lying upon the table beside him, as he had carelessly thrown them 
down, were a heavy riding-whip and a slouched hat, the latter worn 
no doubt as being best suited to the inclemency of the weather.  
There, too, were a pair of pistols in a holster-case, and a short 
riding-cloak.  Little of his face was visible, except the long dark 
lashes which concealed his downcast eyes, but an air of careless 
ease and natural gracefulness of demeanour pervaded the figure, and 
seemed to comprehend even those slight accessories, which were all 
handsome, and in good keeping.

Towards this young gentleman the eyes of Mr Willet wandered but 
once, and then as if in mute inquiry whether he had observed his 
silent neighbour.  It was plain that John and the young gentleman 
had often met before.  Finding that his look was not returned, or 
indeed observed by the person to whom it was addressed, John 
gradually concentrated the whole power of his eyes into one focus, 
and brought it to bear upon the man in the flapped hat, at whom he 
came to stare in course of time with an intensity so remarkable, 
that it affected his fireside cronies, who all, as with one accord, 
took their pipes from their lips, and stared with open mouths at 
the stranger likewise.

The sturdy landlord had a large pair of dull fish-like eyes, and 
the little man who had hazarded the remark about the moon (and who 
was the parish-clerk and bell-ringer of Chigwell, a village hard 
by) had little round black shiny eyes like beads; moreover this 
little man wore at the knees of his rusty black breeches, and on 
his rusty black coat, and all down his long flapped waistcoat, 
little queer buttons like nothing except his eyes; but so like 
them, that as they twinkled and glistened in the light of the fire, 
which shone too in his bright shoe-buckles, he seemed all eyes from 
head to foot, and to be gazing with every one of them at the 
unknown customer.  No wonder that a man should grow restless under 
such an inspection as this, to say nothing of the eyes belonging to 
short Tom Cobb the general chandler and post-office keeper, and 
long Phil Parkes the ranger, both of whom, infected by the example 
of their companions, regarded him of the flapped hat no less 
attentively.

The stranger became restless; perhaps from being exposed to this 
raking fire of eyes, perhaps from the nature of his previous 
meditations--most probably from the latter cause, for as he changed 
his position and looked hastily round, he started to find himself 
the object of such keen regard, and darted an angry and suspicious 
glance at the fireside group.  It had the effect of immediately 
diverting all eyes to the chimney, except those of John Willet, who 
finding himself as it were, caught in the fact, and not being (as 
has been already observed) of a very ready nature, remained staring 
at his guest in a particularly awkward and disconcerted manner.

'Well?' said the stranger.

Well.  There was not much in well.  It was not a long speech.  'I 
thought you gave an order,' said the landlord, after a pause of two 
or three minutes for consideration.

The stranger took off his hat, and disclosed the hard features of a 
man of sixty or thereabouts, much weatherbeaten and worn by time, 
and the naturally harsh expression of which was not improved by a 
dark handkerchief which was bound tightly round his head, and, 
while it served the purpose of a wig, shaded his forehead, and 
almost hid his eyebrows.  If it were intended to conceal or divert 
attention from a deep gash, now healed into an ugly seam, which 
when it was first inflicted must have laid bare his cheekbone, the 
object was but indifferently attained, for it could scarcely fail 
to be noted at a glance.  His complexion was of a cadaverous hue, 
and he had a grizzly jagged beard of some three weeks' date.  Such 
was the figure (very meanly and poorly clad) that now rose from the 
seat, and stalking across the room sat down in a corner of the 
chimney, which the politeness or fears of the little clerk very 
readily assigned to him.

'A highwayman!' whispered Tom Cobb to Parkes the ranger.

'Do you suppose highwaymen don't dress handsomer than that?' 
replied Parkes.  'It's a better business than you think for, Tom, 
and highwaymen don't need or use to be shabby, take my word for it.'

Meanwhile the subject of their speculations had done due honour to 
the house by calling for some drink, which was promptly supplied by 
the landlord's son Joe, a broad-shouldered strapping young fellow 
of twenty, whom it pleased his father still to consider a little 
boy, and to treat accordingly.  Stretching out his hands to warm 
them by the blazing fire, the man turned his head towards the 
company, and after running his eye sharply over them, said in a 
voice well suited to his appearance:

'What house is that which stands a mile or so from here?'

'Public-house?' said the landlord, with his usual deliberation.

'Public-house, father!' exclaimed Joe, 'where's the public-house 
within a mile or so of the Maypole?  He means the great house--the 
Warren--naturally and of course.  The old red brick house, sir, 
that stands in its own grounds--?'

'Aye,' said the stranger.

'And that fifteen or twenty years ago stood in a park five times as 
broad, which with other and richer property has bit by bit changed 
hands and dwindled away--more's the pity!' pursued the young man.

'Maybe,' was the reply.  'But my question related to the owner.  
What it has been I don't care to know, and what it is I can see for 
myself.'

The heir-apparent to the Maypole pressed his finger on his lips, 
and glancing at the young gentleman already noticed, who had 
changed his attitude when the house was first mentioned, replied in 
a lower tone:

'The owner's name is Haredale, Mr Geoffrey Haredale, and'--again he 
glanced in the same direction as before--'and a worthy gentleman 
too--hem!'

Paying as little regard to this admonitory cough, as to the 
significant gesture that had preceded it, the stranger pursued his 
questioning.

'I turned out of my way coming here, and took the footpath that 
crosses the grounds.  Who was the young lady that I saw entering a 
carriage?  His daughter?'

'Why, how should I know, honest man?' replied Joe, contriving in 
the course of some arrangements about the hearth, to advance close 
to his questioner and pluck him by the sleeve, 'I didn't see the 
young lady, you know.  Whew!  There's the wind again--AND rain--
well it IS a night!'

Rough weather indeed!' observed the strange man.

'You're used to it?' said Joe, catching at anything which seemed to 
promise a diversion of the subject.

'Pretty well,' returned the other.  'About the young lady--has Mr 
Haredale a daughter?'

'No, no,' said the young fellow fretfully, 'he's a single 
gentleman--he's--be quiet, can't you, man?  Don't you see this 
talk is not relished yonder?'

Regardless of this whispered remonstrance, and affecting not to 
hear it, his tormentor provokingly continued:

'Single men have had daughters before now.  Perhaps she may be his 
daughter, though he is not married.'

'What do you mean?' said Joe, adding in an undertone as he 
approached him again, 'You'll come in for it presently, I know you 
will!'

'I mean no harm'--returned the traveller boldly, 'and have said 
none that I know of.  I ask a few questions--as any stranger may, 
and not unnaturally--about the inmates of a remarkable house in a 
neighbourhood which is new to me, and you are as aghast and 
disturbed as if I were talking treason against King George.  
Perhaps you can tell me why, sir, for (as I say) I am a stranger, 
and this is Greek to me?'

The latter observation was addressed to the obvious cause of Joe 
Willet's discomposure, who had risen and was adjusting his riding-
cloak preparatory to sallying abroad.  Briefly replying that he 
could give him no information, the young man beckoned to Joe, and 
handing him a piece of money in payment of his reckoning, hurried 
out attended by young Willet himself, who taking up a candle 
followed to light him to the house-door.

While Joe was absent on this errand, the elder Willet and his three 
companions continued to smoke with profound gravity, and in a deep 
silence, each having his eyes fixed on a huge copper boiler that 
was suspended over the fire.  After some time John Willet slowly 
shook his head, and thereupon his friends slowly shook theirs; but 
no man withdrew his eyes from the boiler, or altered the solemn 
expression of his countenance in the slightest degree.

At length Joe returned--very talkative and conciliatory, as though 
with a strong presentiment that he was going to be found fault 
with.

'Such a thing as love is!' he said, drawing a chair near the fire, 
and looking round for sympathy.  'He has set off to walk to 
London,--all the way to London.  His nag gone lame in riding out 
here this blessed afternoon, and comfortably littered down in our 
stable at this minute; and he giving up a good hot supper and our 
best bed, because Miss Haredale has gone to a masquerade up in 
town, and he has set his heart upon seeing her!  I don't think I 
could persuade myself to do that, beautiful as she is,--but then 
I'm not in love (at least I don't think I am) and that's the whole 
difference.'

'He is in love then?' said the stranger.

'Rather,' replied Joe.  'He'll never be more in love, and may very 
easily be less.'

'Silence, sir!' cried his father.

'What a chap you are, Joe!' said Long Parkes.

'Such a inconsiderate lad!' murmured Tom Cobb.

'Putting himself forward and wringing the very nose off his own 
father's face!' exclaimed the parish-clerk, metaphorically.

'What HAVE I done?' reasoned poor Joe.

'Silence, sir!' returned his father, 'what do you mean by talking, 
when you see people that are more than two or three times your age, 
sitting still and silent and not dreaming of saying a word?'

'Why that's the proper time for me to talk, isn't it?' said Joe 
rebelliously.

'The proper time, sir!' retorted his father, 'the proper time's no 
time.'

'Ah to be sure!' muttered Parkes, nodding gravely to the other two 
who nodded likewise, observing under their breaths that that was 
the point.

'The proper time's no time, sir,' repeated John Willet; 'when I was 
your age I never talked, I never wanted to talk.  I listened and 
improved myself that's what I did.'

'And you'd find your father rather a tough customer in argeyment, 
Joe, if anybody was to try and tackle him,' said Parkes.

'For the matter o' that, Phil!' observed Mr Willet, blowing a long, 
thin, spiral cloud of smoke out of the corner of his mouth, and 
staring at it abstractedly as it floated away; 'For the matter o' 
that, Phil, argeyment is a gift of Natur.  If Natur has gifted a 
man with powers of argeyment, a man has a right to make the best of 
'em, and has not a right to stand on false delicacy, and deny that 
he is so gifted; for that is a turning of his back on Natur, a 
flouting of her, a slighting of her precious caskets, and a proving 
of one's self to be a swine that isn't worth her scattering pearls 
before.'

The landlord pausing here for a very long time, Mr Parkes naturally 
concluded that he had brought his discourse to an end; and 
therefore, turning to the young man with some austerity, 
exclaimed:

'You hear what your father says, Joe?  You wouldn't much like to 
tackle him in argeyment, I'm thinking, sir.'

'IF,' said John Willet, turning his eyes from the ceiling to the 
face of his interrupter, and uttering the monosyllable in capitals, 
to apprise him that he had put in his oar, as the vulgar say, with 
unbecoming and irreverent haste; 'IF, sir, Natur has fixed upon me 
the gift of argeyment, why should I not own to it, and rather glory 
in the same?  Yes, sir, I AM a tough customer that way.  You are 
right, sir.  My toughness has been proved, sir, in this room many 
and many a time, as I think you know; and if you don't know,' added 
John, putting his pipe in his mouth again, 'so much the better, for 
I an't proud and am not going to tell you.'

A general murmur from his three cronies, and a general shaking of 
heads at the copper boiler, assured John Willet that they had had 
good experience of his powers and needed no further evidence to 
assure them of his superiority.  John smoked with a little more 
dignity and surveyed them in silence.

'It's all very fine talking,' muttered Joe, who had been fidgeting 
in his chair with divers uneasy gestures.  'But if you mean to tell 
me that I'm never to open my lips--'

'Silence, sir!' roared his father.  'No, you never are.  When your 
opinion's wanted, you give it.  When you're spoke to, you speak.  
When your opinion's not wanted and you're not spoke to, don't you 
give an opinion and don't you speak.  The world's undergone a nice 
alteration since my time, certainly.  My belief is that there an't 
any boys left--that there isn't such a thing as a boy--that there's 
nothing now between a male baby and a man--and that all the boys 
went out with his blessed Majesty King George the Second.'

'That's a very true observation, always excepting the young 
princes,' said the parish-clerk, who, as the representative of 
church and state in that company, held himself bound to the nicest 
loyalty.  'If it's godly and righteous for boys, being of the ages 
of boys, to behave themselves like boys, then the young princes 
must be boys and cannot be otherwise.'

'Did you ever hear tell of mermaids, sir?' said Mr Willet.

'Certainly I have,' replied the clerk.

'Very good,' said Mr Willet.  'According to the constitution of 
mermaids, so much of a mermaid as is not a woman must be a fish.  
According to the constitution of young princes, so much of a young 
prince (if anything) as is not actually an angel, must be godly and 
righteous.  Therefore if it's becoming and godly and righteous in 
the young princes (as it is at their ages) that they should be 
boys, they are and must be boys, and cannot by possibility be 
anything else.'

This elucidation of a knotty point being received with such marks 
of approval as to put John Willet into a good humour, he contented 
himself with repeating to his son his command of silence, and 
addressing the stranger, said:

'If you had asked your questions of a grown-up person--of me or any 
of these gentlemen--you'd have had some satisfaction, and wouldn't 
have wasted breath.  Miss Haredale is Mr Geoffrey Haredale's 
niece.'

'Is her father alive?' said the man, carelessly.

'No,' rejoined the landlord, 'he is not alive, and he is not dead--'

'Not dead!' cried the other.

'Not dead in a common sort of way,' said the landlord.

The cronies nodded to each other, and Mr Parkes remarked in an 
undertone, shaking his head meanwhile as who should say, 'let no 
man contradict me, for I won't believe him,' that John Willet was 
in amazing force to-night, and fit to tackle a Chief Justice.

The stranger suffered a short pause to elapse, and then asked 
abruptly, 'What do you mean?'

'More than you think for, friend,' returned John Willet.  'Perhaps 
there's more meaning in them words than you suspect.'

'Perhaps there is,' said the strange man, gruffly; 'but what the 
devil do you speak in such mysteries for?  You tell me, first, that 
a man is not alive, nor yet dead--then, that he's not dead in a 
common sort of way--then, that you mean a great deal more than I 
think for.  To tell you the truth, you may do that easily; for so 
far as I can make out, you mean nothing.  What DO you mean, I ask 
again?'

'That,' returned the landlord, a little brought down from his 
dignity by the stranger's surliness, 'is a Maypole story, and has 
been any time these four-and-twenty years.  That story is Solomon 
Daisy's story.  It belongs to the house; and nobody but Solomon 
Daisy has ever told it under this roof, or ever shall--that's 
more.'

The man glanced at the parish-clerk, whose air of consciousness 
and importance plainly betokened him to be the person referred to, 
and, observing that he had taken his pipe from his lips, after a 
very long whiff to keep it alight, and was evidently about to tell 
his story without further solicitation, gathered his large coat 
about him, and shrinking further back was almost lost in the gloom 
of the spacious chimney-corner, except when the flame, struggling 
from under a great faggot, whose weight almost crushed it for the 
time, shot upward with a strong and sudden glare, and illumining 
his figure for a moment, seemed afterwards to cast it into deeper 
obscurity than before.

By this flickering light, which made the old room, with its heavy 
timbers and panelled walls, look as if it were built of polished 
ebony--the wind roaring and howling without, now rattling the latch 
and creaking the hinges of the stout oaken door, and now driving at 
the casement as though it would beat it in--by this light, and 
under circumstances so auspicious, Solomon Daisy began his tale:

'It was Mr Reuben Haredale, Mr Geoffrey's elder brother--'

Here he came to a dead stop, and made so long a pause that even 
John Willet grew impatient and asked why he did not proceed.

'Cobb,' said Solomon Daisy, dropping his voice and appealing to the 
post-office keeper; 'what day of the month is this?'

'The nineteenth.'

'Of March,' said the clerk, bending forward, 'the nineteenth of 
March; that's very strange.'

In a low voice they all acquiesced, and Solomon went on:

'It was Mr Reuben Haredale, Mr Geoffrey's elder brother, that 
twenty-two years ago was the owner of the Warren, which, as Joe 
has said--not that you remember it, Joe, for a boy like you can't 
do that, but because you have often heard me say so--was then a 
much larger and better place, and a much more valuable property 
than it is now.  His lady was lately dead, and he was left with one 
child--the Miss Haredale you have been inquiring about--who was 
then scarcely a year old.'

Although the speaker addressed himself to the man who had shown so 
much curiosity about this same family, and made a pause here as if 
expecting some exclamation of surprise or encouragement, the latter 
made no remark, nor gave any indication that he heard or was 
interested in what was said.  Solomon therefore turned to his old 
companions, whose noses were brightly illuminated by the deep red 
glow from the bowls of their pipes; assured, by long experience, of 
their attention, and resolved to show his sense of such indecent 
behaviour.

'Mr Haredale,' said Solomon, turning his back upon the strange man, 
'left this place when his lady died, feeling it lonely like, and 
went up to London, where he stopped some months; but finding that 
place as lonely as this--as I suppose and have always heard say--he 
suddenly came back again with his little girl to the Warren, 
bringing with him besides, that day, only two women servants, and 
his steward, and a gardener.'

Mr Daisy stopped to take a whiff at his pipe, which was going out, 
and then proceeded--at first in a snuffling tone, occasioned by 
keen enjoyment of the tobacco and strong pulling at the pipe, and 
afterwards with increasing distinctness:

'--Bringing with him two women servants, and his steward, and a 
gardener.  The rest stopped behind up in London, and were to follow 
next day.  It happened that that night, an old gentleman who lived 
at Chigwell Row, and had long been poorly, deceased, and an order 
came to me at half after twelve o'clock at night to go and toll the 
passing-bell.'

There was a movement in the little group of listeners, sufficiently 
indicative of the strong repugnance any one of them would have felt 
to have turned out at such a time upon such an errand.  The clerk 
felt and understood it, and pursued his theme accordingly.

'It WAS a dreary thing, especially as the grave-digger was laid up 
in his bed, from long working in a damp soil and sitting down to 
take his dinner on cold tombstones, and I was consequently under 
obligation to go alone, for it was too late to hope to get any 
other companion.  However, I wasn't unprepared for it; as the old 
gentleman had often made it a request that the bell should be 
tolled as soon as possible after the breath was out of his body, 
and he had been expected to go for some days.  I put as good a face 
upon it as I could, and muffling myself up (for it was mortal 
cold), started out with a lighted lantern in one hand and the key 
of the church in the other.'

At this point of the narrative, the dress of the strange man 
rustled as if he had turned himself to hear more distinctly.  
Slightly pointing over his shoulder, Solomon elevated his eyebrows 
and nodded a silent inquiry to Joe whether this was the case.  Joe 
shaded his eyes with his hand and peered into the corner, but could 
make out nothing, and so shook his head.

'It was just such a night as this; blowing a hurricane, raining 
heavily, and very dark--I often think now, darker than I ever saw 
it before or since; that may be my fancy, but the houses were all 
close shut and the folks in doors, and perhaps there is only one 
other man who knows how dark it really was.  I got into the church, 
chained the door back so that it should keep ajar--for, to tell the 
truth, I didn't like to be shut in there alone--and putting my 
lantern on the stone seat in the little corner where the bell-rope 
is, sat down beside it to trim the candle.

'I sat down to trim the candle, and when I had done so I could not 
persuade myself to get up again, and go about my work.  I don't 
know how it was, but I thought of all the ghost stories I had ever 
heard, even those that I had heard when I was a boy at school, and 
had forgotten long ago; and they didn't come into my mind one after 
another, but all crowding at once, like.  I recollected one story 
there was in the village, how that on a certain night in the year 
(it might be that very night for anything I knew), all the dead 
people came out of the ground and sat at the heads of their own 
graves till morning.  This made me think how many people I had 
known, were buried between the church-door and the churchyard gate, 
and what a dreadful thing it would be to have to pass among them 
and know them again, so earthy and unlike themselves.  I had known 
all the niches and arches in the church from a child; still, I 
couldn't persuade myself that those were their natural shadows 
which I saw on the pavement, but felt sure there were some ugly 
figures hiding among 'em and peeping out.  Thinking on in this 
way, I began to think of the old gentleman who was just dead, and I 
could have sworn, as I looked up the dark chancel, that I saw him 
in his usual place, wrapping his shroud about him and shivering as 
if he felt it cold.  All this time I sat listening and listening, 
and hardly dared to breathe.  At length I started up and took the 
bell-rope in my hands.  At that minute there rang--not that bell, 
for I had hardly touched the rope--but another!

'I heard the ringing of another bell, and a deep bell too, plainly.  
It was only for an instant, and even then the wind carried the 
sound away, but I heard it.  I listened for a long time, but it 
rang no more.  I had heard of corpse candles, and at last I 
persuaded myself that this must be a corpse bell tolling of itself 
at midnight for the dead.  I tolled my bell--how, or how long, I 
don't know--and ran home to bed as fast as I could touch the 
ground.

'I was up early next morning after a restless night, and told the 
story to my neighbours.  Some were serious and some made light of 
it; I don't think anybody believed it real.  But, that morning, Mr 
Reuben Haredale was found murdered in his bedchamber; and in his 
hand was a piece of the cord attached to an alarm-bell outside the 
roof, which hung in his room and had been cut asunder, no doubt by 
the murderer, when he seized it.

'That was the bell I heard.

'A bureau was found opened, and a cash-box, which Mr Haredale had 
brought down that day, and was supposed to contain a large sum of 
money, was gone.  The steward and gardener were both missing and 
both suspected for a long time, but they were never found, though 
hunted far and wide.  And far enough they might have looked for 
poor Mr Rudge the steward, whose body--scarcely to be recognised by 
his clothes and the watch and ring he wore--was found, months 
afterwards, at the bottom of a piece of water in the grounds, with 
a deep gash in the breast where he had been stabbed with a knife.  
He was only partly dressed; and people all agreed that he had been 
sitting up reading in his own room, where there were many traces of 
blood, and was suddenly fallen upon and killed before his master.

Everybody now knew that the gardener must be the murderer, and 
though he has never been heard of from that day to this, he will 
be, mark my words.  The crime was committed this day two-and-twenty 
years--on the nineteenth of March, one thousand seven hundred and 
fifty-three.  On the nineteenth of March in some year--no matter 
when--I know it, I am sure of it, for we have always, in some 
strange way or other, been brought back to the subject on that day 
ever since--on the nineteenth of March in some year, sooner or 
later, that man will be discovered.'



Chapter 2


'A strange story!' said the man who had been the cause of the 
narration.--'Stranger still if it comes about as you predict.  Is 
that all?'

A question so unexpected, nettled Solomon Daisy not a little.  By 
dint of relating the story very often, and ornamenting it 
(according to village report) with a few flourishes suggested by 
the various hearers from time to time, he had come by degrees to 
tell it with great effect; and 'Is that all?' after the climax, was 
not what he was accustomed to.

'Is that all?' he repeated, 'yes, that's all, sir.  And enough 
too, I think.'

'I think so too.  My horse, young man!  He is but a hack hired from 
a roadside posting house, but he must carry me to London to-
night.'

'To-night!' said Joe.

'To-night,' returned the other.  'What do you stare at?  This 
tavern would seem to be a house of call for all the gaping idlers 
of the neighbourhood!'

At this remark, which evidently had reference to the scrutiny he 
had undergone, as mentioned in the foregoing chapter, the eyes of 
John Willet and his friends were diverted with marvellous rapidity 
to the copper boiler again.  Not so with Joe, who, being a 
mettlesome fellow, returned the stranger's angry glance with a 
steady look, and rejoined:

'It is not a very bold thing to wonder at your going on to-night.  
Surely you have been asked such a harmless question in an inn 
before, and in better weather than this.  I thought you mightn't 
know the way, as you seem strange to this part.'

'The way--' repeated the other, irritably.

'Yes.  DO you know it?'

'I'll--humph!--I'll find it,' replied the nian, waving his hand and 
turning on his heel.  'Landlord, take the reckoning here.'

John Willet did as he was desired; for on that point he was seldom 
slow, except in the particulars of giving change, and testing the 
goodness of any piece of coin that was proffered to him, by the 
application of his teeth or his tongue, or some other test, or in 
doubtful cases, by a long series of tests terminating in its 
rejection.  The guest then wrapped his garments about him so as to 
shelter himself as effectually as he could from the rough weather, 
and without any word or sign of farewell betook himself to the 
stableyard.  Here Joe (who had left the room on the conclusion of 
their short dialogue) was protecting himself and the horse from the 
rain under the shelter of an old penthouse roof.

'He's pretty much of my opinion,' said Joe, patting the horse upon 
the neck.  'I'll wager that your stopping here to-night would 
please him better than it would please me.'

'He and I are of different opinions, as we have been more than once 
on our way here,' was the short reply.

'So I was thinking before you came out, for he has felt your spurs, 
poor beast.'

The stranger adjusted his coat-collar about his face, and made no 
answer.

'You'll know me again, I see,' he said, marking the young fellow's 
earnest gaze, when he had sprung into the saddle.

'The man's worth knowing, master, who travels a road he don't know, 
mounted on a jaded horse, and leaves good quarters to do it on such 
a night as this.'

'You have sharp eyes and a sharp tongue, I find.'

'Both I hope by nature, but the last grows rusty sometimes for 
want of using.'

'Use the first less too, and keep their sharpness for your 
sweethearts, boy,' said the man.

So saying he shook his hand from the bridle, struck him roughly on 
the head with the butt end of his whip, and galloped away; dashing 
through the mud and darkness with a headlong speed, which few badly 
mounted horsemen would have cared to venture, even had they been 
thoroughly acquainted with the country; and which, to one who knew 
nothing of the way he rode, was attended at every step with great 
hazard and danger.

The roads, even within twelve miles of London, were at that time 
ill paved, seldom repaired, and very badly made.  The way this 
rider traversed had been ploughed up by the wheels of heavy 
waggons, and rendered rotten by the frosts and thaws of the 
preceding winter, or possibly of many winters.  Great holes and 
gaps had been worn into the soil, which, being now filled with 
water from the late rains, were not easily distinguishable even by 
day; and a plunge into any one of them might have brought down a 
surer-footed horse than the poor beast now urged forward to the 
utmost extent of his powers.  Sharp flints and stones rolled from 
under his hoofs continually; the rider could scarcely see beyond 
the animal's head, or farther on either side than his own arm 
would have extended.  At that time, too, all the roads in the 
neighbourhood of the metropolis were infested by footpads or 
highwaymen, and it was a night, of all others, in which any evil-
disposed person of this class might have pursued his unlawful 
calling with little fear of detection.

Still, the traveller dashed forward at the same reckless pace, 
regardless alike of the dirt and wet which flew about his head, the 
profound darkness of the night, and the probability of encountering 
some desperate characters abroad.  At every turn and angle, even 
where a deviation from the direct course might have been least 
expected, and could not possibly be seen until he was close upon 
it, he guided the bridle with an unerring hand, and kept the middle 
of the road.  Thus he sped onward, raising himself in the stirrups, 
leaning his body forward until it almost touched the horse's neck, 
and flourishing his heavy whip above his head with the fervour of a 
madman.

There are times when, the elements being in unusual commotion, 
those who are bent on daring enterprises, or agitated by great 
thoughts, whether of good or evil, feel a mysterious sympathy with 
the tumult of nature, and are roused into corresponding violence.  
In the midst of thunder, lightning, and storm, many tremendous 
deeds have been committed; men, self-possessed before, have given 
a sudden loose to passions they could no longer control.  The 
demons of wrath and despair have striven to emulate those who ride 
the whirlwind and direct the storm; and man, lashed into madness 
with the roaring winds and boiling waters, has become for the time 
as wild and merciless as the elements themselves.

Whether the traveller was possessed by thoughts which the fury of 
the night had heated and stimulated into a quicker current, or was 
merely impelled by some strong motive to reach his journey's end, 
on he swept more like a hunted phantom than a man, nor checked his 
pace until, arriving at some cross roads, one of which led by a 
longer route to the place whence he had lately started, he bore 
down so suddenly upon a vehicle which was coming towards him, that 
in the effort to avoid it he well-nigh pulled his horse upon his 
haunches, and narrowly escaped being thrown.

'Yoho!' cried the voice of a man.  'What's that?  Who goes there?'

'A friend!' replied the traveller.

'A friend!' repeated the voice.  'Who calls himself a friend and 
rides like that, abusing Heaven's gifts in the shape of horseflesh, 
and endangering, not only his own neck (which might be no great 
matter) but the necks of other people?'

'You have a lantern there, I see,' said the traveller dismounting, 
'lend it me for a moment.  You have wounded my horse, I think, with 
your shaft or wheel.'

'Wounded him!' cried the other, 'if I haven't killed him, it's no 
fault of yours.  What do you mean by galloping along the king's 
highway like that, eh?'

'Give me the light,' returned the traveller, snatching it from his 
hand, 'and don't ask idle questions of a man who is in no mood for 
talking.'

'If you had said you were in no mood for talking before, I should 
perhaps have been in no mood for lighting,' said the voice.  
'Hows'ever as it's the poor horse that's damaged and not you, one 
of you is welcome to the light at all events--but it's not the 
crusty one.'

The traveller returned no answer to this speech, but holding the 
light near to his panting and reeking beast, examined him in limb 
and carcass.  Meanwhile, the other man sat very composedly in his 
vehicle, which was a kind of chaise with a depository for a large 
bag of tools, and watched his proceedings with a careful eye.

The looker-on was a round, red-faced, sturdy yeoman, with a double 
chin, and a voice husky with good living, good sleeping, good 
humour, and good health.  He was past the prime of life, but Father 
Time is not always a hard parent, and, though he tarries for none 
of his children, often lays his hand lightly upon those who have 
used him well; making them old men and women inexorably enough, but 
leaving their hearts and spirits young and in full vigour.  With 
such people the grey head is but the impression of the old fellow's 
hand in giving them his blessing, and every wrinkle but a notch in 
the quiet calendar of a well-spent life.

The person whom the traveller had so abruptly encountered was of 
this kind: bluff, hale, hearty, and in a green old age: at peace 
with himself, and evidently disposed to be so with all the world.  
Although muffled up in divers coats and handkerchiefs--one of 
which, passed over his crown, and tied in a convenient crease of 
his double chin, secured his three-cornered hat and bob-wig from 
blowing off his head--there was no disguising his plump and 
comfortable figure; neither did certain dirty finger-marks upon 
his face give it any other than an odd and comical expression, 
through which its natural good humour shone with undiminished 
lustre.

'He is not hurt,' said the traveller at length, raising his head 
and the lantern together.

'You have found that out at last, have you?' rejoined the old man.  
'My eyes have seen more light than yours, but I wouldn't change 
with you.'

'What do you mean?'

'Mean!  I could have told you he wasn't hurt, five minutes ago.  
Give me the light, friend; ride forward at a gentler pace; and good 
night.'

In handing up the lantern, the man necessarily cast its rays full 
on the speaker's face.  Their eyes met at the instant.  He suddenly 
dropped it and crushed it with his foot.

'Did you never see a locksmith before, that you start as if you had 
come upon a ghost?' cried the old man in the chaise, 'or is this,' 
he added hastily, thrusting his hand into the tool basket and 
drawing out a hammer, 'a scheme for robbing me?  I know these 
roads, friend.  When I travel them, I carry nothing but a few 
shillings, and not a crown's worth of them.  I tell you plainly, to 
save us both trouble, that there's nothing to be got from me but a 
pretty stout arm considering my years, and this tool, which, mayhap 
from long acquaintance with, I can use pretty briskly.  You shall 
not have it all your own way, I promise you, if you play at that 
game.  With these words he stood upon the defensive.

'I am not what you take me for, Gabriel Varden,' replied the other.

'Then what and who are you?' returned the locksmith.  'You know my 
name, it seems.  Let me know yours.'

'I have not gained the information from any confidence of yours, 
but from the inscription on your cart which tells it to all the 
town,' replied the traveller.

'You have better eyes for that than you had for your horse, then,' 
said Varden, descending nimbly from his chaise; 'who are you?  Let 
me see your face.'

While the locksmith alighted, the traveller had regained his 
saddle, from which he now confronted the old man, who, moving as 
the horse moved in chafing under the tightened rein, kept close 
beside him.

'Let me see your face, I say.'

'Stand off!'

'No masquerading tricks,' said the locksmith, 'and tales at the 
club to-morrow, how Gabriel Varden was frightened by a surly voice 
and a dark night.  Stand--let me see your face.'

Finding that further resistance would only involve him in a 
personal struggle with an antagonist by no means to be despised, 
the traveller threw back his coat, and stooping down looked 
steadily at the locksmith.

Perhaps two men more powerfully contrasted, never opposed each 
other face to face.  The ruddy features of the locksmith so set off 
and heightened the excessive paleness of the man on horseback, that 
he looked like a bloodless ghost, while the moisture, which hard 
riding had brought out upon his skin, hung there in dark and heavy 
drops, like dews of agony and death.  The countenance of the old 
locksmith lighted up with the smile of one expecting to detect in 
this unpromising stranger some latent roguery of eye or lip, which 
should reveal a familiar person in that arch disguise, and spoil 
his jest.  The face of the other, sullen and fierce, but shrinking 
too, was that of a man who stood at bay; while his firmly closed 
jaws, his puckered mouth, and more than all a certain stealthy 
motion of the hand within his breast, seemed to announce a 
desperate purpose very foreign to acting, or child's play.

Thus they regarded each other for some time, in silence.

'Humph!' he said when he had scanned his features; 'I don't know 
you.'

'Don't desire to?'--returned the other, muffling himself as before.

'I don't,' said Gabriel; 'to be plain with you, friend, you don't 
carry in your countenance a letter of recommendation.'

'It's not my wish,' said the traveller.  'My humour is to be 
avoided.'

'Well,' said the locksmith bluntly, 'I think you'll have your 
humour.'

'I will, at any cost,' rejoined the traveller.  'In proof of it, 
lay this to heart--that you were never in such peril of your life 
as you have been within these few moments; when you are within 
five minutes of breathing your last, you will not be nearer death 
than you have been to-night!'

'Aye!' said the sturdy locksmith.

'Aye! and a violent death.'

'From whose hand?'

'From mine,' replied the traveller.

With that he put spurs to his horse, and rode away; at first 
plashing heavily through the mire at a smart trot, but gradually 
increasing in speed until the last sound of his horse's hoofs died 
away upon the wind; when he was again hurrying on at the same 
furious gallop, which had been his pace when the locksmith first 
encountered him.

Gabriel Varden remained standing in the road with the broken 
lantern in his hand, listening in stupefied silence until no sound 
reached his ear but the moaning of the wind, and the fast-falling 
rain; when he struck himself one or two smart blows in the breast 
by way of rousing himself, and broke into an exclamation of 
surprise.

'What in the name of wonder can this fellow be! a madman? a 
highwayman? a cut-throat?  If he had not scoured off so fast, we'd 
have seen who was in most danger, he or I.  I never nearer death 
than I have been to-night!  I hope I may be no nearer to it for a 
score of years to come--if so, I'll be content to be no farther 
from it.  My stars!--a pretty brag this to a stout man--pooh, 
pooh!'

Gabriel resumed his seat, and looked wistfully up the road by which 
the traveller had come; murmuring in a half whisper:

'The Maypole--two miles to the Maypole.  I came the other road from 
the Warren after a long day's work at locks and bells, on purpose 
that I should not come by the Maypole and break my promise to 
Martha by looking in--there's resolution!  It would be dangerous to 
go on to London without a light; and it's four miles, and a good 
half mile besides, to the Halfway-House; and between this and that 
is the very place where one needs a light most.  Two miles to the 
Maypole!  I told Martha I wouldn't; I said I wouldn't, and I 
didn't--there's resolution!'

Repeating these two last words very often, as if to compensate for 
the little resolution he was going to show by piquing himself on 
the great resolution he had shown, Gabriel Varden quietly turned 
back, determining to get a light at the Maypole, and to take 
nothing but a light.

When he got to the Maypole, however, and Joe, responding to his 
well-known hail, came running out to the horse's head, leaving the 
door open behind him, and disclosing a delicious perspective of 
warmth and brightness--when the ruddy gleam of the fire, streaming 
through the old red curtains of the common room, seemed to bring 
with it, as part of itself, a pleasant hum of voices, and a 
fragrant odour of steaming grog and rare tobacco, all steeped as 
it were in the cheerful glow--when the shadows, flitting across the 
curtain, showed that those inside had risen from their snug seats, 
and were making room in the snuggest corner (how well he knew that 
corner!) for the honest locksmith, and a broad glare, suddenly 
streaming up, bespoke the goodness of the crackling log from which 
a brilliant train of sparks was doubtless at that moment whirling 
up the chimney in honour of his coming--when, superadded to these 
enticements, there stole upon him from the distant kitchen a gentle 
sound of frying, with a musical clatter of plates and dishes, and a 
savoury smell that made even the boisterous wind a perfume--Gabriel 
felt his firmness oozing rapidly away.  He tried to look stoically 
at the tavern, but his features would relax into a look of 
fondness.  He turned his head the other way, and the cold black 
country seemed to frown him off, and drive him for a refuge into 
its hospitable arms.

'The merciful man, Joe,' said the locksmith, 'is merciful to his 
beast.  I'll get out for a little while.'

And how natural it was to get out!  And how unnatural it seemed for 
a sober man to be plodding wearily along through miry roads, 
encountering the rude buffets of the wind and pelting of the rain, 
when there was a clean floor covered with crisp white sand, a well 
swept hearth, a blazing fire, a table decorated with white cloth, 
bright pewter flagons, and other tempting preparations for a well-
cooked meal--when there were these things, and company disposed to 
make the most of them, all ready to his hand, and entreating him to 
enjoyment!



Chapter 3


Such were the locksmith's thoughts when first seated in the snug 
corner, and slowly recovering from a pleasant defect of vision--
pleasant, because occasioned by the wind blowing in his eyes--which 
made it a matter of sound policy and duty to himself, that he 
should take refuge from the weather, and tempted him, for the same 
reason, to aggravate a slight cough, and declare he felt but 
poorly.  Such were still his thoughts more than a full hour 
afterwards, when, supper over, he still sat with shining jovial 
face in the same warm nook, listening to the cricket-like chirrup 
of little Solomon Daisy, and bearing no unimportant or slightly 
respected part in the social gossip round the Maypole fire.

'I wish he may be an honest man, that's all,' said Solomon, winding 
up a variety of speculations relative to the stranger, concerning 
whom Gabriel had compared notes with the company, and so raised a 
grave discussion; 'I wish he may be an honest man.'

'So we all do, I suppose, don't we?' observed the locksmith.

'I don't,' said Joe.

'No!' cried Gabriel.

'No.  He struck me with his whip, the coward, when he was mounted 
and I afoot, and I should be better pleased that he turned out what 
I think him.'

'And what may that be, Joe?'

'No good, Mr Varden.  You may shake your head, father, but I say no 
good, and will say no good, and I would say no good a hundred times 
over, if that would bring him back to have the drubbing he 
deserves.'

'Hold your tongue, sir,' said John Willet.

'I won't, father.  It's all along of you that he ventured to do 
what he did.  Seeing me treated like a child, and put down like a 
fool, HE plucks up a heart and has a fling at a fellow that he 
thinks--and may well think too--hasn't a grain of spirit.  But he's 
mistaken, as I'll show him, and as I'll show all of you before 
long.'

'Does the boy know what he's a saying of!' cried the astonished 
John Willet.

'Father,' returned Joe, 'I know what I say and mean, well--better 
than you do when you hear me.  I can bear with you, but I cannot 
bear the contempt that your treating me in the way you do, brings 
upon me from others every day.  Look at other young men of my age.  
Have they no liberty, no will, no right to speak?  Are they obliged 
to sit mumchance, and to be ordered about till they are the 
laughing-stock of young and old?  I am a bye-word all over 
Chigwell, and I say--and it's fairer my saying so now, than waiting 
till you are dead, and I have got your money--I say, that before 
long I shall be driven to break such bounds, and that when I do, it 
won't be me that you'll have to blame, but your own self, and no 
other.'

John Willet was so amazed by the exasperation and boldness of his 
hopeful son, that he sat as one bewildered, staring in a ludicrous 
manner at the boiler, and endeavouring, but quite ineffectually, to 
collect his tardy thoughts, and invent an answer.  The guests, 
scarcely less disturbed, were equally at a loss; and at length, 
with a variety of muttered, half-expressed condolences, and pieces 
of advice, rose to depart; being at the same time slightly muddled 
with liquor.

The honest locksmith alone addressed a few words of coherent and 
sensible advice to both parties, urging John Willet to remember 
that Joe was nearly arrived at man's estate, and should not be 
ruled with too tight a hand, and exhorting Joe himself to bear with 
his father's caprices, and rather endeavour to turn them aside by 
temperate remonstrance than by ill-timed rebellion.  This advice 
was received as such advice usually is.  On John Willet it made 
almost as much impression as on the sign outside the door, while 
Joe, who took it in the best part, avowed himself more obliged than 
he could well express, but politely intimated his intention 
nevertheless of taking his own course uninfluenced by anybody.

'You have always been a very good friend to me, Mr Varden,' he 
said, as they stood without, in the porch, and the locksmith was 
equipping himself for his journey home; 'I take it very kind of 
you to say all this, but the time's nearly come when the Maypole 
and I must part company.'

'Roving stones gather no moss, Joe,' said Gabriel.

'Nor milestones much,' replied Joe.  'I'm little better than one 
here, and see as much of the world.'

'Then, what would you do, Joe?' pursued the locksmith, stroking 
his chin reflectively.  'What could you be?  Where could you go, 
you see?'

'I must trust to chance, Mr Varden.'

'A bad thing to trust to, Joe.  I don't like it.  I always tell my 
girl when we talk about a husband for her, never to trust to 
chance, but to make sure beforehand that she has a good man and 
true, and then chance will neither make her nor break her.  What 
are you fidgeting about there, Joe?  Nothing gone in the harness, I 
hope?'

'No no,' said Joe--finding, however, something very engrossing to 
do in the way of strapping and buckling--'Miss Dolly quite well?'

'Hearty, thankye.  She looks pretty enough to be well, and good 
too.'

'She's always both, sir'--

'So she is, thank God!'

'I hope,' said Joe after some hesitation, 'that you won't tell this 
story against me--this of my having been beat like the boy they'd 
make of me--at all events, till I have met this man again and 
settled the account.  It'll be a better story then.'

'Why who should I tell it to?' returned Gabriel.  'They know it 
here, and I'm not likely to come across anybody else who would care 
about it.'

'That's true enough,' said the young fellow with a sigh.  'I quite 
forgot that.  Yes, that's true!'

So saying, he raised his face, which was very red,--no doubt from 
the exertion of strapping and buckling as aforesaid,--and giving 
the reins to the old man, who had by this time taken his seat, 
sighed again and bade him good night.

'Good night!' cried Gabriel.  'Now think better of what we have 
just been speaking of; and don't be rash, there's a good fellow!  I 
have an interest in you, and wouldn't have you cast yourself away.  
Good night!'

Returning his cheery farewell with cordial goodwill, Joe Willet 
lingered until the sound of wheels ceased to vibrate in his ears, 
and then, shaking his head mournfully, re-entered the house.

Gabriel Varden went his way towards London, thinking of a great 
many things, and most of all of flaming terms in which to relate 
his adventure, and so account satisfactorily to Mrs Varden for 
visiting the Maypole, despite certain solemn covenants between 
himself and that lady.  Thinking begets, not only thought, but 
drowsiness occasionally, and the more the locksmith thought, the 
more sleepy he became.

A man may be very sober--or at least firmly set upon his legs on 
that neutral ground which lies between the confines of perfect 
sobriety and slight tipsiness--and yet feel a strong tendency to 
mingle up present circumstances with others which have no manner of 
connection with them; to confound all consideration of persons, 
things, times, and places; and to jumble his disjointed thoughts 
together in a kind of mental kaleidoscope, producing combinations 
as unexpected as they are transitory.  This was Gabriel Varden's 
state, as, nodding in his dog sleep, and leaving his horse to 
pursue a road with which he was well acquainted, he got over the 
ground unconsciously, and drew nearer and nearer home.  He had 
roused himself once, when the horse stopped until the turnpike gate 
was opened, and had cried a lusty 'good night!' to the toll-
keeper; but then he awoke out of a dream about picking a lock in 
the stomach of the Great Mogul, and even when he did wake, mixed up 
the turnpike man with his mother-in-law who had been dead twenty 
years.  It is not surprising, therefore, that he soon relapsed, and 
jogged heavily along, quite insensible to his progress.

And, now, he approached the great city, which lay outstretched 
before him like a dark shadow on the ground, reddening the sluggish 
air with a deep dull light, that told of labyrinths of public ways 
and shops, and swarms of busy people.  Approaching nearer and 
nearer yet, this halo began to fade, and the causes which produced 
it slowly to develop themselves.  Long lines of poorly lighted 
streets might be faintly traced, with here and there a lighter 
spot, where lamps were clustered round a square or market, or round 
some great building; after a time these grew more distinct, and the 
lamps themselves were visible; slight yellow specks, that seemed to 
be rapidly snuffed out, one by one, as intervening obstacles hid 
them from the sight.  Then, sounds arose--the striking of church 
clocks, the distant bark of dogs, the hum of traffic in the 
streets; then outlines might be traced--tall steeples looming in 
the air, and piles of unequal roofs oppressed by chimneys; then, 
the noise swelled into a louder sound, and forms grew more distinct 
and numerous still, and London--visible in the darkness by its own 
faint light, and not by that of Heaven--was at hand.

The locksmith, however, all unconscious of its near vicinity, still 
jogged on, half sleeping and half waking, when a loud cry at no 
great distance ahead, roused him with a start.

For a moment or two he looked about him like a man who had been 
transported to some strange country in his sleep, but soon 
recognising familiar objects, rubbed his eyes lazily and might have 
relapsed again, but that the cry was repeated--not once or twice or 
thrice, but many times, and each time, if possible, with increased 
vehemence.  Thoroughly aroused, Gabriel, who was a bold man and not 
easily daunted, made straight to the spot, urging on his stout 
little horse as if for life or death.

The matter indeed looked sufficiently serious, for, coming to the 
place whence the cries had proceeded, he descried the figure of a 
man extended in an apparently lifeless state upon the pathway, 
and, hovering round him, another person with a torch in his hand, 
which he waved in the air with a wild impatience, redoubling 
meanwhile those cries for help which had brought the locksmith to 
the spot.

'What's here to do?' said the old man, alighting.  'How's this--
what--Barnaby?'

The bearer of the torch shook his long loose hair back from his 
eyes, and thrusting his face eagerly into that of the locksmith, 
fixed upon him a look which told his history at once.

'You know me, Barnaby?' said Varden.

He nodded--not once or twice, but a score of times, and that with a 
fantastic exaggeration which would have kept his head in motion for 
an hour, but that the locksmith held up his finger, and fixing his 
eye sternly upon him caused him to desist; then pointed to the body 
with an inquiring look.

'There's blood upon him,' said Barnaby with a shudder.  'It makes 
me sick!'

'How came it there?' demanded Varden.

'Steel, steel, steel!' he replied fiercely, imitating with his hand 
the thrust of a sword.

'Is he robbed?' said the locksmith.

Barnaby caught him by the arm, and nodded 'Yes;' then pointed 
towards the city.

'Oh!' said the old man, bending over the body and looking round as 
he spoke into Barnaby's pale face, strangely lighted up by 
something that was NOT intellect.  'The robber made off that way, 
did he?  Well, well, never mind that just now.  Hold your torch 
this way--a little farther off--so.  Now stand quiet, while I try 
to see what harm is done.'

With these words, he applied himself to a closer examination of the 
prostrate form, while Barnaby, holding the torch as he had been 
directed, looked on in silence, fascinated by interest or 
curiosity, but repelled nevertheless by some strong and secret 
horror which convulsed him in every nerve.

As he stood, at that moment, half shrinking back and half bending 
forward, both his face and figure were full in the strong glare of 
the link, and as distinctly revealed as though it had been broad 
day.  He was about three-and-twenty years old, and though rather 
spare, of a fair height and strong make.  His hair, of which he had 
a great profusion, was red, and hanging in disorder about his face 
and shoulders, gave to his restless looks an expression quite 
unearthly--enhanced by the paleness of his complexion, and the 
glassy lustre of his large protruding eyes.  Startling as his 
aspect was, the features were good, and there was something even 
plaintive in his wan and haggard aspect.  But, the absence of the 
soul is far more terrible in a living man than in a dead one; and 
in this unfortunate being its noblest powers were wanting.

His dress was of green, clumsily trimmed here and there--apparently 
by his own hands--with gaudy lace; brightest where the cloth was 
most worn and soiled, and poorest where it was at the best.  A pair 
of tawdry ruffles dangled at his wrists, while his throat was 
nearly bare.  He had ornamented his hat with a cluster of peacock's 
feathers, but they were limp and broken, and now trailed 
negligently down his back.  Girt to his side was the steel hilt of 
an old sword without blade or scabbard; and some particoloured ends 
of ribands and poor glass toys completed the ornamental portion of 
his attire.  The fluttered and confused disposition of all the 
motley scraps that formed his dress, bespoke, in a scarcely less 
degree than his eager and unsettled manner, the disorder of his 
mind, and by a grotesque contrast set off and heightened the more 
impressive wildness of his face.

'Barnaby,' said the locksmith, after a hasty but careful 
inspection, 'this man is not dead, but he has a wound in his side, 
and is in a fainting-fit.'

'I know him, I know him!' cried Barnaby, clapping his hands.

'Know him?' repeated the locksmith.

'Hush!' said Barnaby, laying his fingers upon his lips.  'He went 
out to-day a wooing.  I wouldn't for a light guinea that he should 
never go a wooing again, for, if he did, some eyes would grow dim 
that are now as bright as--see, when I talk of eyes, the stars come 
out!  Whose eyes are they?  If they are angels' eyes, why do they 
look down here and see good men hurt, and only wink and sparkle all 
the night?'

'Now Heaven help this silly fellow,' murmured the perplexed 
locksmith; 'can he know this gentleman?  His mother's house is not 
far off; I had better see if she can tell me who he is.  Barnaby, 
my man, help me to put him in the chaise, and we'll ride home 
together.'

'I can't touch him!' cried the idiot falling back, and shuddering 
as with a strong spasm; he's bloody!'

'It's in his nature, I know,' muttered the locksmith, 'it's cruel 
to ask him, but I must have help.  Barnaby--good Barnaby--dear 
Barnaby--if you know this gentleman, for the sake of his life and 
everybody's life that loves him, help me to raise him and lay him 
down.'

'Cover him then, wrap him close--don't let me see it--smell it--
hear the word.  Don't speak the word--don't!'

'No, no, I'll not.  There, you see he's covered now.  Gently.  Well 
done, well done!'

They placed him in the carriage with great ease, for Barnaby was 
strong and active, but all the time they were so occupied he 
shivered from head to foot, and evidently experienced an ecstasy of 
terror.

This accomplished, and the wounded man being covered with Varden's 
own greatcoat which he took off for the purpose, they proceeded 
onward at a brisk pace: Barnaby gaily counting the stars upon his 
fingers, and Gabriel inwardly congratulating himself upon having an 
adventure now, which would silence Mrs Varden on the subject of the 
Maypole, for that night, or there was no faith in woman.



Chapter 4


In the venerable suburb--it was a suburb once--of Clerkenwell, 
towards that part of its confines which is nearest to the Charter 
House, and in one of those cool, shady Streets, of which a few, 
widely scattered and dispersed, yet remain in such old parts of the 
metropolis,--each tenement quietly vegetating like an ancient 
citizen who long ago retired from business, and dozing on in its 
infirmity until in course of time it tumbles down, and is replaced 
by some extravagant young heir, flaunting in stucco and ornamental 
work, and all the vanities of modern days,--in this quarter, and in 
a street of this description, the business of the present chapter 
lies.

At the time of which it treats, though only six-and-sixty years 
ago, a very large part of what is London now had no existence.  
Even in the brains of the wildest speculators, there had sprung up 
no long rows of streets connecting Highgate with Whitechapel, no 
assemblages of palaces in the swampy levels, nor little cities in 
the open fields.  Although this part of town was then, as now, 
parcelled out in streets, and plentifully peopled, it wore a 
different aspect.  There were gardens to many of the houses, and 
trees by the pavement side; with an air of freshness breathing up 
and down, which in these days would be sought in vain.  Fields were 
nigh at hand, through which the New River took its winding course, 
and where there was merry haymaking in the summer time.  Nature was 
not so far removed, or hard to get at, as in these days; and 
although there were busy trades in Clerkenwell, and working 
jewellers by scores, it was a purer place, with farm-houses nearer 
to it than many modern Londoners would readily believe, and lovers' 
walks at no great distance, which turned into squalid courts, long 
before the lovers of this age were born, or, as the phrase goes, 
thought of.

In one of these streets, the cleanest of them all, and on the shady 
side of the way--for good housewives know that sunlight damages 
their cherished furniture, and so choose the shade rather than its 
intrusive glare--there stood the house with which we have to deal.  
It was a modest building, not very straight, not large, not tall; 
not bold-faced, with great staring windows, but a shy, blinking 
house, with a conical roof going up into a peak over its garret 
window of four small panes of glass, like a cocked hat on the head 
of an elderly gentleman with one eye.  It was not built of brick or 
lofty stone, but of wood and plaster; it was not planned with a 
dull and wearisome regard to regularity, for no one window matched 
the other, or seemed to have the slightest reference to anything 
besides itself.

The shop--for it had a shop--was, with reference to the first 
floor, where shops usually are; and there all resemblance between 
it and any other shop stopped short and ceased.  People who went in 
and out didn't go up a flight of steps to it, or walk easily in 
upon a level with the street, but dived down three steep stairs, 
as into a cellar.  Its floor was paved with stone and brick, as 
that of any other cellar might be; and in lieu of window framed and 
glazed it had a great black wooden flap or shutter, nearly breast 
high from the ground, which turned back in the day-time, admitting 
as much cold air as light, and very often more.  Behind this shop 
was a wainscoted parlour, looking first into a paved yard, and 
beyond that again into a little terrace garden, raised some feet 
above it.  Any stranger would have supposed that this wainscoted 
parlour, saving for the door of communication by which he had 
entered, was cut off and detached from all the world; and indeed 
most strangers on their first entrance were observed to grow 
extremely thoughtful, as weighing and pondering in their minds 
whether the upper rooms were only approachable by ladders from 
without; never suspecting that two of the most unassuming and 
unlikely doors in existence, which the most ingenious mechanician 
on earth must of necessity have supposed to be the doors of 
closets, opened out of this room--each without the smallest 
preparation, or so much as a quarter of an inch of passage--upon 
two dark winding flights of stairs, the one upward, the other 
downward, which were the sole means of communication between that 
chamber and the other portions of the house.

With all these oddities, there was not a neater, more scrupulously 
tidy, or more punctiliously ordered house, in Clerkenwell, in 
London, in all England.  There were not cleaner windows, or whiter 
floors, or brighter Stoves, or more highly shining articles of 
furniture in old mahogany; there was not more rubbing, scrubbing, 
burnishing and polishing, in the whole street put together.  Nor 
was this excellence attained without some cost and trouble and 
great expenditure of voice, as the neighbours were frequently 
reminded when the good lady of the house overlooked and assisted in 
its being put to rights on cleaning days--which were usually from 
Monday morning till Saturday night, both days inclusive.

Leaning against the door-post of this, his dwelling, the locksmith 
stood early on the morning after he had met with the wounded man, 
gazing disconsolately at a great wooden emblem of a key, painted in 
vivid yellow to resemble gold, which dangled from the house-front, 
and swung to and fro with a mournful creaking noise, as if 
complaining that it had nothing to unlock.  Sometimes, he looked 
over his shoulder into the shop, which was so dark and dingy with 
numerous tokens of his trade, and so blackened by the smoke of a 
little forge, near which his 'prentice was at work, that it would 
have been difficult for one unused to such espials to have 
distinguished anything but various tools of uncouth make and shape, 
great bunches of rusty keys, fragments of iron, half-finished 
locks, and such like things, which garnished the walls and hung in 
clusters from the ceiling.

After a long and patient contemplation of the golden key, and many 
such backward glances, Gabriel stepped into the road, and stole a 
look at the upper windows.  One of them chanced to be thrown open 
at the moment, and a roguish face met his; a face lighted up by the 
loveliest pair of sparkling eyes that ever locksmith looked upon; 
the face of a pretty, laughing, girl; dimpled and fresh, and 
healthful--the very impersonation of good-humour and blooming 
beauty.

'Hush!' she whispered, bending forward and pointing archly to the 
window underneath.  'Mother is still asleep.'

'Still, my dear,' returned the locksmith in the same tone.  'You 
talk as if she had been asleep all night, instead of little more 
than half an hour.  But I'm very thankful.  Sleep's a blessing--no 
doubt about it.'  The last few words he muttered to himself.

'How cruel of you to keep us up so late this morning, and never 
tell us where you were, or send us word!' said the girl.

'Ah Dolly, Dolly!' returned the locksmith, shaking his head, and 
smiling, 'how cruel of you to run upstairs to bed!  Come down to 
breakfast, madcap, and come down lightly, or you'll wake your 
mother.  She must be tired, I am sure--I am.'

Keeping these latter words to himself, and returning his 
daughter's nod, he was passing into the workshop, with the smile 
she had awakened still beaming on his face, when he just caught 
sight of his 'prentice's brown paper cap ducking down to avoid 
observation, and shrinking from the window back to its former 
place, which the wearer no sooner reached than he began to hammer 
lustily.

'Listening again, Simon!' said Gabriel to himself.  'That's bad.  
What in the name of wonder does he expect the girl to say, that I 
always catch him listening when SHE speaks, and never at any other 
time!  A bad habit, Sim, a sneaking, underhanded way.  Ah! you may 
hammer, but you won't beat that out of me, if you work at it till 
your time's up!'

So saying, and shaking his head gravely, he re-entered the 
workshop, and confronted the subject of these remarks.

'There's enough of that just now,' said the locksmith.  'You 
needn't make any more of that confounded clatter.  Breakfast's 
ready.'

'Sir,' said Sim, looking up with amazing politeness, and a peculiar 
little bow cut short off at the neck, 'I shall attend you 
immediately.'

'I suppose,' muttered Gabriel, 'that's out of the 'Prentice's 
Garland or the 'Prentice's Delight, or the 'Prentice's Warbler, or 
the Prentice's Guide to the Gallows, or some such improving 
textbook.  Now he's going to beautify himself--here's a precious 
locksmith!'

Quite unconscious that his master was looking on from the dark 
corner by the parlour door, Sim threw off the paper cap, sprang 
from his seat, and in two extraordinary steps, something between 
skating and minuet dancing, bounded to a washing place at the other 
end of the shop, and there removed from his face and hands all 
traces of his previous work--practising the same step all the time 
with the utmost gravity.  This done, he drew from some concealed 
place a little scrap of looking-glass, and with its assistance 
arranged his hair, and ascertained the exact state of a little 
carbuncle on his nose.  Having now completed his toilet, he placed 
the fragment of mirror on a low bench, and looked over his shoulder 
at so much of his legs as could be reflected in that small compass, 
with the greatest possible complacency and satisfaction.

Sim, as he was called in the locksmith's family, or Mr Simon 
Tappertit, as he called himself, and required all men to style him 
out of doors, on holidays, and Sundays out,--was an old-fashioned, 
thin-faced, sleek-haired, sharp-nosed, small-eyed little fellow, 
very little more than five feet high, and thoroughly convinced in 
his own mind that he was above the middle size; rather tall, in 
fact, than otherwise.  Of his figure, which was well enough formed, 
though somewhat of the leanest, he entertained the highest 
admiration; and with his legs, which, in knee-breeches, were 
perfect curiosities of littleness, he was enraptured to a degree 
amounting to enthusiasm.  He also had some majestic, shadowy ideas, 
which had never been quite fathomed by his intimate friends, 
concerning the power of his eye.  Indeed he had been known to go so 
far as to boast that he could utterly quell and subdue the 
haughtiest beauty by a simple process, which he termed 'eyeing her 
over;' but it must be added, that neither of this faculty, nor of 
the power he claimed to have, through the same gift, of vanquishing 
and heaving down dumb animals, even in a rabid state, had he ever 
furnished evidence which could be deemed quite satisfactory and 
conclusive.

It may be inferred from these premises, that in the small body of 
Mr Tappertit there was locked up an ambitious and aspiring soul.  
As certain liquors, confined in casks too cramped in their 
dimensions, will ferment, and fret, and chafe in their 
imprisonment, so the spiritual essence or soul of Mr Tappertit 
would sometimes fume within that precious cask, his body, until, 
with great foam and froth and splutter, it would force a vent, and 
carry all before it.  It was his custom to remark, in reference to 
any one of these occasions, that his soul had got into his head; 
and in this novel kind of intoxication many scrapes and mishaps 
befell him, which he had frequently concealed with no small 
difficulty from his worthy master.

Sim Tappertit, among the other fancies upon which his before-
mentioned soul was for ever feasting and regaling itself (and which 
fancies, like the liver of Prometheus, grew as they were fed 
upon), had a mighty notion of his order; and had been heard by the 
servant-maid openly expressing his regret that the 'prentices no 
longer carried clubs wherewith to mace the citizens: that was his 
strong expression.  He was likewise reported to have said that in 
former times a stigma had been cast upon the body by the execution 
of George Barnwell, to which they should not have basely 
submitted, but should have demanded him of the legislature--
temperately at first; then by an appeal to arms, if necessary--to 
be dealt with as they in their wisdom might think fit.  These 
thoughts always led him to consider what a glorious engine the 
'prentices might yet become if they had but a master spirit at 
their head; and then he would darkly, and to the terror of his 
hearers, hint at certain reckless fellows that he knew of, and at a 
certain Lion Heart ready to become their captain, who, once afoot, 
would make the Lord Mayor tremble on his throne.

In respect of dress and personal decoration, Sim Tappertit was no 
less of an adventurous and enterprising character.  He had been 
seen, beyond dispute, to pull off ruffles of the finest quality at 
the corner of the street on Sunday nights, and to put them 
carefully in his pocket before returning home; and it was quite 
notorious that on all great holiday occasions it was his habit to 
exchange his plain steel knee-buckles for a pair of glittering 
paste, under cover of a friendly post, planted most conveniently 
in that same spot.  Add to this that he was in years just twenty, 
in his looks much older, and in conceit at least two hundred; that 
he had no objection to be jested with, touching his admiration of 
his master's daughter; and had even, when called upon at a certain 
obscure tavern to pledge the lady whom he honoured with his love, 
toasted, with many winks and leers, a fair creature whose Christian 
name, he said, began with a D--;--and as much is known of Sim 
Tappertit, who has by this time followed the locksmith in to 
breakfast, as is necessary to be known in making his acquaintance.

It was a substantial meal; for, over and above the ordinary tea 
equipage, the board creaked beneath the weight of a jolly round of 
beef, a ham of the first magnitude, and sundry towers of buttered 
Yorkshire cake, piled slice upon slice in most alluring order.  
There was also a goodly jug of well-browned clay, fashioned into 
the form of an old gentleman, not by any means unlike the 
locksmith, atop of whose bald head was a fine white froth answering 
to his wig, indicative, beyond dispute, of sparkling home-brewed 
ale.  But, better far than fair home-brewed, or Yorkshire cake, or 
ham, or beef, or anything to eat or drink that earth or air or 
water can supply, there sat, presiding over all, the locksmith's 
rosy daughter, before whose dark eyes even beef grew insignificant, 
and malt became as nothing.

Fathers should never kiss their daughters when young men are by.  
It's too much.  There are bounds to human endurance.  So thought 
Sim Tappertit when Gabriel drew those rosy lips to his--those lips 
within Sim's reach from day to day, and yet so far off.  He had a 
respect for his master, but he wished the Yorkshire cake might 
choke him.

'Father,' said the locksmith's daughter, when this salute was over, 
and they took their seats at table, 'what is this I hear about last 
night?'

'All true, my dear; true as the Gospel, Doll.'

'Young Mr Chester robbed, and lying wounded in the road, when you 
came up!'

'Ay--Mr Edward.  And beside him, Barnaby, calling for help with all 
his might.  It was well it happened as it did; for the road's a 
lonely one, the hour was late, and, the night being cold, and poor 
Barnaby even less sensible than usual from surprise and fright, the 
young gentleman might have met his death in a very short time.'

'I dread to think of it!' cried his daughter with a shudder.  'How 
did you know him?'

'Know him!' returned the locksmith.  'I didn't know him--how could 
I?  I had never seen him, often as I had heard and spoken of him.  
I took him to Mrs Rudge's; and she no sooner saw him than the truth 
came out.'

'Miss Emma, father--If this news should reach her, enlarged upon as 
it is sure to be, she will go distracted.'

'Why, lookye there again, how a man suffers for being good-
natured,' said the locksmith.  'Miss Emma was with her uncle at the 
masquerade at Carlisle House, where she had gone, as the people at 
the Warren told me, sorely against her will.  What does your 
blockhead father when he and Mrs Rudge have laid their heads 
together, but goes there when he ought to be abed, makes interest 
with his friend the doorkeeper, slips him on a mask and domino, 
and mixes with the masquers.'

'And like himself to do so!' cried the girl, putting her fair arm 
round his neck, and giving him a most enthusiastic kiss.

'Like himself!' repeated Gabriel, affecting to grumble, but 
evidently delighted with the part he had taken, and with her 
praise.  'Very like himself--so your mother said.  However, he 
mingled with the crowd, and prettily worried and badgered he was, I 
warrant you, with people squeaking, "Don't you know me?" and "I've 
found you out," and all that kind of nonsense in his ears.  He 
might have wandered on till now, but in a little room there was a 
young lady who had taken off her mask, on account of the place 
being very warm, and was sitting there alone.'

'And that was she?' said his daughter hastily.

'And that was she,' replied the locksmith; 'and I no sooner 
whispered to her what the matter was--as softly, Doll, and with 
nearly as much art as you could have used yourself--than she gives 
a kind of scream and faints away.'

'What did you do--what happened next?' asked his daughter.  'Why, 
the masks came flocking round, with a general noise and hubbub, and 
I thought myself in luck to get clear off, that's all,' rejoined 
the locksmith.  'What happened when I reached home you may guess, 
if you didn't hear it.  Ah!  Well, it's a poor heart that never 
rejoices.--Put Toby this way, my dear.'

This Toby was the brown jug of which previous mention has been 
made.  Applying his lips to the worthy old gentleman's benevolent 
forehead, the locksmith, who had all this time been ravaging among 
the eatables, kept them there so long, at the same time raising the 
vessel slowly in the air, that at length Toby stood on his head 
upon his nose, when he smacked his lips, and set him on the table 
again with fond reluctance.

Although Sim Tappertit had taken no share in this conversation, no 
part of it being addressed to him, he had not been wanting in such 
silent manifestations of astonishment, as he deemed most compatible 
with the favourable display of his eyes.  Regarding the pause which 
now ensued, as a particularly advantageous opportunity for doing 
great execution with them upon the locksmith's daughter (who he had 
no doubt was looking at him in mute admiration), he began to screw 
and twist his face, and especially those features, into such 
extraordinary, hideous, and unparalleled contortions, that Gabriel, 
who happened to look towards him, was stricken with amazement.

'Why, what the devil's the matter with the lad?' cried the 
locksmith.  'Is he choking?'

'Who?' demanded Sim, with some disdain.

'Who?  Why, you,' returned his master.  'What do you mean by making 
those horrible faces over your breakfast?'

'Faces are matters of taste, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, rather 
discomfited; not the less so because he saw the locksmith's 
daughter smiling.

'Sim,' rejoined Gabriel, laughing heartily.  'Don't be a fool, for 
I'd rather see you in your senses.  These young fellows,' he added, 
turning to his daughter, 'are always committing some folly or 
another.  There was a quarrel between Joe Willet and old John last 
night though I can't say Joe was much in fault either.  He'll be 
missing one of these mornings, and will have gone away upon some 
wild-goose errand, seeking his fortune.--Why, what's the matter, 
Doll?  YOU are making faces now.  The girls are as bad as the boys 
every bit!'

'It's the tea,' said Dolly, turning alternately very red and very 
white, which is no doubt the effect of a slight scald--'so very hot.'

Mr Tappertit looked immensely big at a quartern loaf on the table, 
and breathed hard.

'Is that all?' returned the locksmith.  'Put some more milk in it.--
Yes, I am sorry for Joe, because he is a likely young fellow, and 
gains upon one every time one sees him.  But he'll start off, 
you'll find.  Indeed he told me as much himself!'

'Indeed!' cried Dolly in a faint voice.  'In-deed!'

'Is the tea tickling your throat still, my dear?' said the 
locksmith.

But, before his daughter could make him any answer, she was taken 
with a troublesome cough, and it was such a very unpleasant cough, 
that, when she left off, the tears were starting in her bright 
eyes.  The good-natured locksmith was still patting her on the back 
and applying such gentle restoratives, when a message arrived from 
Mrs Varden, making known to all whom it might concern, that she 
felt too much indisposed to rise after her great agitation and 
anxiety of the previous night; and therefore desired to be 
immediately accommodated with the little black teapot of strong 
mixed tea, a couple of rounds of buttered toast, a middling-sized 
dish of beef and ham cut thin, and the Protestant Manual in two 
volumes post octavo.  Like some other ladies who in remote ages 
flourished upon this globe, Mrs Varden was most devout when most 
ill-tempered.  Whenever she and her husband were at unusual 
variance, then the Protestant Manual was in high feather.

Knowing from experience what these requests portended, the 
triumvirate broke up; Dolly, to see the orders executed with all 
despatch; Gabriel, to some out-of-door work in his little chaise; 
and Sim, to his daily duty in the workshop, to which retreat he 
carried the big look, although the loaf remained behind.

Indeed the big look increased immensely, and when he had tied his 
apron on, became quite gigantic.  It was not until he had several 
times walked up and down with folded arms, and the longest strides 
be could take, and had kicked a great many small articles out of 
his way, that his lip began to curl.  At length, a gloomy derision 
came upon his features, and he smiled; uttering meanwhile with 
supreme contempt the monosyllable 'Joe!'

'I eyed her over, while he talked about the fellow,' he said, 'and 
that was of course the reason of her being confused.  Joe!'

He walked up and down again much quicker than before, and if 
possible with longer strides; sometimes stopping to take a glance 
at his legs, and sometimes to jerk out, and cast from him, another 
'Joe!'  In the course of a quarter of an hour or so he again 
assumed the paper cap and tried to work.  No.  It could not be 
done.

'I'll do nothing to-day,' said Mr Tappertit, dashing it down again, 
'but grind.  I'll grind up all the tools.  Grinding will suit my 
present humour well.  Joe!'

Whirr-r-r-r.  The grindstone was soon in motion; the sparks were 
flying off in showers.  This was the occupation for his heated 
spirit.

Whirr-r-r-r-r-r-r.

'Something will come of this!' said Mr Tappertit, pausing as if in 
triumph, and wiping his heated face upon his sleeve.  'Something 
will come of this.  I hope it mayn't be human gore!'

Whirr-r-r-r-r-r-r-r.



Chapter 5


As soon as the business of the day was over, the locksmith sallied 
forth, alone, to visit the wounded gentleman and ascertain the 
progress of his recovery.  The house where he had left him was in a 
by-street in Southwark, not far from London Bridge; and thither he 
hied with all speed, bent upon returning with as little delay as 
might be, and getting to bed betimes.

The evening was boisterous--scarcely better than the previous night 
had been.  It was not easy for a stout man like Gabriel to keep his 
legs at the street corners, or to make head against the high wind, 
which often fairly got the better of him, and drove him back some 
paces, or, in defiance of all his energy, forced him to take 
shelter in an arch or doorway until the fury of the gust was spent.  
Occasionally a hat or wig, or both, came spinning and trundling 
past him, like a mad thing; while the more serious spectacle of 
falling tiles and slates, or of masses of brick and mortar or 
fragments of stone-coping rattling upon the pavement near at hand, 
and splitting into fragments, did not increase the pleasure of the 
journey, or make the way less dreary.

'A trying night for a man like me to walk in!' said the locksmith, 
as he knocked softly at the widow's door.  'I'd rather be in old 
John's chimney-corner, faith!'

'Who's there?' demanded a woman's voice from within.  Being 
answered, it added a hasty word of welcome, and the door was 
quickly opened.

She was about forty--perhaps two or three years older--with a 
cheerful aspect, and a face that had once been pretty.  It bore 
traces of affliction and care, but they were of an old date, and 
Time had smoothed them.  Any one who had bestowed but a casual 
glance on Barnaby might have known that this was his mother, from 
the strong resemblance between them; but where in his face there 
was wildness and vacancy, in hers there was the patient composure 
of long effort and quiet resignation.

One thing about this face was very strange and startling.  You 
could not look upon it in its most cheerful mood without feeling 
that it had some extraordinary capacity of expressing terror.  It 
was not on the surface.  It was in no one feature that it lingered.  
You could not take the eyes or mouth, or lines upon the cheek, and 
say, if this or that were otherwise, it would not be so.  Yet there 
it always lurked--something for ever dimly seen, but ever there, 
and never absent for a moment.  It was the faintest, palest shadow 
of some look, to which an instant of intense and most unutterable 
horror only could have given birth; but indistinct and feeble as it 
was, it did suggest what that look must have been, and fixed it in 
the mind as if it had had existence in a dream.

More faintly imaged, and wanting force and purpose, as it were, 
because of his darkened intellect, there was this same stamp upon 
the son.  Seen in a picture, it must have had some legend with it, 
and would have haunted those who looked upon the canvas.  They who 
knew the Maypole story, and could remember what the widow was, 
before her husband's and his master's murder, understood it well.  
They recollected how the change had come, and could call to mind 
that when her son was born, upon the very day the deed was known, 
he bore upon his wrist what seemed a smear of blood but half washed 
out.

'God save you, neighbour!' said the locksmith, as he followed her, 
with the air of an old friend, into a little parlour where a 
cheerful fire was burning.

'And you,' she answered smiling.  'Your kind heart has brought you 
here again.  Nothing will keep you at home, I know of old, if there 
are friends to serve or comfort, out of doors.'

'Tut, tut,' returned the locksmith, rubbing his hands and warming 
them.  'You women are such talkers.  What of the patient, 
neighbour?'

'He is sleeping now.  He was very restless towards daylight, and 
for some hours tossed and tumbled sadly.  But the fever has left 
him, and the doctor says he will soon mend.  He must not be removed 
until to-morrow.'

'He has had visitors to-day--humph?' said Gabriel, slyly.

'Yes.  Old Mr Chester has been here ever since we sent for him, and 
had not been gone many minutes when you knocked.'

'No ladies?' said Gabriel, elevating his eyebrows and looking 
disappointed.

'A letter,' replied the widow.

'Come.  That's better than nothing!' replied the locksmith.  'Who 
was the bearer?'

'Barnaby, of course.'

'Barnaby's a jewel!' said Varden; 'and comes and goes with ease 
where we who think ourselves much wiser would make but a poor hand 
of it.  He is not out wandering, again, I hope?'

'Thank Heaven he is in his bed; having been up all night, as you 
know, and on his feet all day.  He was quite tired out.  Ah, 
neighbour, if I could but see him oftener so--if I could but tame 
down that terrible restlessness--'

'In good time,' said the locksmith, kindly, 'in good time--don't be 
down-hearted.  To my mind he grows wiser every day.'

The widow shook her head.  And yet, though she knew the locksmith 
sought to cheer her, and spoke from no conviction of his own, she 
was glad to hear even this praise of her poor benighted son.

'He will be a 'cute man yet,' resumed the locksmith.  'Take care, 
when we are growing old and foolish, Barnaby doesn't put us to the 
blush, that's all.  But our other friend,' he added, looking under 
the table and about the floor--'sharpest and cunningest of all the 
sharp and cunning ones--where's he?'

'In Barnaby's room,' rejoined the widow, with a faint smile.

'Ah!  He's a knowing blade!' said Varden, shaking his head.  'I 
should be sorry to talk secrets before him.  Oh!  He's a deep 
customer.  I've no doubt he can read, and write, and cast accounts 
if he chooses.  What was that?  Him tapping at the door?'

'No,' returned the widow.  'It was in the street, I think.  Hark!  
Yes.  There again!  'Tis some one knocking softly at the shutter.  
Who can it be!'

They had been speaking in a low tone, for the invalid lay overhead, 
and the walls and ceilings being thin and poorly built, the sound 
of their voices might otherwise have disturbed his slumber.  The 
party without, whoever it was, could have stood close to the 
shutter without hearing anything spoken; and, seeing the light 
through the chinks and finding all so quiet, might have been 
persuaded that only one person was there.

'Some thief or ruffian maybe,' said the locksmith.  'Give me the 
light.'

'No, no,' she returned hastily.  'Such visitors have never come to 
this poor dwelling.  Do you stay here.  You're within call, at the 
worst.  I would rather go myself--alone.'

'Why?' said the locksmith, unwillingly relinquishing the candle he 
had caught up from the table.

'Because--I don't know why--because the wish is so strong upon me,' 
she rejoined.  'There again--do not detain me, I beg of you!'

Gabriel looked at her, in great surprise to see one who was usually 
so mild and quiet thus agitated, and with so little cause.  She 
left the room and closed the door behind her.  She stood for a 
moment as if hesitating, with her hand upon the lock.  In this 
short interval the knocking came again, and a voice close to the 
window--a voice the locksmith seemed to recollect, and to have some 
disagreeable association with--whispered 'Make haste.'

The words were uttered in that low distinct voice which finds its 
way so readily to sleepers' ears, and wakes them in a fright.  For 
a moment it startled even the locksmith; who involuntarily drew 
back from the window, and listened.

The wind rumbling in the chimney made it difficult to hear what 
passed, but he could tell that the door was opened, that there was 
the tread of a man upon the creaking boards, and then a moment's 
silence--broken by a suppressed something which was not a shriek, 
or groan, or cry for help, and yet might have been either or all 
three; and the words 'My God!' uttered in a voice it chilled him to 
hear.

He rushed out upon the instant.  There, at last, was that dreadful 
look--the very one he seemed to know so well and yet had never seen 
before--upon her face.  There she stood, frozen to the ground, 
gazing with starting eyes, and livid cheeks, and every feature 
fixed and ghastly, upon the man he had encountered in the dark last 
night.  His eyes met those of the locksmith.  It was but a flash, 
an instant, a breath upon a polished glass, and he was gone.

The locksmith was upon him--had the skirts of his streaming garment 
almost in his grasp--when his arms were tightly clutched, and the 
widow flung herself upon the ground before him.

'The other way--the other way,' she cried.  'He went the other way.  
Turn--turn!'

'The other way!  I see him now,' rejoined the locksmith, pointing--
'yonder--there--there is his shadow passing by that light.  What--
who is this?  Let me go.'

'Come back, come back!' exclaimed the woman, clasping him; 'Do not 
touch him on your life.  I charge you, come back.  He carries other 
lives besides his own.  Come back!'

'What does this mean?' cried the locksmith.

'No matter what it means, don't ask, don't speak, don't think about 
it.  He is not to be followed, checked, or stopped.  Come back!'

The old man looked at her in wonder, as she writhed and clung about 
him; and, borne down by her passion, suffered her to drag him into 
the house.  It was not until she had chained and double-locked the 
door, fastened every bolt and bar with the heat and fury of a 
maniac, and drawn him back into the room, that she turned upon him, 
once again, that stony look of horror, and, sinking down into a 
chair, covered her face, and shuddered, as though the hand of death 
were on her.



Chapter 6


Beyond all measure astonished by the strange occurrences which had 
passed with so much violence and rapidity, the locksmith gazed upon 
the shuddering figure in the chair like one half stupefied, and 
would have gazed much longer, had not his tongue been loosened by 
compassion and humanity.

'You are ill,' said Gabriel.  'Let me call some neighbour in.'

'Not for the world,' she rejoined, motioning to him with her 
trembling hand, and holding her face averted.  'It is enough that 
you have been by, to see this.'

'Nay, more than enough--or less,' said Gabriel.

'Be it so,' she returned.  'As you like.  Ask me no questions, I 
entreat you.'

'Neighbour,' said the locksmith, after a pause.  'Is this fair, or 
reasonable, or just to yourself?  Is it like you, who have known me 
so long and sought my advice in all matters--like you, who from a 
girl have had a strong mind and a staunch heart?'

'I have need of them,' she replied.  'I am growing old, both in 
years and care.  Perhaps that, and too much trial, have made them 
weaker than they used to be.  Do not speak to me.'

'How can I see what I have seen, and hold my peace!' returned the 
locksmith.  'Who was that man, and why has his coming made this 
change in you?'

She was silent, but held to the chair as though to save herself 
from falling on the ground.

'I take the licence of an old acquaintance, Mary,' said the 
locksmith, 'who has ever had a warm regard for you, and maybe has 
tried to prove it when he could.  Who is this ill-favoured man, and 
what has he to do with you?  Who is this ghost, that is only seen 
in the black nights and bad weather?  How does he know, and why 
does he haunt, this house, whispering through chinks and crevices, 
as if there was that between him and you, which neither durst so 
much as speak aloud of?  Who is he?'

'You do well to say he haunts this house,' returned the widow, 
faintly.  'His shadow has been upon it and me, in light and 
darkness, at noonday and midnight.  And now, at last, he has come 
in the body!'

'But he wouldn't have gone in the body,' returned the locksmith 
with some irritation, 'if you had left my arms and legs at liberty.  
What riddle is this?'

'It is one,' she answered, rising as she spoke, 'that must remain 
for ever as it is.  I dare not say more than that.'

'Dare not!' repeated the wondering locksmith.

'Do not press me,' she replied.  'I am sick and faint, and every 
faculty of life seems dead within me.--No!--Do not touch me, 
either.'

Gabriel, who had stepped forward to render her assistance, fell 
back as she made this hasty exclamation, and regarded her in silent 
wonder.

'Let me go my way alone,' she said in a low voice, 'and let the 
hands of no honest man touch mine to-night.'  When she had 
tottered to the door, she turned, and added with a stronger effort, 
'This is a secret, which, of necessity, I trust to you.  You are a 
true man.  As you have ever been good and kind to me,--keep it.  If 
any noise was heard above, make some excuse--say anything but what 
you really saw, and never let a word or look between us, recall 
this circumstance.  I trust to you.  Mind, I trust to you.  How 
much I trust, you never can conceive.'

Casting her eyes upon him for an instant, she withdrew, and left 
him there alone.

Gabriel, not knowing what to think, stood staring at the door with 
a countenance full of surprise and dismay.  The more he pondered on 
what had passed, the less able he was to give it any favourable 
interpretation.  To find this widow woman, whose life for so many 
years had been supposed to be one of solitude and retirement, and 
who, in her quiet suffering character, had gained the good opinion 
and respect of all who knew her--to find her linked mysteriously 
with an ill-omened man, alarmed at his appearance, and yet 
favouring his escape, was a discovery that pained as much as 
startled him.  Her reliance on his secrecy, and his tacit 
acquiescence, increased his distress of mind.  If he had spoken 
boldly, persisted in questioning her, detained her when she rose to 
leave the room, made any kind of protest, instead of silently 
compromising himself, as he felt he had done, he would have been 
more at ease.

'Why did I let her say it was a secret, and she trusted it to me!' 
said Gabriel, putting his wig on one side to scratch his head with 
greater ease, and looking ruefully at the fire.  'I have no more 
readiness than old John himself.  Why didn't I say firmly, "You 
have no right to such secrets, and I demand of you to tell me what 
this means," instead of standing gaping at her, like an old moon-
calf as I am!  But there's my weakness.  I can be obstinate enough 
with men if need be, but women may twist me round their fingers at 
their pleasure.'

He took his wig off outright as he made this reflection, and, 
warming his handkerchief at the fire began to rub and polish his 
bald head with it, until it glistened again.

'And yet,' said the locksmith, softening under this soothing 
process, and stopping to smile, 'it MAY be nothing.  Any drunken 
brawler trying to make his way into the house, would have alarmed a 
quiet soul like her.  But then'--and here was the vexation--'how 
came it to be that man; how comes he to have this influence over 
her; how came she to favour his getting away from me; and, more 
than all, how came she not to say it was a sudden fright, and 
nothing more?  It's a sad thing to have, in one minute, reason to 
mistrust a person I have known so long, and an old sweetheart into 
the bargain; but what else can I do, with all this upon my mind!--
Is that Barnaby outside there?'

'Ay!' he cried, looking in and nodding.  'Sure enough it's 
Barnaby--how did you guess?'

'By your shadow,' said the locksmith.

'Oho!' cried Barnaby, glancing over his shoulder, 'He's a merry 
fellow, that shadow, and keeps close to me, though I AM silly.  We 
have such pranks, such walks, such runs, such gambols on the grass!  
Sometimes he'll be half as tall as a church steeple, and sometimes 
no bigger than a dwarf.  Now, he goes on before, and now behind, 
and anon he'll be stealing on, on this side, or on that, stopping 
whenever I stop, and thinking I can't see him, though I have my eye 
on him sharp enough.  Oh! he's a merry fellow.  Tell me--is he 
silly too?  I think he is.'

'Why?' asked Gabriel.

'Because be never tires of mocking me, but does it all day long.--
Why don't you come?'

'Where?'

'Upstairs.  He wants you.  Stay--where's HIS shadow?  Come.  You're 
a wise man; tell me that.'

'Beside him, Barnaby; beside him, I suppose,' returned the locksmith.

'No!' he replied, shaking his head.  'Guess again.'

'Gone out a walking, maybe?'

'He has changed shadows with a woman,' the idiot whispered in his 
ear, and then fell back with a look of triumph.  'Her shadow's 
always with him, and his with her.  That's sport I think, eh?'

'Barnaby,' said the locksmith, with a grave look; 'come hither, 
lad.'

'I know what you want to say.  I know!' he replied, keeping away 
from him.  'But I'm cunning, I'm silent.  I only say so much to 
you--are you ready?'  As he spoke, he caught up the light, and 
waved it with a wild laugh above his head.

'Softly--gently,' said the locksmith, exerting all his influence to 
keep him calm and quiet.  'I thought you had been asleep.'

'So I HAVE been asleep,' he rejoined, with widely-opened eyes.  
'There have been great faces coming and going--close to my face, 
and then a mile away--low places to creep through, whether I would 
or no--high churches to fall down from--strange creatures crowded 
up together neck and heels, to sit upon the bed--that's sleep, eh?'

'Dreams, Barnaby, dreams,' said the locksmith.

'Dreams!' he echoed softly, drawing closer to him.  'Those are not 
dreams.'

'What are,' replied the locksmith, 'if they are not?'

'I dreamed,' said Barnaby, passing his arm through Varden's, and 
peering close into his face as he answered in a whisper, 'I dreamed 
just now that something--it was in the shape of a man--followed me--
came softly after me--wouldn't let me be--but was always hiding 
and crouching, like a cat in dark corners, waiting till I should 
pass; when it crept out and came softly after me.--Did you ever see 
me run?'

'Many a time, you know.'

'You never saw me run as I did in this dream.  Still it came 
creeping on to worry me.  Nearer, nearer, nearer--I ran faster--
leaped--sprung out of bed, and to the window--and there, in the 
street below--but he is waiting for us.  Are you coming?'

'What in the street below, Barnaby?' said Varden, imagining that he 
traced some connection between this vision and what had actually 
occurred.

Barnaby looked into his face, muttered incoherently, waved the 
light above his head again, laughed, and drawing the locksmith's 
arm more tightly through his own, led him up the stairs in silence.

They entered a homely bedchamber, garnished in a scanty way with 
chairs, whose spindle-shanks bespoke their age, and other furniture 
of very little worth; but clean and neatly kept.  Reclining in an 
easy-chair before the fire, pale and weak from waste of blood, was 
Edward Chester, the young gentleman who had been the first to quit 
the Maypole on the previous night, and who, extending his hand to 
the locksmith, welcomed him as his preserver and friend.

'Say no more, sir, say no more,' said Gabriel.  'I hope I would 
have done at least as much for any man in such a strait, and most 
of all for you, sir.  A certain young lady,' he added, with some 
hesitation, 'has done us many a kind turn, and we naturally feel--I 
hope I give you no offence in saying this, sir?'

The young man smiled and shook his head; at the same time moving in 
his chair as if in pain.

'It's no great matter,' he said, in answer to the locksmith's 
sympathising look, 'a mere uneasiness arising at least as much from 
being cooped up here, as from the slight wound I have, or from the 
loss of blood.  Be seated, Mr Varden.'

'If I may make so bold, Mr Edward, as to lean upon your chair,' 
returned the locksmith, accommodating his action to his speech, and 
bending over him, 'I'll stand here for the convenience of speaking 
low.  Barnaby is not in his quietest humour to-night, and at such 
times talking never does him good.'

They both glanced at the subject of this remark, who had taken a 
seat on the other side of the fire, and, smiling vacantly, was 
making puzzles on his fingers with a skein of string.

'Pray, tell me, sir,' said Varden, dropping his voice still lower, 
'exactly what happened last night.  I have my reason for inquiring.  
You left the Maypole, alone?'

'And walked homeward alone, until I had nearly reached the place 
where you found me, when I heard the gallop of a horse.'

'Behind you?' said the locksmith.

'Indeed, yes--behind me.  It was a single rider, who soon overtook 
me, and checking his horse, inquired the way to London.'

'You were on the alert, sir, knowing how many highwaymen there are, 
scouring the roads in all directions?' said Varden.

'I was, but I had only a stick, having imprudently left my pistols 
in their holster-case with the landlord's son.  I directed him as 
he desired.  Before the words had passed my lips, he rode upon me 
furiously, as if bent on trampling me down beneath his horse's 
hoofs.  In starting aside, I slipped and fell.  You found me with 
this stab and an ugly bruise or two, and without my purse--in which 
he found little enough for his pains.  And now, Mr Varden,' he 
added, shaking the locksmith by the hand, 'saving the extent of my 
gratitude to you, you know as much as I.'

'Except,' said Gabriel, bending down yet more, and looking 
cautiously towards their silent neighhour, 'except in respect of 
the robber himself.  What like was he, sir?  Speak low, if you 
please.  Barnaby means no harm, but I have watched him oftener than 
you, and I know, little as you would think it, that he's listening 
now.'

It required a strong confidence in the locksmith's veracity to 
lead any one to this belief, for every sense and faculty that 
Barnahy possessed, seemed to be fixed upon his game, to the 
exclusion of all other things.  Something in the young man's face 
expressed this opinion, for Gabriel repeated what he had just said, 
more earnestly than before, and with another glance towards 
Barnaby, again asked what like the man was.

'The night was so dark,' said Edward, 'the attack so sudden, and 
he so wrapped and muffled up, that I can hardly say.  It seems 
that--'

'Don't mention his name, sir,' returned the locksmith, following 
his look towards Barnaby; 'I know HE saw him.  I want to know what 
YOU saw.'

'All I remember is,' said Edward, 'that as he checked his horse his 
hat was blown off.  He caught it, and replaced it on his head, 
which I observed was bound with a dark handkerchief.  A stranger 
entered the Maypole while I was there, whom I had not seen--for I 
had sat apart for reasons of my own--and when I rose to leave the 
room and glanced round, he was in the shadow of the chimney and 
hidden from my sight.  But, if he and the robber were two different 
persons, their voices were strangely and most remarkably alike; for 
directly the man addressed me in the road, I recognised his speech 
again.'

'It is as I feared.  The very man was here to-night,' thought the 
locksmith, changing colour.  'What dark history is this!'

'Halloa!' cried a hoarse voice in his ear.  'Halloa, halloa, 
halloa!  Bow wow wow.  What's the matter here!  Hal-loa!'

The speaker--who made the locksmith start as if he had been some 
supernatural agent--was a large raven, who had perched upon the top 
of the easy-chair, unseen by him and Edward, and listened with a 
polite attention and a most extraordinary appearance of 
comprehending every word, to all they had said up to this point; 
turning his head from one to the other, as if his office were to 
judge between them, and it were of the very last importance that he 
should not lose a word.

'Look at him!' said Varden, divided between admiration of the bird 
and a kind of fear of him.  'Was there ever such a knowing imp as 
that!  Oh he's a dreadful fellow!'

The raven, with his head very much on one side, and his bright eye 
shining like a diamond, preserved a thoughtful silence for a few 
seconds, and then replied in a voice so hoarse and distant, that it 
seemed to come through his thick feathers rather than out of his 
mouth.

'Halloa, halloa, halloa!  What's the matter here!  Keep up your 
spirits.  Never say die.  Bow wow wow.  I'm a devil, I'm a devil, 
I'm a devil.  Hurrah!'--And then, as if exulting in his infernal 
character, he began to whistle.

'I more than half believe he speaks the truth.  Upon my word I do,' 
said Varden.  'Do you see how he looks at me, as if he knew what I 
was saying?'

To which the bird, balancing himself on tiptoe, as it were, and 
moving his body up and down in a sort of grave dance, rejoined, 
'I'm a devil, I'm a devil, I'm a devil,' and flapped his wings 
against his sides as if he were bursting with laughter.  Barnaby 
clapped his hands, and fairly rolled upon the ground in an ecstasy 
of delight.

'Strange companions, sir,' said the locksmith, shaking his head, 
and looking from one to the other.  'The bird has all the wit.'

'Strange indeed!' said Edward, holding out his forefinger to the 
raven, who, in acknowledgment of the attention, made a dive at it 
immediately with his iron bill.  'Is he old?'

'A mere boy, sir,' replied the locksmith.  'A hundred and twenty, 
or thereabouts.  Call him down, Barnaby, my man.'

'Call him!' echoed Barnaby, sitting upright upon the floor, and 
staring vacantly at Gabriel, as he thrust his hair back from his 
face.  'But who can make him come!  He calls me, and makes me go 
where he will.  He goes on before, and I follow.  He's the master, 
and I'm the man.  Is that the truth, Grip?'

The raven gave a short, comfortable, confidential kind of croak;--a 
most expressive croak, which seemed to say, 'You needn't let these 
fellows into our secrets.  We understand each other.  It's all 
right.'

'I make HIM come?' cried Barnaby, pointing to the bird.  'Him, who 
never goes to sleep, or so much as winks!--Why, any time of night, 
you may see his eyes in my dark room, shining like two sparks.  And 
every night, and all night too, he's broad awake, talking to 
himself, thinking what he shall do to-morrow, where we shall go, 
and what he shall steal, and hide, and bury.  I make HIM come!  
Ha ha ha!'

On second thoughts, the bird appeared disposed to come of himself.  
After a short survey of the ground, and a few sidelong looks at the 
ceiling and at everybody present in turn, he fluttered to the 
floor, and went to Barnaby--not in a hop, or walk, or run, but in a 
pace like that of a very particular gentleman with exceedingly 
tight boots on, trying to walk fast over loose pebbles.  Then, 
stepping into his extended hand, and condescending to be held out 
at arm's length, he gave vent to a succession of sounds, not unlike 
the drawing of some eight or ten dozen of long corks, and again 
asserted his brimstone birth and parentage with great distinctness.

The locksmith shook his head--perhaps in some doubt of the 
creature's being really nothing but a bird--perhaps in pity for 
Bamaby, who by this time had him in his arms, and was rolling 
about, with him, on the ground.  As he raised his eyes from the 
poor fellow he encountered those of his mother, who had entered the 
room, and was looking on in silence.

She was quite white in the face, even to her lips, but had wholly 
subdued her emotion, and wore her usual quiet look.  Varden fancied 
as he glanced at her that she shrunk from his eye; and that she 
busied herself about the wounded gentleman to avoid him the better.

It was time he went to bed, she said.  He was to be removed to his 
own home on the morrow, and he had already exceeded his time for 
sitting up, by a full hour.  Acting on this hint, the locksmith 
prepared to take his leave.

'By the bye,' said Edward, as he shook him by the hand, and looked 
from him to Mrs Rudge and back again, 'what noise was that below?  
I heard your voice in the midst of it, and should have inquired 
before, but our other conversation drove it from my memory.  What 
was it?'

The locksmith looked towards her, and bit his lip.  She leant 
against the chair, and bent her eyes upon the ground.  Barnaby too--
he was listening.

--'Some mad or drunken fellow, sir,' Varden at length made answer, 
looking steadily at the widow as he spoke.  'He mistook the house, 
and tried to force an entrance.'

She breathed more freely, but stood quite motionless.  As the 
locksmith said 'Good night,' and Barnaby caught up the candle to 
light him down the stairs, she took it from him, and charged him--
with more haste and earnestness than so slight an occasion appeared 
to warrant--not to stir.  The raven followed them to satisfy 
himself that all was right below, and when they reached the street-
door, stood on the bottom stair drawing corks out of number.

With a trembling hand she unfastened the chain and bolts, and 
turned the key.  As she had her hand upon the latch, the locksmith 
said in a low voice,

'I have told a lie to-night, for your sake, Mary, and for the sake 
of bygone times and old acquaintance, when I would scorn to do so 
for my own.  I hope I may have done no harm, or led to none.  I 
can't help the suspicions you have forced upon me, and I am loth, I 
tell you plainly, to leave Mr Edward here.  Take care he comes to 
no hurt.  I doubt the safety of this roof, and am glad he leaves it 
so soon.  Now, let me go.'

For a moment she hid her face in her hands and wept; but resisting 
the strong impulse which evidently moved her to reply, opened the 
door--no wider than was sufficient for the passage of his body--
and motioned him away.  As the locksmith stood upon the step, it 
was chained and locked behind him, and the raven, in furtherance of 
these precautions, barked like a lusty house-dog.

'In league with that ill-looking figure that might have fallen from 
a gibbet--he listening and hiding here--Barnaby first upon the spot 
last night--can she who has always borne so fair a name be guilty 
of such crimes in secret!' said the locksmith, musing.  'Heaven 
forgive me if I am wrong, and send me just thoughts; but she is 
poor, the temptation may be great, and we daily hear of things as 
strange.--Ay, bark away, my friend.  If there's any wickedness 
going on, that raven's in it, I'll be sworn.'



Chapter 7


Mrs Varden was a lady of what is commonly called an uncertain 
temper--a phrase which being interpreted signifies a temper 
tolerably certain to make everybody more or less uncomfortable.  
Thus it generally happened, that when other people were merry, Mrs 
Varden was dull; and that when other people were dull, Mrs Varden 
was disposed to be amazingly cheerful.  Indeed the worthy housewife 
was of such a capricious nature, that she not only attained a 
higher pitch of genius than Macbeth, in respect of her ability to 
be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, loyal and neutral in an 
instant, but would sometimes ring the changes backwards and 
forwards on all possible moods and flights in one short quarter of 
an hour; performing, as it were, a kind of triple bob major on the 
peal of instruments in the female belfry, with a skilfulness and 
rapidity of execution that astonished all who heard her.

It had been observed in this good lady (who did not want for 
personal attractions, being plump and buxom to look at, though like 
her fair daughter, somewhat short in stature) that this 
uncertainty of disposition strengthened and increased with her 
temporal prosperity; and divers wise men and matrons, on friendly 
terms with the locksmith and his family, even went so far as to 
assert, that a tumble down some half-dozen rounds in the world's 
ladder--such as the breaking of the bank in which her husband kept 
his money, or some little fall of that kind--would be the making 
of her, and could hardly fail to render her one of the most 
agreeable companions in existence.  Whether they were right or 
wrong in this conjecture, certain it is that minds, like bodies, 
will often fall into a pimpled ill-conditioned state from mere 
excess of comfort, and like them, are often successfully cured by 
remedies in themselves very nauseous and unpalatable.

Mrs Varden's chief aider and abettor, and at the same time her 
principal victim and object of wrath, was her single domestic 
servant, one Miss Miggs; or as she was called, in conformity with 
those prejudices of society which lop and top from poor hand-
maidens all such genteel excrescences--Miggs.  This Miggs was a 
tall young lady, very much addicted to pattens in private life; 
slender and shrewish, of a rather uncomfortable figure, and though 
not absolutely ill-looking, of a sharp and acid visage.  As a 
general principle and abstract proposition, Miggs held the male sex 
to be utterly contemptible and unworthy of notice; to be fickle, 
false, base, sottish, inclined to perjury, and wholly undeserving.  
When particularly exasperated against them (which, scandal said, 
was when Sim Tappertit slighted her most) she was accustomed to 
wish with great emphasis that the whole race of women could but die 
off, in order that the men might be brought to know the real value 
of the blessings by which they set so little store; nay, her 
feeling for her order ran so high, that she sometimes declared, if 
she could only have good security for a fair, round number--say ten 
thousand--of young virgins following her example, she would, to 
spite mankind, hang, drown, stab, or poison herself, with a joy 
past all expression.

It was the voice of Miggs that greeted the locksmith, when he 
knocked at his own house, with a shrill cry of 'Who's there?'

'Me, girl, me,' returned Gabriel.

What, already, sir!' said Miggs, opening the door with a look of 
surprise.  'We were just getting on our nightcaps to sit up,--me 
and mistress.  Oh, she has been SO bad!'

Miggs said this with an air of uncommon candour and concern; but 
the parlour-door was standing open, and as Gabriel very well knew 
for whose ears it was designed, he regarded her with anything but 
an approving look as he passed in.

'Master's come home, mim,' cried Miggs, running before him into the 
parlour.  'You was wrong, mim, and I was right.  I thought he 
wouldn't keep us up so late, two nights running, mim.  Master's 
always considerate so far.  I'm so glad, mim, on your account.  I'm 
a little'--here Miggs simpered--'a little sleepy myself; I'll own 
it now, mim, though I said I wasn't when you asked me.  It ain't of 
no consequence, mim, of course.'

'You had better,' said the locksmith, who most devoutly wished that 
Barnaby's raven was at Miggs's ankles, 'you had better get to bed 
at once then.'

'Thanking you kindly, sir,' returned Miggs, 'I couldn't take my 
rest in peace, nor fix my thoughts upon my prayers, otherways than 
that I knew mistress was comfortable in her bed this night; by 
rights she ought to have been there, hours ago.'

'You're talkative, mistress,' said Varden, pulling off his 
greatcoat, and looking at her askew.

'Taking the hint, sir,' cried Miggs, with a flushed face, 'and 
thanking you for it most kindly, I will make bold to say, that if I 
give offence by having consideration for my mistress, I do not ask 
your pardon, but am content to get myself into trouble and to be in 
suffering.'

Here Mrs Varden, who, with her countenance shrouded in a large 
nightcap, had been all this time intent upon the Protestant Manual, 
looked round, and acknowledged Miggs's championship by commanding 
her to hold her tongue.

Every little bone in Miggs's throat and neck developed itself with 
a spitefulness quite alarming, as she replied, 'Yes, mim, I will.'

'How do you find yourself now, my dear?' said the locksmith, 
taking a chair near his wife (who had resumed her book), and 
rubbing his knees hard as he made the inquiry.

'You're very anxious to know, an't you?' returned Mrs Varden, with 
her eyes upon the print.  'You, that have not been near me all day, 
and wouldn't have been if I was dying!'

'My dear Martha--' said Gabriel.

Mrs Varden turned over to the next page; then went back again to 
the bottom line over leaf to be quite sure of the last words; and 
then went on reading with an appearance of the deepest interest and 
study.

'My dear Martha,' said the locksmith, 'how can you say such things, 
when you know you don't mean them?  If you were dying!  Why, if 
there was anything serious the matter with you, Martha, shouldn't I 
be in constant attendance upon you?'

'Yes!' cried Mrs Varden, bursting into tears, 'yes, you would.  I 
don't doubt it, Varden.  Certainly you would.  That's as much as to 
tell me that you would be hovering round me like a vulture, waiting 
till the breath was out of my body, that you might go and marry 
somebody else.'

Miggs groaned in sympathy--a little short groan, checked in its 
birth, and changed into a cough.  It seemed to say, 'I can't help 
it.  It's wrung from me by the dreadful brutality of that monster 
master.'

'But you'll break my heart one of these days,' added Mrs Varden, 
with more resignation, 'and then we shall both be happy.  My only 
desire is to see Dolly comfortably settled, and when she is, you 
may settle ME as soon as you like.'

'Ah!' cried Miggs--and coughed again.

Poor Gabriel twisted his wig about in silence for a long time, and 
then said mildly, 'Has Dolly gone to bed?'

'Your master speaks to you,' said Mrs Varden, looking sternly over 
her shoulder at Miss Miggs in waiting.

'No, my dear, I spoke to you,' suggested the locksmith.

'Did you hear me, Miggs?' cried the obdurate lady, stamping her 
foot upon the ground.  'YOU are beginning to despise me now, are 
you?  But this is example!'

At this cruel rebuke, Miggs, whose tears were always ready, for 
large or small parties, on the shortest notice and the most 
reasonable terms, fell a crying violently; holding both her hands 
tight upon her heart meanwhile, as if nothing less would prevent 
its splitting into small fragments.  Mrs Varden, who likewise 
possessed that faculty in high perfection, wept too, against Miggs; 
and with such effect that Miggs gave in after a time, and, except 
for an occasional sob, which seemed to threaten some remote 
intention of breaking out again, left her mistress in possession of 
the field.  Her superiority being thoroughly asserted, that lady 
soon desisted likewise, and fell into a quiet melancholy.

The relief was so great, and the fatiguing occurrences of last 
night so completely overpowered the locksmith, that he nodded in 
his chair, and would doubtless have slept there all night, but for 
the voice of Mrs Varden, which, after a pause of some five minutes, 
awoke him with a start.

'If I am ever,' said Mrs V.--not scolding, but in a sort of 
monotonous remonstrance--'in spirits, if I am ever cheerful, if I 
am ever more than usually disposed to be talkative and comfortable, 
this is the way I am treated.'

'Such spirits as you was in too, mim, but half an hour ago!' cried 
Miggs.  'I never see such company!'

'Because,' said Mrs Varden, 'because I never interfere or 
interrupt; because I never question where anybody comes or goes; 
because my whole mind and soul is bent on saving where I can save, 
and labouring in this house;--therefore, they try me as they do.'

'Martha,' urged the locksmith, endeavouring to look as wakeful as 
possible, 'what is it you complain of?  I really came home with 
every wish and desire to be happy.  I did, indeed.'

'What do I complain of!' retorted his wife.  'Is it a chilling 
thing to have one's husband sulking and falling asleep directly he 
comes home--to have him freezing all one's warm-heartedness, and 
throwing cold water over the fireside?  Is it natural, when I know 
he went out upon a matter in which I am as much interested as 
anybody can be, that I should wish to know all that has happened, 
or that he should tell me without my begging and praying him to do 
it?  Is that natural, or is it not?'

'I am very sorry, Martha,' said the good-natured locksmith.  'I was 
really afraid you were not disposed to talk pleasantly; I'll tell 
you everything; I shall only be too glad, my dear.'

'No, Varden,' returned his wife, rising with dignity.  'I dare say--
thank you!  I'm not a child to be corrected one minute and petted 
the next--I'm a little too old for that, Varden.  Miggs, carry the 
light.--YOU can be cheerful, Miggs, at least'

Miggs, who, to this moment, had been in the very depths of 
compassionate despondency, passed instantly into the liveliest 
state conceivable, and tossing her head as she glanced towards the 
locksmith, bore off her mistress and the light together.

'Now, who would think,' thought Varden, shrugging his shoulders and 
drawing his chair nearer to the fire, 'that that woman could ever 
be pleasant and agreeable?  And yet she can be.  Well, well, all of 
us have our faults.  I'll not be hard upon hers.  We have been man 
and wife too long for that.'

He dozed again--not the less pleasantly, perhaps, for his hearty 
temper.  While his eyes were closed, the door leading to the upper 
stairs was partially opened; and a head appeared, which, at sight 
of him, hastily drew back again.

'I wish,' murmured Gabriel, waking at the noise, and looking round 
the room, 'I wish somebody would marry Miggs.  But that's 
impossible!  I wonder whether there's any madman alive, who would 
marry Miggs!'

This was such a vast speculation that he fell into a doze again, 
and slept until the fire was quite burnt out.  At last he roused 
himself; and having double-locked the street-door according to 
custom, and put the key in his pocket, went off to bed.

He had not left the room in darkness many minutes, when the head 
again appeared, and Sim Tappertit entered, bearing in his hand a 
little lamp.

'What the devil business has he to stop up so late!' muttered Sim, 
passing into the workshop, and setting it down upon the forge.  
'Here's half the night gone already.  There's only one good that 
has ever come to me, out of this cursed old rusty mechanical trade, 
and that's this piece of ironmongery, upon my soul!'

As he spoke, he drew from the right hand, or rather right leg 
pocket of his smalls, a clumsy large-sized key, which he inserted 
cautiously in the lock his master had secured, and softly opened 
the door.  That done, he replaced his piece of secret workmanship 
in his pocket; and leaving the lamp burning, and closing the door 
carefully and without noise, stole out into the street--as little 
suspected by the locksmith in his sound deep sleep, as by Barnaby 
himself in his phantom-haunted dreams.



Chapter 8


Clear of the locksmith's house, Sim Tappertit laid aside his 
cautious manner, and assuming in its stead that of a ruffling, 
swaggering, roving blade, who would rather kill a man than 
otherwise, and eat him too if needful, made the best of his way 
along the darkened streets.

Half pausing for an instant now and then to smite his pocket and 
assure himself of the safety of his master key, he hurried on to 
Barbican, and turning into one of the narrowest of the narrow 
streets which diverged from that centre, slackened his pace and 
wiped his heated brow, as if the termination of his walk were near 
at hand.

It was not a very choice spot for midnight expeditions, being in 
truth one of more than questionable character, and of an appearance 
by no means inviting.  From the main street he had entered, itself 
little better than an alley, a low-browed doorway led into a blind 
court, or yard, profoundly dark, unpaved, and reeking with stagnant 
odours.  Into this ill-favoured pit, the locksmith's vagrant 
'prentice groped his way; and stopping at a house from whose 
defaced and rotten front the rude effigy of a bottle swung to and 
fro like some gibbeted malefactor, struck thrice upon an iron 
grating with his foot.  After listening in vain for some response 
to his signal, Mr Tappertit became impatient, and struck the 
grating thrice again.

A further delay ensued, but it was not of long duration.  The 
ground seemed to open at his feet, and a ragged head appeared.

'Is that the captain?' said a voice as ragged as the head.

'Yes,' replied Mr Tappertit haughtily, descending as he spoke, 'who 
should it be?'

'It's so late, we gave you up,' returned the voice, as its owner 
stopped to shut and fasten the grating.  'You're late, sir.'

'Lead on,' said Mr Tappertit, with a gloomy majesty, 'and make 
remarks when I require you.  Forward!'

This latter word of command was perhaps somewhat theatrical and 
unnecessary, inasmuch as the descent was by a very narrow, steep, 
and slippery flight of steps, and any rashness or departure from 
the beaten track must have ended in a yawning water-butt.  But Mr 
Tappertit being, like some other great commanders, favourable to 
strong effects, and personal display, cried 'Forward!' again, in 
the hoarsest voice he could assume; and led the way, with folded 
arms and knitted brows, to the cellar down below, where there was a 
small copper fixed in one corner, a chair or two, a form and table, 
a glimmering fire, and a truckle-bed, covered with a ragged 
patchwork rug.

'Welcome, noble captain!' cried a lanky figure, rising as from a 
nap.

The captain nodded.  Then, throwing off his outer coat, he stood 
composed in all his dignity, and eyed his follower over.

'What news to-night?' he asked, when he had looked into his very 
soul.

'Nothing particular,' replied the other, stretching himself--and he 
was so long already that it was quite alarming to see him do it--
'how come you to be so late?'

'No matter,' was all the captain deigned to say in answer.  'Is the 
room prepared?'

'It is,' replied the follower.

'The comrade--is he here?'

'Yes.  And a sprinkling of the others--you hear 'em?'

'Playing skittles!' said the captain moodily.  'Light-hearted 
revellers!'

There was no doubt respecting the particular amusement in which 
these heedless spirits were indulging, for even in the close and 
stifling atmosphere of the vault, the noise sounded like distant 
thunder.  It certainly appeared, at first sight, a singular spot to 
choose, for that or any other purpose of relaxation, if the other 
cellars answered to the one in which this brief colloquy took 
place; for the floors were of sodden earth, the walls and roof of 
damp bare brick tapestried with the tracks of snails and slugs; the 
air was sickening, tainted, and offensive.  It seemed, from one 
strong flavour which was uppermost among the various odours of the 
place, that it had, at no very distant period, been used as a 
storehouse for cheeses; a circumstance which, while it accounted 
for the greasy moisture that hung about it, was agreeably 
suggestive of rats.  It was naturally damp besides, and little 
trees of fungus sprung from every mouldering corner.

The proprietor of this charming retreat, and owner of the ragged 
head before mentioned--for he wore an old tie-wig as bare and 
frowzy as a stunted hearth-broom--had by this time joined them; and 
stood a little apart, rubbing his hands, wagging his hoary bristled 
chin, and smiling in silence.  His eyes were closed; but had they 
been wide open, it would have been easy to tell, from the attentive 
expression of the face he turned towards them--pale and unwholesome 
as might be expected in one of his underground existence--and from 
a certain anxious raising and quivering of the lids, that he was 
blind.

'Even Stagg hath been asleep,' said the long comrade, nodding 
towards this person.

'Sound, captain, sound!' cried the blind man; 'what does my noble 
captain drink--is it brandy, rum, usquebaugh?  Is it soaked 
gunpowder, or blazing oil?  Give it a name, heart of oak, and we'd 
get it for you, if it was wine from a bishop's cellar, or melted 
gold from King George's mint.'

'See,' said Mr Tappertit haughtily, 'that it's something strong, 
and comes quick; and so long as you take care of that, you may 
bring it from the devil's cellar, if you like.'

'Boldly said, noble captain!' rejoined the blind man.  'Spoken like 
the 'Prentices' Glory.  Ha, ha!  From the devil's cellar!  A brave 
joke!  The captain joketh.  Ha, ha, ha!'

'I'll tell you what, my fine feller,' said Mr Tappertit, eyeing the 
host over as he walked to a closet, and took out a bottle and glass 
as carelessly as if he had been in full possession of his sight, 
'if you make that row, you'll find that the captain's very far from 
joking, and so I tell you.'

'He's got his eyes on me!' cried Stagg, stopping short on his way 
back, and affecting to screen his face with the bottle.  'I feel 
'em though I can't see 'em.  Take 'em off, noble captain.  Remove 
'em, for they pierce like gimlets.'

Mr Tappertit smiled grimly at his comrade; and twisting out one 
more look--a kind of ocular screw--under the influence of which the 
blind man feigned to undergo great anguish and torture, bade him, 
in a softened tone, approach, and hold his peace.

'I obey you, captain,' cried Stagg, drawing close to him and 
filling out a bumper without spilling a drop, by reason that he 
held his little finger at the brim of the glass, and stopped at the 
instant the liquor touched it, 'drink, noble governor.  Death to 
all masters, life to all 'prentices, and love to all fair damsels.  
Drink, brave general, and warm your gallant heart!'

Mr Tappertit condescended to take the glass from his outstretched 
hand.  Stagg then dropped on one knee, and gently smoothed the 
calves of his legs, with an air of humble admiration.

'That I had but eyes!' he cried, 'to behold my captain's 
symmetrical proportions!  That I had but eyes, to look upon these 
twin invaders of domestic peace!'

'Get out!' said Mr Tappertit, glancing downward at his favourite 
limbs.  'Go along, will you, Stagg!'

'When I touch my own afterwards,' cried the host, smiting them 
reproachfully, 'I hate 'em.  Comparatively speaking, they've no 
more shape than wooden legs, beside these models of my noble 
captain's.'

'Yours!' exclaimed Mr Tappertit.  'No, I should think not.  Don't 
talk about those precious old toothpicks in the same breath with 
mine; that's rather too much.  Here.  Take the glass.  Benjamin.  
Lead on.  To business!'

With these words, he folded his arms again; and frowning with a 
sullen majesty, passed with his companion through a little door at 
the upper end of the cellar, and disappeared; leaving Stagg to his 
private meditations.

The vault they entered, strewn with sawdust and dimly lighted, was 
between the outer one from which they had just come, and that in 
which the skittle-players were diverting themselves; as was 
manifested by the increased noise and clamour of tongues, which was 
suddenly stopped, however, and replaced by a dead silence, at a 
signal from the long comrade.  Then, this young gentleman, going to 
a little cupboard, returned with a thigh-bone, which in former 
times must have been part and parcel of some individual at least as 
long as himself, and placed the same in the hands of Mr Tappertit; 
who, receiving it as a sceptre and staff of authority, cocked his 
three-cornered hat fiercely on the top of his head, and mounted a 
large table, whereon a chair of state, cheerfully ornamented with a 
couple of skulls, was placed ready for his reception.

He had no sooner assumed this position, than another young 
gentleman appeared, bearing in his arms a huge clasped book, who 
made him a profound obeisance, and delivering it to the long 
comrade, advanced to the table, and turning his back upon it, stood 
there Atlas-wise.  Then, the long comrade got upon the table too; 
and seating himself in a lower chair than Mr Tappertit's, with much 
state and ceremony, placed the large book on the shoulders of their 
mute companion as deliberately as if he had been a wooden desk, and 
prepared to make entries therein with a pen of corresponding size.

When the long comrade had made these preparations, he looked 
towards Mr Tappertit; and Mr Tappertit, flourishing the bone, 
knocked nine times therewith upon one of the skulls.  At the ninth 
stroke, a third young gentleman emerged from the door leading to 
the skittle ground, and bowing low, awaited his commands.

'Prentice!' said the mighty captain, 'who waits without?'

The 'prentice made answer that a stranger was in attendance, who 
claimed admission into that secret society of 'Prentice Knights, 
and a free participation in their rights, privileges, and 
immunities.  Thereupon Mr Tappertit flourished the bone again, and 
giving the other skull a prodigious rap on the nose, exclaimed 
'Admit him!'  At these dread words the 'prentice bowed once more, 
and so withdrew as he had come.

There soon appeared at the same door, two other 'prentices, having 
between them a third, whose eyes were bandaged, and who was attired 
in a bag-wig, and a broad-skirted coat, trimmed with tarnished 
lace; and who was girded with a sword, in compliance with the laws 
of the Institution regulating the introduction of candidates, which 
required them to assume this courtly dress, and kept it constantly 
in lavender, for their convenience.  One of the conductors of this 
novice held a rusty blunderbuss pointed towards his ear, and the 
other a very ancient sabre, with which he carved imaginary 
offenders as he came along in a sanguinary and anatomical manner.

As this silent group advanced, Mr Tappertit fixed his hat upon his 
head.  The novice then laid his hand upon his breast and bent 
before him.  When he had humbled himself sufficiently, the captain 
ordered the bandage to be removed, and proceeded to eye him over.

'Ha!' said the captain, thoughtfully, when he had concluded this 
ordeal.  'Proceed.'

The long comrade read aloud as follows:--'Mark Gilbert.  Age, 
nineteen.  Bound to Thomas Curzon, hosier, Golden Fleece, Aldgate.  
Loves Curzon's daughter.  Cannot say that Curzon's daughter loves 
him.  Should think it probable.  Curzon pulled his ears last 
Tuesday week.'

'How!' cried the captain, starting.

'For looking at his daughter, please you,' said the novice.

'Write Curzon down, Denounced,' said the captain.  'Put a black 
cross against the name of Curzon.'

'So please you,' said the novice, 'that's not the worst--he calls 
his 'prentice idle dog, and stops his beer unless he works to his 
liking.  He gives Dutch cheese, too, eating Cheshire, sir, himself; 
and Sundays out, are only once a month.'

'This,' said Mr Tappert;t gravely, 'is a flagrant case.  Put two 
black crosses to the name of Curzon.'

'If the society,' said the novice, who was an ill-looking, one-
sided, shambling lad, with sunken eyes set close together in his 
head--'if the society would burn his house down--for he's not 
insured--or beat him as he comes home from his club at night, or 
help me to carry off his daughter, and marry her at the Fleet, 
whether she gave consent or no--'

Mr Tappertit waved his grizzly truncheon as an admonition to him 
not to interrupt, and ordered three black crosses to the name of 
Curzon.

'Which means,' he said in gracious explanation, 'vengeance, 
complete and terrible.  'Prentice, do you love the Constitution?'

To which the novice (being to that end instructed by his attendant 
sponsors) replied 'I do!'

'The Church, the State, and everything established--but the 
masters?' quoth the captain.

Again the novice said 'I do.'

Having said it, he listened meekly to the captain, who in an 
address prepared for such occasions, told him how that under that 
same Constitution (which was kept in a strong box somewhere, but 
where exactly he could not find out, or he would have endeavoured 
to procure a copy of it), the 'prentices had, in times gone by, 
had frequent holidays of right, broken people's heads by scores, 
defied their masters, nay, even achieved some glorious murders in 
the streets, which privileges had gradually been wrested from them, 
and in all which noble aspirations they were now restrained; how 
the degrading checks imposed upon them were unquestionably 
attributable to the innovating spirit of the times, and how they 
united therefore to resist all change, except such change as would 
restore those good old English customs, by which they would stand 
or fall.  After illustrating the wisdom of going backward, by 
reference to that sagacious fish, the crab, and the not unfrequent 
practice of the mule and donkey, he described their general 
objects; which were briefly vengeance on their Tyrant Masters (of 
whose grievous and insupportable oppression no 'prentice could 
entertain a moment's doubt) and the restoration, as aforesaid, of 
their ancient rights and holidays; for neither of which objects 
were they now quite ripe, being barely twenty strong, but which 
they pledged themselves to pursue with fire and sword when needful.  
Then he described the oath which every member of that small remnant 
of a noble body took, and which was of a dreadful and impressive 
kind; binding him, at the bidding of his chief, to resist and 
obstruct the Lord Mayor, sword-bearer, and chaplain; to despise the 
authority of the sheriffs; and to hold the court of aldermen as 
nought; but not on any account, in case the fulness of time should 
bring a general rising of 'prentices, to damage or in any way 
disfigure Temple Bar, which was strictly constitutional and always 
to be approached with reverence.  Having gone over these several 
heads with great eloquence and force, and having further informed 
the novice that this society had its origin in his own teeming 
brain, stimulated by a swelling sense of wrong and outrage, Mr 
Tappertit demanded whether he had strength of heart to take the 
mighty pledge required, or whether he would withdraw while retreat 
was yet in his power.

To this the novice made rejoinder, that he would take the vow, 
though it should choke him; and it was accordingly administered 
with many impressive circumstances, among which the lighting up of 
the two skulls with a candle-end inside of each, and a great many 
flourishes with the bone, were chiefly conspicuous; not to mention 
a variety of grave exercises with the blunderbuss and sabre, and 
some dismal groaning by unseen 'prentices without.  All these dark 
and direful ceremonies being at length completed, the table was put 
aside, the chair of state removed, the sceptre locked up in its 
usual cupboard, the doors of communication between the three 
cellars thrown freely open, and the 'Prentice Knights resigned 
themselves to merriment.

But Mr Tappertit, who had a soul above the vulgar herd, and who, on 
account of his greatness, could only afford to be merry now and 
then, threw himself on a bench with the air of a man who was faint 
with dignity.  He looked with an indifferent eye, alike on 
skittles, cards, and dice, thinking only of the locksmith's 
daughter, and the base degenerate days on which he had fallen.

'My noble captain neither games, nor sings, nor dances,' said his 
host, taking a seat beside him.  'Drink, gallant general!'

Mr Tappertit drained the proffered goblet to the dregs; then thrust 
his hands into his pockets, and with a lowering visage walked among 
the skittles, while his followers (such is the influence of 
superior genius) restrained the ardent ball, and held his little 
shins in dumb respect.

'If I had been born a corsair or a pirate, a brigand, genteel 
highwayman or patriot--and they're the same thing,' thought Mr 
Tappertit, musing among the nine-pins, 'I should have been all 
right.  But to drag out a ignoble existence unbeknown to mankind in 
general--patience!  I will be famous yet.  A voice within me keeps 
on whispering Greatness.  I shall burst out one of these days, and 
when I do, what power can keep me down?  I feel my soul getting 
into my head at the idea.  More drink there!'

'The novice,' pursued Mr Tappertit, not exactly in a voice of 
thunder, for his tones, to say the truth were rather cracked and 
shrill--but very impressively, notwithstanding--'where is he?'

'Here, noble captain!' cried Stagg.  'One stands beside me who I 
feel is a stranger.'

'Have you,' said Mr Tappertit, letting his gaze fall on the party 
indicated, who was indeed the new knight, by this time restored to 
his own apparel; 'Have you the impression of your street-door key 
in wax?'

The long comrade anticipated the reply, by producing it from the 
shelf on which it had been deposited.

'Good,' said Mr Tappertit, scrutinising it attentively, while a 
breathless silence reigned around; for he had constructed secret 
door-keys for the whole society, and perhaps owed something of his 
influence to that mean and trivial circumstance--on such slight 
accidents do even men of mind depend!--'This is easily made.  Come 
hither, friend.'

With that, he beckoned the new knight apart, and putting the 
pattern in his pocket, motioned to him to walk by his side.

'And so,' he said, when they had taken a few turns up and down, 
you--you love your master's daughter?'

'I do,' said the 'prentice.  'Honour bright.  No chaff, you know.'

'Have you,' rejoined Mr Tappertit, catching him by the wrist, and 
giving him a look which would have been expressive of the most 
deadly malevolence, but for an accidental hiccup that rather 
interfered with it; 'have you a--a rival?'

'Not as I know on,' replied the 'prentice.

'If you had now--' said Mr Tappertit--'what would you--eh?--'

The 'prentice looked fierce and clenched his fists.

'It is enough,' cried Mr Tappertit hastily, 'we understand each 
other.  We are observed.  I thank you.'

So saying, he cast him off again; and calling the long comrade 
aside after taking a few hasty turns by himself, bade him 
immediately write and post against the wall, a notice, proscribing 
one Joseph Willet (commonly known as Joe) of Chigwell; forbidding 
all 'Prentice Knights to succour, comfort, or hold communion with 
him; and requiring them, on pain of excommunication, to molest, 
hurt, wrong, annoy, and pick quarrels with the said Joseph, 
whensoever and wheresoever they, or any of them, should happen to 
encounter him.

Having relieved his mind by this energetic proceeding, he 
condescended to approach the festive board, and warming by degrees, 
at length deigned to preside, and even to enchant the company with 
a song.  After this, he rose to such a pitch as to consent to 
regale the society with a hornpipe, which be actually performed to 
the music of a fiddle (played by an ingenious member) with such 
surpassing agility and brilliancy of execution, that the spectators 
could not be sufficiently enthusiastic in their admiration; and 
their host protested, with tears in his eyes, that he had never 
truly felt his blindness until that moment.

But the host withdrawing--probably to weep in secret--soon returned 
with the information that it wanted little more than an hour of 
day, and that all the cocks in Barbican had already begun to crow, 
as if their lives depended on it.  At this intelligence, the 
'Prentice Knights arose in haste, and marshalling into a line, 
filed off one by one and dispersed with all speed to their several 
homes, leaving their leader to pass the grating last.

'Good night, noble captain,' whispered the blind man as he held it 
open for his passage out; 'Farewell, brave general.  Bye, bye, 
illustrious commander.  Good luck go with you for a--conceited, 
bragging, empty-headed, duck-legged idiot.'

With which parting words, coolly added as he listened to his 
receding footsteps and locked the grate upon himself, he descended 
the steps, and lighting the fire below the little copper, 
prepared, without any assistance, for his daily occupation; which 
was to retail at the area-head above pennyworths of broth and soup, 
and savoury puddings, compounded of such scraps as were to be 
bought in the heap for the least money at Fleet Market in the 
evening time; and for the sale of which he had need to have 
depended chiefly on his private connection, for the court had no 
thoroughfare, and was not that kind of place in which many people 
were likely to take the air, or to frequent as an agreeable 
promenade.



Chapter 9


Chronicler's are privileged to enter where they list, to come and 
go through keyholes, to ride upon the wind, to overcome, in their 
soarings up and down, all obstacles of distance, time, and place.  
Thrice blessed be this last consideration, since it enables us to 
follow the disdainful Miggs even into the sanctity of her chamber, 
and to hold her in sweet companionship through the dreary watches 
of the night!

Miss Miggs, having undone her mistress, as she phrased it (which 
means, assisted to undress her), and having seen her comfortably to 
bed in the back room on the first floor, withdrew to her own 
apartment, in the attic story.  Notwithstanding her declaration in 
the locksmith's presence, she was in no mood for sleep; so, putting 
her light upon the table and withdrawing the little window curtain, 
she gazed out pensively at the wild night sky.

Perhaps she wondered what star was destined for her habitation when 
she had run her little course below; perhaps speculated which of 
those glimmering spheres might be the natal orb of Mr Tappertit; 
perhaps marvelled how they could gaze down on that perfidious 
creature, man, and not sicken and turn green as chemists' lamps; 
perhaps thought of nothing in particular.  Whatever she thought 
about, there she sat, until her attention, alive to anything 
connected with the insinuating 'prentice, was attracted by a noise 
in the next room to her own--his room; the room in which he slept, 
and dreamed--it might be, sometimes dreamed of her.

That he was not dreaming now, unless he was taking a walk in his 
sleep, was clear, for every now and then there came a shuffling 
noise, as though he were engaged in polishing the whitewashed wall; 
then a gentle creaking of his door; then the faintest indication of 
his stealthy footsteps on the landing-place outside.  Noting this 
latter circumstance, Miss Miggs turned pale and shuddered, as 
mistrusting his intentions; and more than once exclaimed, below her 
breath, 'Oh! what a Providence it is, as I am bolted in!'--which, 
owing doubtless to her alarm, was a confusion of ideas on her part 
between a bolt and its use; for though there was one on the door, 
it was not fastened.

Miss Miggs's sense of hearing, however, having as sharp an edge as 
her temper, and being of the same snappish and suspicious kind, 
very soon informed her that the footsteps passed her door, and 
appeared to have some object quite separate and disconnected from 
herself.  At this discovery she became more alarmed than ever, and 
was about to give utterance to those cries of 'Thieves!' and 
'Murder!' which she had hitherto restrained, when it occurred to 
her to look softly out, and see that her fears had some good 
palpable foundation.

Looking out accordingly, and stretching her neck over the handrail, 
she descried, to her great amazement, Mr Tappertit completely 
dressed, stealing downstairs, one step at a time, with his shoes in 
one hand and a lamp in the other.  Following him with her eyes, and 
going down a little way herself to get the better of an intervening 
angle, she beheld him thrust his head in at the parlour-door, draw 
it back again with great swiftness, and immediately begin a retreat 
upstairs with all possible expedition.

'Here's mysteries!' said the damsel, when she was safe in her own 
room again, quite out of breath.  'Oh, gracious, here's mysteries!'

The prospect of finding anybody out in anything, would have kept 
Miss Miggs awake under the influence of henbane.  Presently, she 
heard the step again, as she would have done if it had been that of 
a feather endowed with motion and walking down on tiptoe.  Then 
gliding out as before, she again beheld the retreating figure of 
the 'prentice; again he looked cautiously in at the parlour-door, 
but this time instead of retreating, he passed in and disappeared.

Miggs was back in her room, and had her head out of the window, 
before an elderly gentleman could have winked and recovered from 
it.  Out he came at the street-door, shut it carefully behind him, 
tried it with his knee, and swaggered off, putting something in his 
pocket as he went along.  At this spectacle Miggs cried 'Gracious!' 
again, and then 'Goodness gracious!' and then 'Goodness gracious 
me!' and then, candle in hand, went downstairs as he had done.  
Coming to the workshop, she saw the lamp burning on the forge, and 
everything as Sim had left it.

'Why I wish I may only have a walking funeral, and never be buried 
decent with a mourning-coach and feathers, if the boy hasn't been 
and made a key for his own self!' cried Miggs.  'Oh the little 
villain!'

This conclusion was not arrived at without consideration, and much 
peeping and peering about; nor was it unassisted by the 
recollection that she had on several occasions come upon the 
'prentice suddenly, and found him busy at some mysterious 
occupation.  Lest the fact of Miss Miggs calling him, on whom she 
stooped to cast a favourable eye, a boy, should create surprise in 
any breast, it may be observed that she invariably affected to 
regard all male bipeds under thirty as mere chits and infants; 
which phenomenon is not unusual in ladies of Miss Miggs's temper, 
and is indeed generally found to be the associate of such 
indomitable and savage virtue.

Miss Miggs deliberated within herself for some little time, looking 
hard at the shop-door while she did so, as though her eyes and 
thoughts were both upon it; and then, taking a sheet of paper from 
a drawer, twisted it into a long thin spiral tube.  Having filled 
this instrument with a quantity of small coal-dust from the forge, 
she approached the door, and dropping on one knee before it, 
dexterously blew into the keyhole as much of these fine ashes as 
the lock would hold.  When she had filled it to the brim in a very 
workmanlike and skilful manner, she crept upstairs again, and 
chuckled as she went.

'There!' cried Miggs, rubbing her hands, 'now let's see whether you 
won't be glad to take some notice of me, mister.  He, he, he!  
You'll have eyes for somebody besides Miss Dolly now, I think.  A 
fat-faced puss she is, as ever I come across!'

As she uttered this criticism, she glanced approvingly at her small 
mirror, as who should say, I thank my stars that can't be said of 
me!--as it certainly could not; for Miss Miggs's style of beauty 
was of that kind which Mr Tappertit himself had not inaptly termed, 
in private, 'scraggy.'

'I don't go to bed this night!' said Miggs, wrapping herself in a 
shawl, and drawing a couple of chairs near the window, flouncing 
down upon one, and putting her feet upon the other, 'till you come 
home, my lad.  I wouldn't,' said Miggs viciously, 'no, not for 
five-and-forty pound!'

With that, and with an expression of face in which a great number 
of opposite ingredients, such as mischief, cunning, malice, 
triumph, and patient expectation, were all mixed up together in a 
kind of physiognomical punch, Miss Miggs composed herself to wait 
and listen, like some fair ogress who had set a trap and was 
watching for a nibble from a plump young traveller.

She sat there, with perfect composure, all night.  At length, just 
upon break of day, there was a footstep in the street, and 
presently she could hear Mr Tappertit stop at the door.  Then she 
could make out that he tried his key--that he was blowing into it--
that he knocked it on the nearest post to beat the dust out--that 
he took it under a lamp to look at it--that he poked bits of stick 
into the lock to clear it--that he peeped into the keyhole, first 
with one eye, and then with the other--that he tried the key again--
that he couldn't turn it, and what was worse, couldn't get it out--
that he bent it--that then it was much less disposed to come out 
than before--that he gave it a mighty twist and a great pull, and 
then it came out so suddenly that he staggered backwards--that he 
kicked the door--that he shook it--finally, that he smote his 
forehead, and sat down on the step in despair.

When this crisis had arrived, Miss Miggs, affecting to be exhausted 
with terror, and to cling to the window-sill for support, put out 
her nightcap, and demanded in a faint voice who was there.

Mr Tappertit cried 'Hush!' and, backing to the road, exhorted her 
in frenzied pantomime to secrecy and silence.

'Tell me one thing,' said Miggs.  'Is it thieves?'

'No--no--no!' cried Mr Tappertit.

'Then,' said Miggs, more faintly than before, 'it's fire.  Where 
is it, sir?  It's near this room, I know.  I've a good conscience, 
sir, and would much rather die than go down a ladder.  All I wish 
is, respecting my love to my married sister, Golden Lion Court, 
number twenty-sivin, second bell-handle on the right-hand door-
post.'

'Miggs!' cried Mr Tappertit, 'don't you know me?  Sim, you know--
Sim--'

'Oh!  what about him!' cried Miggs, clasping her hands.  'Is he in 
any danger?  Is he in the midst of flames and blazes!  Oh gracious, 
gracious!'

'Why I'm here, an't I?' rejoined Mr Tappertit, knocking himself on 
the breast.  'Don't you see me?  What a fool you are, Miggs!'

'There!' cried Miggs, unmindful of this compliment.  'Why--so it--
Goodness, what is the meaning of--If you please, mim, here's--'

'No, no!' cried Mr Tappertit, standing on tiptoe, as if by that 
means he, in the street, were any nearer being able to stop the 
mouth of Miggs in the garret.  'Don't!--I've been out without 
leave, and something or another's the matter with the lock.  Come 
down, and undo the shop window, that I may get in that way.'

'I dursn't do it, Simmun,' cried Miggs--for that was her 
pronunciation of his Christian name.  'I dursn't do it, indeed.  
You know as well as anybody, how particular I am.  And to come 
down in the dead of night, when the house is wrapped in slumbers 
and weiled in obscurity.'  And there she stopped and shivered, for 
her modesty caught cold at the very thought.

'But Miggs,' cried Mr Tappertit, getting under the lamp, that she 
might see his eyes.  'My darling Miggs--'

Miggs screamed slightly.

'--That I love so much, and never can help thinking of,' and it is 
impossible to describe the use he made of his eyes when he said 
this--'do--for my sake, do.'

'Oh Simmun,' cried Miggs, 'this is worse than all.  I know if I 
come down, you'll go, and--'

'And what, my precious?' said Mr Tappertit.

'And try,' said Miggs, hysterically, 'to kiss me, or some such 
dreadfulness; I know you will!'

'I swear I won't,' said Mr Tappertit, with remarkable earnestness.  
'Upon my soul I won't.  It's getting broad day, and the watchman's 
waking up.  Angelic Miggs!  If you'll only come and let me in, I 
promise you faithfully and truly I won't.'

Miss Miggs, whose gentle heart was touched, did not wait for the 
oath (knowing how strong the temptation was, and fearing he might 
forswear himself), but tripped lightly down the stairs, and with 
her own fair hands drew back the rough fastenings of the workshop 
window.  Having helped the wayward 'prentice in, she faintly 
articulated the words 'Simmun is safe!' and yielding to her woman's 
nature, immediately became insensible.

'I knew I should quench her,' said Sim, rather embarrassed by this 
circumstance.  'Of course I was certain it would come to this, but 
there was nothing else to be done--if I hadn't eyed her over, she 
wouldn't have come down.  Here.  Keep up a minute, Miggs.  What a 
slippery figure she is!  There's no holding her, comfortably.  Do 
keep up a minute, Miggs, will you?'

As Miggs, however, was deaf to all entreaties, Mr Tappertit leant 
her against the wall as one might dispose of a walking-stick or 
umbrella, until he had secured the window, when he took her in his 
arms again, and, in short stages and with great difficulty--arising 
from her being tall and his being short, and perhaps in some degree 
from that peculiar physical conformation on which he had already 
remarked--carried her upstairs, and planting her, in the same 
umbrella and walking-stick fashion, just inside her own door, left 
her to her repose.

'He may be as cool as he likes,' said Miss Miggs, recovering as 
soon as she was left alone; 'but I'm in his confidence and he can't 
help himself, nor couldn't if he was twenty Simmunses!'



Chapter 10


It was on one of those mornings, common in early spring, when the 
year, fickle and changeable in its youth like all other created 
things, is undecided whether to step backward into winter or 
forward into summer, and in its uncertainty inclines now to the one 
and now to the other, and now to both at once--wooing summer in the 
sunshine, and lingering still with winter in the shade--it was, in 
short, on one of those mornings, when it is hot and cold, wet and 
dry, bright and lowering, sad and cheerful, withering and genial, 
in the compass of one short hour, that old John Willet, who was 
dropping asleep over the copper boiler, was roused by the sound of 
a horse's feet, and glancing out at window, beheld a traveller of 
goodly promise, checking his bridle at the Maypole door.

He was none of your flippant young fellows, who would call for a 
tankard of mulled ale, and make themselves as much at home as if 
they had ordered a hogshead of wine; none of your audacious young 
swaggerers, who would even penetrate into the bar--that solemn 
sanctuary--and, smiting old John upon the back, inquire if there 
was never a pretty girl in the house, and where he hid his little 
chambermaids, with a hundred other impertinences of that nature; 
none of your free-and-easy companions, who would scrape their 
boots upon the firedogs in the common room, and be not at all 
particular on the subject of spittoons; none of your unconscionable 
blades, requiring impossible chops, and taking unheard-of pickles 
for granted.  He was a staid, grave, placid gentleman, something 
past the prime of life, yet upright in his carriage, for all that, 
and slim as a greyhound.  He was well-mounted upon a sturdy 
chestnut cob, and had the graceful seat of an experienced horseman; 
while his riding gear, though free from such fopperies as were then 
in vogue, was handsome and well chosen.  He wore a riding-coat of a 
somewhat brighter green than might have been expected to suit the 
taste of a gentleman of his years, with a short, black velvet cape, 
and laced pocket-holes and cuffs, all of a jaunty fashion; his 
linen, too, was of the finest kind, worked in a rich pattern at the 
wrists and throat, and scrupulously white.  Although he seemed, 
judging from the mud he had picked up on the way, to have come from 
London, his horse was as smooth and cool as his own iron-grey 
periwig and pigtail.  Neither man nor beast had turned a single 
hair; and saving for his soiled skirts and spatter-dashes, this 
gentleman, with his blooming face, white teeth, exactly-ordered 
dress, and perfect calmness, might have come from making an 
elaborate and leisurely toilet, to sit for an equestrian portrait 
at old John Willet's gate.

It must not be supposed that John observed these several 
characteristics by other than very slow degrees, or that he took in 
more than half a one at a time, or that he even made up his mind 
upon that, without a great deal of very serious consideration.  
Indeed, if he had been distracted in the first instance by 
questionings and orders, it would have taken him at the least a 
fortnight to have noted what is here set down; but it happened that 
the gentleman, being struck with the old house, or with the plump 
pigeons which were skimming and curtseying about it, or with the 
tall maypole, on the top of which a weathercock, which had been out 
of order for fifteen years, performed a perpetual walk to the music 
of its own creaking, sat for some little time looking round in 
silence.  Hence John, standing with his hand upon the horse's 
bridle, and his great eyes on the rider, and with nothing passing 
to divert his thoughts, had really got some of these little 
circumstances into his brain by the time he was called upon to 
speak.

'A quaint place this,' said the gentleman--and his voice was as 
rich as his dress.  'Are you the landlord?'

'At your service, sir,' replied John Willet.

'You can give my horse good stabling, can you, and me an early 
dinner (I am not particular what, so that it be cleanly served), 
and a decent room of which there seems to be no lack in this great 
mansion,' said the stranger, again running his eyes over the 
exterior.

'You can have, sir,' returned John with a readiness quite 
surprising, 'anything you please.'

'It's well I am easily satisfied,' returned the other with a smile, 
'or that might prove a hardy pledge, my friend.'  And saying so, he 
dismounted, with the aid of the block before the door, in a 
twinkling.

'Halloa there!  Hugh!' roared John.  'I ask your pardon, sir, for 
keeping you standing in the porch; but my son has gone to town on 
business, and the boy being, as I may say, of a kind of use to me, 
I'm rather put out when he's away.  Hugh!--a dreadful idle vagrant 
fellow, sir, half a gipsy, as I think--always sleeping in the sun 
in summer, and in the straw in winter time, sir--Hugh!  Dear Lord, 
to keep a gentleman a waiting here through him!--Hugh!  I wish that 
chap was dead, I do indeed.'

'Possibly he is,' returned the other.  'I should think if he were 
living, he would have heard you by this time.'

'In his fits of laziness, he sleeps so desperate hard,' said the 
distracted host, 'that if you were to fire off cannon-balls into 
his ears, it wouldn't wake him, sir.'

The guest made no remark upon this novel cure for drowsiness, and 
recipe for making people lively, but, with his hands clasped behind 
him, stood in the porch, very much amused to see old John, with the 
bridle in his hand, wavering between a strong impulse to abandon 
the animal to his fate, and a half disposition to lead him into the 
house, and shut him up in the parlour, while he waited on his 
master.

'Pillory the fellow, here he is at last!' cried John, in the very 
height and zenith of his distress.  'Did you hear me a calling, 
villain?'

The figure he addressed made no answer, but putting his hand upon 
the saddle, sprung into it at a bound, turned the horse's head 
towards the stable, and was gone in an instant.

'Brisk enough when he is awake,' said the guest.

'Brisk enough, sir!' replied John, looking at the place where the 
horse had been, as if not yet understanding quite, what had become 
of him.  'He melts, I think.  He goes like a drop of froth.  You 
look at him, and there he is.  You look at him again, and--there he 
isn't.'

Having, in the absence of any more words, put this sudden climax to 
what he had faintly intended should be a long explanation of the 
whole life and character of his man, the oracular John Willet led 
the gentleman up his wide dismantled staircase into the Maypole's 
best apartment.

It was spacious enough in all conscience, occupying the whole depth 
of the house, and having at either end a great bay window, as large 
as many modern rooms; in which some few panes of stained glass, 
emblazoned with fragments of armorial bearings, though cracked, and 
patched, and shattered, yet remained; attesting, by their 
presence, that the former owner had made the very light subservient 
to his state, and pressed the sun itself into his list of 
flatterers; bidding it, when it shone into his chamber, reflect the 
badges of his ancient family, and take new hues and colours from 
their pride.

But those were old days, and now every little ray came and went as 
it would; telling the plain, bare, searching truth.  Although the 
best room of the inn, it had the melancholy aspect of grandeur in 
decay, and was much too vast for comfort.  Rich rustling hangings, 
waving on the walls; and, better far, the rustling of youth and 
beauty's dress; the light of women's eyes, outshining the tapers 
and their own rich jewels; the sound of gentle tongues, and music, 
and the tread of maiden feet, had once been there, and filled it 
with delight.  But they were gone, and with them all its gladness.  
It was no longer a home; children were never born and bred there; 
the fireside had become mercenary--a something to be bought and 
sold--a very courtezan: let who would die, or sit beside, or leave 
it, it was still the same--it missed nobody, cared for nobody, had 
equal warmth and smiles for all.  God help the man whose heart ever 
changes with the world, as an old mansion when it becomes an inn!

No effort had been made to furnish this chilly waste, but before 
the broad chimney a colony of chairs and tables had been planted on 
a square of carpet, flanked by a ghostly screen, enriched with 
figures, grinning and grotesque.  After lighting with his own hands 
the faggots which were heaped upon the hearth, old John withdrew to 
hold grave council with his cook, touching the stranger's 
entertainment; while the guest himself, seeing small comfort in 
the yet unkindled wood, opened a lattice in the distant window, and 
basked in a sickly gleam of cold March sun.

Leaving the window now and then, to rake the crackling logs 
together, or pace the echoing room from end to end, he closed it 
when the fire was quite burnt up, and having wheeled the easiest 
chair into the warmest corner, summoned John Willet.

'Sir,' said John.

He wanted pen, ink, and paper.  There was an old standish on the 
mantelshelf containing a dusty apology for all three.  Having set 
this before him, the landlord was retiring, when he motioned him to 
stay.

'There's a house not far from here,' said the guest when he had 
written a few lines, 'which you call the Warren, I believe?'

As this was said in the tone of one who knew the fact, and asked 
the question as a thing of course, John contented himself with 
nodding his head in the affirmative; at the same time taking one 
hand out of his pockets to cough behind, and then putting it in 
again.

'I want this note'--said the guest, glancing on what he had 
written, and folding it, 'conveyed there without loss of time, and 
an answer brought back here.  Have you a messenger at hand?'

John was thoughtful for a minute or thereabouts, and then said Yes.

'Let me see him,' said the guest.

This was disconcerting; for Joe being out, and Hugh engaged in 
rubbing down the chestnut cob, he designed sending on the errand, 
Barnaby, who had just then arrived in one of his rambles, and who, 
so that he thought himself employed on a grave and serious 
business, would go anywhere.

'Why the truth is,' said John after a long pause, 'that the person 
who'd go quickest, is a sort of natural, as one may say, sir; and 
though quick of foot, and as much to be trusted as the post 
itself, he's not good at talking, being touched and flighty, sir.'

'You don't,' said the guest, raising his eyes to John's fat face, 
'you don't mean--what's the fellow's name--you don't mean Barnaby?'

'Yes, I do,' returned the landlord, his features turning quite 
expressive with surprise.

'How comes he to be here?' inquired the guest, leaning back in his 
chair; speaking in the bland, even tone, from which he never 
varied; and with the same soft, courteous, never-changing smile 
upon his face.  'I saw him in London last night.'

'He's, for ever, here one hour, and there the next,' returned old 
John, after the usual pause to get the question in his mind.  
'Sometimes he walks, and sometimes runs.  He's known along the road 
by everybody, and sometimes comes here in a cart or chaise, and 
sometimes riding double.  He comes and goes, through wind, rain, 
snow, and hail, and on the darkest nights.  Nothing hurts HIM.'

'He goes often to the Warren, does he not?' said the guest 
carelessly.  'I seem to remember his mother telling me something to 
that effect yesterday.  But I was not attending to the good woman 
much.'

'You're right, sir,' John made answer, 'he does.  His father, sir, 
was murdered in that house.'

'So I have heard,' returned the guest, taking a gold toothpick 
from his pocket with the same sweet smile.  'A very disagreeable 
circumstance for the family.'

'Very,' said John with a puzzled look, as if it occurred to him, 
dimly and afar off, that this might by possibility be a cool way of 
treating the subject.

'All the circumstances after a murder,' said the guest 
soliloquising, 'must be dreadfully unpleasant--so much bustle and 
disturbance--no repose--a constant dwelling upon one subject--and 
the running in and out, and up and down stairs, intolerable.  I 
wouldn't have such a thing happen to anybody I was nearly 
interested in, on any account.  'Twould be enough to wear one's 
life out.--You were going to say, friend--' he added, turning to 
John again.

'Only that Mrs Rudge lives on a little pension from the family, and 
that Barnaby's as free of the house as any cat or dog about it,' 
answered John.  'Shall he do your errand, sir?'

'Oh yes,' replied the guest.  'Oh certainly.  Let him do it by all 
means.  Please to bring him here that I may charge him to be quick.  
If he objects to come you may tell him it's Mr Chester.  He will 
remember my name, I dare say.'

John was so very much astonished to find who his visitor was, that 
he could express no astonishment at all, by looks or otherwise, but 
left the room as if he were in the most placid and imperturbable of 
all possible conditions.  It has been reported that when he got 
downstairs, he looked steadily at the boiler for ten minutes by 
the clock, and all that time never once left off shaking his head; 
for which statement there would seem to be some ground of truth and 
feasibility, inasmuch as that interval of time did certainly 
elapse, before he returned with Barnaby to the guest's apartment.

'Come hither, lad,' said Mr Chester.  'You know Mr Geoffrey 
Haredale?'

Barnaby laughed, and looked at the landlord as though he would say, 
'You hear him?'  John, who was greatly shocked at this breach of 
decorum, clapped his finger to his nose, and shook his head in mute 
remonstrance.

'He knows him, sir,' said John, frowning aside at Barnaby, 'as well 
as you or I do.'

'I haven't the pleasure of much acquaintance with the gentleman,' 
returned his guest.  'YOU may have.  Limit the comparison to 
yourself, my friend.'

Although this was said with the same easy affability, and the same 
smile, John felt himself put down, and laying the indignity at 
Barnaby's door, determined to kick his raven, on the very first 
opportunity.

'Give that,' said the guest, who had by this time sealed the note, 
and who beckoned his messenger towards him as he spoke, 'into Mr 
Haredale's own hands.  Wait for an answer, and bring it back to me 
here.  If you should find that Mr Haredale is engaged just now, 
tell him--can he remember a message, landlord?'

'When he chooses, sir,' replied John.  'He won't forget this one.'

'How are you sure of that?'

John merely pointed to him as he stood with his head bent forward, 
and his earnest gaze fixed closely on his questioner's face; and 
nodded sagely.

'Tell him then, Barnaby, should he be engaged,' said Mr Chester, 
'that I shall be glad to wait his convenience here, and to see him 
(if he will call) at any time this evening.--At the worst I can 
have a bed here, Willet, I suppose?'

Old John, immensely flattered by the personal notoriety implied in 
this familiar form of address, answered, with something like a 
knowing look, 'I should believe you could, sir,' and was turning 
over in his mind various forms of eulogium, with the view of 
selecting one appropriate to the qualities of his best bed, when 
his ideas were put to flight by Mr Chester giving Barnaby the 
letter, and bidding him make all speed away.

'Speed!' said Barnaby, folding the little packet in his breast, 
'Speed!  If you want to see hurry and mystery, come here.  Here!'

With that, he put his hand, very much to John Willet's horror, on 
the guest's fine broadcloth sleeve, and led him stealthily to the 
back window.

'Look down there,' he said softly; 'do you mark how they whisper in 
each other's ears; then dance and leap, to make believe they are in 
sport?  Do you see how they stop for a moment, when they think 
there is no one looking, and mutter among themselves again; and 
then how they roll and gambol, delighted with the mischief they've 
been plotting?  Look at 'em now.  See how they whirl and plunge.  
And now they stop again, and whisper, cautiously together--little 
thinking, mind, how often I have lain upon the grass and watched 
them.  I say what is it that they plot and hatch?  Do you know?'

'They are only clothes,' returned the guest, 'such as we wear; 
hanging on those lines to dry, and fluttering in the wind.'

'Clothes!' echoed Barnaby, looking close into his face, and falling 
quickly back.  'Ha ha!  Why, how much better to be silly, than as 
wise as you!  You don't see shadowy people there, like those that 
live in sleep--not you.  Nor eyes in the knotted panes of glass, 
nor swift ghosts when it blows hard, nor do you hear voices in the 
air, nor see men stalking in the sky--not you!  I lead a merrier 
life than you, with all your cleverness.  You're the dull men.  
We're the bright ones.  Ha! ha!  I'll not change with you, clever 
as you are,--not I!'

With that, he waved his hat above his head, and darted off.

'A strange creature, upon my word!' said the guest, pulling out a 
handsome box, and taking a pinch of snuff.

'He wants imagination,' said Mr Willet, very slowly, and after a 
long silence; 'that's what he wants.  I've tried to instil it into 
him, many and many's the time; but'--John added this in confidence--
'he an't made for it; that's the fact.'

To record that Mr Chester smiled at John's remark would be little 
to the purpose, for he preserved the same conciliatory and pleasant 
look at all times.  He drew his chair nearer to the fire though, as 
a kind of hint that he would prefer to be alone, and John, having 
no reasonable excuse for remaining, left him to himself.

Very thoughtful old John Willet was, while the dinner was 
preparing; and if his brain were ever less clear at one time than 
another, it is but reasonable to suppose that he addled it in no 
slight degree by shaking his head so much that day.  That Mr 
Chester, between whom and Mr Haredale, it was notorious to all the 
neighbourhood, a deep and bitter animosity existed, should come 
down there for the sole purpose, as it seemed, of seeing him, and 
should choose the Maypole for their place of meeting, and should 
send to him express, were stumbling blocks John could not overcome.  
The only resource he had, was to consult the boiler, and wait 
impatiently for Barnaby's return.

But Barnaby delayed beyond all precedent.  The visitor's dinner was 
served, removed, his wine was set, the fire replenished, the hearth 
clean swept; the light waned without, it grew dusk, became quite 
dark, and still no Barnaby appeared.  Yet, though John Willet was 
full of wonder and misgiving, his guest sat cross-legged in the 
easy-chair, to all appearance as little ruffled in his thoughts as 
in his dress--the same calm, easy, cool gentleman, without a care 
or thought beyond his golden toothpick.

'Barnaby's late,' John ventured to observe, as he placed a pair of 
tarnished candlesticks, some three feet high, upon the table, and 
snuffed the lights they held.

'He is rather so,' replied the guest, sipping his wine.  'He will 
not be much longer, I dare say.'

John coughed and raked the fire together.

'As your roads bear no very good character, if I may judge from my 
son's mishap, though,' said Mr Chester, 'and as I have no fancy to 
be knocked on the head--which is not only disconcerting at the 
moment, but places one, besides, in a ridiculous position with 
respect to the people who chance to pick one up--I shall stop here 
to-night.  I think you said you had a bed to spare.'

'Such a bed, sir,' returned John Willet; 'ay, such a bed as few, 
even of the gentry's houses, own.  A fixter here, sir.  I've heard 
say that bedstead is nigh two hundred years of age.  Your noble 
son--a fine young gentleman--slept in it last, sir, half a year 
ago.'

'Upon my life, a recommendation!' said the guest, shrugging his 
shoulders and wheeling his chair nearer to the fire.  'See that it 
be well aired, Mr Willet, and let a blazing fire be lighted there 
at once.  This house is something damp and chilly.'

John raked the faggots up again, more from habit than presence of 
mind, or any reference to this remark, and was about to withdraw, 
when a bounding step was heard upon the stair, and Barnaby came 
panting in.

'He'll have his foot in the stirrup in an hour's time,' he cried, 
advancing.  'He has been riding hard all day--has just come home--
but will be in the saddle again as soon as he has eat and drank, to 
meet his loving friend.'

'Was that his message?' asked the visitor, looking up, but without 
the smallest discomposure--or at least without the show of any.

'All but the last words,' Barnaby rejoined.  'He meant those.  I 
saw that, in his face.'

'This for your pains,' said the other, putting money in his hand, 
and glancing at him steadfastly.'   This for your pains, sharp 
Barnaby.'

'For Grip, and me, and Hugh, to share among us,' he rejoined, 
putting it up, and nodding, as he counted it on his fingers.  'Grip 
one, me two, Hugh three; the dog, the goat, the cats--well, we 
shall spend it pretty soon, I warn you.  Stay.--Look.  Do you wise 
men see nothing there, now?'

He bent eagerly down on one knee, and gazed intently at the smoke, 
which was rolling up the chimney in a thick black cloud.  John 
Willet, who appeared to consider himself particularly and chiefly 
referred to under the term wise men, looked that way likewise, and 
with great solidity of feature.

'Now, where do they go to, when they spring so fast up there,' 
asked Barnaby; 'eh?  Why do they tread so closely on each other's 
heels, and why are they always in a hurry--which is what you blame 
me for, when I only take pattern by these busy folk about me?  More 
of 'em! catching to each other's skirts; and as fast as they go, 
others come!  What a merry dance it is!  I would that Grip and I 
could frisk like that!'

'What has he in that basket at his back?' asked the guest after a 
few moments, during which Barnaby was still bending down to look 
higher up the chimney, and earnestly watching the smoke.

'In this?' he answered, jumping up, before John Willet could reply--
shaking it as he spoke, and stooping his head to listen.  'In 
this!  What is there here?  Tell him!'

'A devil, a devil, a devil!' cried a hoarse voice.

'Here's money!' said Barnaby, chinking it in his hand, 'money for a 
treat, Grip!'

'Hurrah!  Hurrah!  Hurrah!' replied the raven, 'keep up your 
spirits.  Never say die.  Bow, wow, wow!'

Mr Willet, who appeared to entertain strong doubts whether a 
customer in a laced coat and fine linen could be supposed to have 
any acquaintance even with the existence of such unpolite gentry as 
the bird claimed to belong to, took Barnaby off at this juncture, 
with the view of preventing any other improper declarations, and 
quitted the room with his very best bow.



Chapter 11


There was great news that night for the regular Maypole customers, 
to each of whom, as he straggled in to occupy his allotted seat in 
the chimney-corner, John, with a most impressive slowness of 
delivery, and in an apoplectic whisper, communicated the fact that 
Mr Chester was alone in the large room upstairs, and was waiting 
the arrival of Mr Geoffrey Haredale, to whom he had sent a letter 
(doubtless of a threatening nature) by the hands of Barnaby, then 
and there present.

For a little knot of smokers and solemn gossips, who had seldom any 
new topics of discussion, this was a perfect Godsend.  Here was a 
good, dark-looking mystery progressing under that very roof--
brought home to the fireside, as it were, and enjoyable without the 
smallest pains or trouble.  It is extraordinary what a zest and 
relish it gave to the drink, and how it heightened the flavour of 
the tobacco.  Every man smoked his pipe with a face of grave and 
serious delight, and looked at his neighbour with a sort of quiet 
congratulation.  Nay, it was felt to be such a holiday and special 
night, that, on the motion of little Solomon Daisy, every man 
(including John himself) put down his sixpence for a can of flip, 
which grateful beverage was brewed with all despatch, and set down 
in the midst of them on the brick floor; both that it might simmer 
and stew before the fire, and that its fragrant steam, rising up 
among them, and mixing with the wreaths of vapour from their pipes, 
might shroud them in a delicious atmosphere of their own, and shut 
out all the world.  The very furniture of the room seemed to 
mellow and deepen in its tone; the ceiling and walls looked 
blacker and more highly polished, the curtains of a ruddier red; 
the fire burnt clear and high, and the crickets in the hearthstone 
chirped with a more than wonted satisfaction.

There were present two, however, who showed but little interest in 
the general contentment.  Of these, one was Barnaby himself, who 
slept, or, to avoid being beset with questions, feigned to sleep, 
in the chimney-corner; the other, Hugh, who, sleeping too, lay 
stretched upon the bench on the opposite side, in the full glare of 
the blazing fire.

The light that fell upon this slumbering form, showed it in all its 
muscular and handsome proportions.  It was that of a young man, of 
a hale athletic figure, and a giant's strength, whose sunburnt face 
and swarthy throat, overgrown with jet black hair, might have 
served a painter for a model.  Loosely attired, in the coarsest and 
roughest garb, with scraps of straw and hay--his usual bed--
clinging here and there, and mingling with his uncombed locks, he 
had fallen asleep in a posture as careless as his dress.  The 
negligence and disorder of the whole man, with something fierce and 
sullen in his features, gave him a picturesque appearance, that 
attracted the regards even of the Maypole customers who knew him 
well, and caused Long Parkes to say that Hugh looked more like a 
poaching rascal to-night than ever he had seen him yet.

'He's waiting here, I suppose,' said Solomon, 'to take Mr 
Haredale's horse.'

'That's it, sir,' replied John Willet.  'He's not often in the 
house, you know.  He's more at his ease among horses than men.  I 
look upon him as a animal himself.'

Following up this opinion with a shrug that seemed meant to say, 
'we can't expect everybody to be like us,' John put his pipe into 
his mouth again, and smoked like one who felt his superiority over 
the general run of mankind.

'That chap, sir,' said John, taking it out again after a time, and 
pointing at him with the stem, 'though he's got all his faculties 
about him--bottled up and corked down, if I may say so, somewheres 
or another--'

'Very good!' said Parkes, nodding his head.  'A very good 
expression, Johnny.  You'll be a tackling somebody presently.  
You're in twig to-night, I see.'

'Take care,' said Mr Willet, not at all grateful for the 
compliment, 'that I don't tackle you, sir, which I shall certainly 
endeavour to do, if you interrupt me when I'm making observations.--
That chap, I was a saying, though he has all his faculties about 
him, somewheres or another, bottled up and corked down, has no more 
imagination than Barnaby has.  And why hasn't he?'

The three friends shook their heads at each other; saying by that 
action, without the trouble of opening their lips, 'Do you observe 
what a philosophical mind our friend has?'

'Why hasn't he?' said John, gently striking the table with his open 
hand.  'Because they was never drawed out of him when he was a 
boy.  That's why.  What would any of us have been, if our fathers 
hadn't drawed our faculties out of us?  What would my boy Joe have 
been, if I hadn't drawed his faculties out of him?--Do you mind 
what I'm a saying of, gentlemen?'

'Ah!  we mind you,' cried Parkes.  'Go on improving of us, Johnny.'

'Consequently, then,' said Mr Willet, 'that chap, whose mother was 
hung when he was a little boy, along with six others, for passing 
bad notes--and it's a blessed thing to think how many people are 
hung in batches every six weeks for that, and such like offences, 
as showing how wide awake our government is--that chap that was 
then turned loose, and had to mind cows, and frighten birds away, 
and what not, for a few pence to live on, and so got on by degrees 
to mind horses, and to sleep in course of time in lofts and litter, 
instead of under haystacks and hedges, till at last he come to be 
hostler at the Maypole for his board and lodging and a annual 
trifle--that chap that can't read nor write, and has never had much 
to do with anything but animals, and has never lived in any way but 
like the animals he has lived among, IS a animal.  And,' said Mr 
Willet, arriving at his logical conclusion, 'is to be treated 
accordingly.'

'Willet,' said Solomon Daisy, who had exhibited some impatience at 
the intrusion of so unworthy a subject on their more interesting 
theme, 'when Mr Chester come this morning, did he order the large 
room?'

'He signified, sir,' said John, 'that he wanted a large apartment.  
Yes.  Certainly.'

'Why then, I'll tell you what,' said Solomon, speaking softly and 
with an earnest look.  'He and Mr Haredale are going to fight a 
duel in it.'

Everybody looked at Mr Willet, after this alarming suggestion.  Mr 
Willet looked at the fire, weighing in his own mind the effect 
which such an occurrence would be likely to have on the establishment.

'Well,' said John, 'I don't know--I am sure--I remember that when I 
went up last, he HAD put the lights upon the mantel-shelf.'

'It's as plain,' returned Solomon, 'as the nose on Parkes's face'--
Mr Parkes, who had a large nose, rubbed it, and looked as if he 
considered this a personal allusion--'they'll fight in that room.  
You know by the newspapers what a common thing it is for gentlemen 
to fight in coffee-houses without seconds.  One of 'em will be 
wounded or perhaps killed in this house.'

'That was a challenge that Barnaby took then, eh?' said John.

'--Inclosing a slip of paper with the measure of his sword upon it, 
I'll bet a guinea,' answered the little man.  'We know what sort of 
gentleman Mr Haredale is.  You have told us what Barnaby said about 
his looks, when he came back.  Depend upon it, I'm right.  Now, 
mind.'

The flip had had no flavour till now.  The tobacco had been of mere 
English growth, compared with its present taste.  A duel in that 
great old rambling room upstairs, and the best bed ordered already 
for the wounded man!

'Would it be swords or pistols, now?' said John.

'Heaven knows.  Perhaps both,' returned Solomon.  'The gentlemen 
wear swords, and may easily have pistols in their pockets--most 
likely have, indeed.  If they fire at each other without effect, 
then they'll draw, and go to work in earnest.'

A shade passed over Mr Willet's face as he thought of broken 
windows and disabled furniture, but bethinking himself that one of 
the parties would probably be left alive to pay the damage, he 
brightened up again.

'And then,' said Solomon, looking from face to face, 'then we shall 
have one of those stains upon the floor that never come out.  If Mr 
Haredale wins, depend upon it, it'll be a deep one; or if he loses, 
it will perhaps be deeper still, for he'll never give in unless 
he's beaten down.  We know him better, eh?'

'Better indeed!' they whispered all together.

'As to its ever being got out again,' said Solomon, 'I tell you it 
never will, or can be.  Why, do you know that it has been tried, at 
a certain house we are acquainted with?'

'The Warren!' cried John.  'No, sure!'

'Yes, sure--yes.  It's only known by very few.  It has been 
whispered about though, for all that.  They planed the board away, 
but there it was.  They went deep, but it went deeper.  They put 
new boards down, but there was one great spot that came through 
still, and showed itself in the old place.  And--harkye--draw 
nearer--Mr Geoffrey made that room his study, and sits there, 
always, with his foot (as I have heard) upon it; and he believes, 
through thinking of it long and very much, that it will never fade 
until he finds the man who did the deed.'

As this recital ended, and they all drew closer round the fire, the 
tramp of a horse was heard without.

'The very man!' cried John, starting up.  'Hugh!  Hugh!'

The sleeper staggered to his feet, and hurried after him.  John 
quickly returned, ushering in with great attention and deference 
(for Mr Haredale was his landlord) the long-expected visitor, who 
strode into the room clanking his heavy boots upon the floor; and 
looking keenly round upon the bowing group, raised his hat in 
acknowledgment of their profound respect.

'You have a stranger here, Willet, who sent to me,' he said, in a 
voice which sounded naturally stern and deep.  'Where is he?'

'In the great room upstairs, sir,' answered John.

'Show the way.  Your staircase is dark, I know.  Gentlemen, good 
night.'

With that, he signed to the landlord to go on before; and went 
clanking out, and up the stairs; old John, in his agitation, 
ingeniously lighting everything but the way, and making a stumble 
at every second step.

'Stop!' he said, when they reached the landing.  'I can announce 
myself.  Don't wait.'

He laid his hand upon the door, entered, and shut it heavily.  Mr 
Willet was by no means disposed to stand there listening by 
himself, especially as the walls were very thick; so descended, 
with much greater alacrity than he had come up, and joined his 
friends below.



Chapter 12


There was a brief pause in the state-room of the Maypole, as Mr 
Haredale tried the lock to satisfy himself that he had shut the 
door securely, and, striding up the dark chamber to where the 
screen inclosed a little patch of light and warmth, presented 
himself, abruptly and in silence, before the smiling guest.

If the two had no greater sympathy in their inward thoughts than in 
their outward bearing and appearance, the meeting did not seem 
likely to prove a very calm or pleasant one.  With no great 
disparity between them in point of years, they were, in every other 
respect, as unlike and far removed from each other as two men could 
well be.  The one was soft-spoken, delicately made, precise, and 
elegant; the other, a burly square-built man, negligently dressed, 
rough and abrupt in manner, stern, and, in his present mood, 
forbidding both in look and speech.  The one preserved a calm and 
placid smile; the other, a distrustful frown.  The new-comer, 
indeed, appeared bent on showing by his every tone and gesture his 
determined opposition and hostility to the man he had come to meet.  
The guest who received him, on the other hand, seemed to feel that 
the contrast between them was all in his favour, and to derive a 
quiet exultation from it which put him more at his ease than ever.

'Haredale,' said this gentleman, without the least appearance of 
embarrassment or reserve, 'I am very glad to see you.'

'Let us dispense with compliments.  They are misplaced between us,' 
returned the other, waving his hand, 'and say plainly what we have 
to say.  You have asked me to meet you.  I am here.  Why do we 
stand face to face again?'

'Still the same frank and sturdy character, I see!'

'Good or bad, sir, I am,' returned the other, leaning his arm upon 
the chimney-piece, and turning a haughty look upon the occupant of 
the easy-chair, 'the man I used to be.  I have lost no old likings 
or dislikings; my memory has not failed me by a hair's-breadth.  
You ask me to give you a meeting.  I say, I am here.'

'Our meeting, Haredale,' said Mr Chester, tapping his snuff-box, 
and following with a smile the impatient gesture he had made--
perhaps unconsciously--towards his sword, 'is one of conference and 
peace, I hope?'

'I have come here,' returned the other, 'at your desire, holding 
myself bound to meet you, when and where you would.  I have not 
come to bandy pleasant speeches, or hollow professions.  You are a 
smooth man of the world, sir, and at such play have me at a 
disadvantage.  The very last man on this earth with whom I would 
enter the lists to combat with gentle compliments and masked faces, 
is Mr Chester, I do assure you.  I am not his match at such 
weapons, and have reason to believe that few men are.'

'You do me a great deal of honour Haredale,' returned the other, 
most composedly, 'and I thank you.  I will be frank with you--'

'I beg your pardon--will be what?'

'Frank--open--perfectly candid.'

'Hab!' cried Mr Haredale, drawing his breath.  'But don't let me 
interrupt you.'

'So resolved am I to hold this course,' returned the other, tasting 
his wine with great deliberation; 'that I have determined not to 
quarrel with you, and not to be betrayed into a warm expression or 
a hasty word.'

'There again,' said Mr Haredale, 'you have me at a great advantage.  
Your self-command--'

'Is not to be disturbed, when it will serve my purpose, you would 
say'--rejoined the other, interrupting him with the same 
complacency.  'Granted.  I allow it.  And I have a purpose to serve 
now.  So have you.  I am sure our object is the same.  Let us 
attain it like sensible men, who have ceased to be boys some time.--
Do you drink?'

'With my friends,' returned the other.

'At least,' said Mr Chester, 'you will be seated?'

'I will stand,' returned Mr Haredale impatiently, 'on this 
dismantled, beggared hearth, and not pollute it, fallen as it is, 
with mockeries.  Go on.'

'You are wrong, Haredale,' said the other, crossing his legs, and 
smiling as he held his glass up in the bright glow of the fire.  
'You are really very wrong.  The world is a lively place enough, in 
which we must accommodate ourselves to circumstances, sail with the 
stream as glibly as we can, be content to take froth for substance, 
the surface for the depth, the counterfeit for the real coin.  I 
wonder no philosopher has ever established that our globe itself is 
hollow.  It should be, if Nature is consistent in her works.'

'YOU think it is, perhaps?'

'I should say,' he returned, sipping his wine, 'there could be no 
doubt about it.  Well; we, in trifling with this jingling toy, have 
had the ill-luck to jostle and fall out.  We are not what the world 
calls friends; but we are as good and true and loving friends for 
all that, as nine out of every ten of those on whom it bestows the 
title.  You have a niece, and I a son--a fine lad, Haredale, but 
foolish.  They fall in love with each other, and form what this 
same world calls an attachment; meaning a something fanciful and 
false like the rest, which, if it took its own free time, would 
break like any other bubble.  But it may not have its own free 
time--will not, if they are left alone--and the question is, shall 
we two, because society calls us enemies, stand aloof, and let them 
rush into each other's arms, when, by approaching each other 
sensibly, as we do now, we can prevent it, and part them?'

'I love my niece,' said Mr Haredale, after a short silence.  'It 
may sound strangely in your ears; but I love her.'

'Strangely, my good fellow!' cried Mr Chester, lazily filling his 
glass again, and pulling out his toothpick.  'Not at all.  I like 
Ned too--or, as you say, love him--that's the word among such near 
relations.  I'm very fond of Ned.  He's an amazingly good fellow, 
and a handsome fellow--foolish and weak as yet; that's all.  But 
the thing is, Haredale--for I'll be very frank, as I told you I 
would at first--independently of any dislike that you and I might 
have to being related to each other, and independently of the 
religious differences between us--and damn it, that's important--I 
couldn't afford a match of this description.  Ned and I couldn't do 
it.  It's impossible.'

'Curb your tongue, in God's name, if this conversation is to last,' 
retorted Mr Haredale fiercely.  'I have said I love my niece.  Do 
you think that, loving her, I would have her fling her heart away 
on any man who had your blood in his veins?'

'You see,' said the other, not at all disturbed, 'the advantage of 
being so frank and open.  Just what I was about to add, upon my 
honour!  I am amazingly attached to Ned--quite doat upon him, 
indeed--and even if we could afford to throw ourselves away, that 
very objection would be quite insuperable.--I wish you'd take some 
wine?'

'Mark me,' said Mr Haredale, striding to the table, and laying his 
hand upon it heavily.  'If any man believes--presumes to think--
that I, in word or deed, or in the wildest dream, ever entertained 
remotely the idea of Emma Haredale's favouring the suit of any one 
who was akin to you--in any way--I care not what--he lies.  He 
lies, and does me grievous wrong, in the mere thought.'

'Haredale,' returned the other, rocking himself to and fro as in 
assent, and nodding at the fire, 'it's extremely manly, and really 
very generous in you, to meet me in this unreserved and handsome 
way.  Upon my word, those are exactly my sentiments, only 
expressed with much more force and power than I could use--you know 
my sluggish nature, and will forgive me, I am sure.'

'While I would restrain her from all correspondence with your son, 
and sever their intercourse here, though it should cause her 
death,' said Mr Haredale, who had been pacing to and fro, 'I would 
do it kindly and tenderly if I can.  I have a trust to discharge, 
which my nature is not formed to understand, and, for this reason, 
the bare fact of there being any love between them comes upon me 
to-night, almost for the first time.'

'I am more delighted than I can possibly tell you,' rejoined Mr 
Chester with the utmost blandness, 'to find my own impression so 
confirmed.  You see the advantage of our having met.  We understand 
each other.  We quite agree.  We have a most complete and thorough 
explanation, and we know what course to take.--Why don't you taste 
your tenant's wine?  It's really very good.'

'Pray who,' said Mr Haredale, 'have aided Emma, or your son?  Who 
are their go-betweens, and agents--do you know?'

'All the good people hereabouts--the neighbourhood in general, I 
think,' returned the other, with his most affable smile.  'The 
messenger I sent to you to-day, foremost among them all.'

'The idiot?  Barnaby?'

'You are surprised?  I am glad of that, for I was rather so myself.  
Yes.  I wrung that from his mother--a very decent sort of woman--
from whom, indeed, I chiefly learnt how serious the matter had 
become, and so determined to ride out here to-day, and hold a 
parley with you on this neutral ground.--You're stouter than you 
used to be, Haredale, but you look extremely well.'

'Our business, I presume, is nearly at an end,' said Mr Haredale, 
with an expression of impatience he was at no pains to conceal.  
'Trust me, Mr Chester, my niece shall change from this time.  I 
will appeal,' he added in a lower tone, 'to her woman's heart, her 
dignity, her pride, her duty--'

'I shall do the same by Ned,' said Mr Chester, restoring some 
errant faggots to their places in the grate with the toe of his 
boot.  'If there is anything real in this world, it is those 
amazingly fine feelings and those natural obligations which must 
subsist between father and son.  I shall put it to him on every 
ground of moral and religious feeling.  I shall represent to him 
that we cannot possibly afford it--that I have always looked 
forward to his marrying well, for a genteel provision for myself in 
the autumn of life--that there are a great many clamorous dogs to 
pay, whose claims are perfectly just and right, and who must be 
paid out of his wife's fortune.  In short, that the very highest 
and most honourable feelings of our nature, with every 
consideration of filial duty and affection, and all that sort of 
thing, imperatively demand that he should run away with an 
heiress.'

'And break her heart as speedily as possible?' said Mr Haredale, 
drawing on his glove.

'There Ned will act exactly as he pleases,' returned the other, 
sipping his wine; 'that's entirely his affair.  I wouldn't for the 
world interfere with my son, Haredale, beyond a certain point.  The 
relationship between father and son, you know, is positively quite 
a holy kind of bond.--WON'T you let me persuade you to take one 
glass of wine?  Well! as you please, as you please,' he added, 
helping himself again.

'Chester,' said Mr Haredale, after a short silence, during which he 
had eyed his smiling face from time to time intently, 'you have the 
head and heart of an evil spirit in all matters of deception.'

'Your health!' said the other, with a nod.  'But I have interrupted 
you--'

'If now,' pursued Mr Haredale, 'we should find it difficult to 
separate these young people, and break off their intercourse--if, 
for instance, you find it difficult on your side, what course do 
you intend to take?'

'Nothing plainer, my good fellow, nothing easier,' returned the 
other, shrugging his shoulders and stretching himself more 
comfortably before the fire.  'I shall then exert those powers on 
which you flatter me so highly--though, upon my word, I don't 
deserve your compliments to their full extent--and resort to a few 
little trivial subterfuges for rousing jealousy and resentment.  
You see?'

'In short, justifying the means by the end, we are, as a last 
resource for tearing them asunder, to resort to treachery and--and 
lying,' said Mr Haredale.

'Oh dear no.  Fie, fie!' returned the other, relishing a pinch of 
snuff extremely.  'Not lying.  Only a little management, a little 
diplomacy, a little--intriguing, that's the word.'

'I wish,' said Mr Haredale, moving to and fro, and stopping, and 
moving on again, like one who was ill at ease, 'that this could 
have been foreseen or prevented.  But as it has gone so far, and it 
is necessary for us to act, it is of no use shrinking or 
regretting.  Well! I shall second your endeavours to the utmost of 
my power.  There is one topic in the whole wide range of human 
thoughts on which we both agree.  We shall act in concert, but 
apart.  There will be no need, I hope, for us to meet again.'

'Are you going?' said Mr Chester, rising with a graceful indolence.  
'Let me light you down the stairs.'

'Pray keep your seat,' returned the other drily, 'I know the way.  
So, waving his hand slightly, and putting on his hat as he turned 
upon his heel, he went clanking out as he had come, shut the door 
behind him, and tramped down the echoing stairs.

'Pah!  A very coarse animal, indeed!' said Mr Chester, composing 
himself in the easy-chair again.  'A rough brute.  Quite a human 
badger!'

John Willet and his friends, who had been listening intently for 
the clash of swords, or firing of pistols in the great room, and 
had indeed settled the order in which they should rush in when 
summoned--in which procession old John had carefully arranged that 
he should bring up the rear--were very much astonished to see Mr 
Haredale come down without a scratch, call for his horse, and ride 
away thoughtfully at a footpace.  After some consideration, it was 
decided that he had left the gentleman above, for dead, and had 
adopted this stratagem to divert suspicion or pursuit.

As this conclusion involved the necessity of their going upstairs 
forthwith, they were about to ascend in the order they had agreed 
upon, when a smart ringing at the guest's bell, as if he had pulled 
it vigorously, overthrew all their speculations, and involved them 
in great uncertainty and doubt.  At length Mr Willet agreed to go 
upstairs himself, escorted by Hugh and Barnaby, as the strongest 
and stoutest fellows on the premises, who were to make their 
appearance under pretence of clearing away the glasses.

Under this protection, the brave and broad-faced John boldly 
entered the room, half a foot in advance, and received an order for 
a boot-jack without trembling.  But when it was brought, and he 
leant his sturdy shoulder to the guest, Mr Willet was observed to 
look very hard into his boots as he pulled them off, and, by 
opening his eyes much wider than usual, to appear to express some 
surprise and disappointment at not finding them full of blood.  He 
took occasion, too, to examine the gentleman as closely as he 
could, expecting to discover sundry loopholes in his person, 
pierced by his adversary's sword.  Finding none, however, and 
observing in course of time that his guest was as cool and 
unruffled, both in his dress and temper, as he had been all day, 
old John at last heaved a deep sigh, and began to think no duel had 
been fought that night.

'And now, Willet,' said Mr Chester, 'if the room's well aired, I'll 
try the merits of that famous bed.'

'The room, sir,' returned John, taking up a candle, and nudging 
Barnaby and Hugh to accompany them, in case the gentleman should 
unexpectedly drop down faint or dead from some internal wound, 'the 
room's as warm as any toast in a tankard.  Barnaby, take you that 
other candle, and go on before.  Hugh!  Follow up, sir, with the 
easy-chair.'

In this order--and still, in his earnest inspection, holding his 
candle very close to the guest; now making him feel extremely warm 
about the legs, now threatening to set his wig on fire, and 
constantly begging his pardon with great awkwardness and 
embarrassment--John led the party to the best bedroom, which was 
nearly as large as the chamber from which they had come, and held, 
drawn out near the fire for warmth, a great old spectral bedstead, 
hung with faded brocade, and ornamented, at the top of each carved 
post, with a plume of feathers that had once been white, but with 
dust and age had now grown hearse-like and funereal.

'Good night, my friends,' said Mr Chester with a sweet smile, 
seating himself, when he had surveyed the room from end to end, in 
the easy-chair which his attendants wheeled before the fire.  'Good 
night!  Barnaby, my good fellow, you say some prayers before you go 
to bed, I hope?'

Barnaby nodded.  'He has some nonsense that he calls his prayers, 
sir,' returned old John, officiously.  'I'm afraid there an't much 
good in em.'

'And Hugh?' said Mr Chester, turning to him.

'Not I,' he answered.  'I know his'--pointing to Barnaby--'they're 
well enough.  He sings 'em sometimes in the straw.  I listen.'

'He's quite a animal, sir,' John whispered in his ear with dignity.  
'You'll excuse him, I'm sure.  If he has any soul at all, sir, it 
must be such a very small one, that it don't signify what he does 
or doesn't in that way.  Good night, sir!'

The guest rejoined 'God bless you!' with a fervour that was quite 
affecting; and John, beckoning his guards to go before, bowed 
himself out of the room, and left him to his rest in the Maypole's 
ancient bed.



Chapter 13


If Joseph Willet, the denounced and proscribed of 'prentices, had 
happened to be at home when his father's courtly guest presented 
himself before the Maypole door--that is, if it had not perversely 
chanced to be one of the half-dozen days in the whole year on which 
he was at liberty to absent himself for as many hours without 
question or reproach--he would have contrived, by hook or crook, to 
dive to the very bottom of Mr Chester's mystery, and to come at his 
purpose with as much certainty as though he had been his 
confidential adviser.  In that fortunate case, the lovers would 
have had quick warning of the ills that threatened them, and the 
aid of various timely and wise suggestions to boot; for all Joe's 
readiness of thought and action, and all his sympathies and good 
wishes, were enlisted in favour of the young people, and were 
staunch in devotion to their cause.  Whether this disposition arose 
out of his old prepossessions in favour of the young lady, whose 
history had surrounded her in his mind, almost from his cradle, 
with circumstances of unusual interest; or from his attachment 
towards the young gentleman, into whose confidence he had, through 
his shrewdness and alacrity, and the rendering of sundry important 
services as a spy and messenger, almost imperceptibly glided; 
whether they had their origin in either of these sources, or in the 
habit natural to youth, or in the constant badgering and worrying 
of his venerable parent, or in any hidden little love affair of his 
own which gave him something of a fellow-feeling in the matter, it 
is needless to inquire--especially as Joe was out of the way, and 
had no opportunity on that particular occasion of testifying to his 
sentiments either on one side or the other.

It was, in fact, the twenty-fifth of March, which, as most people 
know to their cost, is, and has been time out of mind, one of those 
unpleasant epochs termed quarter-days.  On this twenty-fifth of 
March, it was John Willet's pride annually to settle, in hard cash, 
his account with a certain vintner and distiller in the city of 
London; to give into whose hands a canvas bag containing its exact 
amount, and not a penny more or less, was the end and object of a 
journey for Joe, so surely as the year and day came round.

This journey was performed upon an old grey mare, concerning whom 
John had an indistinct set of ideas hovering about him, to the 
effect that she could win a plate or cup if she tried.  She never 
had tried, and probably never would now, being some fourteen or 
fifteen years of age, short in wind, long in body, and rather the 
worse for wear in respect of her mane and tail.  Notwithstanding 
these slight defects, John perfectly gloried in the animal; and 
when she was brought round to the door by Hugh, actually retired 
into the bar, and there, in a secret grove of lemons, laughed with 
pride.

'There's a bit of horseflesh, Hugh!' said John, when he had 
recovered enough self-command to appear at the door again.  
'There's a comely creature!  There's high mettle!  There's bone!'

There was bone enough beyond all doubt; and so Hugh seemed to 
think, as he sat sideways in the saddle, lazily doubled up with his 
chin nearly touching his knees; and heedless of the dangling 
stirrups and loose bridle-rein, sauntered up and down on the little 
green before the door.

'Mind you take good care of her, sir,' said John, appealing from 
this insensible person to his son and heir, who now appeared, fully 
equipped and ready.  'Don't you ride hard.'

'I should be puzzled to do that, I think, father,' Joe replied, 
casting a disconsolate look at the animal.

'None of your impudence, sir, if you please,' retorted old John.  
'What would you ride, sir?  A wild ass or zebra would be too tame 
for you, wouldn't he, eh sir?  You'd like to ride a roaring lion, 
wouldn't you, sir, eh sir?  Hold your tongue, sir.'  When Mr 
Willet, in his differences with his son, had exhausted all the 
questions that occurred to him, and Joe had said nothing at all in 
answer, he generally wound up by bidding him hold his tongue.

'And what does the boy mean,' added Mr Willet, after he had stared 
at him for a little time, in a species of stupefaction, 'by cocking 
his hat, to such an extent!  Are you going to kill the wintner, sir?'

'No,' said Joe, tartly; 'I'm not.  Now your mind's at ease, 
father.'

'With a milintary air, too!' said Mr Willet, surveying him from top 
to toe; 'with a swaggering, fire-eating, biling-water drinking 
sort of way with him!  And what do you mean by pulling up the 
crocuses and snowdrops, eh sir?'

'It's only a little nosegay,' said Joe, reddening.  'There's no 
harm in that, I hope?'

'You're a boy of business, you are, sir!' said Mr Willet, 
disdainfully, 'to go supposing that wintners care for nosegays.'

'I don't suppose anything of the kind,' returned Joe.  'Let them 
keep their red noses for bottles and tankards.  These are going to 
Mr Varden's house.'

'And do you suppose HE minds such things as crocuses?' demanded 
John.

'I don't know, and to say the truth, I don't care,' said Joe.  
'Come, father, give me the money, and in the name of patience let 
me go.'

'There it is, sir,' replied John; 'and take care of it; and mind 
you don't make too much haste back, but give the mare a long rest.--
Do you mind?'

'Ay, I mind,' returned Joe.  'She'll need it, Heaven knows.'

'And don't you score up too much at the Black Lion,' said John.  
'Mind that too.'

'Then why don't you let me have some money of my own?' retorted 
Joe, sorrowfully; 'why don't you, father?  What do you send me into 
London for, giving me only the right to call for my dinner at the 
Black Lion, which you're to pay for next time you go, as if I was 
not to be trusted with a few shillings?  Why do you use me like 
this?  It's not right of you.  You can't expect me to be quiet 
under it.'

'Let him have money!' cried John, in a drowsy reverie.  'What does 
he call money--guineas?  Hasn't he got money?  Over and above the 
tolls, hasn't he one and sixpence?'

'One and sixpence!' repeated his son contemptuously.

'Yes, sir,' returned John, 'one and sixpence.  When I was your age, 
I had never seen so much money, in a heap.  A shilling of it is in 
case of accidents--the mare casting a shoe, or the like of that.  
The other sixpence is to spend in the diversions of London; and the 
diversion I recommend is going to the top of the Monument, and 
sitting there.  There's no temptation there, sir--no drink--no 
young women--no bad characters of any sort--nothing but imagination.  
That's the way I enjoyed myself when I was your age, sir.'

To this, Joe made no answer, but beckoning Hugh, leaped into the 
saddle and rode away; and a very stalwart, manly horseman he 
looked, deserving a better charger than it was his fortune to 
bestride.  John stood staring after him, or rather after the grey 
mare (for he had no eyes for her rider), until man and beast had 
been out of sight some twenty minutes, when he began to think they 
were gone, and slowly re-entering the house, fell into a gentle doze.

The unfortunate grey mare, who was the agony of Joe's life, 
floundered along at her own will and pleasure until the Maypole was 
no longer visible, and then, contracting her legs into what in a 
puppet would have been looked upon as a clumsy and awkward 
imitation of a canter, mended her pace all at once, and did it of 
her own accord.  The acquaintance with her rider's usual mode of 
proceeding, which suggested this improvement in hers, impelled her 
likewise to turn up a bye-way, leading--not to London, but through 
lanes running parallel with the road they had come, and passing 
within a few hundred yards of the Maypole, which led finally to an 
inclosure surrounding a large, old, red-brick mansion--the same of 
which mention was made as the Warren in the first chapter of this 
history.  Coming to a dead stop in a little copse thereabout, she 
suffered her rider to dismount with right goodwill, and to tie her 
to the trunk of a tree.

'Stay there, old girl,' said Joe, 'and let us see whether there's 
any little commission for me to-day.'  So saying, he left her to 
browze upon such stunted grass and weeds as happened to grow within 
the length of her tether, and passing through a wicket gate, 
entered the grounds on foot.

The pathway, after a very few minutes' walking, brought him close 
to the house, towards which, and especially towards one particular 
window, he directed many covert glances.  It was a dreary, silent 
building, with echoing courtyards, desolated turret-chambers, and 
whole suites of rooms shut up and mouldering to ruin.

The terrace-garden, dark with the shade of overhanging trees, had 
an air of melancholy that was quite oppressive.  Great iron gates, 
disused for many years, and red with rust, drooping on their hinges 
and overgrown with long rank grass, seemed as though they tried to 
sink into the ground, and hide their fallen state among the 
friendly weeds.  The fantastic monsters on the walls, green with 
age and damp, and covered here and there with moss, looked grim and 
desolate.  There was a sombre aspect even on that part of the 
mansion which was inhabited and kept in good repair, that struck 
the beholder with a sense of sadness; of something forlorn and 
failing, whence cheerfulness was banished.  It would have been 
difficult to imagine a bright fire blazing in the dull and darkened 
rooms, or to picture any gaiety of heart or revelry that the 
frowning walls shut in.  It seemed a place where such things had 
been, but could be no more--the very ghost of a house, haunting the 
old spot in its old outward form, and that was all.

Much of this decayed and sombre look was attributable, no doubt, to 
the death of its former master, and the temper of its present 
occupant; but remembering the tale connected with the mansion, it 
seemed the very place for such a deed, and one that might have been 
its predestined theatre years upon years ago.  Viewed with 
reference to this legend, the sheet of water where the steward's 
body had been found appeared to wear a black and sullen character, 
such as no other pool might own; the bell upon the roof that had 
told the tale of murder to the midnight wind, became a very phantom 
whose voice would raise the listener's hair on end; and every 
leafless bough that nodded to another, had its stealthy whispering 
of the crime.

Joe paced up and down the path, sometimes stopping in affected 
contemplation of the building or the prospect, sometimes leaning 
against a tree with an assumed air of idleness and indifference, 
but always keeping an eye upon the window he had singled out at 
first.  After some quarter of an hour's delay, a small white hand 
was waved to him for an instant from this casement, and the young 
man, with a respectful bow, departed; saying under his breath as he 
crossed his horse again, 'No errand for me to-day!'

But the air of smartness, the cock of the hat to which John Willet 
had objected, and the spring nosegay, all betokened some little 
errand of his own, having a more interesting object than a vintner 
or even a locksmith.  So, indeed, it turned out; for when he had 
settled with the vintner--whose place of business was down in some 
deep cellars hard by Thames Street, and who was as purple-faced an 
old gentleman as if he had all his life supported their arched roof 
on his head--when he had settled the account, and taken the 
receipt, and declined tasting more than three glasses of old 
sherry, to the unbounded astonishment of the purple-faced vintner, 
who, gimlet in hand, had projected an attack upon at least a score 
of dusty casks, and who stood transfixed, or morally gimleted as it 
were, to his own wall--when he had done all this, and disposed 
besides of a frugal dinner at the Black Lion in Whitechapel; 
spurning the Monument and John's advice, he turned his steps 
towards the locksmith's house, attracted by the eyes of blooming 
Dolly Varden.

Joe was by no means a sheepish fellow, but, for all that, when he 
got to the corner of the street in which the locksmith lived, he 
could by no means make up his mind to walk straight to the house.  
First, he resolved to stroll up another street for five minutes, 
then up another street for five minutes more, and so on until he 
had lost full half an hour, when he made a bold plunge and found 
himself with a red face and a beating heart in the smoky workshop.

'Joe Willet, or his ghost?' said Varden, rising from the desk at 
which he was busy with his books, and looking at him under his 
spectacles.  'Which is it?  Joe in the flesh, eh?  That's hearty.  
And how are all the Chigwell company, Joe?'

'Much as usual, sir--they and I agree as well as ever.'

'Well, well!' said the locksmith.  'We must be patient, Joe, and 
bear with old folks' foibles.  How's the mare, Joe?  Does she do 
the four miles an hour as easily as ever?  Ha, ha, ha! Does she, 
Joe?  Eh!--What have we there, Joe--a nosegay!'

'A very poor one, sir--I thought Miss Dolly--'

'No, no,' said Gabriel, dropping his voice, and shaking his head, 
'not Dolly.  Give 'em to her mother, Joe.  A great deal better give 
'em to her mother.  Would you mind giving 'em to Mrs Varden, Joe?'

'Oh no, sir,' Joe replied, and endeavouring, but not with the 
greatest possible success, to hide his disappointment.  'I shall be 
very glad, I'm sure.'

'That's right,' said the locksmith, patting him on the back.  'It 
don't matter who has 'em, Joe?'

'Not a bit, sir.'--Dear heart, how the words stuck in his throat!

'Come in,' said Gabriel.  'I have just been called to tea.  She's 
in the parlour.'

'She,' thought Joe.  'Which of 'em I wonder--Mrs or Miss?'  The 
locksmith settled the doubt as neatly as if it had been expressed 
aloud, by leading him to the door, and saying, 'Martha, my dear, 
here's young Mr Willet.'

Now, Mrs Varden, regarding the Maypole as a sort of human mantrap, 
or decoy for husbands; viewing its proprietor, and all who aided 
and abetted him, in the light of so many poachers among Christian 
men; and believing, moreover, that the publicans coupled with 
sinners in Holy Writ were veritable licensed victuallers; was far 
from being favourably disposed towards her visitor.  Wherefore she 
was taken faint directly; and being duly presented with the 
crocuses and snowdrops, divined on further consideration that they 
were the occasion of the languor which had seized upon her spirits.  
'I'm afraid I couldn't bear the room another minute,' said the good 
lady, 'if they remained here.  WOULD you excuse my putting them out 
of window?'

Joe begged she wouldn't mention it on any account, and smiled 
feebly as he saw them deposited on the sill outside.  If anybody 
could have known the pains he had taken to make up that despised 
and misused bunch of flowers!--

'I feel it quite a relief to get rid of them, I assure you,' said 
Mrs Varden.  'I'm better already.'  And indeed she did appear to 
have plucked up her spirits.

Joe expressed his gratitude to Providence for this favourable 
dispensation, and tried to look as if he didn't wonder where 
Dolly was.

'You're sad people at Chigwell, Mr Joseph,' said Mrs V.

'I hope not, ma'am,' returned Joe.

'You're the cruellest and most inconsiderate people in the world,' 
said Mrs Varden, bridling.  'I wonder old Mr Willet, having been a 
married man himself, doesn't know better than to conduct himself as 
he does.  His doing it for profit is no excuse.  I would rather 
pay the money twenty times over, and have Varden come home like a 
respectable and sober tradesman.  If there is one character,' said 
Mrs Varden with great emphasis, 'that offends and disgusts me more 
than another, it is a sot.'

'Come, Martha, my dear,' said the locksmith cheerily, 'let us have 
tea, and don't let us talk about sots.  There are none here, and 
Joe don't want to hear about them, I dare say.'

At this crisis, Miggs appeared with toast.

'I dare say he does not,' said Mrs Varden; 'and I dare say you do 
not, Varden.  It's a very unpleasant subiect, I have no doubt, 
though I won't say it's personal'--Miggs coughed--'whatever I may 
be forced to think'--Miggs sneezed expressively.  'You never will 
know, Varden, and nobody at young Mr Willet's age--you'll excuse 
me, sir--can be expected to know, what a woman suffers when she is 
waiting at home under such circumstances.  If you don't believe me, 
as I know you don't, here's Miggs, who is only too often a witness 
of it--ask her.'

'Oh! she were very bad the other night, sir, indeed she were, said 
Miggs.  'If you hadn't the sweetness of an angel in you, mim, I 
don't think you could abear it, I raly don't.'

'Miggs,' said Mrs Varden, 'you're profane.'

'Begging your pardon, mim,' returned Miggs, with shrill rapidity, 
'such was not my intentions, and such I hope is not my character, 
though I am but a servant.'

'Answering me, Miggs, and providing yourself,' retorted her 
mistress, looking round with dignity, 'is one and the same thing.  
How dare you speak of angels in connection with your sinful 
fellow-beings--mere'--said Mrs Varden, glancing at herself in a 
neighbouring mirror, and arranging the ribbon of her cap in a more 
becoming fashion--'mere worms and grovellers as we are!'

'I did not intend, mim, if you please, to give offence,' said 
Miggs, confident in the strength of her compliment, and developing 
strongly in the throat as usual, 'and I did not expect it would be 
took as such.  I hope I know my own unworthiness, and that I hate 
and despise myself and all my fellow-creatures as every practicable 
Christian should.'

'You'll have the goodness, if you please,' said Mrs Varden, 
loftily, 'to step upstairs and see if Dolly has finished dressing, 
and to tell her that the chair that was ordered for her will be 
here in a minute, and that if she keeps it waiting, I shall send it 
away that instant.--I'm sorry to see that you don't take your tea, 
Varden, and that you don't take yours, Mr Joseph; though of course 
it would be foolish of me to expect that anything that can be had 
at home, and in the company of females, would please YOU.'

This pronoun was understood in the plural sense, and included both 
gentlemen, upon both of whom it was rather hard and undeserved, 
for Gabriel had applied himself to the meal with a very promising 
appetite, until it was spoilt by Mrs Varden herself, and Joe had as 
great a liking for the female society of the locksmith's house--or 
for a part of it at all events--as man could well entertain.

But he had no opportunity to say anything in his own defence, for 
at that moment Dolly herself appeared, and struck him quite dumb 
with her beauty.  Never had Dolly looked so handsome as she did 
then, in all the glow and grace of youth, with all her charms 
increased a hundredfold by a most becoming dress, by a thousand 
little coquettish ways which nobody could assume with a better 
grace, and all the sparkling expectation of that accursed party.  
It is impossible to tell how Joe hated that party wherever it was, 
and all the other people who were going to it, whoever they were.

And she hardly looked at him--no, hardly looked at him.  And when 
the chair was seen through the open door coming blundering into the 
workshop, she actually clapped her hands and seemed glad to go.  
But Joe gave her his arm--there was some comfort in that--and 
handed her into it.  To see her seat herself inside, with her 
laughing eyes brighter than diamonds, and her hand--surely she had 
the prettiest hand in the world--on the ledge of the open window, 
and her little finger provokingly and pertly tilted up, as if it 
wondered why Joe didn't squeeze or kiss it!  To think how well one 
or two of the modest snowdrops would have become that delicate 
bodice, and how they were lying neglected outside the parlour 
window!  To see how Miggs looked on with a face expressive of 
knowing how all this loveliness was got up, and of being in the 
secret of every string and pin and hook and eye, and of saying it 
ain't half as real as you think, and I could look quite as well 
myself if I took the pains!  To hear that provoking precious little 
scream when the chair was hoisted on its poles, and to catch that 
transient but not-to-be-forgotten vision of the happy face within--
what torments and aggravations, and yet what delights were these!  
The very chairmen seemed favoured rivals as they bore her down the 
street.

There never was such an alteration in a small room in a small time 
as in that parlour when they went back to finish tea.  So dark, so 
deserted, so perfectly disenchanted.  It seemed such sheer nonsense 
to be sitting tamely there, when she was at a dance with more 
lovers than man could calculate fluttering about her--with the 
whole party doting on and adoring her, and wanting to marry her.  
Miggs was hovering about too; and the fact of her existence, the 
mere circumstance of her ever having been born, appeared, after 
Dolly, such an unaccountable practical joke.  It was impossible to 
talk.  It couldn't be done.  He had nothing left for it but to stir 
his tea round, and round, and round, and ruminate on all the 
fascinations of the locksmith's lovely daughter.

Gabriel was dull too.  It was a part of the certain uncertainty of 
Mrs Varden's temper, that when they were in this condition, she 
should be gay and sprightly.

'I need have a cheerful disposition, I am sure,' said the smiling 
housewife, 'to preserve any spirits at all; and how I do it I can 
scarcely tell.'

'Ah, mim,' sighed Miggs, 'begging your pardon for the interruption, 
there an't a many like you.'

'Take away, Miggs,' said Mrs Varden, rising, 'take away, pray.  I 
know I'm a restraint here, and as I wish everybody to enjoy 
themselves as they best can, I feel I had better go.'

'No, no, Martha,' cried the locksmith.  'Stop here.  I'm sure we 
shall be very sorry to lose you, eh Joe!'  Joe started, and said 
'Certainly.'

'Thank you, Varden, my dear,' returned his wife; 'but I know your 
wishes better.  Tobacco and beer, or spirits, have much greater 
attractions than any I can boast of, and therefore I shall go and 
sit upstairs and look out of window, my love.  Good night, Mr 
Joseph.  I'm very glad to have seen you, and I only wish I could 
have provided something more suitable to your taste.  Remember me 
very kindly if you please to old Mr Willet, and tell him that 
whenever he comes here I have a crow to pluck with him.  Good 
night!'

Having uttered these words with great sweetness of manner, the good 
lady dropped a curtsey remarkable for its condescension, and 
serenely withdrew.

And it was for this Joe had looked forward to the twenty-fifth of 
March for weeks and weeks, and had gathered the flowers with so 
much care, and had cocked his hat, and made himself so smart!  This 
was the end of all his bold determination, resolved upon for the 
hundredth time, to speak out to Dolly and tell her how he loved 
her!  To see her for a minute--for but a minute--to find her going 
out to a party and glad to go; to be looked upon as a common pipe-
smoker, beer-bibber, spirit-guzzler, and tosspot!  He bade 
farewell to his friend the locksmith, and hastened to take horse at 
the Black Lion, thinking as he turned towards home, as many another 
Joe has thought before and since, that here was an end to all his 
hopes--that the thing was impossible and never could be--that she 
didn't care for him--that he was wretched for life--and that the 
only congenial prospect left him, was to go for a soldier or a 
sailor, and get some obliging enemy to knock his brains out as 
soon as possible.



Chapter 14


Joe Willet rode leisurely along in his desponding mood, picturing 
the locksmith's daughter going down long country-dances, and 
poussetting dreadfully with bold strangers--which was almost too 
much to bear--when he heard the tramp of a horse's feet behind him, 
and looking back, saw a well-mounted gentleman advancing at a 
smart canter.  As this rider passed, he checked his steed, and 
called him of the Maypole by his name.  Joe set spurs to the grey 
mare, and was at his side directly.

'I thought it was you, sir,' he said, touching his hat.  'A fair 
evening, sir.  Glad to see you out of doors again.'

The gentleman smiled and nodded.  'What gay doings have been going 
on to-day, Joe?  Is she as pretty as ever?  Nay, don't blush, man.'

'If I coloured at all, Mr Edward,' said Joe, 'which I didn't know I 
did, it was to think I should have been such a fool as ever to have 
any hope of her.  She's as far out of my reach as--as Heaven is.'

'Well, Joe, I hope that's not altogether beyond it,' said Edward, 
good-humouredly.  'Eh?'

'Ah!' sighed Joe.  'It's all very fine talking, sir.  Proverbs are 
easily made in cold blood.  But it can't be helped.  Are you bound 
for our house, sir?'

'Yes.  As I am not quite strong yet, I shall stay there to-night, 
and ride home coolly in the morning.'

'If you're in no particular hurry,' said Joe after a short silence, 
'and will bear with the pace of this poor jade, I shall be glad to 
ride on with you to the Warren, sir, and hold your horse when you 
dismount.  It'll save you having to walk from the Maypole, there 
and back again.  I can spare the time well, sir, for I am too soon.'

'And so am I,' returned Edward, 'though I was unconsciously riding 
fast just now, in compliment I suppose to the pace of my thoughts, 
which were travelling post.  We will keep together, Joe, willingly, 
and be as good company as may be.  And cheer up, cheer up, think of 
the locksmith's daughter with a stout heart, and you shall win her 
yet.'

Joe shook his head; but there was something so cheery in the 
buoyant hopeful manner of this speech, that his spirits rose under 
its influence, and communicated as it would seem some new impulse 
even to the grey mare, who, breaking from her sober amble into a 
gentle trot, emulated the pace of Edward Chester's horse, and 
appeared to flatter herself that he was doing his very best.

It was a fine dry night, and the light of a young moon, which was 
then just rising, shed around that peace and tranquillity which 
gives to evening time its most delicious charm.  The lengthened 
shadows of the trees, softened as if reflected in still water, 
threw their carpet on the path the travellers pursued, and the 
light wind stirred yet more softly than before, as though it were 
soothing Nature in her sleep.  By little and little they ceased 
talking, and rode on side by side in a pleasant silence.

'The Maypole lights are brilliant to-night,' said Edward, as they 
rode along the lane from which, while the intervening trees were 
bare of leaves, that hostelry was visible.

'Brilliant indeed, sir,' returned Joe, rising in his stirrups to 
get a better view.  'Lights in the large room, and a fire 
glimmering in the best bedchamber?  Why, what company can this be 
for, I wonder!'

'Some benighted horseman wending towards London, and deterred from 
going on to-night by the marvellous tales of my friend the 
highwayman, I suppose,' said Edward.

'He must be a horseman of good quality to have such accommodations.  
Your bed too, sir--!'

'No matter, Joe.  Any other room will do for me.  But come--there's 
nine striking.  We may push on.'

They cantered forward at as brisk a pace as Joe's charger could 
attain, and presently stopped in the little copse where he had left 
her in the morning.  Edward dismounted, gave his bridle to his 
companion, and walked with a light step towards the house.

A female servant was waiting at a side gate in the garden-wall, and 
admitted him without delay.  He hurried along the terrace-walk, and 
darted up a flight of broad steps leading into an old and gloomy 
hall, whose walls were ornamented with rusty suits of armour, 
antlers, weapons of the chase, and suchlike garniture.  Here he 
paused, but not long; for as he looked round, as if expecting the 
attendant to have followed, and wondering she had not done so, a 
lovely girl appeared, whose dark hair next moment rested on his 
breast.  Almost at the same instant a heavy hand was laid upon her 
arm, Edward felt himself thrust away, and Mr Haredale stood between 
them.

He regarded the young man sternly without removing his hat; with 
one hand clasped his niece, and with the other, in which he held 
his riding-whip, motioned him towards the door.  The young man drew 
himself up, and returned his gaze.

'This is well done of you, sir, to corrupt my servants, and enter 
my house unbidden and in secret, like a thief!' said Mr Haredale.  
'Leave it, sir, and return no more.'

'Miss Haredale's presence,' returned the young man, 'and your 
relationship to her, give you a licence which, if you are a brave 
man, you will not abuse.  You have compelled me to this course, 
and the fault is yours--not mine.'

'It is neither generous, nor honourable, nor the act of a true 
man, sir,' retorted the other, 'to tamper with the affections of a 
weak, trusting girl, while you shrink, in your unworthiness, from 
her guardian and protector, and dare not meet the light of day.  
More than this I will not say to you, save that I forbid you this 
house, and require you to be gone.'

'It is neither generous, nor honourable, nor the act of a true man 
to play the spy,' said Edward.  'Your words imply dishonour, and I 
reject them with the scorn they merit.'

'You will find,' said Mr Haredale, calmly, 'your trusty go-between 
in waiting at the gate by which you entered.  I have played no 
spy's part, sir.  I chanced to see you pass the gate, and 
followed.  You might have heard me knocking for admission, had you 
been less swift of foot, or lingered in the garden.  Please to 
withdraw.  Your presence here is offensive to me and distressful to 
my niece.'  As he said these words, he passed his arm about the 
waist of the terrified and weeping girl, and drew her closer to 
him; and though the habitual severity of his manner was scarcely 
changed, there was yet apparent in the action an air of kindness 
and sympathy for her distress.

'Mr Haredale,' said Edward, 'your arm encircles her on whom I have 
set my every hope and thought, and to purchase one minute's 
happiness for whom I would gladly lay down my life; this house is 
the casket that holds the precious jewel of my existence.  Your 
niece has plighted her faith to me, and I have plighted mine to 
her.  What have I done that you should hold me in this light 
esteem, and give me these discourteous words?'

'You have done that, sir,' answered Mr Haredale, 'which must he 
undone.  You have tied a lover'-knot here which must be cut 
asunder.  Take good heed of what I say.  Must.  I cancel the bond 
between ye.  I reject you, and all of your kith and kin--all the 
false, hollow, heartless stock.'

'High words, sir,' said Edward, scornfully.

'Words of purpose and meaning, as you will find,' replied the 
other.  'Lay them to heart.'

'Lay you then, these,' said Edward.  'Your cold and sullen temper, 
which chills every breast about you, which turns affection into 
fear, and changes duty into dread, has forced us on this secret 
course, repugnant to our nature and our wish, and far more foreign, 
sir, to us than you.  I am not a false, a hollow, or a heartless 
man; the character is yours, who poorly venture on these injurious 
terms, against the truth, and under the shelter whereof I reminded 
you just now.  You shall not cancel the bond between us.  I will 
not abandon this pursuit.  I rely upon your niece's truth and 
honour, and set your influence at nought.  I leave her with a 
confidence in her pure faith, which you will never weaken, and with 
no concern but that I do not leave her in some gentler care.'

With that, he pressed her cold hand to his lips, and once more 
encountering and returning Mr Haredale's steady look, withdrew.

A few words to Joe as he mounted his horse sufficiently explained 
what had passed, and renewed all that young gentleman's despondency 
with tenfold aggravation.  They rode back to the Maypole without 
exchanging a syllable, and arrived at the door with heavy hearts.

Old John, who had peeped from behind the red curtain as they rode 
up shouting for Hugh, was out directly, and said with great 
importance as he held the young man's stirrup,

'He's comfortable in bed--the best bed.  A thorough gentleman; the 
smilingest, affablest gentleman I ever had to do with.'

'Who, Willet?' said Edward carelessly, as he dismounted.

'Your worthy father, sir,' replied John.  'Your honourable, 
venerable father.'

'What does he mean?' said Edward, looking with a mixture of alarm 
and doubt, at Joe.

'What DO you mean?' said Joe.  'Don't you see Mr Edward doesn't 
understand, father?'

'Why, didn't you know of it, sir?' said John, opening his eyes 
wide.  'How very singular!  Bless you, he's been here ever since 
noon to-day, and Mr Haredale has been having a long talk with him, 
and hasn't been gone an hour.'

'My father, Willet!'

'Yes, sir, he told me so--a handsome, slim, upright gentleman, in 
green-and-gold.  In your old room up yonder, sir.  No doubt you 
can go in, sir,' said John, walking backwards into the road and 
looking up at the window.  'He hasn't put out his candles yet, I 
see.'

Edward glanced at the window also, and hastily murmuring that he 
had changed his mind--forgotten something--and must return to 
London, mounted his horse again and rode away; leaving the Willets, 
father and son, looking at each other in mute astonishment.



Chapter 15


At noon next day, John Willet's guest sat lingering over his 
breakfast in his own home, surrounded by a variety of comforts, 
which left the Maypole's highest flight and utmost stretch of 
accommodation at an infinite distance behind, and suggested 
comparisons very much to the disadvantage and disfavour of that 
venerable tavern.

In the broad old-fashioned window-seat--as capacious as many modern 
sofas, and cushioned to serve the purpose of a luxurious settee--in 
the broad old-fashioned window-seat of a roomy chamber, Mr Chester 
lounged, very much at his ease, over a well-furnished breakfast-
table.  He had exchanged his riding-coat for a handsome morning-
gown, his boots for slippers; had been at great pains to atone for 
the having been obliged to make his toilet when he rose without the 
aid of dressing-case and tiring equipage; and, having gradually 
forgotten through these means the discomforts of an indifferent 
night and an early ride, was in a state of perfect complacency, 
indolence, and satisfaction.

The situation in which he found himself, indeed, was particularly 
favourable to the growth of these feelings; for, not to mention the 
lazy influence of a late and lonely breakfast, with the additional 
sedative of a newspaper, there was an air of repose about his place 
of residence peculiar to itself, and which hangs about it, even in 
these times, when it is more bustling and busy than it was in days 
of yore.

There are, still, worse places than the Temple, on a sultry day, 
for basking in the sun, or resting idly in the shade.  There is yet 
a drowsiness in its courts, and a dreamy dulness in its trees and 
gardens; those who pace its lanes and squares may yet hear the 
echoes of their footsteps on the sounding stones, and read upon its 
gates, in passing from the tumult of the Strand or Fleet Street, 
'Who enters here leaves noise behind.'  There is still the plash of 
falling water in fair Fountain Court, and there are yet nooks and 
corners where dun-haunted students may look down from their dusty 
garrets, on a vagrant ray of sunlight patching the shade of the 
tall houses, and seldom troubled to reflect a passing stranger's 
form.  There is yet, in the Temple, something of a clerkly monkish 
atmosphere, which public offices of law have not disturbed, and 
even legal firms have failed to scare away.  In summer time, its 
pumps suggest to thirsty idlers, springs cooler, and more 
sparkling, and deeper than other wells; and as they trace the 
spillings of full pitchers on the heated ground, they snuff the 
freshness, and, sighing, cast sad looks towards the Thames, and 
think of baths and boats, and saunter on, despondent.

It was in a room in Paper Buildings--a row of goodly tenements, 
shaded in front by ancient trees, and looking, at the back, upon 
the Temple Gardens--that this, our idler, lounged; now taking up 
again the paper he had laid down a hundred times; now trifling with 
the fragments of his meal; now pulling forth his golden toothpick, 
and glancing leisurely about the room, or out at window into the 
trim garden walks, where a few early loiterers were already pacing 
to and fro.  Here a pair of lovers met to quarrel and make up; 
there a dark-eyed nursery-maid had better eyes for Templars than 
her charge; on this hand an ancient spinster, with her lapdog in a 
string, regarded both enormities with scornful sidelong looks; on 
that a weazen old gentleman, ogling the nursery-maid, looked with 
like scorn upon the spinster, and wondered she didn't know she was 
no longer young.  Apart from all these, on the river's margin two 
or three couple of business-talkers walked slowly up and down in 
earnest conversation; and one young man sat thoughtfully on a 
bench, alone.

'Ned is amazingly patient!' said Mr Chester, glancing at this last-
named person as he set down his teacup and plied the golden 
toothpick, 'immensely patient!  He was sitting yonder when I began 
to dress, and has scarcely changed his posture since.  A most 
eccentric dog!'

As he spoke, the figure rose, and came towards him with a rapid 
pace.

'Really, as if he had heard me,' said the father, resuming his 
newspaper with a yawn.  'Dear Ned!'

Presently the room-door opened, and the young man entered; to whom 
his father gently waved his hand, and smiled.

'Are you at leisure for a little conversation, sir?' said Edward.

'Surely, Ned.  I am always at leisure.  You know my constitution.--
Have you breakfasted?'

'Three hours ago.'

'What a very early dog!' cried his father, contemplating him from 
behind the toothpick, with a languid smile.

'The truth is,' said Edward, bringing a chair forward, and seating 
himself near the table, 'that I slept but ill last night, and was 
glad to rise.  The cause of my uneasiness cannot but be known to 
you, sir; and it is upon that I wish to speak.'

'My dear boy,' returned his father, 'confide in me, I beg.  But you 
know my constitution--don't be prosy, Ned.'

'I will be plain, and brief,' said Edward.

'Don't say you will, my good fellow,' returned his father, crossing 
his legs, 'or you certainly will not.  You are going to tell me'--

'Plainly this, then,' said the son, with an air of great concern, 
'that I know where you were last night--from being on the spot, 
indeed--and whom you saw, and what your purpose was.'

'You don't say so!' cried his father.  'I am delighted to hear it.  
It saves us the worry, and terrible wear and tear of a long 
explanation, and is a great relief for both.  At the very house!  
Why didn't you come up?  I should have been charmed to see you.'

'I knew that what I had to say would be better said after a night's 
reflection, when both of us were cool,' returned the son.

''Fore Gad, Ned,' rejoined the father, 'I was cool enough last 
night.  That detestable Maypole!  By some infernal contrivance of 
the builder, it holds the wind, and keeps it fresh.  You remember 
the sharp east wind that blew so hard five weeks ago?  I give you 
my honour it was rampant in that old house last night, though out 
of doors there was a dead calm.  But you were saying'--

'I was about to say, Heaven knows how seriously and earnestly, that 
you have made me wretched, sir.  Will you hear me gravely for a 
moment?'

'My dear Ned,' said his father, 'I will hear you with the patience 
of an anchorite.  Oblige me with the milk.'

'I saw Miss Haredale last night,' Edward resumed, when he had 
complied with this request; 'her uncle, in her presence, 
immediately after your interview, and, as of course I know, in 
consequence of it, forbade me the house, and, with circumstances of 
indignity which are of your creation I am sure, commanded me to 
leave it on the instant.'

'For his manner of doing so, I give you my honour, Ned, I am not 
accountable,' said his father.  'That you must excuse.  He is a 
mere boor, a log, a brute, with no address in life.--Positively a 
fly in the jug.  The first I have seen this year.'

Edward rose, and paced the room.  His imperturbable parent sipped 
his tea.

'Father,' said the young man, stopping at length before him, 'we 
must not trifle in this matter.  We must not deceive each other, or 
ourselves.  Let me pursue the manly open part I wish to take, and 
do not repel me by this unkind indifference.'

'Whether I am indifferent or no,' returned the other, 'I leave you, 
my dear boy, to judge.  A ride of twenty-five or thirty miles, 
through miry roads--a Maypole dinner--a tete-a-tete with Haredale, 
which, vanity apart, was quite a Valentine and Orson business--a 
Maypole bed--a Maypole landlord, and a Maypole retinue of idiots 
and centaurs;--whether the voluntary endurance of these things 
looks like indifference, dear Ned, or like the excessive anxiety, 
and devotion, and all that sort of thing, of a parent, you shall 
determine for yourself.'

'I wish you to consider, sir,' said Edward, 'in what a cruel 
situation I am placed.  Loving Miss Haredale as I do'--

'My dear fellow,' interrupted his father with a compassionate 
smile, 'you do nothing of the kind.  You don't know anything about 
it.  There's no such thing, I assure you.  Now, do take my word for 
it.  You have good sense, Ned,--great good sense.  I wonder you 
should be guilty of such amazing absurdities.  You really surprise 
me.'

'I repeat,' said his son firmly, 'that I love her.  You have 
interposed to part us, and have, to the extent I have just now told 
you of, succeeded.  May I induce you, sir, in time, to think more 
favourably of our attachment, or is it your intention and your 
fixed design to hold us asunder if you can?'

'My dear Ned,' returned his father, taking a pinch of snuff and 
pushing his box towards him, 'that is my purpose most undoubtedly.'

'The time that has elapsed,' rejoined his son, 'since I began to 
know her worth, has flown in such a dream that until now I have 
hardly once paused to reflect upon my true position.  What is it?  
From my childhood I have been accustomed to luxury and idleness, 
and have been bred as though my fortune were large, and my 
expectations almost without a limit.  The idea of wealth has been 
familiarised to me from my cradle.  I have been taught to look upon 
those means, by which men raise themselves to riches and 
distinction, as being beyond my heeding, and beneath my care.  I 
have been, as the phrase is, liberally educated, and am fit for 
nothing.  I find myself at last wholly dependent upon you, with no 
resource but in your favour.  In this momentous question of my life 
we do not, and it would seem we never can, agree.  I have shrunk 
instinctively alike from those to whom you have urged me to pay 
court, and from the motives of interest and gain which have 
rendered them in your eyes visible objects for my suit.  If there 
never has been thus much plain-speaking between us before, sir, the 
fault has not been mine, indeed.  If I seem to speak too plainly 
now, it is, believe me father, in the hope that there may be a 
franker spirit, a worthier reliance, and a kinder confidence 
between us in time to come.'

'My good fellow,' said his smiling father, 'you quite affect me.  
Go on, my dear Edward, I beg.  But remember your promise.  There is 
great earnestness, vast candour, a manifest sincerity in all you 
say, but I fear I observe the faintest indications of a tendency to 
prose.'

'I am very sorry, sir.'

'I am very sorry, too, Ned, but you know that I cannot fix my mind 
for any long period upon one subject.  If you'll come to the point 
at once, I'll imagine all that ought to go before, and conclude it 
said.  Oblige me with the milk again.  Listening, invariably makes 
me feverish.'

'What I would say then, tends to this,' said Edward.  'I cannot 
bear this absolute dependence, sir, even upon you.  Time has been 
lost and opportunity thrown away, but I am yet a young man, and may 
retrieve it.  Will you give me the means of devoting such abilities 
and energies as I possess, to some worthy pursuit?  Will you let me 
try to make for myself an honourable path in life?  For any term 
you please to name--say for five years if you will--I will pledge 
myself to move no further in the matter of our difference without 
your fall concurrence.  During that period, I will endeavour 
earnestly and patiently, if ever man did, to open some prospect for 
myself, and free you from the burden you fear I should become if I 
married one whose worth and beauty are her chief endowments.  Will 
you do this, sir?  At the expiration of the term we agree upon, let 
us discuss this subject again.  Till then, unless it is revived by 
you, let it never be renewed between us.'

'My dear Ned,' returned his father, laying down the newspaper at 
which he had been glancing carelessly, and throwing himself back in 
the window-seat, 'I believe you know how very much I dislike what 
are called family affairs, which are only fit for plebeian 
Christmas days, and have no manner of business with people of our 
condition.  But as you are proceeding upon a mistake, Ned--
altogether upon a mistake--I will conquer my repugnance to entering 
on such matters, and give you a perfectly plain and candid answer, 
if you will do me the favour to shut the door.'

Edward having obeyed him, he took an elegant little knife from his 
pocket, and paring his nails, continued:

'You have to thank me, Ned, for being of good family; for your 
mother, charming person as she was, and almost broken-hearted, and 
so forth, as she left me, when she was prematurely compelled to 
become immortal--had nothing to boast of in that respect.'

'Her father was at least an eminent lawyer, sir,' said Edward.

'Quite right, Ned; perfectly so.  He stood high at the bar, had a 
great name and great wealth, but having risen from nothing--I have 
always closed my eyes to the circumstance and steadily resisted its 
contemplation, but I fear his father dealt in pork, and that his 
business did once involve cow-heel and sausages--he wished to marry 
his daughter into a good family.  He had his heart's desire, Ned.  
I was a younger son's younger son, and I married her.  We each had 
our object, and gained it.  She stepped at once into the politest 
and best circles, and I stepped into a fortune which I assure you 
was very necessary to my comfort--quite indispensable.  Now, my 
good fellow, that fortune is among the things that have been.  It 
is gone, Ned, and has been gone--how old are you?  I always 
forget.'

'Seven-and-twenty, sir.'

'Are you indeed?' cried his father, raising his eyelids in a 
languishing surprise.  'So much!  Then I should say, Ned, that as 
nearly as I remember, its skirts vanished from human knowledge, 
about eighteen or nineteen years ago.  It was about that time when 
I came to live in these chambers (once your grandfather's, and 
bequeathed by that extremely respectable person to me), and 
commenced to live upon an inconsiderable annuity and my past 
reputation.'

'You are jesting with me, sir,' said Edward.

'Not in the slightest degree, I assure you,' returned his father 
with great composure.  'These family topics are so extremely dry, 
that I am sorry to say they don't admit of any such relief.  It is 
for that reason, and because they have an appearance of business, 
that I dislike them so very much.  Well!  You know the rest.  A 
son, Ned, unless he is old enough to be a companion--that is to 
say, unless he is some two or three and twenty--is not the kind of 
thing to have about one.  He is a restraint upon his father, his 
father is a restraint upon him, and they make each other mutually 
uncomfortable.  Therefore, until within the last four years or so--
I have a poor memory for dates, and if I mistake, you will correct 
me in your own mind--you pursued your studies at a distance, and 
picked up a great variety of accomplishments.  Occasionally we 
passed a week or two together here, and disconcerted each other as 
only such near relations can.  At last you came home.  I candidly 
tell you, my dear boy, that if you had been awkward and overgrown, 
I should have exported you to some distant part of the world.'

'I wish with all my soul you had, sir,' said Edward.

'No you don't, Ned,' said his father coolly; 'you are mistaken, I 
assure you.  I found you a handsome, prepossessing, elegant 
fellow, and I threw you into the society I can still command.  
Having done that, my dear fellow, I consider that I have provided 
for you in life, and rely upon your doing something to provide for 
me in return.'

'I do not understand your meaning, sir.'

'My meaning, Ned, is obvious--I observe another fly in the cream-
jug, but have the goodness not to take it out as you did the first, 
for their walk when their legs are milky, is extremely ungraceful 
and disagreeable--my meaning is, that you must do as I did; that 
you must marry well and make the most of yourself.'

'A mere fortune-hunter!' cried the son, indignantly.

'What in the devil's name, Ned, would you be!' returned the father.  
'All men are fortune-hunters, are they not?  The law, the church, 
the court, the camp--see how they are all crowded with fortune-
hunters, jostling each other in the pursuit.  The stock-exchange, 
the pulpit, the counting-house, the royal drawing-room, the 
senate,--what but fortune-hunters are they filled with?  A fortune-
hunter!  Yes.  You ARE one; and you would be nothing else, my dear 
Ned, if you were the greatest courtier, lawyer, legislator, 
prelate, or merchant, in existence.  If you are squeamish and 
moral, Ned, console yourself with the reflection that at the very 
worst your fortune-hunting can make but one person miserable or 
unhappy.  How many people do you suppose these other kinds of 
huntsmen crush in following their sport--hundreds at a step?  Or 
thousands?'

The young man leant his head upon his hand, and made no answer.

'I am quite charmed,' said the father rising, and walking slowly to 
and fro--stopping now and then to glance at himself in the mirror, 
or survey a picture through his glass, with the air of a 
connoisseur, 'that we have had this conversation, Ned, unpromising 
as it was.  It establishes a confidence between us which is quite 
delightful, and was certainly necessary, though how you can ever 
have mistaken our positions and designs, I confess I cannot 
understand.  I conceived, until I found your fancy for this girl, 
that all these points were tacitly agreed upon between us.'

'I knew you were embarrassed, sir,' returned the son, raising his 
head for a moment, and then falling into his former attitude, 'but 
I had no idea we were the beggared wretches you describe.  How 
could I suppose it, bred as I have been; witnessing the life you 
have always led; and the appearance you have always made?'

'My dear child,' said the father--'for you really talk so like a 
child that I must call you one--you were bred upon a careful 
principle; the very manner of your education, I assure you, 
maintained my credit surprisingly.  As to the life I lead, I must 
lead it, Ned.  I must have these little refinements about me.  I 
have always been used to them, and I cannot exist without them.  
They must surround me, you observe, and therefore they are here.  
With regard to our circumstances, Ned, you may set your mind at 
rest upon that score.  They are desperate.  Your own appearance is 
by no means despicable, and our joint pocket-money alone devours 
our income.  That's the truth.'

'Why have I never known this before?  Why have you encouraged me, 
sir, to an expenditure and mode of life to which we have no right 
or title?'

'My good fellow,' returned his father more compassionately than 
ever, 'if you made no appearance, how could you possibly succeed in 
the pursuit for which I destined you?  As to our mode of life, 
every man has a right to live in the best way he can; and to make 
himself as comfortable as he can, or he is an unnatural scoundrel.  
Our debts, I grant, are very great, and therefore it the more 
behoves you, as a young man of principle and honour, to pay them 
off as speedily as possible.'

'The villain's part,' muttered Edward, 'that I have unconsciously 
played!  I to win the heart of Emma Haredale!  I would, for her 
sake, I had died first!'

'I am glad you see, Ned,' returned his father, 'how perfectly self-
evident it is, that nothing can be done in that quarter.  But apart 
from this, and the necessity of your speedily bestowing yourself 
on another (as you know you could to-morrow, if you chose), I wish 
you'd look upon it pleasantly.  In a religious point of view alone, 
how could you ever think of uniting yourself to a Catholic, unless 
she was amazingly rich?  You ought to be so very Protestant, 
coming of such a Protestant family as you do.  Let us be moral, 
Ned, or we are nothing.  Even if one could set that objection 
aside, which is impossible, we come to another which is quite 
conclusive.  The very idea of marrying a girl whose father was 
killed, like meat!  Good God, Ned, how disagreeable!  Consider the 
impossibility of having any respect for your father-in-law under 
such unpleasant circumstances--think of his having been "viewed" by 
jurors, and "sat upon" by coroners, and of his very doubtful 
position in the family ever afterwards.  It seems to me such an 
indelicate sort of thing that I really think the girl ought to have 
been put to death by the state to prevent its happening.  But I 
tease you perhaps.  You would rather be alone?  My dear Ned, most 
willingly.  God bless you.  I shall be going out presently, but we 
shall meet to-night, or if not to-night, certainly to-morrow.  
Take care of yourself in the mean time, for both our sakes.  You 
are a person of great consequence to me, Ned--of vast consequence 
indeed.  God bless you!'

With these words, the father, who had been arranging his cravat in 
the glass, while he uttered them in a disconnected careless manner, 
withdrew, humming a tune as he went.  The son, who had appeared so 
lost in thought as not to hear or understand them, remained quite 
still and silent.  After the lapse of half an hour or so, the elder 
Chester, gaily dressed, went out.  The younger still sat with his 
head resting on his hands, in what appeared to be a kind of stupor.



Chapter 16


A series of pictures representing the streets of London in the 
night, even at the comparatively recent date of this tale, would 
present to the eye something so very different in character from 
the reality which is witnessed in these times, that it would be 
difficult for the beholder to recognise his most familiar walks in 
the altered aspect of little more than half a century ago.

They were, one and all, from the broadest and best to the narrowest 
and least frequented, very dark.  The oil and cotton lamps, though 
regularly trimmed twice or thrice in the long winter nights, burnt 
feebly at the best; and at a late hour, when they were unassisted 
by the lamps and candles in the shops, cast but a narrow track of 
doubtful light upon the footway, leaving the projecting doors and 
house-fronts in the deepest gloom.  Many of the courts and lanes 
were left in total darkness; those of the meaner sort, where one 
glimmering light twinkled for a score of houses, being favoured in 
no slight degree.  Even in these places, the inhabitants had often 
good reason for extinguishing their lamp as soon as it was lighted; 
and the watch being utterly inefficient and powerless to prevent 
them, they did so at their pleasure.  Thus, in the lightest 
thoroughfares, there was at every turn some obscure and dangerous 
spot whither a thief might fly or shelter, and few would care to 
follow; and the city being belted round by fields, green lanes, 
waste grounds, and lonely roads, dividing it at that time from the 
suburbs that have joined it since, escape, even where the pursuit 
was hot, was rendered easy.

It is no wonder that with these favouring circumstances in full and 
constant operation, street robberies, often accompanied by cruel 
wounds, and not unfrequently by loss of life, should have been of 
nightly occurrence in the very heart of London, or that quiet folks 
should have had great dread of traversing its streets after the 
shops were closed.  It was not unusual for those who wended home 
alone at midnight, to keep the middle of the road, the better to 
guard against surprise from lurking footpads; few would venture to 
repair at a late hour to Kentish Town or Hampstead, or even to 
Kensington or Chelsea, unarmed and unattended; while he who had 
been loudest and most valiant at the supper-table or the tavern, 
and had but a mile or so to go, was glad to fee a link-boy to 
escort him home.

There were many other characteristics--not quite so disagreeable--
about the thoroughfares of London then, with which they had been 
long familiar.  Some of the shops, especially those to the eastward 
of Temple Bar, still adhered to the old practice of hanging out a 
sign; and the creaking and swinging of these boards in their iron 
frames on windy nights, formed a strange and mournfal concert for 
the ears of those who lay awake in bed or hurried through the 
streets.  Long stands of hackney-chairs and groups of chairmen, 
compared with whom the coachmen of our day are gentle and polite, 
obstructed the way and filled the air with clamour; night-cellars, 
indicated by a little stream of light crossing the pavement, and 
stretching out half-way into the road, and by the stifled roar of 
voices from below, yawned for the reception and entertainment of 
the most abandoned of both sexes; under every shed and bulk small 
groups of link-boys gamed away the earnings of the day; or one more 
weary than the rest, gave way to sleep, and let the fragment of his 
torch fall hissing on the puddled ground.

Then there was the watch with staff and lantern crying the hour, 
and the kind of weather; and those who woke up at his voice and 
turned them round in bed, were glad to hear it rained, or snowed, 
or blew, or froze, for very comfort's sake.  The solitary passenger 
was startled by the chairmen's cry of 'By your leave there!' as two 
came trotting past him with their empty vehicle--carried backwards 
to show its being disengaged--and hurried to the nearest stand.  
Many a private chair, too, inclosing some fine lady, monstrously 
hooped and furbelowed, and preceded by running-footmen bearing 
flambeaux--for which extinguishers are yet suspended before the 
doors of a few houses of the better sort--made the way gay and 
light as it danced along, and darker and more dismal when it had 
passed.  It was not unusual for these running gentry, who carried 
it with a very high hand, to quarrel in the servants' hall while 
waiting for their masters and mistresses; and, falling to blows 
either there or in the street without, to strew the place of 
skirmish with hair-powder, fragments of bag-wigs, and scattered 
nosegays.  Gaming, the vice which ran so high among all classes 
(the fashion being of course set by the upper), was generally the 
cause of these disputes; for cards and dice were as openly used, 
and worked as much mischief, and yielded as much excitement below 
stairs, as above.  While incidents like these, arising out of drums 
and masquerades and parties at quadrille, were passing at the west 
end of the town, heavy stagecoaches and scarce heavier waggons were 
lumbering slowly towards the city, the coachmen, guard, and 
passengers, armed to the teeth, and the coach--a day or so perhaps 
behind its time, but that was nothing--despoiled by highwaymen; who 
made no scruple to attack, alone and single-handed, a whole caravan 
of goods and men, and sometimes shot a passenger or two, and were 
sometimes shot themselves, as the case might be.  On the morrow, 
rumours of this new act of daring on the road yielded matter for a 
few hours' conversation through the town, and a Public Progress of 
some fine gentleman (half-drunk) to Tyburn, dressed in the newest 
fashion, and damning the ordinary with unspeakable gallantry and 
grace, furnished to the populace, at once a pleasant excitement and 
a wholesome and profound example.

Among all the dangerous characters who, in such a state of society, 
prowled and skulked in the metropolis at night, there was one man 
from whom many as uncouth and fierce as he, shrunk with an 
involuntary dread.  Who he was, or whence he came, was a question 
often asked, but which none could answer.  His name was unknown, he 
had never been seen until within about eight days or thereabouts, 
and was equally a stranger to the old ruffians, upon whose haunts 
he ventured fearlessly, as to the young.  He could be no spy, for 
he never removed his slouched hat to look about him, entered into 
conversation with no man, heeded nothing that passed, listened to 
no discourse, regarded nobody that came or went.  But so surely as 
the dead of night set in, so surely this man was in the midst of 
the loose concourse in the night-cellar where outcasts of every 
grade resorted; and there he sat till morning.

He was not only a spectre at their licentious feasts; a something 
in the midst of their revelry and riot that chilled and haunted 
them; but out of doors he was the same.  Directly it was dark, he 
was abroad--never in company with any one, but always alone; never 
lingering or loitering, but always walking swiftly; and looking (so 
they said who had seen him) over his shoulder from time to time, 
and as he did so quickening his pace.  In the fields, the lanes, 
the roads, in all quarters of the town--east, west, north, and 
south--that man was seen gliding on like a shadow.  He was always 
hurrying away.  Those who encountered him, saw him steal past, 
caught sight of the backward glance, and so lost him in the 
darkness.

This constant restlessness, and flitting to and fro, gave rise to 
strange stories.  He was seen in such distant and remote places, at 
times so nearly tallying with each other, that some doubted whether 
there were not two of them, or more--some, whether he had not 
unearthly means of travelling from spot to spot.  The footpad 
hiding in a ditch had marked him passing like a ghost along its 
brink; the vagrant had met him on the dark high-road; the beggar 
had seen him pause upon the bridge to look down at the water, and 
then sweep on again; they who dealt in bodies with the surgeons 
could swear he slept in churchyards, and that they had beheld him 
glide away among the tombs on their approach.  And as they told 
these stories to each other, one who had looked about him would 
pull his neighbour by the sleeve, and there he would be among them.

At last, one man--he was one of those whose commerce lay among the 
graves--resolved to question this strange companion.  Next night, 
when he had eat his poor meal voraciously (he was accustomed to do 
that, they had observed, as though he had no other in the day), 
this fellow sat down at his elbow.

'A black night, master!'

'It is a black night.'

'Blacker than last, though that was pitchy too.  Didn't I pass you 
near the turnpike in the Oxford Road?'

'It's like you may.  I don't know.'

'Come, come, master,' cried the fellow, urged on by the looks of 
his comrades, and slapping him on the shoulder; 'be more 
companionable and communicative.  Be more the gentleman in this 
good company.  There are tales among us that you have sold yourself 
to the devil, and I know not what.'

'We all have, have we not?' returned the stranger, looking up.  'If 
we were fewer in number, perhaps he would give better wages.'

'It goes rather hard with you, indeed,' said the fellow, as the 
stranger disclosed his haggard unwashed face, and torn clothes.  
'What of that?  Be merry, master.  A stave of a roaring song now'--

'Sing you, if you desire to hear one,' replied the other, shaking 
him roughly off; 'and don't touch me if you're a prudent man; I 
carry arms which go off easily--they have done so, before now--and 
make it dangerous for strangers who don't know the trick of them, 
to lay hands upon me.'

'Do you threaten?' said the fellow.

'Yes,' returned the other, rising and turning upon him, and looking 
fiercely round as if in apprehension of a general attack.

His voice, and look, and bearing--all expressive of the wildest 
recklessness and desperation--daunted while they repelled the 
bystanders.  Although in a very different sphere of action now, 
they were not without much of the effect they had wrought at the 
Maypole Inn.

'I am what you all are, and live as you all do,' said the man 
sternly, after a short silence.  'I am in hiding here like the 
rest, and if we were surprised would perhaps do my part with the 
best of ye.  If it's my humour to be left to myself, let me have 
it.  Otherwise,'--and here he swore a tremendous oath--'there'll be 
mischief done in this place, though there ARE odds of a score 
against me.'

A low murmur, having its origin perhaps in a dread of the man and 
the mystery that surrounded him, or perhaps in a sincere opinion on 
the part of some of those present, that it would be an inconvenient 
precedent to meddle too curiously with a gentleman's private 
affairs if he saw reason to conceal them, warned the fellow who 
had occasioned this discussion that he had best pursue it no 
further.  After a short time the strange man lay down upon a bench 
to sleep, and when they thought of him again, they found he was 
gone.

Next night, as soon as it was dark, he was abroad again and 
traversing the streets; he was before the locksmith's house more 
than once, but the family were out, and it was close shut.  This 
night he crossed London Bridge and passed into Southwark.  As he 
glided down a bye street, a woman with a little basket on her arm, 
turned into it at the other end.  Directly he observed her, he 
sought the shelter of an archway, and stood aside until she had 
passed.  Then he emerged cautiously from his hiding-place, and 
followed.

She went into several shops to purchase various kinds of household 
necessaries, and round every place at which she stopped he hovered 
like her evil spirit; following her when she reappeared.  It was 
nigh eleven o'clock, and the passengers in the streets were 
thinning fast, when she turned, doubtless to go home.  The phantom 
still followed her.

She turned into the same bye street in which he had seen her first, 
which, being free from shops, and narrow, was extremely dark.  She 
quickened her pace here, as though distrustful of being stopped, 
and robbed of such trifling property as she carried with her.  He 
crept along on the other side of the road.  Had she been gifted 
with the speed of wind, it seemed as if his terrible shadow would 
have tracked her down.

At length the widow--for she it was--reached her own door, and, 
panting for breath, paused to take the key from her basket.  In a 
flush and glow, with the haste she had made, and the pleasure of 
being safe at home, she stooped to draw it out, when, raising her 
head, she saw him standing silently beside her: the apparition of 
a dream.

His hand was on her mouth, but that was needless, for her tongue 
clove to its roof, and her power of utterance was gone.  'I have 
been looking for you many nights.  Is the house empty?  Answer me.  
Is any one inside?'

She could only answer by a rattle in her throat.

'Make me a sign.'

She seemed to indicate that there was no one there.  He took the 
key, unlocked the door, carried her in, and secured it carefully 
behind them.



Chapter 17


It was a chilly night, and the fire in the widow's parlour had 
burnt low.  Her strange companion placed her in a chair, and 
stooping down before the half-extinguished ashes, raked them 
together and fanned them with his hat.  From time to time he 
glanced at her over his shoulder, as though to assure himself of 
her remaining quiet and making no effort to depart; and that done, 
busied himself about the fire again.

It was not without reason that he took these pains, for his dress 
was dank and drenched with wet, his jaws rattled with cold, and he 
shivered from head to foot.  It had rained hard during the previous 
night and for some hours in the morning, but since noon it had been 
fine.  Wheresoever he had passed the hours of darkness, his 
condition sufficiently betokened that many of them had been spent 
beneath the open sky.  Besmeared with mire; his saturated clothes 
clinging with a damp embrace about his limbs; his beard unshaven, 
his face unwashed, his meagre cheeks worn into deep hollows,--a 
more miserable wretch could hardly be, than this man who now 
cowered down upon the widow's hearth, and watched the struggling 
flame with bloodshot eyes.

She had covered her face with her hands, fearing, as it seemed, to 
look towards him.  So they remained for some short time in silence.  
Glancing round again, he asked at length:

'Is this your house?'

'It is.  Why, in the name of Heaven, do you darken it?'

'Give me meat and drink,' he answered sullenly, 'or I dare do more 
than that.  The very marrow in my bones is cold, with wet and 
hunger.  I must have warmth and food, and I will have them here.'

'You were the robber on the Chigwell road.'

'I was.'

'And nearly a murderer then.'

'The will was not wanting.  There was one came upon me and raised 
the hue-and-cry', that it would have gone hard with, but for his 
nimbleness.  I made a thrust at him.'

'You thrust your sword at HIM!' cried the widow, looking upwards.  
'You hear this man! you hear and saw!'

He looked at her, as, with her head thrown back, and her hands 
tight clenched together, she uttered these words in an agony of 
appeal.  Then, starting to his feet as she had done, he advanced 
towards her.

'Beware!' she cried in a suppressed voice, whose firmness stopped 
him midway.  'Do not so much as touch me with a finger, or you are 
lost; body and soul, you are lost.'

'Hear me,' he replied, menacing her with his hand.  'I, that in the 
form of a man live the life of a hunted beast; that in the body am 
a spirit, a ghost upon the earth, a thing from which all creatures 
shrink, save those curst beings of another world, who will not 
leave me;--I am, in my desperation of this night, past all fear but 
that of the hell in which I exist from day to day.  Give the 
alarm, cry out, refuse to shelter me.  I will not hurt you.  But I 
will not be taken alive; and so surely as you threaten me above 
your breath, I fall a dead man on this floor.  The blood with which 
I sprinkle it, be on you and yours, in the name of the Evil Spirit 
that tempts men to their ruin!'

As he spoke, he took a pistol from his breast, and firmly clutched 
it in his hand.

'Remove this man from me, good Heaven!' cried the widow.  'In thy 
grace and mercy, give him one minute's penitence, and strike him 
dead!'

'It has no such purpose,' he said, confronting her.  'It is deaf.  
Give me to eat and drink, lest I do that it cannot help my doing, 
and will not do for you.'

'Will you leave me, if I do thus much?  Will you leave me and 
return no more?'

'I will promise nothing,' he rejoined, seating himself at the 
table, 'nothing but this--I will execute my threat if you betray 
me.'

She rose at length, and going to a closet or pantry in the room, 
brought out some fragments of cold meat and bread and put them on 
the table.  He asked for brandy, and for water.  These she produced 
likewise; and he ate and drank with the voracity of a famished 
hound.  All the time he was so engaged she kept at the uttermost 
distance of the chamber, and sat there shuddering, but with her 
face towards him.  She never turned her back upon him once; and 
although when she passed him (as she was obliged to do in going to 
and from the cupboard) she gathered the skirts of her garment about 
her, as if even its touching his by chance were horrible to think 
of, still, in the midst of all this dread and terror, she kept her 
face towards his own, and watched his every movement.

His repast ended--if that can be called one, which was a mere 
ravenous satisfying of the calls of hunger--he moved his chair 
towards the fire again, and warming himself before the blaze which 
had now sprung brightly up, accosted her once more.

'I am an outcast, to whom a roof above his head is often an 
uncommon luxury, and the food a beggar would reject is delicate 
fare.  You live here at your ease.  Do you live alone?'

'I do not,' she made answer with an effort.

'Who dwells here besides?'

'One--it is no matter who.  You had best begone, or he may find you 
here.  Why do you linger?'

'For warmth,' he replied, spreading out his hands before the fire.  
'For warmth.  You are rich, perhaps?'

'Very,' she said faintly.  'Very rich.  No doubt I am very rich.'

'At least you are not penniless.  You have some money.  You were 
making purchases to-night.'

'I have a little left.  It is but a few shillings.'

'Give me your purse.  You had it in your hand at the door.  Give it 
to me.'

She stepped to the table and laid it down.  He reached across, took 
it up, and told the contents into his hand.  As he was counting 
them, she listened for a moment, and sprung towards him.

'Take what there is, take all, take more if more were there, but go 
before it is too late.  I have heard a wayward step without, I know 
full well.  It will return directly.  Begone.'

'What do you mean?'

'Do not stop to ask.  I will not answer.  Much as I dread to touch 
you, I would drag you to the door if I possessed the strength, 
rather than you should lose an instant.  Miserable wretch! fly from 
this place.'

'If there are spies without, I am safer here,' replied the man, 
standing aghast.  'I will remain here, and will not fly till the 
danger is past.'

'It is too late!' cried the widow, who had listened for the step, 
and not to him.  'Hark to that foot upon the ground.  Do you 
tremble to hear it!  It is my son, my idiot son!'

As she said this wildly, there came a heavy knocking at the door.  
He looked at her, and she at him.

'Let him come in,' said the man, hoarsely.  'I fear him less than 
the dark, houseless night.  He knocks again.  Let him come in!'

'The dread of this hour,' returned the widow, 'has been upon me all 
my life, and I will not.  Evil will fall upon him, if you stand eye 
to eye.  My blighted boy!  Oh! all good angels who know the truth--
hear a poor mother's prayer, and spare my boy from knowledge of 
this man!'

'He rattles at the shutters!' cried the man.  'He calls you.  That 
voice and cry!  It was he who grappled with me in the road.  Was it 
he?'

She had sunk upon her knees, and so knelt down, moving her lips, 
but uttering no sound.  As he gazed upon her, uncertain what to do 
or where to turn, the shutters flew open.  He had barely time to 
catch a knife from the table, sheathe it in the loose sleeve of his 
coat, hide in the closet, and do all with the lightning's speed, 
when Barnaby tapped at the bare glass, and raised the sash 
exultingly.

'Why, who can keep out Grip and me!' he cried, thrusting in his 
head, and staring round the room.  'Are you there, mother?  How 
long you keep us from the fire and light.'

She stammered some excuse and tendered him her hand.  But Barnaby 
sprung lightly in without assistance, and putting his arms about 
her neck, kissed her a hundred times.

'We have been afield, mother--leaping ditches, scrambling through 
hedges, running down steep banks, up and away, and hurrying on.  
The wind has been blowing, and the rushes and young plants bowing 
and bending to it, lest it should do them harm, the cowards--and 
Grip--ha ha ha!--brave Grip, who cares for nothing, and when the 
wind rolls him over in the dust, turns manfully to bite it--Grip, 
bold Grip, has quarrelled with every little bowing twig--thinking, 
he told me, that it mocked him--and has worried it like a bulldog.  
Ha ha ha!'

The raven, in his little basket at his master's back, hearing this 
frequent mention of his name in a tone of exultation, expressed his 
sympathy by crowing like a cock, and afterwards running over his 
various phrases of speech with such rapidity, and in so many 
varieties of hoarseness, that they sounded like the murmurs of a 
crowd of people.

'He takes such care of me besides!' said Barnaby.  'Such care, 
mother!  He watches all the time I sleep, and when I shut my eyes 
and make-believe to slumber, he practises new learning softly; but 
he keeps his eye on me the while, and if he sees me laugh, though 
never so little, stops directly.  He won't surprise me till he's 
perfect.'

The raven crowed again in a rapturous manner which plainly said, 
'Those are certainly some of my characteristics, and I glory in 
them.'  In the meantime, Barnaby closed the window and secured it, 
and coming to the fireplace, prepared to sit down with his face
to the closet.  But his mother prevented this, by hastily taking 
that side herself, and motioning him towards the other.

'How pale you are to-night!' said Barnaby, leaning on his stick.  
'We have been cruel, Grip, and made her anxious!'

Anxious in good truth, and sick at heart!  The listener held the 
door of his hiding-place open with his hand, and closely watched 
her son.  Grip--alive to everything his master was unconscious of--
had his head out of the basket, and in return was watching him 
intently with his glistening eye.

'He flaps his wings,' said Barnaby, turning almost quickly enough 
to catch the retreating form and closing door, 'as if there were 
strangers here, but Grip is wiser than to fancy that.  Jump then!'

Accepting this invitation with a dignity peculiar to himself, the 
bird hopped up on his master's shoulder, from that to his extended 
hand, and so to the ground.  Barnaby unstrapping the basket and 
putting it down in a corner with the lid open, Grip's first care 
was to shut it down with all possible despatch, and then to stand 
upon it.  Believing, no doubt, that he had now rendered it utterly 
impossible, and beyond the power of mortal man, to shut him up in 
it any more, he drew a great many corks in triumph, and uttered a 
corresponding number of hurrahs.

'Mother!' said Barnaby, laying aside his hat and stick, and 
returning to the chair from which he had risen, 'I'll tell you 
where we have been to-day, and what we have been doing,--shall I?'

She took his hand in hers, and holding it, nodded the word she 
could not speak.

'You mustn't tell,' said Barnaby, holding up his finger, 'for it's 
a secret, mind, and only known to me, and Grip, and Hugh.  We had 
the dog with us, but he's not like Grip, clever as he is, and 
doesn't guess it yet, I'll wager.--Why do you look behind me so?'

'Did I?' she answered faintly.  'I didn't know I did.  Come nearer 
me.'

'You are frightened!' said Barnaby, changing colour.  'Mother--you 
don't see'--

'See what?'

'There's--there's none of this about, is there?' he answered in a 
whisper, drawing closer to her and clasping the mark upon his 
wrist.  'I am afraid there is, somewhere.  You make my hair stand 
on end, and my flesh creep.  Why do you look like that?  Is it in 
the room as I have seen it in my dreams, dashing the ceiling and 
the walls with red?  Tell me.  Is it?'

He fell into a shivering fit as he put the question, and shutting 
out the light with his hands, sat shaking in every limb until it 
had passed away.  After a time, he raised his head and looked about 
him.

'Is it gone?'

'There has been nothing here,' rejoined his mother, soothing him.  
'Nothing indeed, dear Barnaby.  Look!  You see there are but you 
and me.'

He gazed at her vacantly, and, becoming reassured by degrees, burst 
into a wild laugh.

'But let us see,' he said, thoughtfully.  'Were we talking?  Was it 
you and me?  Where have we been?'

'Nowhere but here.'

'Aye, but Hugh, and I,' said Barnaby,--'that's it.  Maypole Hugh, 
and I, you know, and Grip--we have been lying in the forest, and 
among the trees by the road side, with a dark lantern after night 
came on, and the dog in a noose ready to slip him when the man came 
by.'

'What man?'

'The robber; him that the stars winked at.  We have waited for him 
after dark these many nights, and we shall have him.  I'd know him 
in a thousand.  Mother, see here!  This is the man.  Look!'

He twisted his handkerchief round his head, pulled his hat upon his 
brow, wrapped his coat about him, and stood up before her: so like 
the original he counterfeited, that the dark figure peering out 
behind him might have passed for his own shadow.

'Ha ha ha!  We shall have him,' he cried, ridding himself of the 
semblance as hastily as he had assumed it.  'You shall see him, 
mother, bound hand and foot, and brought to London at a saddle-
girth; and you shall hear of him at Tyburn Tree if we have luck.  
So Hugh says.  You're pale again, and trembling.  And why DO you 
look behind me so?'

'It is nothing,' she answered.  'I am not quite well.  Go you to 
bed, dear, and leave me here.'

'To bed!' he answered.  'I don't like bed.  I like to lie before 
the fire, watching the prospects in the burning coals--the rivers, 
hills, and dells, in the deep, red sunset, and the wild faces.  I 
am hungry too, and Grip has eaten nothing since broad noon.  Let us 
to supper.  Grip!  To supper, lad!'

The raven flapped his wings, and, croaking his satisfaction, hopped 
to the feet of his master, and there held his bill open, ready for 
snapping up such lumps of meat as he should throw him.  Of these he 
received about a score in rapid succession, without the smallest 
discomposure.

'That's all,' said Barnaby.

'More!' cried Grip.  'More!'

But it appearing for a certainty that no more was to be had, he 
retreated with his store; and disgorging the morsels one by one 
from his pouch, hid them in various corners--taking particular 
care, however, to avoid the closet, as being doubtful of the hidden 
man's propensities and power of resisting temptation.  When he had 
concluded these arrangements, he took a turn or two across the room 
with an elaborate assumption of having nothing on his mind (but 
with one eye hard upon his treasure all the time), and then, and 
not till then, began to drag it out, piece by piece, and eat it 
with the utmost relish.

Barnaby, for his part, having pressed his mother to eat in vain, 
made a hearty supper too.  Once during the progress of his meal, he 
wanted more bread from the closet and rose to get it.  She 
hurriedly interposed to prevent him, and summoning her utmost 
fortitude, passed into the recess, and brought it out herself.

'Mother,' said Barnaby, looking at her steadfastly as she sat down 
beside him after doing so; 'is to-day my birthday?'

'To-day!' she answered.  'Don't you recollect it was but a week or 
so ago, and that summer, autumn, and winter have to pass before it 
comes again?'

'I remember that it has been so till now,' said Barnaby.  'But I 
think to-day must be my birthday too, for all that.'

She asked him why?  'I'll tell you why,' he said.  'I have always 
seen you--I didn't let you know it, but I have--on the evening of 
that day grow very sad.  I have seen you cry when Grip and I were 
most glad; and look frightened with no reason; and I have touched 
your hand, and felt that it was cold--as it is now.  Once, mother 
(on a birthday that was, also), Grip and I thought of this after we 
went upstairs to bed, and when it was midnight, striking one 
o'clock, we came down to your door to see if you were well.  You 
were on your knees.  I forget what it was you said.  Grip, what was 
it we heard her say that night?'

'I'm a devil!' rejoined the raven promptly.

'No, no,' said Barnaby.  'But you said something in a prayer; and 
when you rose and walked about, you looked (as you have done ever 
since, mother, towards night on my birthday) just as you do now.  I 
have found that out, you see, though I am silly.  So I say you're 
wrong; and this must be my birthday--my birthday, Grip!'

The bird received this information with a crow of such duration as 
a cock, gifted with intelligence beyond all others of his kind, 
might usher in the longest day with.  Then, as if he had well 
considered the sentiment, and regarded it as apposite to birthdays, 
he cried, 'Never say die!' a great many times, and flapped his 
wings for emphasis.

The widow tried to make light of Barnaby's remark, and endeavoured 
to divert his attention to some new subject; too easy a task at all 
times, as she knew.  His supper done, Barnaby, regardless of her 
entreaties, stretched himself on the mat before the fire; Grip 
perched upon his leg, and divided his time between dozing in the 
grateful warmth, and endeavouring (as it presently appeared) to 
recall a new accomplishment he had been studying all day.

A long and profound silence ensued, broken only by some change of 
position on the part of Barnaby, whose eyes were still wide open 
and intently fixed upon the fire; or by an effort of recollection 
on the part of Grip, who would cry in a low voice from time to 
time, 'Polly put the ket--' and there stop short, forgetting the 
remainder, and go off in a doze again.

After a long interval, Barnaby's breathing grew more deep and 
regular, and his eyes were closed.  But even then the unquiet 
spirit of the raven interposed.  'Polly put the ket--' cried Grip, 
and his master was broad awake again.

At length Barnaby slept soundly, and the bird with his bill sunk 
upon his breast, his breast itself puffed out into a comfortable 
alderman-like form, and his bright eye growing smaller and smaller, 
really seemed to be subsiding into a state of repose.  Now and then 
he muttered in a sepulchral voice, 'Polly put the ket--' but very 
drowsily, and more like a drunken man than a reflecting raven.

The widow, scarcely venturing to breathe, rose from her seat.  The 
man glided from the closet, and extinguished the candle.

'--tle on,' cried Grip, suddenly struck with an idea and very much 
excited.  '--tle on.  Hurrah!  Polly put the ket-tle on, we'll all 
have tea; Polly put the ket-tle on, we'll all have tea.  Hurrah, 
hurrah, hurrah!  I'm a devil, I'm a devil, I'm a ket-tle on, Keep 
up your spirits, Never say die, Bow, wow, wow, I'm a devil, I'm a 
ket-tle, I'm a--Polly put the ket-tle on, we'll all have tea.'

They stood rooted to the ground, as though it had been a voice from 
the grave.

But even this failed to awaken the sleeper.  He turned over towards 
the fire, his arm fell to the ground, and his head drooped heavily 
upon it.  The widow and her unwelcome visitor gazed at him and at 
each other for a moment, and then she motioned him towards the 
door.

'Stay,' he whispered.  'You teach your son well.'

'I have taught him nothing that you heard to-night.  Depart 
instantly, or I will rouse him.'

'You are free to do so.  Shall I rouse him?'

'You dare not do that.'

'I dare do anything, I have told you.  He knows me well, it seems.  
At least I will know him.'

'Would you kill him in his sleep?' cried the widow, throwing 
herself between them.

'Woman,' he returned between his teeth, as he motioned her aside, 
'I would see him nearer, and I will.  If you want one of us to kill 
the other, wake him.'

With that he advanced, and bending down over the prostrate form, 
softly turned back the head and looked into the face.  The light of 
the fire was upon it, and its every lineament was revealed 
distinctly.  He contemplated it for a brief space, and hastily 
uprose.

'Observe,' he whispered in the widow's ear: 'In him, of whose 
existence I was ignorant until to-night, I have you in my power.  
Be careful how you use me.  Be careful how you use me.  I am 
destitute and starving, and a wanderer upon the earth.  I may take 
a sure and slow revenge.'

'There is some dreadful meaning in your words.  I do not fathom it.'

'There is a meaning in them, and I see you fathom it to its very 
depth.  You have anticipated it for years; you have told me as 
much.  I leave you to digest it.  Do not forget my warning.'

He pointed, as he left her, to the slumbering form, and stealthily 
withdrawing, made his way into the street.  She fell on her knees 
beside the sleeper, and remained like one stricken into stone, 
until the tears which fear had frozen so long, came tenderly to her 
relief.

'Oh Thou,' she cried, 'who hast taught me such deep love for this 
one remnant of the promise of a happy life, out of whose 
affliction, even, perhaps the comfort springs that he is ever a 
relying, loving child to me--never growing old or cold at heart, 
but needing my care and duty in his manly strength as in his 
cradle-time--help him, in his darkened walk through this sad world, 
or he is doomed, and my poor heart is broken!'



Chapter 18


Gliding along the silent streets, and holding his course where they 
were darkest and most gloomy, the man who had left the widow's 
house crossed London Bridge, and arriving in the City, plunged into 
the backways, lanes, and courts, between Cornhill and Smithfield; 
with no more fixedness of purpose than to lose himself among their 
windings, and baffle pursuit, if any one were dogging his steps.

It was the dead time of the night, and all was quiet.  Now and then 
a drowsy watchman's footsteps sounded on the pavement, or the 
lamplighter on his rounds went flashing past, leaving behind a 
little track of smoke mingled with glowing morsels of his hot red 
link.  He hid himself even from these partakers of his lonely walk, 
and, shrinking in some arch or doorway while they passed, issued 
forth again when they were gone and so pursued his solitary way.

To be shelterless and alone in the open country, hearing the wind 
moan and watching for day through the whole long weary night; to 
listen to the falling rain, and crouch for warmth beneath the lee 
of some old barn or rick, or in the hollow of a tree; are dismal 
things--but not so dismal as the wandering up and down where 
shelter is, and beds and sleepers are by thousands; a houseless 
rejected creature.  To pace the echoing stones from hour to hour, 
counting the dull chimes of the clocks; to watch the lights 
twinkling in chamber windows, to think what happy forgetfulness 
each house shuts in; that here are children coiled together in 
their beds, here youth, here age, here poverty, here wealth, all 
equal in their sleep, and all at rest; to have nothing in common 
with the slumbering world around, not even sleep, Heaven's gift to 
all its creatures, and be akin to nothing but despair; to feel, by 
the wretched contrast with everything on every hand, more utterly 
alone and cast away than in a trackless desert; this is a kind of 
suffering, on which the rivers of great cities close full many a 
time, and which the solitude in crowds alone awakens.

The miserable man paced up and down the streets--so long, so 
wearisome, so like each other--and often cast a wistful look 
towards the east, hoping to see the first faint streaks of day.  
But obdurate night had yet possession of the sky, and his disturbed 
and restless walk found no relief.

One house in a back street was bright with the cheerful glare of 
lights; there was the sound of music in it too, and the tread of 
dancers, and there were cheerful voices, and many a burst of 
laughter.  To this place--to be near something that was awake and 
glad--he returned again and again; and more than one of those who 
left it when the merriment was at its height, felt it a check upon 
their mirthful mood to see him flitting to and fro like an uneasy 
ghost.  At last the guests departed, one and all; and then the 
house was close shut up, and became as dull and silent as the rest.

His wanderings brought him at one time to the city jail.  Instead 
of hastening from it as a place of ill omen, and one he had cause 
to shun, he sat down on some steps hard by, and resting his chin 
upon his hand, gazed upon its rough and frowning walls as though 
even they became a refuge in his jaded eyes.  He paced it round and 
round, came back to the same spot, and sat down again.  He did this 
often, and once, with a hasty movement, crossed to where some men 
were watching in the prison lodge, and had his foot upon the steps 
as though determined to accost them.  But looking round, he saw 
that the day began to break, and failing in his purpose, turned and 
fled.

He was soon in the quarter he had lately traversed, and pacing to 
and fro again as he had done before.  He was passing down a mean 
street, when from an alley close at hand some shouts of revelry 
arose, and there came straggling forth a dozen madcaps, whooping 
and calling to each other, who, parting noisily, took different 
ways and dispersed in smaller groups.

Hoping that some low place of entertainment which would afford him 
a safe refuge might be near at hand, he turned into this court when 
they were all gone, and looked about for a half-opened door, or 
lighted window, or other indication of the place whence they had 
come.  It was so profoundly dark, however, and so ill-favoured, 
that he concluded they had but turned up there, missing their way, 
and were pouring out again when he observed them.  With this 
impression, and finding there was no outlet but that by which he 
had entered, he was about to turn, when from a grating near his 
feet a sudden stream of light appeared, and the sound of talking 
came.  He retreated into a doorway to see who these talkers were, 
and to listen to them.

The light came to the level of the pavement as he did this, and a 
man ascended, bearing in his hand a torch.  This figure unlocked 
and held open the grating as for the passage of another, who 
presently appeared, in the form of a young man of small stature and 
uncommon self-importance, dressed in an obsolete and very gaudy 
fashion.

'Good night, noble captain,' said he with the torch.  'Farewell, 
commander.  Good luck, illustrious general!'

In return to these compliments the other bade him hold his tongue, 
and keep his noise to himself, and laid upon him many similar 
injunctions, with great fluency of speech and sternness of manner.

'Commend me, captain, to the stricken Miggs,' returned the torch-
bearer in a lower voice.  'My captain flies at higher game than 
Miggses.  Ha, ha, ha!  My captain is an eagle, both as respects his 
eye and soaring wings.  My captain breaketh hearts as other 
bachelors break eggs at breakfast.'

'What a fool you are, Stagg!' said Mr Tappertit, stepping on the 
pavement of the court, and brushing from his legs the dust he had 
contracted in his passage upward.

'His precious limbs!' cried Stagg, clasping one of his ankles.  
'Shall a Miggs aspire to these proportions!  No, no, my captain.  
We will inveigle ladies fair, and wed them in our secret cavern.  
We will unite ourselves with blooming beauties, captain.'

'I'll tell you what, my buck,' said Mr Tappertit, releasing his 
leg; 'I'll trouble you not to take liberties, and not to broach 
certain questions unless certain questions are broached to you.  
Speak when you're spoke to on particular subjects, and not 
otherways.  Hold the torch up till I've got to the end of the 
court, and then kennel yourself, do you hear?'

'I hear you, noble captain.'

'Obey then,' said Mr Tappertit haughtily.  'Gentlemen, lead on!'  
With which word of command (addressed to an imaginary staff or 
retinue) he folded his arms, and walked with surpassing dignity 
down the court.

His obsequious follower stood holding the torch above his head, and 
then the observer saw for the first time, from his place of 
concealment, that he was blind.  Some involuntary motion on his 
part caught the quick ear of the blind man, before he was conscious 
of having moved an inch towards him, for he turned suddenly and 
cried, 'Who's there?'

'A man,' said the other, advancing.  'A friend.'

'A stranger!' rejoined the blind man.  'Strangers are not my 
friends.  What do you do there?'

'I saw your company come out, and waited here till they were gone.  
I want a lodging.'

'A lodging at this time!' returned Stagg, pointing towards the dawn 
as though he saw it.  'Do you know the day is breaking?'

'I know it,' rejoined the other, 'to my cost.  I have been 
traversing this iron-hearted town all night.'

'You had better traverse it again,' said the blind man, preparing 
to descend, 'till you find some lodgings suitable to your taste.  I 
don't let any.'

'Stay!' cried the other, holding him by the arm.

'I'll beat this light about that hangdog face of yours (for hangdog 
it is, if it answers to your voice), and rouse the neighbourhood 
besides, if you detain me,' said the blind man.  'Let me go.  Do 
you hear?'

'Do YOU hear!' returned the other, chinking a few shillings 
together, and hurriedly pressing them into his hand.  'I beg 
nothing of you.  I will pay for the shelter you give me.  Death!  
Is it much to ask of such as you!  I have come from the country, 
and desire to rest where there are none to question me.  I am 
faint, exhausted, worn out, almost dead.  Let me lie down, like a 
dog, before your fire.  I ask no more than that.  If you would be 
rid of me, I will depart to-morrow.'

'If a gentleman has been unfortunate on the road,' muttered Stagg, 
yielding to the other, who, pressing on him, had already gained a 
footing on the steps--'and can pay for his accommodation--'

'I will pay you with all I have.  I am just now past the want of 
food, God knows, and wish but to purchase shelter.  What companion 
have you below?'

'None.'

'Then fasten your grate there, and show me the way.  Quick!'

The blind man complied after a moment's hesitation, and they 
descended together.  The dialogue had passed as hurriedly as the 
words could be spoken, and they stood in his wretched room before 
he had had time to recover from his first surprise.

'May I see where that door leads to, and what is beyond?' said the 
man, glancing keenly round.  'You will not mind that?'

'I will show you myself.  Follow me, or go before.  Take your 
choice.'

He bade him lead the way, and, by the light of the torch which his 
conductor held up for the purpose, inspected all three cellars 
narrowly.  Assured that the blind man had spoken truth, and that he 
lived there alone, the visitor returned with him to the first, in 
which a fire was burning, and flung himself with a deep groan upon 
the ground before it.

His host pursued his usual occupation without seeming to heed him 
any further.  But directly he fell asleep--and he noted his falling 
into a slumber, as readily as the keenest-sighted man could have 
done--he knelt down beside him, and passed his hand lightly but 
carefully over his face and person.

His sleep was checkered with starts and moans, and sometimes with a 
muttered word or two.  His hands were clenched, his brow bent, and 
his mouth firmly set.  All this, the blind man accurately marked; 
and as if his curiosity were strongly awakened, and he had already 
some inkling of his mystery, he sat watching him, if the expression 
may be used, and listening, until it was broad day.



Chapter 19


Dolly Varden's pretty little head was yet bewildered by various 
recollections of the party, and her bright eyes were yet dazzled by 
a crowd of images, dancing before them like motes in the sunbeams, 
among which the effigy of one partner in particular did especially 
figure, the same being a young coachmaker (a master in his own 
right) who had given her to understand, when he handed her into the 
chair at parting, that it was his fixed resolve to neglect his 
business from that time, and die slowly for the love of her--
Dolly's head, and eyes, and thoughts, and seven senses, were all in 
a state of flutter and confusion for which the party was 
accountable, although it was now three days old, when, as she was 
sitting listlessly at breakfast, reading all manner of fortunes 
(that is to say, of married and flourishing fortunes) in the 
grounds of her teacup, a step was heard in the workshop, and Mr 
Edward Chester was descried through the glass door, standing among 
the rusty locks and keys, like love among the roses--for which apt 
comparison the historian may by no means take any credit to 
himself, the same being the invention, in a sentimental mood, of 
the chaste and modest Miggs, who, beholding him from the doorsteps 
she was then cleaning, did, in her maiden meditation, give 
utterance to the simile.

The locksmith, who happened at the moment to have his eyes thrown 
upward and his head backward, in an intense communing with Toby, 
did not see his visitor, until Mrs Varden, more watchful than the 
rest, had desired Sim Tappertit to open the glass door and give him 
admission--from which untoward circumstance the good lady argued 
(for she could deduce a precious moral from the most trifling 
event) that to take a draught of small ale in the morning was to 
observe a pernicious, irreligious, and Pagan custom, the relish 
whereof should be left to swine, and Satan, or at least to Popish 
persons, and should be shunned by the righteous as a work of sin 
and evil.  She would no doubt have pursued her admonition much 
further, and would have founded on it a long list of precious 
precepts of inestimable value, but that the young gentleman 
standing by in a somewhat uncomfortable and discomfited manner 
while she read her spouse this lecture, occasioned her to bring it 
to a premature conclusion.

'I'm sure you'll excuse me, sir,' said Mrs Varden, rising and 
curtseying.  'Varden is so very thoughtless, and needs so much 
reminding--Sim, bring a chair here.'

Mr Tappertit obeyed, with a flourish implying that he did so, 
under protest.

'And you can go, Sim,' said the locksmith.

Mr Tappertit obeyed again, still under protest; and betaking 
himself to the workshop, began seriously to fear that he might find 
it necessary to poison his master, before his time was out.

In the meantime, Edward returned suitable replies to Mrs Varden's 
courtesies, and that lady brightened up very much; so that when he 
accepted a dish of tea from the fair hands of Dolly, she was 
perfectly agreeable.

'I am sure if there's anything we can do,--Varden, or I, or Dolly 
either,--to serve you, sir, at any time, you have only to say it, 
and it shall be done,' said Mrs V.

'I am much obliged to you, I am sure,' returned Edward.  'You 
encourage me to say that I have come here now, to beg your good 
offices.'

Mrs Varden was delighted beyond measure.

'It occurred to me that probably your fair daughter might be going 
to the Warren, either to-day or to-morrow,' said Edward, glancing 
at Dolly; 'and if so, and you will allow her to take charge of this 
letter, ma'am, you will oblige me more than I can tell you.  The 
truth is, that while I am very anxious it should reach its 
destination, I have particular reasons for not trusting it to any 
other conveyance; so that without your help, I am wholly at a loss.'

'She was not going that way, sir, either to-day, or to-morrow, nor 
indeed all next week,' the lady graciously rejoined, 'but we shall 
be very glad to put ourselves out of the way on your account, and 
if you wish it, you may depend upon its going to-day.  You might 
suppose,' said Mrs Varden, frowning at her husband, 'from Varden's 
sitting there so glum and silent, that he objected to this 
arrangement; but you must not mind that, sir, if you please.  It's 
his way at home.  Out of doors, he can be cheerful and talkative 
enough.'

Now, the fact was, that the unfortunate locksmith, blessing his 
stars to find his helpmate in such good humour, had been sitting 
with a beaming face, hearing this discourse with a joy past all 
expression.  Wherefore this sudden attack quite took him by 
surprise.

'My dear Martha--' he said.

'Oh yes, I dare say,' interrupted Mrs Varden, with a smile of 
mingled scorn and pleasantry.  'Very dear!  We all know that.'

'No, but my good soul,' said Gabriel, 'you are quite mistaken.  You 
are indeed.  I was delighted to find you so kind and ready.  I 
waited, my dear, anxiously, I assure you, to hear what you would 
say.'

'You waited anxiously,' repeated Mrs V.  'Yes!  Thank you, Varden.  
You waited, as you always do, that I might bear the blame, if any 
came of it.  But I am used to it,' said the lady with a kind of 
solemn titter, 'and that's my comfort!'

'I give you my word, Martha--' said Gabriel.

'Let me give you MY word, my dear,' interposed his wife with a 
Christian smile, 'that such discussions as these between married 
people, are much better left alone.  Therefore, if you please, 
Varden, we'll drop the subject.  I have no wish to pursue it.  I 
could.  I might say a great deal.  But I would rather not.  Pray 
don't say any more.'

'I don't want to say any more,' rejoined the goaded locksmith.

'Well then, don't,' said Mrs Varden.

'Nor did I begin it, Martha,' added the locksmith, good-humouredly, 
'I must say that.'

'You did not begin it, Varden!' exclaimed his wife, opening her 
eyes very wide and looking round upon the company, as though she 
would say, You hear this man!  'You did not begin it, Varden!  But 
you shall not say I was out of temper.  No, you did not begin it, 
oh dear no, not you, my dear!'

'Well, well,' said the locksmith.  'That's settled then.'

'Oh yes,' rejoined his wife, 'quite.  If you like to say Dolly 
began it, my dear, I shall not contradict you.  I know my duty.  I 
need know it, I am sure.  I am often obliged to bear it in mind, 
when my inclination perhaps would be for the moment to forget it.  
Thank you, Varden.'  And so, with a mighty show of humility and 
forgiveness, she folded her hands, and looked round again, with a 
smile which plainly said, 'If you desire to see the first and 
foremost among female martyrs, here she is, on view!'

This little incident, illustrative though it was of Mrs Varden's 
extraordinary sweetness and amiability, had so strong a tendency to 
check the conversation and to disconcert all parties but that 
excellent lady, that only a few monosyllables were uttered until 
Edward withdrew; which he presently did, thanking the lady of the 
house a great many times for her condescension, and whispering in 
Dolly's ear that he would call on the morrow, in case there should 
happen to be an answer to the note--which, indeed, she knew without 
his telling, as Barnaby and his friend Grip had dropped in on the 
previous night to prepare her for the visit which was then 
terminating.

Gabriel, who had attended Edward to the door, came back with his 
hands in his pockets; and, after fidgeting about the room in a very 
uneasy manner, and casting a great many sidelong looks at Mrs 
Varden (who with the calmest countenance in the world was five 
fathoms deep in the Protestant Manual), inquired of Dolly how she 
meant to go.  Dolly supposed by the stage-coach, and looked at her 
lady mother, who finding herself silently appealed to, dived down 
at least another fathom into the Manual, and became unconscious of 
all earthly things.

'Martha--' said the locksmith.

'I hear you, Varden,' said his wife, without rising to the surface.

'I am sorry, my dear, you have such an objection to the Maypole and 
old John, for otherways as it's a very fine morning, and Saturday's 
not a busy day with us, we might have all three gone to Chigwell in 
the chaise, and had quite a happy day of it.'

Mrs Varden immediately closed the Manual, and bursting into tears, 
requested to be led upstairs.

'What is the matter now, Martha?' inquired the locksmith.

To which Martha rejoined, 'Oh! don't speak to me,' and protested in 
agony that if anybody had told her so, she wouldn't have believed 
it.

'But, Martha,' said Gabriel, putting himself in the way as she was 
moving off with the aid of Dolly's shoulder, 'wouldn't have 
believed what?  Tell me what's wrong now.  Do tell me.  Upon my 
soul I don't know.  Do you know, child?  Damme!' cried the 
locksmith, plucking at his wig in a kind of frenzy, 'nobody does 
know, I verily believe, but Miggs!'

'Miggs,' said Mrs Varden faintly, and with symptoms of approaching 
incoherence, 'is attached to me, and that is sufficient to draw 
down hatred upon her in this house.  She is a comfort to me, 
whatever she may be to others.'

'She's no comfort to me,' cried Gabriel, made bold by despair.  
'She's the misery of my life.  She's all the plagues of Egypt in 
one.'

'She's considered so, I have no doubt,' said Mrs Varden.  'I was 
prepared for that; it's natural; it's of a piece with the rest.  
When you taunt me as you do to my face, how can I wonder that you 
taunt her behind her back!'  And here the incoherence coming on 
very strong, Mrs Varden wept, and laughed, and sobbed, and 
shivered, and hiccoughed, and choked; and said she knew it was very 
foolish but she couldn't help it; and that when she was dead and 
gone, perhaps they would be sorry for it--which really under the 
circumstances did not appear quite so probable as she seemed to 
think--with a great deal more to the same effect.  In a word, she 
passed with great decency through all the ceremonies incidental to 
such occasions; and being supported upstairs, was deposited in a 
highly spasmodic state on her own bed, where Miss Miggs shortly 
afterwards flung herself upon the body.

The philosophy of all this was, that Mrs Varden wanted to go to 
Chigwell; that she did not want to make any concession or 
explanation; that she would only go on being implored and entreated 
so to do; and that she would accept no other terms.  Accordingly, 
after a vast amount of moaning and crying upstairs, and much 
damping of foreheads, and vinegaring of temples, and hartshorning 
of noses, and so forth; and after most pathetic adjurations from 
Miggs, assisted by warm brandy-and-water not over-weak, and divers 
other cordials, also of a stimulating quality, administered at 
first in teaspoonfuls and afterwards in increasing doses, and of 
which Miss Miggs herself partook as a preventive measure (for 
fainting is infectious); after all these remedies, and many more 
too numerous to mention, but not to take, had been applied; and 
many verbal consolations, moral, religious, and miscellaneous, had 
been super-added thereto; the locksmith humbled himself, and the 
end was gained.

'If it's only for the sake of peace and quietness, father,' said 
Dolly, urging him to go upstairs.

'Oh, Doll, Doll,' said her good-natured father.  'If you ever have 
a husband of your own--'

Dolly glanced at the glass.

'--Well, WHEN you have,' said the locksmith, 'never faint, my 
darling.  More domestic unhappiness has come of easy fainting, 
Doll, than from all the greater passions put together.  Remember 
that, my dear, if you would be really happy, which you never can 
be, if your husband isn't.  And a word in your ear, my precious.  
Never have a Miggs about you!'

With this advice he kissed his blooming daughter on the cheek, and 
slowly repaired to Mrs Varden's room; where that lady, lying all 
pale and languid on her couch, was refreshing herself with a sight 
of her last new bonnet, which Miggs, as a means of calming her 
scattered spirits, displayed to the best advantage at her bedside.

'Here's master, mim,' said Miggs.  'Oh, what a happiness it is 
when man and wife come round again!  Oh gracious, to think that him 
and her should ever have a word together!'  In the energy of these 
sentiments, which were uttered as an apostrophe to the Heavens in 
general, Miss Miggs perched the bonnet on the top of her own head, 
and folding her hands, turned on her tears.

'I can't help it,' cried Miggs.  'I couldn't, if I was to be 
drownded in 'em.  She has such a forgiving spirit!  She'll forget 
all that has passed, and go along with you, sir--Oh, if it was to 
the world's end, she'd go along with you.'

Mrs Varden with a faint smile gently reproved her attendant for 
this enthusiasm, and reminded her at the same time that she was far 
too unwell to venture out that day.

'Oh no, you're not, mim, indeed you're not,' said Miggs; 'I repeal 
to master; master knows you're not, mim.  The hair, and motion of 
the shay, will do you good, mim, and you must not give way, you 
must not raly.  She must keep up, mustn't she, sir, for all out 
sakes?  I was a telling her that, just now.  She must remember us, 
even if she forgets herself.  Master will persuade you, mim, I'm 
sure.  There's Miss Dolly's a-going you know, and master, and you, 
and all so happy and so comfortable.  Oh!' cried Miggs, turning on 
the tears again, previous to quitting the room in great emotion, 'I 
never see such a blessed one as she is for the forgiveness of her 
spirit, I never, never, never did.  Not more did master neither; 
no, nor no one--never!'

For five minutes or thereabouts, Mrs Varden remained mildly opposed 
to all her husband's prayers that she would oblige him by taking a 
day's pleasure, but relenting at length, she suffered herself to be 
persuaded, and granting him her free forgiveness (the merit 
whereof, she meekly said, rested with the Manual and not with her), 
desired that Miggs might come and help her dress.  The handmaid 
attended promptly, and it is but justice to their joint exertions 
to record that, when the good lady came downstairs in course of 
time, completely decked out for the journey, she really looked as 
if nothing had happened, and appeared in the very best health 
imaginable.

As to Dolly, there she was again, the very pink and pattern of good 
looks, in a smart little cherry-coloured mantle, with a hood of 
the same drawn over her head, and upon the top of that hood, a 
little straw hat trimmed with cherry-coloured ribbons, and worn the 
merest trifle on one side--just enough in short to make it the 
wickedest and most provoking head-dress that ever malicious 
milliner devised.  And not to speak of the manner in which these 
cherry-coloured decorations brightened her eyes, or vied with her 
lips, or shed a new bloom on her face, she wore such a cruel little 
muff, and such a heart-rending pair of shoes, and was so 
surrounded and hemmed in, as it were, by aggravations of all kinds, 
that when Mr Tappettit, holding the horse's head, saw her come out 
of the house alone, such impulses came over him to decoy her into 
the chaise and drive off like mad, that he would unquestionably 
have done it, but for certain uneasy doubts besetting him as to the 
shortest way to Gretna Green; whether it was up the street or 
down, or up the right-hand turning or the left; and whether, 
supposing all the turnpikes to be carried by storm, the blacksmith 
in the end would marry them on credit; which by reason of his 
clerical office appeared, even to his excited imagination, so 
unlikely, that he hesitated.  And while he stood hesitating, and 
looking post-chaises-and-six at Dolly, out came his master and his 
mistress, and the constant Miggs, and the opportunity was gone for 
ever.  For now the chaise creaked upon its springs, and Mrs Varden 
was inside; and now it creaked again, and more than ever, and the 
locksmith was inside; and now it bounded once, as if its heart beat 
lightly, and Dolly was inside; and now it was gone and its place 
was empty, and he and that dreary Miggs were standing in the street 
together.

The hearty locksmith was in as good a humour as if nothing had 
occurred for the last twelve months to put him out of his way, 
Dolly was all smiles and graces, and Mrs Varden was agreeable 
beyond all precedent.  As they jogged through the streets talking 
of this thing and of that, who should be descried upon the pavement 
but that very coachmaker, looking so genteel that nobody would have 
believed he had ever had anything to do with a coach but riding in 
it, and bowing like any nobleman.  To be sure Dolly was confused 
when she bowed again, and to be sure the cherry-coloured ribbons 
trembled a little when she met his mournful eye, which seemed to 
say, 'I have kept my word, I have begun, the business is going to 
the devil, and you're the cause of it.'  There he stood, rooted to 
the ground: as Dolly said, like a statue; and as Mrs Varden said, 
like a pump; till they turned the corner: and when her father 
thought it was like his impudence, and her mother wondered what he 
meant by it, Dolly blushed again till her very hood was pale.

But on they went, not the less merrily for this, and there was the 
locksmith in the incautious fulness of his heart 'pulling-up' at 
all manner of places, and evincing a most intimate acquaintance 
with all the taverns on the road, and all the landlords and all the 
landladies, with whom, indeed, the little horse was on equally 
friendly terms, for he kept on stopping of his own accord.  Never 
were people so glad to see other people as these landlords and 
landladies were to behold Mr Varden and Mrs Varden and Miss Varden; 
and wouldn't they get out, said one; and they really must walk 
upstairs, said another; and she would take it ill and be quite 
certain they were proud if they wouldn't have a little taste of 
something, said a third; and so on, that it was really quite a 
Progress rather than a ride, and one continued scene of hospitality 
from beginning to end.  It was pleasant enough to be held in such 
esteem, not to mention the refreshments; so Mrs Varden said nothing 
at the time, and was all affability and delight--but such a body of 
evidence as she collected against the unfortunate locksmith that 
day, to be used thereafter as occasion might require, never was got 
together for matrimonial purposes.

In course of time--and in course of a pretty long time too, for 
these agreeable interruptions delayed them not a little,--they 
arrived upon the skirts of the Forest, and riding pleasantly on 
among the trees, came at last to the Maypole, where the locksmith's 
cheerful 'Yoho!' speedily brought to the porch old John, and after 
him young Joe, both of whom were so transfixed at sight of the 
ladies, that for a moment they were perfectly unable to give them 
any welcome, and could do nothing but stare.

It was only for a moment, however, that Joe forgot himself, for 
speedily reviving he thrust his drowsy father aside--to Mr Willet's 
mighty and inexpressible indignation--and darting out, stood ready 
to help them to alight.  It was necessary for Dolly to get out 
first.  Joe had her in his arms;--yes, though for a space of time 
no longer than you could count one in, Joe had her in his arms.  
Here was a glimpse of happiness!

It would be difficult to describe what a flat and commonplace 
affair the helping Mrs Varden out afterwards was, but Joe did it, 
and did it too with the best grace in the world.  Then old John, 
who, entertaining a dull and foggy sort of idea that Mrs Varden 
wasn't fond of him, had been in some doubt whether she might not 
have come for purposes of assault and battery, took courage, hoped 
she was well, and offered to conduct her into the house.  This 
tender being amicably received, they marched in together; Joe and 
Dolly followed, arm-in-arm, (happiness again!) and Varden brought 
up the rear.

Old John would have it that they must sit in the bar, and nobody 
objecting, into the bar they went.  All bars are snug places, but 
the Maypole's was the very snuggest, cosiest, and completest bar, 
that ever the wit of man devised.  Such amazing bottles in old 
oaken pigeon-holes; such gleaming tankards dangling from pegs at 
about the same inclination as thirsty men would hold them to their 
lips; such sturdy little Dutch kegs ranged in rows on shelves; so 
many lemons hanging in separate nets, and forming the fragrant 
grove already mentioned in this chronicle, suggestive, with goodly 
loaves of snowy sugar stowed away hard by, of punch, idealised 
beyond all mortal knowledge; such closets, such presses, such 
drawers full of pipes, such places for putting things away in 
hollow window-seats, all crammed to the throat with eatables, 
drinkables, or savoury condiments; lastly, and to crown all, as 
typical of the immense resources of the establishment, and its 
defiances to all visitors to cut and come again, such a stupendous 
cheese!

It is a poor heart that never rejoices--it must have been the 
poorest, weakest, and most watery heart that ever beat, which would 
not have warmed towards the Maypole bar.  Mrs Varden's did 
directly.  She could no more have reproached John Willet among 
those household gods, the kegs and bottles, lemons, pipes, and 
cheese, than she could have stabbed him with his own bright 
carving-knife.  The order for dinner too--it might have soothed a 
savage.  'A bit of fish,' said John to the cook, 'and some lamb 
chops (breaded, with plenty of ketchup), and a good salad, and a 
roast spring chicken, with a dish of sausages and mashed potatoes, 
or something of that sort.'  Something of that sort!  The resources 
of these inns!  To talk carelessly about dishes, which in 
themselves were a first-rate holiday kind of dinner, suitable to 
one's wedding-day, as something of that sort: meaning, if you can't 
get a spring chicken, any other trifle in the way of poultry will 
do--such as a peacock, perhaps!  The kitchen too, with its great 
broad cavernous chimney; the kitchen, where nothing in the way of 
cookery seemed impossible; where you could believe in anything to 
eat, they chose to tell you of.  Mrs Varden returned from the 
contemplation of these wonders to the bar again, with a head quite 
dizzy and bewildered.  Her housekeeping capacity was not large 
enough to comprehend them.  She was obliged to go to sleep.  Waking 
was pain, in the midst of such immensity.

Dolly in the meanwhile, whose gay heart and head ran upon other 
matters, passed out at the garden door, and glancing back now and 
then (but of course not wondering whether Joe saw her), tripped 
away by a path across the fields with which she was well 
acquainted, to discharge her mission at the Warren; and this 
deponent hath been informed and verily believes, that you might 
have seen many less pleasant objects than the cherry-coloured 
mantle and ribbons, as they went fluttering along the green meadows 
in the bright light of the day, like giddy things as they were.



Chapter 20


The proud consciousness of her trust, and the great importance she 
derived from it, might have advertised it to all the house if she 
had had to run the gauntlet of its inhabitants; but as Dolly had 
played in every dull room and passage many and many a time, when a 
child, and had ever since been the humble friend of Miss Haredale, 
whose foster-sister she was, she was as free of the building as the 
young lady herself.  So, using no greater precaution than holding 
her breath and walking on tiptoe as she passed the library door, 
she went straight to Emma's room as a privileged visitor.

It was the liveliest room in the building.  The chamber was sombre 
like the rest for the matter of that, but the presence of youth and 
beauty would make a prison cheerful (saving alas! that confinement 
withers them), and lend some charms of their own to the gloomiest 
scene.  Birds, flowers, books, drawing, music, and a hundred such 
graceful tokens of feminine loves and cares, filled it with more of 
life and human sympathy than the whole house besides seemed made to 
hold.  There was heart in the room; and who that has a heart, ever 
fails to recognise the silent presence of another!

Dolly had one undoubtedly, and it was not a tough one either, 
though there was a little mist of coquettishness about it, such as 
sometimes surrounds that sun of life in its morning, and slightly 
dims its lustre.  Thus, when Emma rose to greet her, and kissing 
her affectionately on the cheek, told her, in her quiet way, that 
she had been very unhappy, the tears stood in Dolly's eyes, and she 
felt more sorry than she could tell; but next moment she happened 
to raise them to the glass, and really there was something there so 
exceedingly agreeable, that as she sighed, she smiled, and felt 
surprisingly consoled.

'I have heard about it, miss,' said Dolly, 'and it's very sad 
indeed, but when things are at the worst they are sure to mend.'

'But are you sure they are at the worst?' asked Emma with a smile.

'Why, I don't see how they can very well be more unpromising than 
they are; I really don't,' said Dolly.  'And I bring something to 
begin with.'

'Not from Edward?'

Dolly nodded and smiled, and feeling in her pockets (there were 
pockets in those days) with an affectation of not being able to 
find what she wanted, which greatly enhanced her importance, at 
length produced the letter.  As Emma hastily broke the seal and 
became absorbed in its contents, Dolly's eyes, by one of those 
strange accidents for which there is no accounting, wandered to the 
glass again.  She could not help wondering whether the coach-maker 
suffered very much, and quite pitied the poor man.

It was a long letter--a very long letter, written close on all four 
sides of the sheet of paper, and crossed afterwards; but it was not 
a consolatory letter, for as Emma read it she stopped from time to 
time to put her handkerchief to her eyes.  To be sure Dolly 
marvelled greatly to see her in so much distress, for to her 
thinking a love affair ought to be one of the best jokes, and the 
slyest, merriest kind of thing in life.  But she set it down in her 
own mind that all this came from Miss Haredale's being so constant, 
and that if she would only take on with some other young gentleman--
just in the most innocent way possible, to keep her first lover up 
to the mark--she would find herself inexpressibly comforted.

'I am sure that's what I should do if it was me,' thought Dolly.  
'To make one's sweetheart miserable is well enough and quite right, 
but to be made miserable one's self is a little too much!'

However it wouldn't do to say so, and therefore she sat looking on 
in silence.  She needed a pretty considerable stretch of patience, 
for when the long letter had been read once all through it was read 
again, and when it had been read twice all through it was read 
again.  During this tedious process, Dolly beguiled the time in the 
most improving manner that occurred to her, by curling her hair on 
her fingers, with the aid of the looking-glass before mentioned, 
and giving it some killing twists.

Everything has an end.  Even young ladies in love cannot read their 
letters for ever.  In course of time the packet was folded up, and 
it only remained to write the answer.

But as this promised to be a work of time likewise, Emma said she 
would put it off until after dinner, and that Dolly must dine with 
her.  As Dolly had made up her mind to do so beforehand, she 
required very little pressing; and when they had settled this 
point, they went to walk in the garden.

They strolled up and down the terrace walks, talking incessantly--
at least, Dolly never left off once--and making that quarter of the 
sad and mournful house quite gay.  Not that they talked loudly or 
laughed much, but they were both so very handsome, and it was such 
a breezy day, and their light dresses and dark curls appeared so 
free and joyous in their abandonment, and Emma was so fair, and 
Dolly so rosy, and Emma so delicately shaped, and Dolly so plump, 
and--in short, there are no flowers for any garden like such 
flowers, let horticulturists say what they may, and both house and 
garden seemed to know it, and to brighten up sensibly.

After this, came the dinner and the letter writing, and some more 
talking, in the course of which Miss Haredale took occasion to 
charge upon Dolly certain flirtish and inconstant propensities, 
which accusations Dolly seemed to think very complimentary indeed, 
and to be mightily amused with.  Finding her quite incorrigible in 
this respect, Emma suffered her to depart; but not before she had 
confided to her that important and never-sufficiently-to-be-taken-
care-of answer, and endowed her moreover with a pretty little 
bracelet as a keepsake.  Having clasped it on her arm, and again 
advised her half in jest and half in earnest to amend her roguish 
ways, for she knew she was fond of Joe at heart (which Dolly 
stoutly denied, with a great many haughty protestations that she 
hoped she could do better than that indeed! and so forth), she bade 
her farewell; and after calling her back to give her more 
supplementary messages for Edward, than anybody with tenfold the 
gravity of Dolly Varden could be reasonably expected to remember, 
at length dismissed her.

Dolly bade her good bye, and tripping lightly down the stairs 
arrived at the dreaded library door, and was about to pass it again 
on tiptoe, when it opened, and behold! there stood Mr Haredale.  
Now, Dolly had from her childhood associated with this gentleman 
the idea of something grim and ghostly, and being at the moment 
conscience-stricken besides, the sight of him threw her into such a 
flurry that she could neither acknowledge his presence nor run 
away, so she gave a great start, and then with downcast eyes stood 
still and trembled.

'Come here, girl,' said Mr Haredale, taking her by the hand.  'I 
want to speak to you.'

'If you please, sir, I'm in a hurry,' faltered Dolly, 'and--you 
have frightened me by coming so suddenly upon me, sir--I would 
rather go, sir, if you'll be so good as to let me.'

'Immediately,' said Mr Haredale, who had by this time led her into 
the room and closed the door.  You shall go directly.  You have 
just left Emma?'

'Yes, sir, just this minute.--Father's waiting for me, sir, if 
you'll please to have the goodness--'

I know.  I know,' said Mr Haredale.  'Answer me a question.  What 
did you bring here to-day?' 

'Bring here, sir?' faltered Dolly.  

'You will tell me the truth, I am sure.  Yes.'

Dolly hesitated for a little while, and somewhat emboldened by his 
manner, said at last, 'Well then, sir.  It was a letter.'

'From Mr Edward Chester, of course.  And you are the bearer of the 
answer?'

Dolly hesitated again, and not being able to decide upon any other 
course of action, burst into tears.

'You alarm yourself without cause,' said Mr Haredale.  'Why are you 
so foolish?  Surely you can answer me.  You know that I have but 
to put the question to Emma and learn the truth directly.  Have you 
the answer with you?'

Dolly had what is popularly called a spirit of her own, and being 
now fairly at bay, made the best of it.

'Yes, sir,' she rejoined, trembling and frightened as she was.  
'Yes, sir, I have.  You may kill me if you please, sir, but I won't 
give it up.  I'm very sorry,--but I won't.  There, sir.'

'I commend your firmness and your plain-speaking,' said Mr 
Haredale.  'Rest assured that I have as little desire to take your 
letter as your life.  You are a very discreet messenger and a good 
girl.'

Not feeling quite certain, as she afterwards said, whether he might 
not be 'coming over her' with these compliments, Dolly kept as far 
from him as she could, cried again, and resolved to defend her 
pocket (for the letter was there) to the last extremity.

'I have some design,' said Mr Haredale after a short silence, 
during which a smile, as he regarded her, had struggled through 
the gloom and melancholy that was natural to his face, 'of 
providing a companion for my niece; for her life is a very lonely 
one.  Would you like the office?  You are the oldest friend she 
has, and the best entitled to it.'

'I don't know, sir,' answered Dolly, not sure but he was bantering 
her; 'I can't say.  I don't know what they might wish at home.  I 
couldn't give an opinion, sir.'

'If your friends had no objection, would you have any?' said Mr 
Haredale.  'Come.  There's a plain question; and easy to answer.'

'None at all that I know of sir,' replied Dolly.  'I should be very 
glad to be near Miss Emma of course, and always am.'

'That's well,' said Mr Haredale.  'That is all I had to say.  You 
are anxious to go.  Don't let me detain you.'

Dolly didn't let him, nor did she wait for him to try, for the 
words had no sooner passed his lips than she was out of the room, 
out of the house, and in the fields again.

The first thing to be done, of course, when she came to herself and 
considered what a flurry she had been in, was to cry afresh; and 
the next thing, when she reflected how well she had got over it, 
was to laugh heartily.  The tears once banished gave place to the 
smiles, and at last Dolly laughed so much that she was fain to lean 
against a tree, and give vent to her exultation.  When she could 
laugh no longer, and was quite tired, she put her head-dress to 
rights, dried her eyes, looked back very merrily and triumphantly 
at the Warren chimneys, which were just visible, and resumed her 
walk.

The twilight had come on, and it was quickly growing dusk, but the 
path was so familiar to her from frequent traversing that she 
hardly thought of this, and certainly felt no uneasiness at being 
left alone.  Moreover, there was the bracelet to admire; and when 
she had given it a good rub, and held it out at arm's length, it 
sparkled and glittered so beautifully on her wrist, that to look at 
it in every point of view and with every possible turn of the arm, 
was quite an absorbing business.  There was the letter too, and it 
looked so mysterious and knowing, when she took it out of her 
pocket, and it held, as she knew, so much inside, that to turn it 
over and over, and think about it, and wonder how it began, and how 
it ended, and what it said all through, was another matter of 
constant occupation.  Between the bracelet and the letter, there 
was quite enough to do without thinking of anything else; and 
admiring each by turns, Dolly went on gaily.

As she passed through a wicket-gate to where the path was narrow, 
and lay between two hedges garnished here and there with trees, she 
heard a rustling close at hand, which brought her to a sudden stop.  
She listened.  All was very quiet, and she went on again--not 
absolutely frightened, but a little quicker than before perhaps, 
and possibly not quite so much at her ease, for a check of that 
kind is startling.

She had no sooner moved on again, than she was conscious of the 
same sound, which was like that of a person tramping stealthily 
among bushes and brushwood.  Looking towards the spot whence it 
appeared to come, she almost fancied she could make out a crouching 
figure.  She stopped again.  All was quiet as before.  On she went 
once more--decidedly faster now--and tried to sing softly to 
herself.  It must he the wind.

But how came the wind to blow only when she walked, and cease when 
she stood still?  She stopped involuntarily as she made the 
reflection, and the rustling noise stopped likewise.  She was 
really frightened now, and was yet hesitating what to do, when the 
bushes crackled and snapped, and a man came plunging through them, 
close before her.



Chapter 21


It was for the moment an inexpressible relief to Dolly, to 
recognise in the person who forced himself into the path so 
abruptly, and now stood directly in her way, Hugh of the Maypole, 
whose name she uttered in a tone of delighted surprise that came 
from her heart.

'Was it you?' she said, 'how glad I am to see you! and how could 
you terrify me so!'

In answer to which, he said nothing at all, but stood quite still, 
looking at her.

'Did you come to meet me?' asked Dolly.

Hugh nodded, and muttered something to the effect that he had been 
waiting for her, and had expected her sooner.

'I thought it likely they would send,' said Dolly, greatly 
reassured by this.

'Nobody sent me,' was his sullen answer.  'I came of my own 
accord.'

The rough bearing of this fellow, and his wild, uncouth appearance, 
had often filled the girl with a vague apprehension even when other 
people were by, and had occasioned her to shrink from him 
involuntarily.  The having him for an unbidden companion in so 
solitary a place, with the darkness fast gathering about them, 
renewed and even increased the alarm she had felt at first.

If his manner had been merely dogged and passively fierce, as 
usual, she would have had no greater dislike to his company than 
she always felt--perhaps, indeed, would have been rather glad to 
have had him at hand.  But there was something of coarse bold 
admiration in his look, which terrified her very much.  She glanced 
timidly towards him, uncertain whether to go forward or retreat, 
and he stood gazing at her like a handsome satyr; and so they 
remained for some short time without stirring or breaking silence.  
At length Dolly took courage, shot past him, and hurried on.

'Why do you spend so much breath in avoiding me?' said Hugh, 
accommodating his pace to hers, and keeping close at her side.

'I wish to get back as quickly as I can, and you walk too near me, 
answered Dolly.'

'Too near!' said Hugh, stooping over her so that she could feel his 
breath upon her forehead.  'Why too near?  You're always proud to 
ME, mistress.'

'I am proud to no one.  You mistake me,' answered Dolly.  'Fall 
back, if you please, or go on.'

'Nay, mistress,' he rejoined, endeavouring to draw her arm through 
his, 'I'll walk with you.'

She released herself and clenching her little hand, struck him with 
right good will.  At this, Maypole Hugh burst into a roar of 
laughter, and passing his arm about her waist, held her in his 
strong grasp as easily as if she had been a bird.

'Ha ha ha!  Well done, mistress!  Strike again.  You shall beat my 
face, and tear my hair, and pluck my beard up by the roots, and 
welcome, for the sake of your bright eyes.  Strike again, mistress.  
Do.  Ha ha ha!  I like it.'

'Let me go,' she cried, endeavouring with both her hands to push 
him off.  'Let me go this moment.'

'You had as good be kinder to me, Sweetlips,' said Hugh.  'You had, 
indeed.  Come.  Tell me now.  Why are you always so proud?  I 
don't quarrel with you for it.  I love you when you're proud.  Ha 
ha ha!  You can't hide your beauty from a poor fellow; that's a 
comfort!'

She gave him no answer, but as he had not yet checked her progress, 
continued to press forward as rapidly as she could.  At length, 
between the hurry she had made, her terror, and the tightness of 
his embrace, her strength failed her, and she could go no further.

'Hugh,' cried the panting girl, 'good Hugh; if you will leave me I 
will give you anything--everything I have--and never tell one word 
of this to any living creature.'

'You had best not,' he answered.  'Harkye, little dove, you had 
best not.  All about here know me, and what I dare do if I have a 
mind.  If ever you are going to tell, stop when the words are on 
your lips, and think of the mischief you'll bring, if you do, upon 
some innocent heads that you wouldn't wish to hurt a hair of.  
Bring trouble on me, and I'll bring trouble and something more on 
them in return.  I care no more for them than for so many dogs; not 
so much--why should I?  I'd sooner kill a man than a dog any day.  
I've never been sorry for a man's death in all my life, and I have 
for a dog's.'

There was something so thoroughly savage in the manner of these 
expressions, and the looks and gestures by which they were 
accompanied, that her great fear of him gave her new strength, and 
enabled her by a sudden effort to extricate herself and run fleetly 
from him.  But Hugh was as nimble, strong, and swift of foot, as 
any man in broad England, and it was but a fruitless expenditure of 
energy, for he had her in his encircling arms again before she had 
gone a hundred yards.

'Softly, darling--gently--would you fly from rough Hugh, that loves 
you as well as any drawing-room gallant?'

'I would,' she answered, struggling to free herself again.  'I 
will.  Help!'

'A fine for crying out,' said Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  A fine, pretty 
one, from your lips.  I pay myself!  Ha ha ha!'

'Help! help! help!'  As she shrieked with the utmost violence she 
could exert, a shout was heard in answer, and another, and another.

'Thank Heaven!' cried the girl in an ecstasy.  'Joe, dear Joe, this 
way.  Help!'

Her assailant paused, and stood irresolute for a moment, but the 
shouts drawing nearer and coming quick upon them, forced him to a 
speedy decision.  He released her, whispered with a menacing look, 
'Tell HIM: and see what follows!' and leaping the hedge, was gone 
in an instant.  Dolly darted off, and fairly ran into Joe Willet's 
open arms.

'What is the matter? are you hurt? what was it? who was it? where 
is he? what was he like?' with a great many encouraging expressions 
and assurances of safety, were the first words Joe poured forth.  
But poor little Dolly was so breathless and terrified that for some 
time she was quite unable to answer him, and hung upon his 
shoulder, sobbing and crying as if her heart would break.

Joe had not the smallest objection to have her hanging on his 
shoulder; no, not the least, though it crushed the cherry-coloured 
ribbons sadly, and put the smart little hat out of all shape.  But 
he couldn't bear to see her cry; it went to his very heart.  He 
tried to console her, bent over her, whispered to her--some say 
kissed her, but that's a fable.  At any rate he said all the kind 
and tender things he could think of and Dolly let him go on and 
didn't interrupt him once, and it was a good ten minutes before she 
was able to raise her head and thank him.

'What was it that frightened you?' said Joe.

A man whose person was unknown to her had followed her, she 
answered; he began by begging, and went on to threats of robbery, 
which he was on the point of carrying into execution, and would 
have executed, but for Joe's timely aid.  The hesitation and 
confusion with which she said this, Joe attributed to the fright 
she had sustained, and no suspicion of the truth occurred to him 
for a moment.

'Stop when the words are on your lips.'  A hundred times that 
night, and very often afterwards, when the disclosure was rising 
to her tongue, Dolly thought of that, and repressed it.  A deeply 
rooted dread of the man; the conviction that his ferocious nature, 
once roused, would stop at nothing; and the strong assurance that 
if she impeached him, the full measure of his wrath and vengeance 
would be wreaked on Joe, who had preserved her; these were 
considerations she had not the courage to overcome, and inducements 
to secrecy too powerful for her to surmount.

Joe, for his part, was a great deal too happy to inquire very 
curiously into the matter; and Dolly being yet too tremulous to 
walk without assistance, they went forward very slowly, and in his 
mind very pleasantly, until the Maypole lights were near at hand, 
twinkling their cheerful welcome, when Dolly stopped suddenly and 
with a half scream exclaimed,

'The letter!'

'What letter?' cried Joe.

'That I was carrying--I had it in my hand.  My bracelet too,' she 
said, clasping her wrist.  'I have lost them both.'

'Do you mean just now?' said Joe.

'Either I dropped them then, or they were taken from me,' answered 
Dolly, vainly searching her pocket and rustling her dress.  'They 
are gone, both gone.  What an unhappy girl I am!'  With these words 
poor Dolly, who to do her justice was quite as sorry for the loss 
of the letter as for her bracelet, fell a-crying again, and 
bemoaned her fate most movingly.

Joe tried to comfort her with the assurance that directly he had 
housed her in the Maypole, he would return to the spot with a 
lantern (for it was now quite dark) and make strict search for the 
missing articles, which there was great probability of his finding, 
as it was not likely that anybody had passed that way since, and 
she was not conscious that they had been forcibly taken from her.  
Dolly thanked him very heartily for this offer, though with no 
great hope of his quest being successful; and so with many 
lamentations on her side, and many hopeful words on his, and much 
weakness on the part of Dolly and much tender supporting on the 
part of Joe, they reached the Maypole bar at last, where the 
locksmith and his wife and old John were yet keeping high festival.

Mr Willet received the intelligence of Dolly's trouble with that 
surprising presence of mind and readiness of speech for which he 
was so eminently distinguished above all other men.  Mrs Varden 
expressed her sympathy for her daughter's distress by scolding her 
roundly for being so late; and the honest locksmith divided himself 
between condoling with and kissing Dolly, and shaking hands 
heartily with Joe, whom he could not sufficiently praise or thank.

In reference to this latter point, old John was far from agreeing 
with his friend; for besides that he by no means approved of an 
adventurous spirit in the abstract, it occurred to him that if his 
son and heir had been seriously damaged in a scuffle, the 
consequences would assuredly have been expensive and inconvenient, 
and might perhaps have proved detrimental to the Maypole business.  
Wherefore, and because he looked with no favourable eye upon young 
girls, but rather considered that they and the whole female sex 
were a kind of nonsensical mistake on the part of Nature, he took 
occasion to retire and shake his head in private at the boiler; 
inspired by which silent oracle, he was moved to give Joe various 
stealthy nudges with his elbow, as a parental reproof and gentle 
admonition to mind his own business and not make a fool of himself.

Joe, however, took down the lantern and lighted it; and arming 
himself with a stout stick, asked whether Hugh was in the stable.

'He's lying asleep before the kitchen fire, sir,' said Mr Willet.  
'What do you want him for?'

'I want him to come with me to look after this bracelet and 
letter,' answered Joe.  'Halloa there!  Hugh!'

Dolly turned pale as death, and felt as if she must faint 
forthwith.  After a few moments, Hugh came staggering in, 
stretching himself and yawning according to custom, and presenting 
every appearance of having been roused from a sound nap.

'Here, sleepy-head,' said Joe, giving him the lantern.  'Carry 
this, and bring the dog, and that small cudgel of yours.  And woe 
betide the fellow if we come upon him.'

'What fellow?' growled Hugh, rubbing his eyes and shaking himself.

'What fellow?' returned Joe, who was in a state of great valour and 
bustle; 'a fellow you ought to know of and be more alive about.  
It's well for the like of you, lazy giant that you are, to be 
snoring your time away in chimney-corners, when honest men's 
daughters can't cross even our quiet meadows at nightfall without 
being set upon by footpads, and frightened out of their precious 
lives.'

'They never rob me,' cried Hugh with a laugh.  'I have got nothing 
to lose.  But I'd as lief knock them at head as any other men.  How 
many are there?'

'Only one,' said Dolly faintly, for everybody looked at her.

'And what was he like, mistress?' said Hugh with a glance at young 
Willet, so slight and momentary that the scowl it conveyed was lost 
on all but her.  'About my height?'

'Not--not so tall,' Dolly replied, scarce knowing what she said.

'His dress,' said Hugh, looking at her keenly, 'like--like any of 
ours now?  I know all the people hereabouts, and maybe could give a 
guess at the man, if I had anything to guide me.'

Dolly faltered and turned paler yet; then answered that he was 
wrapped in a loose coat and had his face hidden by a handkerchief 
and that she could give no other description of him.

'You wouldn't know him if you saw him then, belike?' said Hugh with 
a malicious grin.

'I should not,' answered Dolly, bursting into tears again.  'I 
don't wish to see him.  I can't bear to think of him.  I can't talk 
about him any more.  Don't go to look for these things, Mr Joe, 
pray don't.  I entreat you not to go with that man.'

'Not to go with me!' cried Hugh.  'I'm too rough for them all.  
They're all afraid of me.  Why, bless you mistress, I've the 
tenderest heart alive.  I love all the ladies, ma'am,' said Hugh, 
turning to the locksmith's wife.

Mrs Varden opined that if he did, he ought to be ashamed of 
himself; such sentiments being more consistent (so she argued) with 
a benighted Mussulman or wild Islander than with a stanch 
Protestant.  Arguing from this imperfect state of his morals, Mrs 
Varden further opined that he had never studied the Manual.  Hugh 
admitting that he never had, and moreover that he couldn't read, 
Mrs Varden declared with much severity, that he ought to he even 
more ashamed of himself than before, and strongly recommended him 
to save up his pocket-money for the purchase of one, and further to 
teach himself the contents with all convenient diligence.  She was 
still pursuing this train of discourse, when Hugh, somewhat 
unceremoniously and irreverently, followed his young master out, 
and left her to edify the rest of the company.  This she proceeded 
to do, and finding that Mr Willet's eyes were fixed upon her with 
an appearance of deep attention, gradually addressed the whole of 
her discourse to him, whom she entertained with a moral and 
theological lecture of considerable length, in the conviction that 
great workings were taking place in his spirit.  The simple truth 
was, however, that Mr Willet, although his eyes were wide open and 
he saw a woman before him whose head by long and steady looking at 
seemed to grow bigger and bigger until it filled the whole bar, was 
to all other intents and purposes fast asleep; and so sat leaning 
back in his chair with his hands in his pockets until his son's 
return caused him to wake up with a deep sigh, and a faint 
impression that he had been dreaming about pickled pork and greens--
a vision of his slumbers which was no doubt referable to the 
circumstance of Mrs Varden's having frequently pronounced the word 
'Grace' with much emphasis; which word, entering the portals of Mr 
Willet's brain as they stood ajar, and coupling itself with the 
words 'before meat,' which were there ranging about, did in time 
suggest a particular kind of meat together with that description of 
vegetable which is usually its companion.

The search was wholly unsuccessful.  Joe had groped along the path 
a dozen times, and among the grass, and in the dry ditch, and in 
the hedge, but all in vain.  Dolly, who was quite inconsolable for 
her loss, wrote a note to Miss Haredale giving her the same account 
of it that she had given at the Maypole, which Joe undertook to 
deliver as soon as the family were stirring next day.  That done, 
they sat down to tea in the bar, where there was an uncommon 
display of buttered toast, and--in order that they might not grow 
faint for want of sustenance, and might have a decent halting-
place or halfway house between dinner and supper--a few savoury 
trifles in the shape of great rashers of broiled ham, which being 
well cured, done to a turn, and smoking hot, sent forth a tempting 
and delicious fragrance.

Mrs Varden was seldom very Protestant at meals, unless it happened 
that they were underdone, or overdone, or indeed that anything 
occurred to put her out of humour.  Her spirits rose considerably 
on beholding these goodly preparations, and from the nothingness of 
good works, she passed to the somethingness of ham and toast with 
great cheerfulness.  Nay, under the influence of these wholesome 
stimulants, she sharply reproved her daughter for being low and 
despondent (which she considered an unacceptable frame of mind), 
and remarked, as she held her own plate for a fresh supply, that it 
would be well for Dolly, who pined over the loss of a toy and a 
sheet of paper, if she would reflect upon the voluntary sacrifices 
of the missionaries in foreign parts who lived chiefly on salads.

The proceedings of such a day occasion various fluctuations in the 
human thermometer, and especially in instruments so sensitively and 
delicately constructed as Mrs Varden.  Thus, at dinner Mrs V. stood 
at summer heat; genial, smiling, and delightful.  After dinner, in 
the sunshine of the wine, she went up at least half-a-dozen 
degrees, and was perfectly enchanting.  As its effect subsided, she 
fell rapidly, went to sleep for an hour or so at temperate, and 
woke at something below freezing.  Now she was at summer heat 
again, in the shade; and when tea was over, and old John, producing 
a bottle of cordial from one of the oaken cases, insisted on her 
sipping two glasses thereof in slow succession, she stood steadily 
at ninety for one hour and a quarter.  Profiting by experience, the 
locksmith took advantage of this genial weather to smoke his pipe 
in the porch, and in consequence of this prudent management, he was 
fully prepared, when the glass went down again, to start homewards 
directly.

The horse was accordingly put in, and the chaise brought round to 
the door.  Joe, who would on no account be dissuaded from escorting 
them until they had passed the most dreary and solitary part of the 
road, led out the grey mare at the same time; and having helped 
Dolly into her seat (more happiness!) sprung gaily into the saddle.  
Then, after many good nights, and admonitions to wrap up, and 
glancing of lights, and handing in of cloaks and shawls, the chaise 
rolled away, and Joe trotted beside it--on Dolly's side, no doubt, 
and pretty close to the wheel too.



Chapter 22


It was a fine bright night, and for all her lowness of spirits 
Dolly kept looking up at the stars in a manner so bewitching (and 
SHE knew it!) that Joe was clean out of his senses, and plainly 
showed that if ever a man were--not to say over head and ears, but 
over the Monument and the top of Saint Paul's in love, that man was 
himself.  The road was a very good one; not at all a jolting road, 
or an uneven one; and yet Dolly held the side of the chaise with 
one little hand, all the way.  If there had been an executioner 
behind him with an uplifted axe ready to chop off his head if he 
touched that hand, Joe couldn't have helped doing it.  From putting 
his own hand upon it as if by chance, and taking it away again 
after a minute or so, he got to riding along without taking it off 
at all; as if he, the escort, were bound to do that as an important 
part of his duty, and had come out for the purpose.  The most 
curious circumstance about this little incident was, that Dolly 
didn't seem to know of it.  She looked so innocent and unconscious 
when she turned her eyes on Joe, that it was quite provoking.

She talked though; talked about her fright, and about Joe's coming 
up to rescue her, and about her gratitude, and about her fear that 
she might not have thanked him enough, and about their always being 
friends from that time forth--and about all that sort of thing.  
And when Joe said, not friends he hoped, Dolly was quite surprised, 
and said not enemies she hoped; and when Joe said, couldn't they be 
something much better than either, Dolly all of a sudden found out 
a star which was brighter than all the other stars, and begged to 
call his attention to the same, and was ten thousand times more 
innocent and unconscious than ever.

In this manner they travelled along, talking very little above a 
whisper, and wishing the road could be stretched out to some dozen 
times its natural length--at least that was Joe's desire--when, as 
they were getting clear of the forest and emerging on the more 
frequented road, they heard behind them the sound of a horse's feet 
at a round trot, which growing rapidly louder as it drew nearer, 
elicited a scream from Mrs Varden, and the cry 'a friend!' from the 
rider, who now came panting up, and checked his horse beside them.

'This man again!' cried Dolly, shuddering.

'Hugh!' said Joe.  'What errand are you upon?'

'I come to ride back with you,' he answered, glancing covertly at 
the locksmith's daughter.  'HE sent me.

'My father!' said poor Joe; adding under his breath, with a very 
unfilial apostrophe, 'Will he never think me man enough to take 
care of myself!'

'Aye!' returned Hugh to the first part of the inquiry.  'The roads 
are not safe just now, he says, and you'd better have a companion.'

'Ride on then,' said Joe.  'I'm not going to turn yet.'

Hugh complied, and they went on again.  It was his whim or humour 
to ride immediately before the chaise, and from this position he 
constantly turned his head, and looked back.  Dolly felt that he 
looked at her, but she averted her eyes and feared to raise them 
once, so great was the dread with which he had inspired her.

This interruption, and the consequent wakefulness of Mrs Varden, 
who had been nodding in her sleep up to this point, except for a 
minute or two at a time, when she roused herself to scold the 
locksmith for audaciously taking hold of her to prevent her nodding 
herself out of the chaise, put a restraint upon the whispered 
conversation, and made it difficult of resumption.  Indeed, before 
they had gone another mile, Gabriel stopped at his wife's desire, 
and that good lady protested she would not hear of Joe's going a 
step further on any account whatever.  It was in vain for Joe to 
protest on the other hand that he was by no means tired, and would 
turn back presently, and would see them safely past such a point, 
and so forth.  Mrs Varden was obdurate, and being so was not to be 
overcome by mortal agency.

'Good night--if I must say it,' said Joe, sorrowfully.

'Good night,' said Dolly.  She would have added, 'Take care of that 
man, and pray don't trust him,' but he had turned his horse's head, 
and was standing close to them.  She had therefore nothing for it 
but to suffer Joe to give her hand a gentle squeeze, and when the 
chaise had gone on for some distance, to look back and wave it, as 
he still lingered on the spot where they had parted, with the tall 
dark figure of Hugh beside him.

What she thought about, going home; and whether the coach-maker 
held as favourable a place in her meditations as he had occupied in 
the morning, is unknown.  They reached home at last--at last, for 
it was a long way, made none the shorter by Mrs Varden's grumbling.  
Miggs hearing the sound of wheels was at the door immediately.

'Here they are, Simmun!  Here they are!' cried Miggs, clapping her 
hands, and issuing forth to help her mistress to alight.  'Bring a 
chair, Simmun.  Now, an't you the better for it, mim?  Don't you 
feel more yourself than you would have done if you'd have stopped 
at home?  Oh, gracious! how cold you are!  Goodness me, sir, she's 
a perfect heap of ice.'

'I can't help it, my good girl.  You had better take her in to the 
fire,' said the locksmith.

'Master sounds unfeeling, mim,' said Miggs, in a tone of 
commiseration, 'but such is not his intentions, I'm sure.  After 
what he has seen of you this day, I never will believe but that he 
has a deal more affection in his heart than to speak unkind.  Come 
in and sit yourself down by the fire; there's a good dear--do.'

Mrs Varden complied.  The locksmith followed with his hands in his 
pockets, and Mr Tappertit trundled off with the chaise to a 
neighbouring stable.

'Martha, my dear,' said the locksmith, when they reached the 
parlour, 'if you'll look to Dolly yourself or let somebody else do 
it, perhaps it will be only kind and reasonable.  She has been 
frightened, you know, and is not at all well to-night.'

In fact, Dolly had thrown herself upon the sofa, quite regardless 
of all the little finery of which she had been so proud in the 
morning, and with her face buried in her hands was crying very 
much.

At first sight of this phenomenon (for Dolly was by no means 
accustomed to displays of this sort, rather learning from her 
mother's example to avoid them as much as possible) Mrs Varden 
expressed her belief that never was any woman so beset as she; that 
her life was a continued scene of trial; that whenever she was 
disposed to be well and cheerful, so sure were the people around 
her to throw, by some means or other, a damp upon her spirits; and 
that, as she had enjoyed herself that day, and Heaven knew it was 
very seldom she did enjoy herself so she was now to pay the 
penalty.  To all such propositions Miggs assented freely.  Poor 
Dolly, however, grew none the better for these restoratives, but 
rather worse, indeed; and seeing that she was really ill, both Mrs 
Varden and Miggs were moved to compassion, and tended her in 
earnest.

But even then, their very kindness shaped itself into their usual 
course of policy, and though Dolly was in a swoon, it was rendered 
clear to the meanest capacity, that Mrs Varden was the sufferer.  
Thus when Dolly began to get a little better, and passed into that 
stage in which matrons hold that remonstrance and argument may be 
successfully applied, her mother represented to her, with tears in 
her eyes, that if she had been flurried and worried that day, she 
must remember it was the common lot of humanity, and in especial of 
womankind, who through the whole of their existence must expect no 
less, and were bound to make up their minds to meek endurance and 
patient resignation.  Mrs Varden entreated her to remember that one 
of these days she would, in all probability, have to do violence to 
her feelings so far as to be married; and that marriage, as she 
might see every day of her life (and truly she did) was a state 
requiring great fortitude and forbearance.  She represented to her 
in lively colours, that if she (Mrs V.) had not, in steering her 
course through this vale of tears, been supported by a strong 
principle of duty which alone upheld and prevented her from 
drooping, she must have been in her grave many years ago; in which 
case she desired to know what would have become of that errant 
spirit (meaning the locksmith), of whose eye she was the very 
apple, and in whose path she was, as it were, a shining light and 
guiding star?

Miss Miggs also put in her word to the same effect.  She said that 
indeed and indeed Miss Dolly might take pattern by her blessed 
mother, who, she always had said, and always would say, though she 
were to be hanged, drawn, and quartered for it next minute, was 
the mildest, amiablest, forgivingest-spirited, longest-sufferingest 
female as ever she could have believed; the mere narration of whose 
excellencies had worked such a wholesome change in the mind of her 
own sister-in-law, that, whereas, before, she and her husband lived 
like cat and dog, and were in the habit of exchanging brass 
candlesticks, pot-lids, flat-irons, and other such strong 
resentments, they were now the happiest and affectionatest couple 
upon earth; as could be proved any day on application at Golden 
Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, second bell-handle on the right-
hand doorpost.  After glancing at herself as a comparatively 
worthless vessel, but still as one of some desert, she besought her 
to bear in mind that her aforesaid dear and only mother was of a 
weakly constitution and excitable temperament, who had constantly 
to sustain afflictions in domestic life, compared with which 
thieves and robbers were as nothing, and yet never sunk down or 
gave way to despair or wrath, but, in prize-fighting phraseology, 
always came up to time with a cheerful countenance, and went in to 
win as if nothing had happened.  When Miggs finished her solo, her 
mistress struck in again, and the two together performed a duet to 
the same purpose; the burden being, that Mrs Varden was persecuted 
perfection, and Mr Varden, as the representative of mankind in that 
apartment, a creature of vicious and brutal habits, utterly 
insensible to the blessings he enjoyed.  Of so refined a character, 
indeed, was their talent of assault under the mask of sympathy, 
that when Dolly, recovering, embraced her father tenderly, as in 
vindication of his goodness, Mrs Varden expressed her solemn hope 
that this would be a lesson to him for the remainder of his life, 
and that he would do some little justice to a woman's nature ever 
afterwards--in which aspiration Miss Miggs, by divers sniffs and 
coughs, more significant than the longest oration, expressed her 
entire concurrence.

But the great joy of Miggs's heart was, that she not only picked up 
a full account of what had happened, but had the exquisite delight 
of conveying it to Mr Tappertit for his jealousy and torture.  For 
that gentleman, on account of Dolly's indisposition, had been 
requested to take his supper in the workshop, and it was conveyed 
thither by Miss Miggs's own fair hands.

'Oh Simmun!' said the young lady, 'such goings on to-day!  Oh, 
gracious me, Simmun!'

Mr Tappertit, who was not in the best of humours, and who 
disliked Miss Miggs more when she laid her hand on her heart and 
panted for breath than at any other time, as her deficiency of 
outline was most apparent under such circumstances, eyed her over 
in his loftiest style, and deigned to express no curiosity 
whatever.

'I never heard the like, nor nobody else,' pursued Miggs.  'The 
idea of interfering with HER.  What people can see in her to make 
it worth their while to do so, that's the joke--he he he!'

Finding there was a lady in the case, Mr Tappertit haughtily 
requested his fair friend to be more explicit, and demanded to know 
what she meant by 'her.'

'Why, that Dolly,' said Miggs, with an extremely sharp emphasis on 
the name.  'But, oh upon my word and honour, young Joseph Willet is 
a brave one; and he do deserve her, that he do.'

'Woman!' said Mr Tappertit, jumping off the counter on which he was 
seated; 'beware!'

'My stars, Simmun!' cried Miggs, in affected astonishment.  'You 
frighten me to death!  What's the matter?'

'There are strings,' said Mr Tappertit, flourishing his bread-and-
cheese knife in the air, 'in the human heart that had better not be 
wibrated.  That's what's the matter.'

'Oh, very well--if you're in a huff,' cried Miggs, turning away.

'Huff or no huff,' said Mr Tappertit, detaining her by the wrist.  
'What do you mean, Jezebel?  What were you going to say?  Answer 
me!'

Notwithstanding this uncivil exhortation, Miggs gladly did as she 
was required; and told him how that their young mistress, being 
alone in the meadows after dark, had been attacked by three or four 
tall men, who would have certainly borne her away and perhaps 
murdered her, but for the timely arrival of Joseph Willet, who with 
his own single hand put them all to flight, and rescued her; to the 
lasting admiration of his fellow-creatures generally, and to the 
eternal love and gratitude of Dolly Varden.

'Very good,' said Mr Tappertit, fetching a long breath when the 
tale was told, and rubbing his hair up till it stood stiff and 
straight on end all over his head.  'His days are numbered.'

'Oh, Simmun!'

'I tell you,' said the 'prentice, 'his days are numbered.  Leave 
me.  Get along with you.'

Miggs departed at his bidding, but less because of his bidding than 
because she desired to chuckle in secret.  When she had given vent 
to her satisfaction, she returned to the parlour; where the 
locksmith, stimulated by quietness and Toby, had become talkative, 
and was disposed to take a cheerful review of the occurrences of 
the day.  But Mrs Varden, whose practical religion (as is not 
uncommon) was usually of the retrospective order, cut him short by 
declaiming on the sinfulness of such junketings, and holding that 
it was high time to go to bed.  To bed therefore she withdrew, with 
an aspect as grim and gloomy as that of the Maypole's own state 
couch; and to bed the rest of the establishment soon afterwards 
repaired.



Chapter 23


Twilight had given place to night some hours, and it was high noon 
in those quarters of the town in which 'the world' condescended to 
dwell--the world being then, as now, of very limited dimensions and 
easily lodged--when Mr Chester reclined upon a sofa in his 
dressing-room in the Temple, entertaining himself with a book.

He was dressing, as it seemed, by easy stages, and having performed 
half the journey was taking a long rest.  Completely attired as to 
his legs and feet in the trimmest fashion of the day, he had yet 
the remainder of his toilet to perform.  The coat was stretched, 
like a refined scarecrow, on its separate horse; the waistcoat was 
displayed to the best advantage; the various ornamental articles of 
dress were severally set out in most alluring order; and yet he lay 
dangling his legs between the sofa and the ground, as intent upon 
his book as if there were nothing but bed before him.

'Upon my honour,' he said, at length raising his eyes to the 
ceiling with the air of a man who was reflecting seriously on what 
he had read; 'upon my honour, the most masterly composition, the 
most delicate thoughts, the finest code of morality, and the most 
gentlemanly sentiments in the universe!  Ah Ned, Ned, if you would 
but form your mind by such precepts, we should have but one common 
feeling on every subject that could possibly arise between us!'

This apostrophe was addressed, like the rest of his remarks, to 
empty air: for Edward was not present, and the father was quite 
alone.

'My Lord Chesterfield,' he said, pressing his hand tenderly upon 
the book as he laid it down, 'if I could but have profited by your 
genius soon enough to have formed my son on the model you have left 
to all wise fathers, both he and I would have been rich men.  
Shakespeare was undoubtedly very fine in his way; Milton good, 
though prosy; Lord Bacon deep, and decidedly knowing; but the 
writer who should be his country's pride, is my Lord Chesterfield.'

He became thoughtful again, and the toothpick was in requisition.

'I thought I was tolerably accomplished as a man of the world,' he 
continued, 'I flattered myself that I was pretty well versed in all 
those little arts and graces which distinguish men of the world 
from boors and peasants, and separate their character from those 
intensely vulgar sentiments which are called the national 
character.  Apart from any natural prepossession in my own favour, 
I believed I was.  Still, in every page of this enlightened writer, 
I find some captivating hypocrisy which has never occurred to me 
before, or some superlative piece of selfishness to which I was 
utterly a stranger.  I should quite blush for myself before this 
stupendous creature, if remembering his precepts, one might blush 
at anything.  An amazing man! a nobleman indeed! any King or Queen 
may make a Lord, but only the Devil himself--and the Graces--can 
make a Chesterfield.'

Men who are thoroughly false and hollow, seldom try to hide those 
vices from themselves; and yet in the very act of avowing them, 
they lay claim to the virtues they feign most to despise.  'For,' 
say they, 'this is honesty, this is truth.  All mankind are like 
us, but they have not the candour to avow it.'  The more they 
affect to deny the existence of any sincerity in the world, the 
more they would be thought to possess it in its boldest shape; and 
this is an unconscious compliment to Truth on the part of these 
philosophers, which will turn the laugh against them to the Day of 
Judgment.

Mr Chester, having extolled his favourite author, as above recited, 
took up the book again in the excess of his admiration and was 
composing himself for a further perusal of its sublime morality, 
when he was disturbed by a noise at the outer door; occasioned as 
it seemed by the endeavours of his servant to obstruct the entrance 
of some unwelcome visitor.

'A late hour for an importunate creditor,' he said, raising his 
eyebrows with as indolent an expression of wonder as if the noise 
were in the street, and one with which he had not the smallest 
possible concern.  'Much after their accustomed time.  The usual 
pretence I suppose.  No doubt a heavy payment to make up tomorrow.  
Poor fellow, he loses time, and time is money as the good proverb 
says--I never found it out though.  Well.  What now?  You know I am 
not at home.'

'A man, sir,' replied the servant, who was to the full as cool and 
negligent in his way as his master, 'has brought home the riding-
whip you lost the other day.  I told him you were out, but he said 
he was to wait while I brought it in, and wouldn't go till I did.'

'He was quite right,' returned his master, 'and you're a blockhead, 
possessing no judgment or discretion whatever.  Tell him to come 
in, and see that he rubs his shoes for exactly five minutes first.'

The man laid the whip on a chair, and withdrew.  The master, who 
had only heard his foot upon the ground and had not taken the 
trouble to turn round and look at him, shut his book, and pursued 
the train of ideas his entrance had disturbed.

'If time were money,' he said, handling his snuff-box, 'I would 
compound with my creditors, and give them--let me see--how much a 
day?  There's my nap after dinner--an hour--they're extremely 
welcome to that, and to make the most of it.  In the morning, 
between my breakfast and the paper, I could spare them another 
hour; in the evening before dinner say another.  Three hours a day.  
They might pay themselves in calls, with interest, in twelve 
months.  I think I shall propose it to them.  Ah, my centaur, are 
you there?'

'Here I am,' replied Hugh, striding in, followed by a dog, as rough 
and sullen as himself; 'and trouble enough I've had to get here.  
What do you ask me to come for, and keep me out when I DO come?'

'My good fellow,' returned the other, raising his head a little 
from the cushion and carelessly surveying him from top to toe, 'I 
am delighted to see you, and to have, in your being here, the very 
best proof that you are not kept out.  How are you?'

'I'm well enough,' said Hugh impatiently.

'You look a perfect marvel of health.  Sit down.'

'I'd rather stand,' said Hugh.

'Please yourself my good fellow,' returned Mr Chester rising, 
slowly pulling off the loose robe he wore, and sitting down before 
the dressing-glass.  'Please yourself by all means.'

Having said this in the politest and blandest tone possible, he 
went on dressing, and took no further notice of his guest, who 
stood in the same spot as uncertain what to do next, eyeing him 
sulkily from time to time.

'Are you going to speak to me, master?' he said, after a long 
silence.

'My worthy creature,' returned Mr Chester, 'you are a little 
ruffled and out of humour.  I'll wait till you're quite yourself 
again.  I am in no hurry.'

This behaviour had its intended effect.  It humbled and abashed the 
man, and made him still more irresolute and uncertain.  Hard words 
he could have returned, violence he would have repaid with 
interest; but this cool, complacent, contemptuous, self-possessed 
reception, caused him to feel his inferiority more completely than 
the most elaborate arguments.  Everything contributed to this 
effect.  His own rough speech, contrasted with the soft persuasive 
accents of the other; his rude bearing, and Mr Chester's polished 
manner; the disorder and negligence of his ragged dress, and the 
elegant attire he saw before him; with all the unaccustomed 
luxuries and comforts of the room, and the silence that gave him 
leisure to observe these things, and feel how ill at ease they made 
him; all these influences, which have too often some effect on 
tutored minds and become of almost resistless power when brought to 
bear on such a mind as his, quelled Hugh completely.  He moved by 
little and little nearer to Mr Chester's chair, and glancing over 
his shoulder at the reflection of his face in the glass, as if 
seeking for some encouragement in its expression, said at length, 
with a rough attempt at conciliation,

'ARE you going to speak to me, master, or am I to go away?'

'Speak you,' said Mr Chester, 'speak you, good fellow.  I have 
spoken, have I not?  I am waiting for you.'

'Why, look'ee, sir,' returned Hugh with increased embarrassment, 
'am I the man that you privately left your whip with before you 
rode away from the Maypole, and told to bring it back whenever he 
might want to see you on a certain subject?'

'No doubt the same, or you have a twin brother,' said Mr Chester, 
glancing at the reflection of his anxious face; 'which is not 
probable, I should say.'

'Then I have come, sir,' said Hugh, 'and I have brought it back, 
and something else along with it.  A letter, sir, it is, that I 
took from the person who had charge of it.'  As he spoke, he laid 
upon the dressing-table, Dolly's lost epistle.  The very letter 
that had cost her so much trouble.

'Did you obtain this by force, my good fellow?' said Mr Chester, 
casting his eye upon it without the least perceptible surprise or 
pleasure.

'Not quite,' said Hugh.  'Partly.'

'Who was the messenger from whom you took it?'

'A woman.  One Varden's daughter.'

'Oh indeed!' said Mr Chester gaily.  'What else did you take from 
her?'

'What else?'

'Yes,' said the other, in a drawling manner, for he was fixing a 
very small patch of sticking plaster on a very small pimple near 
the corner of his mouth.  'What else?'

'Well a kiss,' replied Hugh, after some hesitation.

'And what else?'

'Nothing.'

'I think,' said Mr Chester, in the same easy tone, and smiling 
twice or thrice to try if the patch adhered--'I think there was 
something else.  I have heard a trifle of jewellery spoken of--a 
mere trifle--a thing of such little value, indeed, that you may 
have forgotten it.  Do you remember anything of the kind--such as a 
bracelet now, for instance?'

Hugh with a muttered oath thrust his hand into his breast, and 
drawing the bracelet forth, wrapped in a scrap of hay, was about to 
lay it on the table likewise, when his patron stopped his hand and 
bade him put it up again.

'You took that for yourself my excellent friend,' he said, 'and may 
keep it.  I am neither a thief nor a receiver.  Don't show it to 
me.  You had better hide it again, and lose no time.  Don't let me 
see where you put it either,' he added, turning away his head.

'You're not a receiver!' said Hugh bluntly, despite the increasing 
awe in which he held him.  'What do you call THAT, master?' 
striking the letter with his heavy hand.

'I call that quite another thing,' said Mr Chester coolly.  'I 
shall prove it presently, as you will see.  You are thirsty, I 
suppose?'

Hugh drew his sleeve across his lips, and gruffly answered yes.

'Step to that closet and bring me a bottle you will see there, and 
a glass.'

He obeyed.  His patron followed him with his eyes, and when his 
back was turned, smiled as he had never done when he stood beside 
the mirror.  On his return he filled the glass, and bade him drink.  
That dram despatched, he poured him out another, and another.

'How many can you bear?' he said, filling the glass again.

'As many as you like to give me.  Pour on.  Fill high.  A bumper 
with a bead in the middle!  Give me enough of this,' he added, as 
he tossed it down his hairy throat, 'and I'll do murder if you ask 
me!'

'As I don't mean to ask you, and you might possibly do it without 
being invited if you went on much further,' said Mr Chester with 
great composure, we will stop, if agreeable to you, my good friend, 
at the next glass.  You were drinking before you came here.'

'I always am when I can get it,' cried Hugh boisterously, waving 
the empty glass above his head, and throwing himself into a rude 
dancing attitude.  'I always am.  Why not?  Ha ha ha!  What's so 
good to me as this?  What ever has been?  What else has kept away 
the cold on bitter nights, and driven hunger off in starving times?  
What else has given me the strength and courage of a man, when men 
would have left me to die, a puny child?  I should never have had a 
man's heart but for this.  I should have died in a ditch.  Where's 
he who when I was a weak and sickly wretch, with trembling legs and 
fading sight, bade me cheer up, as this did?  I never knew him; not 
I.  I drink to the drink, master.  Ha ha ha!'

'You are an exceedingly cheerful young man,' said Mr Chester, 
putting on his cravat with great deliberation, and slightly moving 
his head from side to side to settle his chin in its proper place.  
'Quite a boon companion.'

'Do you see this hand, master,' said Hugh, 'and this arm?' baring 
the brawny limb to the elbow.  'It was once mere skin and bone, and 
would have been dust in some poor churchyard by this time, but for 
the drink.'

'You may cover it,' said Mr Chester, 'it's sufficiently real in 
your sleeve.'

'I should never have been spirited up to take a kiss from the proud 
little beauty, master, but for the drink,' cried Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  
It was a good one.  As sweet as honeysuckle, I warrant you.  I 
thank the drink for it.  I'll drink to the drink again, master.  
Fill me one more.  Come.  One more!'

'You are such a promising fellow,' said his patron, putting on his 
waistcoat with great nicety, and taking no heed of this request, 
'that I must caution you against having too many impulses from the 
drink, and getting hung before your time.  What's your age?'

'I don't know.'

'At any rate,' said Mr Chester, 'you are young enough to escape 
what I may call a natural death for some years to come.  How can 
you trust yourself in my hands on so short an acquaintance, with a 
halter round your neck?  What a confiding nature yours must be!'

Hugh fell back a pace or two and surveyed him with a look of 
mingled terror, indignation, and surprise.  Regarding himself in 
the glass with the same complacency as before, and speaking as 
smoothly as if he were discussing some pleasant chit-chat of the 
town, his patron went on:

'Robbery on the king's highway, my young friend, is a very 
dangerous and ticklish occupation.  It is pleasant, I have no 
doubt, while it lasts; but like many other pleasures in this 
transitory world, it seldom lasts long.  And really if in the 
ingenuousness of youth, you open your heart so readily on the 
subject, I am afraid your career will be an extremely short one.'

'How's this?' said Hugh.  'What do you talk of master?  Who was it 
set me on?'

'Who?' said Mr Chester, wheeling sharply round, and looking full 
at him for the first time.  'I didn't hear you.  Who was it?'

Hugh faltered, and muttered something which was not audible.

'Who was it?  I am curious to know,' said Mr Chester, with 
surpassing affability.  'Some rustic beauty perhaps?  But be 
cautious, my good friend.  They are not always to be trusted.  Do 
take my advice now, and be careful of yourself.'  With these words 
he turned to the glass again, and went on with his toilet.

Hugh would have answered him that he, the questioner himself had 
set him on, but the words stuck in his throat.  The consummate art 
with which his patron had led him to this point, and managed the 
whole conversation, perfectly baffled him.  He did not doubt that 
if he had made the retort which was on his lips when Mr Chester 
turned round and questioned him so keenly, he would straightway 
have given him into custody and had him dragged before a justice 
with the stolen property upon him; in which case it was as certain 
he would have been hung as it was that he had been born.  The 
ascendency which it was the purpose of the man of the world to 
establish over this savage instrument, was gained from that time.  
Hugh's submission was complete.  He dreaded him beyond description; 
and felt that accident and artifice had spun a web about him, which 
at a touch from such a master-hand as his, would bind him to the 
gallows.

With these thoughts passing through his mind, and yet wondering at 
the very same time how he who came there rioting in the confidence 
of this man (as he thought), should be so soon and so thoroughly 
subdued, Hugh stood cowering before him, regarding him uneasily 
from time to time, while he finished dressing.  When he had done 
so, he took up the letter, broke the seal, and throwing himself 
back in his chair, read it leisurely through.

'Very neatly worded upon my life!  Quite a woman's letter, full of 
what people call tenderness, and disinterestedness, and heart, and 
all that sort of thing!'

As he spoke, he twisted it up, and glancing lazily round at Hugh as 
though he would say 'You see this?' held it in the flame of the 
candle.  When it was in a full blaze, he tossed it into the grate, 
and there it smouldered away.

'It was directed to my son,' he said, turning to Hugh, 'and you did 
quite right to bring it here.  I opened it on my own 
responsibility, and you see what I have done with it.  Take this, 
for your trouble.'

Hugh stepped forward to receive the piece of money he held out to 
him.  As he put it in his hand, he added:

'If you should happen to find anything else of this sort, or to 
pick up any kind of information you may think I would like to have, 
bring it here, will you, my good fellow?'

This was said with a smile which implied--or Hugh thought it did--
'fail to do so at your peril!'  He answered that he would.

'And don't,' said his patron, with an air of the very kindest 
patronage, 'don't be at all downcast or uneasy respecting that 
little rashness we have been speaking of.  Your neck is as safe in 
my hands, my good fellow, as though a baby's fingers clasped it, I 
assure you.--Take another glass.  You are quieter now.'

Hugh accepted it from his hand, and looking stealthily at his 
smiling face, drank the contents in silence.

'Don't you--ha, ha!--don't you drink to the drink any more?' said 
Mr Chester, in his most winning manner.

'To you, sir,' was the sullen answer, with something approaching to 
a bow.  'I drink to you.'

'Thank you.  God bless you.  By the bye, what is your name, my good 
soul?  You are called Hugh, I know, of course--your other name?'

'I have no other name.'

'A very strange fellow!  Do you mean that you never knew one, or 
that you don't choose to tell it?  Which?'

'I'd tell it if I could,' said Hugh, quickly.  'I can't.  I have 
been always called Hugh; nothing more.  I never knew, nor saw, nor 
thought about a father; and I was a boy of six--that's not very 
old--when they hung my mother up at Tyburn for a couple of thousand 
men to stare at.  They might have let her live.  She was poor 
enough.'

'How very sad!' exclaimed his patron, with a condescending smile.  
'I have no doubt she was an exceedingly fine woman.'

'You see that dog of mine?' said Hugh, abruptly.

'Faithful, I dare say?' rejoined his patron, looking at him through 
his glass; 'and immensely clever?  Virtuous and gifted animals, 
whether man or beast, always are so very hideous.'

'Such a dog as that, and one of the same breed, was the only living 
thing except me that howled that day,' said Hugh.  'Out of the two 
thousand odd--there was a larger crowd for its being a woman--the 
dog and I alone had any pity.  If he'd have been a man, he'd have 
been glad to be quit of her, for she had been forced to keep him 
lean and half-starved; but being a dog, and not having a man's 
sense, he was sorry.'

'It was dull of the brute, certainly,' said Mr Chester, 'and very 
like a brute.'

Hugh made no rejoinder, but whistling to his dog, who sprung up at 
the sound and came jumping and sporting about him, bade his 
sympathising friend good night.

'Good night; he returned.  'Remember; you're safe with me--quite 
safe.  So long as you deserve it, my good fellow, as I hope you 
always will, you have a friend in me, on whose silence you may 
rely.  Now do be careful of yourself, pray do, and consider what 
jeopardy you might have stood in.  Good night! bless you!'

Hugh truckled before the hidden meaning of these words as much as 
such a being could, and crept out of the door so submissively and 
subserviently--with an air, in short, so different from that with 
which he had entered--that his patron on being left alone, smiled 
more than ever.

'And yet,' he said, as he took a pinch of snuff, 'I do not like 
their having hanged his mother.  The fellow has a fine eye, and I 
am sure she was handsome.  But very probably she was coarse--red-
nosed perhaps, and had clumsy feet.  Aye, it was all for the best, 
no doubt.'

With this comforting reflection, he put on his coat, took a 
farewell glance at the glass, and summoned his man, who promptly 
attended, followed by a chair and its two bearers.

'Foh!' said Mr Chester.  'The very atmosphere that centaur has 
breathed, seems tainted with the cart and ladder.  Here, Peak.  
Bring some scent and sprinkle the floor; and take away the chair he 
sat upon, and air it; and dash a little of that mixture upon me.  I 
am stifled!'

The man obeyed; and the room and its master being both purified, 
nothing remained for Mr Chester but to demand his hat, to fold it 
jauntily under his arm, to take his seat in the chair and be 
carried off; humming a fashionable tune.



Chapter 24


How the accomplished gentleman spent the evening in the midst of a 
dazzling and brilliant circle; how he enchanted all those with 
whom he mingled by the grace of his deportment, the politeness of 
his manner, the vivacity of his conversation, and the sweetness of 
his voice; how it was observed in every corner, that Chester was a 
man of that happy disposition that nothing ruffled him, that he was 
one on whom the world's cares and errors sat lightly as his dress, 
and in whose smiling face a calm and tranquil mind was constantly 
reflected; how honest men, who by instinct knew him better, 
bowed down before him nevertheless, deferred to his every word, and 
courted his favourable notice; how people, who really had good in 
them, went with the stream, and fawned and flattered, and approved, 
and despised themselves while they did so, and yet had not the 
courage to resist; how, in short, he was one of those who are 
received and cherished in society (as the phrase is) by scores who 
individually would shrink from and be repelled by the object of 
their lavish regard; are things of course, which will suggest 
themselves.  Matter so commonplace needs but a passing glance, and 
there an end.

The despisers of mankind--apart from the mere fools and mimics, of 
that creed--are of two sorts.  They who believe their merit 
neglected and unappreciated, make up one class; they who receive 
adulation and flattery, knowing their own worthlessness, compose 
the other.  Be sure that the coldest-hearted misanthropes are ever 
of this last order.

Mr Chester sat up in bed next morning, sipping his coffee, and 
remembering with a kind of contemptuous satisfaction how he had 
shone last night, and how he had been caressed and courted, when 
his servant brought in a very small scrap of dirty paper, tightly 
sealed in two places, on the inside whereof was inscribed in pretty 
large text these words: 'A friend.  Desiring of a conference.  
Immediate.  Private.  Burn it when you've read it.'

'Where in the name of the Gunpowder Plot did you pick up this?' 
said his master.

It was given him by a person then waiting at the door, the man 
replied.

'With a cloak and dagger?' said Mr Chester.

With nothing more threatening about him, it appeared, than a 
leather apron and a dirty face.  'Let him come in.'  In he came--Mr 
Tappertit; with his hair still on end, and a great lock in his 
hand, which he put down on the floor in the middle of the chamber 
as if he were about to go through some performances in which it was 
a necessary agent.

'Sir,' said Mr Tappertit with a low bow, 'I thank you for this 
condescension, and am glad to see you.  Pardon the menial office in 
which I am engaged, sir, and extend your sympathies to one, who, 
humble as his appearance is, has inn'ard workings far above his 
station.'

Mr Chester held the bed-curtain farther back, and looked at him 
with a vague impression that he was some maniac, who had not only 
broken open the door of his place of confinement, but had brought 
away the lock.  Mr Tappertit bowed again, and displayed his legs to 
the best advantage.

'You have heard, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, laying his hand upon his 
breast, 'of G. Varden Locksmith and bell-hanger and repairs neatly 
executed in town and country, Clerkenwell, London?'

'What then?' asked Mr Chester.

'I'm his 'prentice, sir.'

'What THEN?'

'Ahem!' said Mr Tappertit.  'Would you permit me to shut the door, 
sir, and will you further, sir, give me your honour bright, that 
what passes between us is in the strictest confidence?'

Mr Chester laid himself calmly down in bed again, and turning a 
perfectly undisturbed face towards the strange apparition, which 
had by this time closed the door, begged him to speak out, and to 
be as rational as he could, without putting himself to any very 
great personal inconvenience.

'In the first place, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, producing a small 
pocket-handkerchief and shaking it out of the folds, 'as I have not 
a card about me (for the envy of masters debases us below that 
level) allow me to offer the best substitute that circumstances 
will admit of.  If you will take that in your own hand, sir, and 
cast your eye on the right-hand corner,' said Mr Tappertit, 
offering it with a graceful air, 'you will meet with my 
credentials.'

'Thank you,' answered Mr Chester, politely accepting it, and 
turning to some blood-red characters at one end.  '"Four.  Simon 
Tappertit.  One."  Is that the--'

'Without the numbers, sir, that is my name,' replied the 'prentice.  
'They are merely intended as directions to the washerwoman, and 
have no connection with myself or family.  YOUR name, sir,' said Mr 
Tappertit, looking very hard at his nightcap, 'is Chester, I 
suppose?  You needn't pull it off, sir, thank you.  I observe E. C. 
from here.  We will take the rest for granted.'

'Pray, Mr Tappertit,' said Mr Chester, 'has that complicated piece 
of ironmongery which you have done me the favour to bring with you, 
any immediate connection with the business we are to discuss?'

'It has not, sir,' rejoined the 'prentice.  'It's going to be 
fitted on a ware'us-door in Thames Street.'

'Perhaps, as that is the case,' said Mr Chester, 'and as it has a 
stronger flavour of oil than I usually refresh my bedroom with, you 
will oblige me so far as to put it outside the door?'

'By all means, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, suiting the action to the 
word.

'You'll excuse my mentioning it, I hope?'

'Don't apologise, sir, I beg.  And now, if you please, to 
business.'

During the whole of this dialogue, Mr Chester had suffered nothing 
but his smile of unvarying serenity and politeness to appear upon 
his face.  Sim Tappertit, who had far too good an opinion of 
himself to suspect that anybody could be playing upon him, thought 
within himself that this was something like the respect to which he 
was entitled, and drew a comparison from this courteous demeanour 
of a stranger, by no means favourable to the worthy locksmith.

'From what passes in our house,' said Mr Tappertit, 'I am aware, 
sir, that your son keeps company with a young lady against your 
inclinations.  Sir, your son has not used me well.'

'Mr Tappertit,' said the other, 'you grieve me beyond description.'

'Thank you, sir,' replied the 'prentice.  'I'm glad to hear you say 
so.  He's very proud, sir, is your son; very haughty.'

'I am afraid he IS haughty,' said Mr Chester.  'Do you know I was 
really afraid of that before; and you confirm me?'

'To recount the menial offices I've had to do for your son, sir,' 
said Mr Tappertit; 'the chairs I've had to hand him, the coaches 
I've had to call for him, the numerous degrading duties, wholly 
unconnected with my indenters, that I've had to do for him, would 
fill a family Bible.  Besides which, sir, he is but a young man 
himself and I do not consider "thank'ee Sim," a proper form of 
address on those occasions.'

'Mr Tappertit, your wisdom is beyond your years.  Pray go on.'

'I thank you for your good opinion, sir,' said Sim, much gratified, 
'and will endeavour so to do.  Now sir, on this account (and 
perhaps for another reason or two which I needn't go into) I am on 
your side.  And what I tell you is this--that as long as our people 
go backwards and forwards, to and fro, up and down, to that there 
jolly old Maypole, lettering, and messaging, and fetching and 
carrying, you couldn't help your son keeping company with that 
young lady by deputy,--not if he was minded night and day by all 
the Horse Guards, and every man of 'em in the very fullest 
uniform.'

Mr Tappertit stopped to take breath after this, and then started 
fresh again.

'Now, sir, I am a coming to the point.  You will inquire of me, 
"how is this to he prevented?"  I'll tell you how.  If an honest, 
civil, smiling gentleman like you--'

'Mr Tappertit--really--'

'No, no, I'm serious,' rejoined the 'prentice, 'I am, upon my soul.  
If an honest, civil, smiling gentleman like you, was to talk but 
ten minutes to our old woman--that's Mrs Varden--and flatter her up 
a bit, you'd gain her over for ever.  Then there's this point got--
that her daughter Dolly,'--here a flush came over Mr Tappertit's 
face--'wouldn't be allowed to be a go-between from that time 
forward; and till that point's got, there's nothing ever will 
prevent her.  Mind that.'

'Mr Tappertit, your knowledge of human nature--'

'Wait a minute,' said Sim, folding his arms with a dreadful 
calmness.  'Now I come to THE point.  Sir, there is a villain at 
that Maypole, a monster in human shape, a vagabond of the deepest 
dye, that unless you get rid of and have kidnapped and carried off 
at the very least--nothing less will do--will marry your son to 
that young woman, as certainly and as surely as if he was the 
Archbishop of Canterbury himself.  He will, sir, for the hatred and 
malice that he bears to you; let alone the pleasure of doing a bad 
action, which to him is its own reward.  If you knew how this chap, 
this Joseph Willet--that's his name--comes backwards and forwards 
to our house, libelling, and denouncing, and threatening you, and 
how I shudder when I hear him, you'd hate him worse than I do,--
worse than I do, sir,' said Mr Tappertit wildly, putting his hair 
up straighter, and making a crunching noise with his teeth; 'if 
sich a thing is possible.'

'A little private vengeance in this, Mr Tappertit?'

'Private vengeance, sir, or public sentiment, or both combined--
destroy him,' said Mr Tappertit.  'Miggs says so too.  Miggs and me 
both say so.  We can't bear the plotting and undermining that takes 
place.  Our souls recoil from it.  Barnaby Rudge and Mrs Rudge are 
in it likewise; but the villain, Joseph Willet, is the ringleader.  
Their plottings and schemes are known to me and Miggs.  If you want 
information of 'em, apply to us.  Put Joseph Willet down, sir.  
Destroy him.  Crush him.  And be happy.'

With these words, Mr Tappertit, who seemed to expect no reply, and 
to hold it as a necessary consequence of his eloquence that his 
hearer should be utterly stunned, dumbfoundered, and overwhelmed, 
folded his arms so that the palm of each hand rested on the 
opposite shoulder, and disappeared after the manner of those 
mysterious warners of whom he had read in cheap story-books.

'That fellow,' said Mr Chester, relaxing his face when he was 
fairly gone, 'is good practice.  I HAVE some command of my 
features, beyond all doubt.  He fully confirms what I suspected, 
though; and blunt tools are sometimes found of use, where sharper 
instruments would fail.  I fear I may be obliged to make great 
havoc among these worthy people.  A troublesome necessity!  I 
quite feel for them.'

With that he fell into a quiet slumber:--subsided into such a 
gentle, pleasant sleep, that it was quite infantine.



Chapter 25


Leaving the favoured, and well-received, and flattered of the 
world; him of the world most worldly, who never compromised himself 
by an ungentlemanly action, and never was guilty of a manly one; to 
lie smilingly asleep--for even sleep, working but little change in 
his dissembling face, became with him a piece of cold, conventional 
hypocrisy--we follow in the steps of two slow travellers on foot, 
making towards Chigwell.

Barnaby and his mother.  Grip in their company, of course.

The widow, to whom each painful mile seemed longer than the last, 
toiled wearily along; while Barnaby, yielding to every inconstant 
impulse, fluttered here and there, now leaving her far behind, now 
lingering far behind himself, now darting into some by-lane or path 
and leaving her to pursue her way alone, until he stealthily 
emerged again and came upon her with a wild shout of merriment, as 
his wayward and capricious nature prompted.  Now he would call to 
her from the topmost branch of some high tree by the roadside; now 
using his tall staff as a leaping-pole, come flying over ditch or 
hedge or five-barred gate; now run with surprising swiftness for a 
mile or more on the straight road, and halting, sport upon a patch 
of grass with Grip till she came up.  These were his delights; and 
when his patient mother heard his merry voice, or looked into his 
flushed and healthy face, she would not have abated them by one sad 
word or murmur, though each had been to her a source of suffering 
in the same degree as it was to him of pleasure.

It is something to look upon enjoyment, so that it be free and 
wild and in the face of nature, though it is but the enjoyment of 
an idiot.  It is something to know that Heaven has left the 
capacity of gladness in such a creature's breast; it is something 
to be assured that, however lightly men may crush that faculty in 
their fellows, the Great Creator of mankind imparts it even to his 
despised and slighted work.  Who would not rather see a poor idiot 
happy in the sunlight, than a wise man pining in a darkened jail!

Ye men of gloom and austerity, who paint the face of Infinite 
Benevolence with an eternal frown; read in the Everlasting Book, 
wide open to your view, the lesson it would teach.  Its pictures 
are not in black and sombre hues, but bright and glowing tints; its 
music--save when ye drown it--is not in sighs and groans, but songs 
and cheerful sounds.  Listen to the million voices in the summer 
air, and find one dismal as your own.  Remember, if ye can, the 
sense of hope and pleasure which every glad return of day awakens 
in the breast of all your kind who have not changed their nature; 
and learn some wisdom even from the witless, when their hearts are 
lifted up they know not why, by all the mirth and happiness it 
brings.

The widow's breast was full of care, was laden heavily with secret 
dread and sorrow; but her boy's gaiety of heart gladdened her, and 
beguiled the long journey.  Sometimes he would bid her lean upon 
his arm, and would keep beside her steadily for a short distance; 
but it was more his nature to be rambling to and fro, and she 
better liked to see him free and happy, even than to have him near 
her, because she loved him better than herself.

She had quitted the place to which they were travelling, directly 
after the event which had changed her whole existence; and for two-
and-twenty years had never had courage to revisit it.  It was her 
native village.  How many recollections crowded on her mind when it 
appeared in sight!

Two-and-twenty years.  Her boy's whole life and history.  The last 
time she looked back upon those roofs among the trees, she carried 
him in her arms, an infant.  How often since that time had she sat 
beside him night and day, watching for the dawn of mind that never 
came; how had she feared, and doubted, and yet hoped, long after 
conviction forced itself upon her!  The little stratagems she had 
devised to try him, the little tokens he had given in his childish 
way--not of dulness but of something infinitely worse, so ghastly 
and unchildlike in its cunning--came back as vividly as if but 
yesterday had intervened.  The room in which they used to be; the 
spot in which his cradle stood; he, old and elfin-like in face, but 
ever dear to her, gazing at her with a wild and vacant eye, and 
crooning some uncouth song as she sat by and rocked him; every 
circumstance of his infancy came thronging back, and the most 
trivial, perhaps, the most distinctly.

His older childhood, too; the strange imaginings he had; his terror 
of certain senseless things--familiar objects he endowed with life; 
the slow and gradual breaking out of that one horror, in which, 
before his birth, his darkened intellect began; how, in the midst 
of all, she had found some hope and comfort in his being unlike 
another child, and had gone on almost believing in the slow 
development of his mind until he grew a man, and then his childhood 
was complete and lasting; one after another, all these old thoughts 
sprung up within her, strong after their long slumber and bitterer 
than ever.

She took his arm and they hurried through the village street.  It 
was the same as it was wont to be in old times, yet different too, 
and wore another air.  The change was in herself, not it; but she 
never thought of that, and wondered at its alteration, and where it 
lay, and what it was.

The people all knew Barnaby, and the children of the place came 
flocking round him--as she remembered to have done with their 
fathers and mothers round some silly beggarman, when a child 
herself.  None of them knew her; they passed each well-remembered 
house, and yard, and homestead; and striking into the fields, were 
soon alone again.

The Warren was the end of their journey.  Mr Haredale was walking 
in the garden, and seeing them as they passed the iron gate, 
unlocked it, and bade them enter that way.

'At length you have mustered heart to visit the old place,' he said 
to the widow.  'I am glad you have.'

'For the first time, and the last, sir,' she replied.

'The first for many years, but not the last?'

'The very last.'

'You mean,' said Mr Haredale, regarding her with some surprise, 
'that having made this effort, you are resolved not to persevere 
and are determined to relapse?  This is unworthy of you.  I have 
often told you, you should return here.  You would be happier here 
than elsewhere, I know.  As to Barnaby, it's quite his home.'

'And Grip's,' said Barnaby, holding the basket open.  The raven 
hopped gravely out, and perching on his shoulder and addressing 
himself to Mr Haredale, cried--as a hint, perhaps, that some 
temperate refreshment would be acceptable--'Polly put the ket-tle 
on, we'll all have tea!'

'Hear me, Mary,' said Mr Haredale kindly, as he motioned her to 
walk with him towards the house.  'Your life has been an example of 
patience and fortitude, except in this one particular which has 
often given me great pain.  It is enough to know that you were 
cruelly involved in the calamity which deprived me of an only 
brother, and Emma of her father, without being obliged to suppose 
(as I sometimes am) that you associate us with the author of our 
joint misfortunes.'

'Associate you with him, sir!' she cried.

'Indeed,' said Mr Haredale, 'I think you do.  I almost believe 
that because your husband was bound by so many ties to our 
relation, and died in his service and defence, you have come in 
some sort to connect us with his murder.'

'Alas!' she answered.  'You little know my heart, sir.  You little 
know the truth!'

'It is natural you should do so; it is very probable you may, 
without being conscious of it,' said Mr Haredale, speaking more to 
himself than her.  'We are a fallen house.  Money, dispensed with 
the most lavish hand, would be a poor recompense for sufferings 
like yours; and thinly scattered by hands so pinched and tied as 
ours, it becomes a miserable mockery.  I feel it so, God knows,' he 
added, hastily.  'Why should I wonder if she does!'

'You do me wrong, dear sir, indeed,' she rejoined with great 
earnestness; 'and yet when you come to hear what I desire your 
leave to say--'

'I shall find my doubts confirmed?' he said, observing that she 
faltered and became confused.  'Well!'

He quickened his pace for a few steps, but fell back again to her 
side, and said:

'And have you come all this way at last, solely to speak to me?'

She answered, 'Yes.'

'A curse,' he muttered, 'upon the wretched state of us proud 
beggars, from whom the poor and rich are equally at a distance; the 
one being forced to treat us with a show of cold respect; the other 
condescending to us in their every deed and word, and keeping more 
aloof, the nearer they approach us.--Why, if it were pain to you 
(as it must have been) to break for this slight purpose the chain 
of habit forged through two-and-twenty years, could you not let me 
know your wish, and beg me to come to you?'

'There was not time, sir,' she rejoined.  'I took my resolution 
but last night, and taking it, felt that I must not lose a day--a 
day! an hour--in having speech with you.'

They had by this time reached the house.  Mr Haredale paused for a 
moment, and looked at her as if surprised by the energy of her 
manner.  Observing, however, that she took no heed of him, but 
glanced up, shuddering, at the old walls with which such horrors 
were connected in her mind, he led her by a private stair into his 
library, where Emma was seated in a window, reading.

The young lady, seeing who approached, hastily rose and laid aside 
her book, and with many kind words, and not without tears, gave her 
a warm and earnest welcome.  But the widow shrunk from her embrace 
as though she feared her, and sunk down trembling on a chair.

'It is the return to this place after so long an absence,' said 
Emma gently.  'Pray ring, dear uncle--or stay--Barnaby will run 
himself and ask for wine--'

'Not for the world,' she cried.  'It would have another taste--I 
could not touch it.  I want but a minute's rest.  Nothing but 
that.'

Miss Haredale stood beside her chair, regarding her with silent 
pity.  She remained for a little time quite still; then rose and 
turned to Mr Haredale, who had sat down in his easy chair, and was 
contemplating her with fixed attention.

The tale connected with the mansion borne in mind, it seemed, as 
has been already said, the chosen theatre for such a deed as it had 
known.  The room in which this group were now assembled--hard by 
the very chamber where the act was done--dull, dark, and sombre; 
heavy with worm-eaten books; deadened and shut in by faded 
hangings, muffling every sound; shadowed mournfully by trees whose 
rustling boughs gave ever and anon a spectral knocking at the 
glass; wore, beyond all others in the house, a ghostly, gloomy air.  
Nor were the group assembled there, unfitting tenants of the spot.  
The widow, with her marked and startling face and downcast eyes; Mr 
Haredale stern and despondent ever; his niece beside him, like, yet 
most unlike, the picture of her father, which gazed reproachfully 
down upon them from the blackened wall; Barnaby, with his vacant 
look and restless eye; were all in keeping with the place, and 
actors in the legend.  Nay, the very raven, who had hopped upon the 
table and with the air of some old necromancer appeared to be 
profoundly studying a great folio volume that lay open on a desk, 
was strictly in unison with the rest, and looked like the embodied 
spirit of evil biding his time of mischief.

'I scarcely know,' said the widow, breaking silence, 'how to begin.  
You will think my mind disordered.'

'The whole tenor of your quiet and reproachless life since you were 
last here,' returned Mr Haredale, mildly, 'shall bear witness for 
you.  Why do you fear to awaken such a suspicion?  You do not speak 
to strangers.  You have not to claim our interest or consideration 
for the first time.  Be more yourself.  Take heart.  Any advice or 
assistance that I can give you, you know is yours of right, and 
freely yours.'

'What if I came, sir,' she rejoined, 'I who have but one other 
friend on earth, to reject your aid from this moment, and to say 
that henceforth I launch myself upon the world, alone and 
unassisted, to sink or swim as Heaven may decree!'

'You would have, if you came to me for such a purpose,' said Mr 
Haredale calmly, 'some reason to assign for conduct so 
extraordinary, which--if one may entertain the possibility of 
anything so wild and strange--would have its weight, of course.'

'That, sir,' she answered, 'is the misery of my distress.  I can 
give no reason whatever.  My own bare word is all that I can offer.  
It is my duty, my imperative and bounden duty.  If I did not 
discharge it, I should be a base and guilty wretch.  Having said 
that, my lips are sealed, and I can say no more.'

As though she felt relieved at having said so much, and had nerved 
herself to the remainder of her task, she spoke from this time with 
a firmer voice and heightened courage.

'Heaven is my witness, as my own heart is--and yours, dear young 
lady, will speak for me, I know--that I have lived, since that time 
we all have bitter reason to remember, in unchanging devotion, and 
gratitude to this family.  Heaven is my witness that go where I 
may, I shall preserve those feelings unimpaired.  And it is my 
witness, too, that they alone impel me to the course I must take, 
and from which nothing now shall turn me, as I hope for mercy.'

'These are strange riddles,' said Mr Haredale.

'In this world, sir,' she replied, 'they may, perhaps, never be 
explained.  In another, the Truth will be discovered in its own 
good time.  And may that time,' she added in a low voice, 'be far 
distant!'

'Let me be sure,' said Mr Haredale, 'that I understand you, for I 
am doubtful of my own senses.  Do you mean that you are resolved 
voluntarily to deprive yourself of those means of support you have 
received from us so long--that you are determined to resign the 
annuity we settled on you twenty years ago--to leave house, and 
home, and goods, and begin life anew--and this, for some secret 
reason or monstrous fancy which is incapable of explanation, which 
only now exists, and has been dormant all this time?  In the name 
of God, under what delusion are you labouring?'

'As I am deeply thankful,' she made answer, 'for the kindness of 
those, alive and dead, who have owned this house; and as I would 
not have its roof fall down and crush me, or its very walls drip 
blood, my name being spoken in their hearing; I never will again 
subsist upon their bounty, or let it help me to subsistence.  You 
do not know,' she added, suddenly, 'to what uses it may be applied; 
into what hands it may pass.  I do, and I renounce it.'

'Surely,' said Mr Haredale, 'its uses rest with you.'

'They did.  They rest with me no longer.  It may be--it IS--devoted 
to purposes that mock the dead in their graves.  It never can 
prosper with me.  It will bring some other heavy judgement on the 
head of my dear son, whose innocence will suffer for his mother's 
guilt.'

'What words are these!' cried Mr Haredale, regarding her with 
wonder.  'Among what associates have you fallen?  Into what guilt 
have you ever been betrayed?'

'I am guilty, and yet innocent; wrong, yet right; good in 
intention, though constrained to shield and aid the bad.  Ask me no 
more questions, sir; but believe that I am rather to be pitied than 
condemned.  I must leave my house to-morrow, for while I stay 
there, it is haunted.  My future dwelling, if I am to live in 
peace, must be a secret.  If my poor boy should ever stray this 
way, do not tempt him to disclose it or have him watched when he 
returns; for if we are hunted, we must fly again.  And now this 
load is off my mind, I beseech you--and you, dear Miss Haredale, 
too--to trust me if you can, and think of me kindly as you have 
been used to do.  If I die and cannot tell my secret even then (for 
that may come to pass), it will sit the lighter on my breast in 
that hour for this day's work; and on that day, and every day until 
it comes, I will pray for and thank you both, and trouble you no 
more.

With that, she would have left them, but they detained her, and 
with many soothing words and kind entreaties, besought her to 
consider what she did, and above all to repose more freely upon 
them, and say what weighed so sorely on her mind.  Finding her deaf 
to their persuasions, Mr Haredale suggested, as a last resource, 
that she should confide in Emma, of whom, as a young person and one 
of her own sex, she might stand in less dread than of himself.  
From this proposal, however, she recoiled with the same 
indescribable repugnance she had manifested when they met.  The 
utmost that could be wrung from her was, a promise that she would 
receive Mr Haredale at her own house next evening, and in the mean 
time reconsider her determination and their dissuasions--though any 
change on her part, as she told them, was quite hopeless.  This 
condition made at last, they reluctantly suffered her to depart, 
since she would neither eat nor drink within the house; and she, 
and Barnaby, and Grip, accordingly went out as they had come, by 
the private stair and garden-gate; seeing and being seen of no one 
by the way.

It was remarkable in the raven that during the whole interview he 
had kept his eye on his book with exactly the air of a very sly 
human rascal, who, under the mask of pretending to read hard, was 
listening to everything.  He still appeared to have the 
conversation very strongly in his mind, for although, when they 
were alone again, he issued orders for the instant preparation of 
innumerable kettles for purposes of tea, he was thoughtful, and 
rather seemed to do so from an abstract sense of duty, than with 
any regard to making himself agreeable, or being what is commonly 
called good company.

They were to return by the coach.  As there was an interval of 
full two hours before it started, and they needed rest and some 
refreshment, Barnaby begged hard for a visit to the Maypole.  But 
his mother, who had no wish to be recognised by any of those who 
had known her long ago, and who feared besides that Mr Haredale 
might, on second thoughts, despatch some messenger to that place of 
entertainment in quest of her, proposed to wait in the churchyard 
instead.  As it was easy for Barnaby to buy and carry thither such 
humble viands as they required, he cheerfully assented, and in the 
churchyard they sat down to take their frugal dinner.

Here again, the raven was in a highly reflective state; walking up 
and down when he had dined, with an air of elderly complacency 
which was strongly suggestive of his having his hands under his 
coat-tails; and appearing to read the tombstones with a very 
critical taste.  Sometimes, after a long inspection of an epitaph, 
he would strop his beak upon the grave to which it referred, and 
cry in his hoarse tones, 'I'm a devil, I'm a devil, I'm a devil!' 
but whether he addressed his observations to any supposed person 
below, or merely threw them off as a general remark, is matter of 
uncertainty.

It was a quiet pretty spot, but a sad one for Barnaby's mother; for 
Mr Reuben Haredale lay there, and near the vault in which his ashes 
rested, was a stone to the memory of her own husband, with a brief 
inscription recording how and when he had lost his life.  She sat 
here, thoughtful and apart, until their time was out, and the 
distant horn told that the coach was coming.

Barnaby, who had been sleeping on the grass, sprung up quickly at 
the sound; and Grip, who appeared to understand it equally well, 
walked into his basket straightway, entreating society in general 
(as though he intended a kind of satire upon them in connection 
with churchyards) never to say die on any terms.  They were soon on 
the coach-top and rolling along the road.

It went round by the Maypole, and stopped at the door.  Joe was 
from home, and Hugh came sluggishly out to hand up the parcel that 
it called for.  There was no fear of old John coming out.  They 
could see him from the coach-roof fast asleep in his cosy bar.  It 
was a part of John's character.  He made a point of going to sleep 
at the coach's time.  He despised gadding about; he looked upon 
coaches as things that ought to be indicted; as disturbers of the 
peace of mankind; as restless, bustling, busy, horn-blowing 
contrivances, quite beneath the dignity of men, and only suited to 
giddy girls that did nothing but chatter and go a-shopping.  'We 
know nothing about coaches here, sir,' John would say, if any 
unlucky stranger made inquiry touching the offensive vehicles; 'we 
don't book for 'em; we'd rather not; they're more trouble than 
they're worth, with their noise and rattle.  If you like to wait 
for 'em you can; but we don't know anything about 'em; they may 
call and they may not--there's a carrier--he was looked upon as 
quite good enough for us, when I was a boy.'

She dropped her veil as Hugh climbed up, and while he hung behind, 
and talked to Barnaby in whispers.  But neither he nor any other 
person spoke to her, or noticed her, or had any curiosity about 
her; and so, an alien, she visited and left the village where she 
had been born, and had lived a merry child, a comely girl, a happy 
wife--where she had known all her enjoyment of life, and had 
entered on its hardest sorrows.



Chapter 26


'And you're not surprised to hear this, Varden?' said Mr Haredale.  
'Well!  You and she have always been the best friends, and you 
should understand her if anybody does.'

'I ask your pardon, sir,' rejoined the locksmith.  'I didn't say I 
understood her.  I wouldn't have the presumption to say that of any 
woman.  It's not so easily done.  But I am not so much surprised, 
sir, as you expected me to be, certainly.'

'May I ask why not, my good friend?'

'I have seen, sir,' returned the locksmith with evident reluctance, 
'I have seen in connection with her, something that has filled me 
with distrust and uneasiness.  She has made bad friends, how, or 
when, I don't know; but that her house is a refuge for one robber 
and cut-throat at least, I am certain.  There, sir!  Now it's out.'

'Varden!'

'My own eyes, sir, are my witnesses, and for her sake I would be 
willingly half-blind, if I could but have the pleasure of 
mistrusting 'em.  I have kept the secret till now, and it will go 
no further than yourself, I know; but I tell you that with my own 
eyes--broad awake--I saw, in the passage of her house one evening 
after dark, the highwayman who robbed and wounded Mr Edward 
Chester, and on the same night threatened me.'

'And you made no effort to detain him?' said Mr Haredale quickly.

'Sir,' returned the locksmith, 'she herself prevented me--held me, 
with all her strength, and hung about me until he had got clear 
off.'  And having gone so far, he related circumstantially all that 
had passed upon the night in question.

This dialogue was held in a low tone in the locksmith's little 
parlour, into which honest Gabriel had shown his visitor on his 
arrival.  Mr Haredale had called upon him to entreat his company to 
the widow's, that he might have the assistance of his persuasion 
and influence; and out of this circumstance the conversation had 
arisen.

'I forbore,' said Gabriel, 'from repeating one word of this to 
anybody, as it could do her no good and might do her great harm.  I 
thought and hoped, to say the truth, that she would come to me, and 
talk to me about it, and tell me how it was; but though I have 
purposely put myself in her way more than once or twice, she has 
never touched upon the subject--except by a look.  And indeed,' 
said the good-natured locksmith, 'there was a good deal in the 
look, more than could have been put into a great many words.  It 
said among other matters "Don't ask me anything" so imploringly, 
that I didn't ask her anything.  You'll think me an old fool, I 
know, sir.  If it's any relief to call me one, pray do.'

'I am greatly disturbed by what you tell me,' said Mr Haredale, 
after a silence.  'What meaning do you attach to it?'

The locksmith shook his head, and looked doubtfully out of window 
at the failing light.

'She cannot have married again,' said Mr Haredale.

'Not without our knowledge surely, sir.'

'She may have done so, in the fear that it would lead, if known, to 
some objection or estrangement.  Suppose she married incautiously--
it is not improbable, for her existence has been a lonely and 
monotonous one for many years--and the man turned out a ruffian, 
she would be anxious to screen him, and yet would revolt from his 
crimes.  This might be.  It bears strongly on the whole drift of 
her discourse yesterday, and would quite explain her conduct.  Do 
you suppose Barnaby is privy to these circumstances?'

'Quite impossible to say, sir,' returned the locksmith, shaking his 
head again: 'and next to impossible to find out from him.  If what 
you suppose is really the case, I tremble for the lad--a notable 
person, sir, to put to bad uses--'

'It is not possible, Varden,' said Mr Haredale, in a still lower 
tone of voice than he had spoken yet, 'that we have been blinded 
and deceived by this woman from the beginning?  It is not possible 
that this connection was formed in her husband's lifetime, and led 
to his and my brother's--'

'Good God, sir,' cried Gabriel, interrupting him, 'don't entertain 
such dark thoughts for a moment.  Five-and-twenty years ago, where 
was there a girl like her?  A gay, handsome, laughing, bright-eyed 
damsel!  Think what she was, sir.  It makes my heart ache now, even 
now, though I'm an old man, with a woman for a daughter, to think 
what she was and what she is.  We all change, but that's with Time; 
Time does his work honestly, and I don't mind him.  A fig for Time, 
sir.  Use him well, and he's a hearty fellow, and scorns to have 
you at a disadvantage.  But care and suffering (and those have 
changed her) are devils, sir--secret, stealthy, undermining devils--
who tread down the brightest flowers in Eden, and do more havoc in 
a month than Time does in a year.  Picture to yourself for one 
minute what Mary was before they went to work with her fresh heart 
and face--do her that justice--and say whether such a thing is 
possible.'

'You're a good fellow, Varden,' said Mr Haredale, 'and are quite 
right.  I have brooded on that subject so long, that every breath 
of suspicion carries me back to it.  You are quite right.'

'It isn't, sir,' cried the locksmith with brightened eyes, and 
sturdy, honest voice; 'it isn't because I courted her before Rudge, 
and failed, that I say she was too good for him.  She would have 
been as much too good for me.  But she WAS too good for him; he 
wasn't free and frank enough for her.  I don't reproach his memory 
with it, poor fellow; I only want to put her before you as she 
really was.  For myself, I'll keep her old picture in my mind; and 
thinking of that, and what has altered her, I'll stand her friend, 
and try to win her back to peace.  And damme, sir,' cried Gabriel, 
'with your pardon for the word, I'd do the same if she had married 
fifty highwaymen in a twelvemonth; and think it in the Protestant 
Manual too, though Martha said it wasn't, tooth and nail, till 
doomsday!'

If the dark little parlour had been filled with a dense fog, which, 
clearing away in an instant, left it all radiance and brightness, 
it could not have been more suddenly cheered than by this outbreak 
on the part of the hearty locksmith.  In a voice nearly as full and 
round as his own, Mr Haredale cried 'Well said!' and bade him come 
away without more parley.  The locksmith complied right willingly; 
and both getting into a hackney coach which was waiting at the 
door, drove off straightway.

They alighted at the street corner, and dismissing their 
conveyance, walked to the house.  To their first knock at the door 
there was no response.  A second met with the like result.  But in 
answer to the third, which was of a more vigorous kind, the parlour 
window-sash was gently raised, and a musical voice cried:

'Haredale, my dear fellow, I am extremely glad to see you.  How 
very much you have improved in your appearance since our last 
meeting!  I never saw you looking better.  HOW do you do?'

Mr Haredale turned his eyes towards the casement whence the voice 
proceeded, though there was no need to do so, to recognise the 
speaker, and Mr Chester waved his hand, and smiled a courteous 
welcome.

'The door will be opened immediately,' he said.  'There is nobody 
but a very dilapidated female to perform such offices.  You will 
excuse her infirmities?  If she were in a more elevated station of 
society, she would be gouty.  Being but a hewer of wood and drawer 
of water, she is rheumatic.  My dear Haredale, these are natural 
class distinctions, depend upon it.'

Mr Haredale, whose face resumed its lowering and distrustful look 
the moment he heard the voice, inclined his head stiffly, and 
turned his back upon the speaker.

'Not opened yet,' said Mr Chester.  'Dear me!  I hope the aged soul 
has not caught her foot in some unlucky cobweb by the way.  She is 
there at last!  Come in, I beg!'

Mr Haredale entered, followed by the locksmith.  Turning with a 
look of great astonishment to the old woman who had opened the 
door, he inquired for Mrs Rudge--for Barnaby.  They were both gone, 
she replied, wagging her ancient head, for good.  There was a 
gentleman in the parlour, who perhaps could tell them more.  That 
was all SHE knew.

'Pray, sir,' said Mr Haredale, presenting himself before this new 
tenant, 'where is the person whom I came here to see?'

'My dear friend,' he returned, 'I have not the least idea.'

'Your trifling is ill-timed,' retorted the other in a suppressed 
tone and voice, 'and its subject ill-chosen.  Reserve it for those 
who are your friends, and do not expend it on me.  I lay no claim 
to the distinction, and have the self-denial to reject it.'

'My dear, good sir,' said Mr Chester, 'you are heated with walking.  
Sit down, I beg.  Our friend is--'

'Is but a plain honest man,' returned Mr Haredale, 'and quite 
unworthy of your notice.'

'Gabriel Varden by name, sir,' said the locksmith bluntly.

'A worthy English yeoman!' said Mr Chester.  'A most worthy 
yeoman, of whom I have frequently heard my son Ned--darling fellow--
speak, and have often wished to see.  Varden, my good friend, I am 
glad to know you.  You wonder now,' he said, turning languidly to 
Mr Haredale, 'to see me here.  Now, I am sure you do.'

Mr Haredale glanced at him--not fondly or admiringly--smiled, and 
held his peace.

'The mystery is solved in a moment,' said Mr Chester; 'in a moment.  
Will you step aside with me one instant.  You remember our little 
compact in reference to Ned, and your dear niece, Haredale?  You 
remember the list of assistants in their innocent intrigue?  You 
remember these two people being among them?  My dear fellow, 
congratulate yourself, and me.  I have bought them off.'

'You have done what?' said Mr Haredale.

'Bought them off,' returned his smiling friend.  'I have found it 
necessary to take some active steps towards setting this boy and 
girl attachment quite at rest, and have begun by removing these two 
agents.  You are surprised?  Who CAN withstand the influence of a 
little money!  They wanted it, and have been bought off.  We have 
nothing more to fear from them.  They are gone.'

'Gone!' echoed Mr Haredale.  'Where?'

'My dear fellow--and you must permit me to say again, that you 
never looked so young; so positively boyish as you do to-night--the 
Lord knows where; I believe Columbus himself wouldn't find them.  
Between you and me they have their hidden reasons, but upon that 
point I have pledged myself to secrecy.  She appointed to see you 
here to-night, I know, but found it inconvenient, and couldn't 
wait.  Here is the key of the door.  I am afraid you'll find it 
inconveniently large; but as the tenement is yours, your good-
nature will excuse that, Haredale, I am certain!'



Chapter 27


Mr Haredale stood in the widow's parlour with the door-key in his 
hand, gazing by turns at Mr Chester and at Gabriel Varden, and 
occasionally glancing downward at the key as in the hope that of 
its own accord it would unlock the mystery; until Mr Chester, 
putting on his hat and gloves, and sweetly inquiring whether they 
were walking in the same direction, recalled him to himself.

'No,' he said.  'Our roads diverge--widely, as you know.  For the 
present, I shall remain here.'

'You will be hipped, Haredale; you will be miserable, melancholy, 
utterly wretched,' returned the other.  'It's a place of the very 
last description for a man of your temper.  I know it will make you 
very miserable.'

'Let it,' said Mr Haredale, sitting down; 'and thrive upon the 
thought.  Good night!'

Feigning to be wholly unconscious of the abrupt wave of the hand 
which rendered this farewell tantamount to a dismissal, Mr Chester 
retorted with a bland and heartfelt benediction, and inquired of 
Gabriel in what direction HE was going.

'Yours, sir, would be too much honour for the like of me,' replied 
the locksmith, hesitating.

'I wish you to remain here a little while, Varden,' said Mr 
Haredale, without looking towards them.  'I have a word or two to 
say to you.'

'I will not intrude upon your conference another moment,' said Mr 
Chester with inconceivable politeness.  'May it be satisfactory to 
you both!  God bless you!'  So saying, and bestowing upon the 
locksmith a most refulgent smile, he left them.

'A deplorably constituted creature, that rugged person,' he said, 
as he walked along the street; 'he is an atrocity that carries its 
own punishment along with it--a bear that gnaws himself.  And here 
is one of the inestimable advantages of having a perfect command 
over one's inclinations.  I have been tempted in these two short 
interviews, to draw upon that fellow, fifty times.  Five men in six 
would have yielded to the impulse.  By suppressing mine, I wound 
him deeper and more keenly than if I were the best swordsman in all 
Europe, and he the worst.  You are the wise man's very last 
resource,' he said, tapping the hilt of his weapon; 'we can but 
appeal to you when all else is said and done.  To come to you 
before, and thereby spare our adversaries so much, is a barbarian 
mode of warfare, quite unworthy of any man with the remotest 
pretensions to delicacy of feeling, or refinement.'

He smiled so very pleasantly as he communed with himself after this 
manner, that a beggar was emboldened to follow for alms, and to dog 
his footsteps for some distance.  He was gratified by the 
circumstance, feeling it complimentary to his power of feature, and 
as a reward suffered the man to follow him until he called a chair, 
when he graciously dismissed him with a fervent blessing.

'Which is as easy as cursing,' he wisely added, as he took his 
seat, 'and more becoming to the face.--To Clerkenwell, my good 
creatures, if you please!'  The chairmen were rendered quite 
vivacious by having such a courteous burden, and to Clerkenwell 
they went at a fair round trot.

Alighting at a certain point he had indicated to them upon the 
road, and paying them something less than they expected from a fare 
of such gentle speech, he turned into the street in which the 
locksmith dwelt, and presently stood beneath the shadow of the 
Golden Key.  Mr Tappertit, who was hard at work by lamplight, in a 
corner of the workshop, remained unconscious of his presence until 
a hand upon his shoulder made him start and turn his head.

'Industry,' said Mr Chester, 'is the soul of business, and the 
keystone of prosperity.  Mr Tappertit, I shall expect you to invite 
me to dinner when you are Lord Mayor of London.'

'Sir,' returned the 'prentice, laying down his hammer, and rubbing 
his nose on the back of a very sooty hand, 'I scorn the Lord Mayor 
and everything that belongs to him.  We must have another state of 
society, sir, before you catch me being Lord Mayor.  How de do, sir?'

'The better, Mr Tappertit, for looking into your ingenuous face 
once more.  I hope you are well.'

'I am as well, sir,' said Sim, standing up to get nearer to his 
ear, and whispering hoarsely, 'as any man can be under the 
aggrawations to which I am exposed.  My life's a burden to me.  If 
it wasn't for wengeance, I'd play at pitch and toss with it on the 
losing hazard.'

'Is Mrs Varden at home?' said Mr Chester.

'Sir,' returned Sim, eyeing him over with a look of concentrated 
expression,--'she is.  Did you wish to see her?'

Mr Chester nodded.

'Then come this way, sir,' said Sim, wiping his face upon his 
apron.  'Follow me, sir.--Would you permit me to whisper in your 
ear, one half a second?'

'By all means.'

Mr Tappertit raised himself on tiptoe, applied his lips to Mr 
Chester's ear, drew back his head without saying anything, looked 
hard at him, applied them to his ear again, again drew back, and 
finally whispered--'The name is Joseph Willet.  Hush!  I say no 
more.'

Having said that much, he beckoned the visitor with a mysterious 
aspect to follow him to the parlour-door, where he announced him 
in the voice of a gentleman-usher.  'Mr Chester.'

'And not Mr Ed'dard, mind,' said Sim, looking into the door again, 
and adding this by way of postscript in his own person; 'it's his 
father.'

'But do not let his father,' said Mr Chester, advancing hat in 
hand, as he observed the effect of this last explanatory 
announcement, 'do not let his father be any check or restraint on 
your domestic occupations, Miss Varden.'

'Oh!  Now!  There!  An't I always a-saying it!' exclaimed Miggs, 
clapping her hands.  'If he an't been and took Missis for her own 
daughter.  Well, she DO look like it, that she do.  Only think of 
that, mim!'

'Is it possible,' said Mr Chester in his softest tones, 'that this 
is Mrs Varden!  I am amazed.  That is not your daughter, Mrs 
Varden?  No, no.  Your sister.'

'My daughter, indeed, sir,' returned Mrs V., blushing with great 
juvenility.

'Ah, Mrs Varden!' cried the visitor.  'Ah, ma'am--humanity is 
indeed a happy lot, when we can repeat ourselves in others, and 
still be young as they.  You must allow me to salute you--the 
custom of the country, my dear madam--your daughter too.'

Dolly showed some reluctance to perform this ceremony, but was 
sharply reproved by Mrs Varden, who insisted on her undergoing it 
that minute.  For pride, she said with great severity, was one of 
the seven deadly sins, and humility and lowliness of heart were 
virtues.  Wherefore she desired that Dolly would be kissed 
immediately, on pain of her just displeasure; at the same time 
giving her to understand that whatever she saw her mother do, she 
might safely do herself, without being at the trouble of any 
reasoning or reflection on the subject--which, indeed, was 
offensive and undutiful, and in direct contravention of the church 
catechism.

Thus admonished, Dolly complied, though by no means willingly; for 
there was a broad, bold look of admiration in Mr Chester's face, 
refined and polished though it sought to be, which distressed her 
very much.  As she stood with downcast eyes, not liking to look up 
and meet his, he gazed upon her with an approving air, and then 
turned to her mother.

'My friend Gabriel (whose acquaintance I only made this very 
evening) should be a happy man, Mrs Varden.'

'Ah!' sighed Mrs V., shaking her head.

'Ah!' echoed Miggs.

'Is that the case?' said Mr Chester, compassionately.  'Dear me!'

'Master has no intentions, sir,' murmured Miggs as she sidled up 
to him, 'but to be as grateful as his natur will let him, for 
everythink he owns which it is in his powers to appreciate.  But we 
never, sir'--said Miggs, looking sideways at Mrs Varden, and 
interlarding her discourse with a sigh--'we never know the full 
value of SOME wines and fig-trees till we lose 'em.  So much the 
worse, sir, for them as has the slighting of 'em on their 
consciences when they're gone to be in full blow elsewhere.'  And 
Miss Miggs cast up her eyes to signify where that might be.

As Mrs Varden distinctly heard, and was intended to hear, all that 
Miggs said, and as these words appeared to convey in metaphorical 
terms a presage or foreboding that she would at some early period 
droop beneath her trials and take an easy flight towards the stars, 
she immediately began to languish, and taking a volume of the 
Manual from a neighbouring table, leant her arm upon it as though 
she were Hope and that her Anchor.  Mr Chester perceiving this, 
and seeing how the volume was lettered on the back, took it gently 
from her hand, and turned the fluttering leaves.

'My favourite book, dear madam.  How often, how very often in his 
early life--before he can remember'--(this clause was strictly 
true) 'have I deduced little easy moral lessons from its pages, for 
my dear son Ned!  You know Ned?'

Mrs Varden had that honour, and a fine affable young gentleman he 
was.

'You're a mother, Mrs Varden,' said Mr Chester, taking a pinch of 
snuff, 'and you know what I, as a father, feel, when he is praised.  
He gives me some uneasiness--much uneasiness--he's of a roving 
nature, ma'am--from flower to flower--from sweet to sweet--but his 
is the butterfly time of life, and we must not be hard upon such 
trifling.'

He glanced at Dolly.  She was attending evidently to what he said.  
Just what he desired!

'The only thing I object to in this little trait of Ned's, is,' 
said Mr Chester, '--and the mention of his name reminds me, by the 
way, that I am about to beg the favour of a minute's talk with you 
alone--the only thing I object to in it, is, that it DOES partake 
of insincerity.  Now, however I may attempt to disguise the fact 
from myself in my affection for Ned, still I always revert to this--
that if we are not sincere, we are nothing.  Nothing upon earth.  
Let us be sincere, my dear madam--'

'--and Protestant,' murmured Mrs Varden.

'--and Protestant above all things.  Let us be sincere and 
Protestant, strictly moral, strictly just (though always with a 
leaning towards mercy), strictly honest, and strictly true, and we 
gain--it is a slight point, certainly, but still it is something 
tangible; we throw up a groundwork and foundation, so to speak, of 
goodness, on which we may afterwards erect some worthy 
superstructure.'

Now, to be sure, Mrs Varden thought, here is a perfect character.  
Here is a meek, righteous, thoroughgoing Christian, who, having 
mastered all these qualities, so difficult of attainment; who, 
having dropped a pinch of salt on the tails of all the cardinal 
virtues, and caught them every one; makes light of their 
possession, and pants for more morality.  For the good woman never 
doubted (as many good men and women never do), that this slighting 
kind of profession, this setting so little store by great matters, 
this seeming to say, 'I am not proud, I am what you hear, but I 
consider myself no better than other people; let us change the 
subject, pray'--was perfectly genuine and true.  He so contrived 
it, and said it in that way that it appeared to have been forced 
from him, and its effect was marvellous.

Aware of the impression he had made--few men were quicker than he 
at such discoveries--Mr Chester followed up the blow by propounding 
certain virtuous maxims, somewhat vague and general in their 
nature, doubtless, and occasionally partaking of the character of 
truisms, worn a little out at elbow, but delivered in so charming a 
voice and with such uncommon serenity and peace of mind, that they 
answered as well as the best.  Nor is this to be wondered at; for 
as hollow vessels produce a far more musical sound in falling than 
those which are substantial, so it will oftentimes be found that 
sentiments which have nothing in them make the loudest ringing in 
the world, and are the most relished.

Mr Chester, with the volume gently extended in one hand, and with 
the other planted lightly on his breast, talked to them in the most 
delicious manner possible; and quite enchanted all his hearers, 
notwithstanding their conflicting interests and thoughts.  Even 
Dolly, who, between his keen regards and her eyeing over by Mr 
Tappertit, was put quite out of countenance, could not help owning 
within herself that he was the sweetest-spoken gentleman she had 
ever seen.  Even Miss Miggs, who was divided between admiration of 
Mr Chester and a mortal jealousy of her young mistress, had 
sufficient leisure to be propitiated.  Even Mr Tappertit, though 
occupied as we have seen in gazing at his heart's delight, could 
not wholly divert his thoughts from the voice of the other charmer.  
Mrs Varden, to her own private thinking, had never been so improved 
in all her life; and when Mr Chester, rising and craving permission 
to speak with her apart, took her by the hand and led her at arm's 
length upstairs to the best sitting-room, she almost deemed him 
something more than human.

'Dear madam,' he said, pressing her hand delicately to his lips; 
'be seated.'

Mrs Varden called up quite a courtly air, and became seated.

'You guess my object?' said Mr Chester, drawing a chair towards 
her.  'You divine my purpose?  I am an affectionate parent, my dear 
Mrs Varden.'

'That I am sure you are, sir,' said Mrs V.

'Thank you,' returned Mr Chester, tapping his snuff-box lid.  
'Heavy moral responsibilities rest with parents, Mrs Varden.'

Mrs Varden slightly raised her hands, shook her head, and looked at 
the ground as though she saw straight through the globe, out at the 
other end, and into the immensity of space beyond.

'I may confide in you,' said Mr Chester, 'without reserve.  I love 
my son, ma'am, dearly; and loving him as I do, I would save him 
from working certain misery.  You know of his attachment to Miss 
Haredale.  You have abetted him in it, and very kind of you it was 
to do so.  I am deeply obliged to you--most deeply obliged to you--
for your interest in his behalf; but my dear ma'am, it is a 
mistaken one, I do assure you.'

Mrs Varden stammered that she was sorry--'

'Sorry, my dear ma'am,' he interposed.  'Never be sorry for what is 
so very amiable, so very good in intention, so perfectly like 
yourself.  But there are grave and weighty reasons, pressing family 
considerations, and apart even from these, points of religious 
difference, which interpose themselves, and render their union 
impossible; utterly im-possible.  I should have mentioned these 
circumstances to your husband; but he has--you will excuse my 
saying this so freely--he has NOT your quickness of apprehension or 
depth of moral sense.  What an extremely airy house this is, and 
how beautifully kept!  For one like myself--a widower so long--
these tokens of female care and superintendence have inexpressible 
charms.'

Mrs Varden began to think (she scarcely knew why) that the young Mr 
Chester must be in the wrong and the old Mr Chester must he in the 
right.

'My son Ned,' resumed her tempter with his most winning air, 'has 
had, I am told, your lovely daughter's aid, and your open-hearted 
husband's.'

'--Much more than mine, sir,' said Mrs Varden; 'a great deal more.  
I have often had my doubts.  It's a--'

'A bad example,' suggested Mr Chester.  'It is.  No doubt it is.  
Your daughter is at that age when to set before her an 
encouragement for young persons to rebel against their parents on 
this most important point, is particularly injudicious.  You are 
quite right.  I ought to have thought of that myself, but it 
escaped me, I confess--so far superior are your sex to ours, dear 
madam, in point of penetration and sagacity.'

Mrs Varden looked as wise as if she had really said something to 
deserve this compliment--firmly believed she had, in short--and her 
faith in her own shrewdness increased considerably.

'My dear ma'am,' said Mr Chester, 'you embolden me to be plain 
with you.  My son and I are at variance on this point.  The young 
lady and her natural guardian differ upon it, also.  And the 
closing point is, that my son is bound by his duty to me, by his 
honour, by every solemn tie and obligation, to marry some one 
else.'

'Engaged to marry another lady!' quoth Mrs Varden, holding up her 
hands.

'My dear madam, brought up, educated, and trained, expressly for 
that purpose.  Expressly for that purpose.--Miss Haredale, I am 
told, is a very charming creature.'

'I am her foster-mother, and should know--the best young lady in 
the world,' said Mrs Varden.

'I have not the smallest doubt of it.  I am sure she is.  And you, 
who have stood in that tender relation towards her, are bound to 
consult her happiness.  Now, can I--as I have said to Haredale, who 
quite agrees--can I possibly stand by, and suffer her to throw 
herself away (although she IS of a Catholic family), upon a young 
fellow who, as yet, has no heart at all?  It is no imputation upon 
him to say he has not, because young men who have plunged deeply 
into the frivolities and conventionalities of society, very seldom 
have.  Their hearts never grow, my dear ma'am, till after thirty.  
I don't believe, no, I do NOT believe, that I had any heart myself 
when I was Ned's age.'

'Oh sir,' said Mrs Varden, 'I think you must have had.  It's 
impossible that you, who have so much now, can ever have been 
without any.'

'I hope,' he answered, shrugging his shoulders meekly, 'I have a 
little; I hope, a very little--Heaven knows!  But to return to Ned; 
I have no doubt you thought, and therefore interfered benevolently 
in his behalf, that I objected to Miss Haredale.  How very 
natural!  My dear madam, I object to him--to him--emphatically to 
Ned himself.'

Mrs Varden was perfectly aghast at the disclosure.

'He has, if he honourably fulfils this solemn obligation of which I 
have told you--and he must be honourable, dear Mrs Varden, or he is 
no son of mine--a fortune within his reach.  He is of most 
expensive, ruinously expensive habits; and if, in a moment of 
caprice and wilfulness, he were to marry this young lady, and so 
deprive himself of the means of gratifying the tastes to which he 
has been so long accustomed, he would--my dear madam, he would 
break the gentle creature's heart.  Mrs Varden, my good lady, my 
dear soul, I put it to you--is such a sacrifice to be endured?  Is 
the female heart a thing to be trifled with in this way?  Ask your 
own, my dear madam.  Ask your own, I beseech you.'

'Truly,' thought Mrs Varden, 'this gentleman is a saint.  But,' she 
added aloud, and not unnaturally, 'if you take Miss Emma's lover 
away, sir, what becomes of the poor thing's heart then?'

'The very point,' said Mr Chester, not at all abashed, 'to which I 
wished to lead you.  A marriage with my son, whom I should be 
compelled to disown, would be followed by years of misery; they 
would be separated, my dear madam, in a twelvemonth.  To break off 
this attachment, which is more fancied than real, as you and I know 
very well, will cost the dear girl but a few tears, and she is 
happy again.  Take the case of your own daughter, the young lady 
downstairs, who is your breathing image'--Mrs Varden coughed and 
simpered--'there is a young man (I am sorry to say, a dissolute 
fellow, of very indifferent character) of whom I have heard Ned 
speak--Bullet was it--Pullet--Mullet--'

'There is a young man of the name of Joseph Willet, sir,' said Mrs 
Varden, folding her hands loftily.

'That's he,' cried Mr Chester.  'Suppose this Joseph Willet now, 
were to aspire to the affections of your charming daughter, and 
were to engage them.'

'It would be like his impudence,' interposed Mrs Varden, bridling, 
'to dare to think of such a thing!'

'My dear madam, that's the whole case.  I know it would be like his 
impudence.  It is like Ned's impudence to do as he has done; but 
you would not on that account, or because of a few tears from your 
beautiful daughter, refrain from checking their inclinations in 
their birth.  I meant to have reasoned thus with your husband when 
I saw him at Mrs Rudge's this evening--'

'My husband,' said Mrs Varden, interposing with emotion, 'would be 
a great deal better at home than going to Mrs Rudge's so often.  I 
don't know what he does there.  I don't see what occasion he has to 
busy himself in her affairs at all, sir.'

'If I don't appear to express my concurrence in those last 
sentiments of yours,' returned Mr Chester, 'quite so strongly as 
you might desire, it is because his being there, my dear madam, and 
not proving conversational, led me hither, and procured me the 
happiness of this interview with one, in whom the whole management, 
conduct, and prosperity of her family are centred, I perceive.'

With that he took Mrs Varden's hand again, and having pressed it to 
his lips with the highflown gallantry of the day--a little 
burlesqued to render it the more striking in the good lady's 
unaccustomed eyes--proceeded in the same strain of mingled 
sophistry, cajolery, and flattery, to entreat that her utmost 
influence might be exerted to restrain her husband and daughter 
from any further promotion of Edward's suit to Miss Haredale, and 
from aiding or abetting either party in any way.  Mrs Varden was 
but a woman, and had her share of vanity, obstinacy, and love of 
power.  She entered into a secret treaty of alliance, offensive and 
defensive, with her insinuating visitor; and really did believe, as 
many others would have done who saw and heard him, that in so doing 
she furthered the ends of truth, justice, and morality, in a very 
uncommon degree.

Overjoyed by the success of his negotiation, and mightily amused 
within himself, Mr Chester conducted her downstairs in the same 
state as before; and having repeated the previous ceremony of 
salutation, which also as before comprehended Dolly, took his 
leave; first completing the conquest of Miss Miggs's heart, by 
inquiring if 'this young lady' would light him to the door.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, returning with the candle.  'Oh gracious me, 
mim, there's a gentleman!  Was there ever such an angel to talk as 
he is--and such a sweet-looking man!  So upright and noble, that he 
seems to despise the very ground he walks on; and yet so mild and 
condescending, that he seems to say "but I will take notice on it 
too."  And to think of his taking you for Miss Dolly, and Miss 
Dolly for your sister--Oh, my goodness me, if I was master wouldn't 
I be jealous of him!'

Mrs Varden reproved her handmaid for this vain-speaking; but very 
gently and mildly--quite smilingly indeed--remarking that she was a 
foolish, giddy, light-headed girl, whose spirits carried her 
beyond all bounds, and who didn't mean half she said, or she would 
be quite angry with her.

'For my part,' said Dolly, in a thoughtful manner, 'I half believe 
Mr Chester is something like Miggs in that respect.  For all his 
politeness and pleasant speaking, I am pretty sure he was making 
game of us, more than once.'

'If you venture to say such a thing again, and to speak ill of 
people behind their backs in my presence, miss,' said Mrs Varden, 
'I shall insist upon your taking a candle and going to bed 
directly.  How dare you, Dolly?  I'm astonished at you.  The 
rudeness of your whole behaviour this evening has been disgraceful.  
Did anybody ever hear,' cried the enraged matron, bursting into 
tears, 'of a daughter telling her own mother she has been made game 
of!'

What a very uncertain temper Mrs Varden's was!



Chapter 28


Repairing to a noted coffee-house in Covent Garden when he left the 
locksmith's, Mr Chester sat long over a late dinner, entertaining 
himself exceedingly with the whimsical recollection of his recent 
proceedings, and congratulating himself very much on his great 
cleverness.  Influenced by these thoughts, his face wore an 
expression so benign and tranquil, that the waiter in immediate 
attendance upon him felt he could almost have died in his defence, 
and settled in his own mind (until the receipt of the bill, and a 
very small fee for very great trouble disabused it of the idea) 
that such an apostolic customer was worth half-a-dozen of the 
ordinary run of visitors, at least.

A visit to the gaming-table--not as a heated, anxious venturer, but 
one whom it was quite a treat to see staking his two or three 
pieces in deference to the follies of society, and smiling with 
equal benevolence on winners and losers--made it late before he 
reached home.  It was his custom to bid his servant go to bed at 
his own time unless he had orders to the contrary, and to leave a 
candle on the common stair.  There was a lamp on the landing by 
which he could always light it when he came home late, and having a 
key of the door about him he could enter and go to bed at his 
pleasure.

He opened the glass of the dull lamp, whose wick, burnt up and 
swollen like a drunkard's nose, came flying off in little 
carbuncles at the candle's touch, and scattering hot sparks about, 
rendered it matter of some difficulty to kindle the lazy taper; 
when a noise, as of a man snoring deeply some steps higher up, 
caused him to pause and listen.  It was the heavy breathing of a 
sleeper, close at hand.  Some fellow had lain down on the open 
staircase, and was slumbering soundly.  Having lighted the candle 
at length and opened his own door, he softly ascended, holding the 
taper high above his head, and peering cautiously about; curious to 
see what kind of man had chosen so comfortless a shelter for his 
lodging.

With his head upon the landing and his great limbs flung over half-
a-dozen stairs, as carelessly as though he were a dead man whom 
drunken bearers had thrown down by chance, there lay Hugh, face 
uppermost, his long hair drooping like some wild weed upon his 
wooden pillow, and his huge chest heaving with the sounds which so 
unwontedly disturbed the place and hour.

He who came upon him so unexpectedly was about to break his rest by 
thrusting him with his foot, when, glancing at his upturned face, 
he arrested himself in the very action, and stooping down and 
shading the candle with his hand, examined his features closely.  
Close as his first inspection was, it did not suffice, for he 
passed the light, still carefully shaded as before, across and 
across his face, and yet observed him with a searching eye.

While he was thus engaged, the sleeper, without any starting or 
turning round, awoke.  There was a kind of fascination in meeting 
his steady gaze so suddenly, which took from the other the presence 
of mind to withdraw his eyes, and forced him, as it were, to meet 
his look.  So they remained staring at each other, until Mr Chester 
at last broke silence, and asked him in a low voice, why he lay 
sleeping there.

'I thought,' said Hugh, struggling into a sitting posture and 
gazing at him intently, still, 'that you were a part of my dream.  
It was a curious one.  I hope it may never come true, master.'

'What makes you shiver?'

'The--the cold, I suppose,' he growled, as he shook himself and 
rose.  'I hardly know where I am yet.'

'Do you know me?' said Mr Chester.

'Ay, I know you,' he answered.  'I was dreaming of you--we're not 
where I thought we were.  That's a comfort.'

He looked round him as he spoke, and in particular looked above his 
head, as though he half expected to be standing under some object 
which had had existence in his dream.  Then he rubbed his eyes and 
shook himself again, and followed his conductor into his own rooms.

Mr Chester lighted the candles which stood upon his dressing-table, 
and wheeling an easy-chair towards the fire, which was yet 
burning, stirred up a cheerful blaze, sat down before it, and bade 
his uncouth visitor 'Come here,' and draw his boots off.

'You have been drinking again, my fine fellow,' he said, as Hugh 
went down on one knee, and did as he was told.

'As I'm alive, master, I've walked the twelve long miles, and 
waited here I don't know how long, and had no drink between my lips 
since dinner-time at noon.'

'And can you do nothing better, my pleasant friend, than fall 
asleep, and shake the very building with your snores?' said Mr 
Chester.  'Can't you dream in your straw at home, dull dog as you 
are, that you need come here to do it?--Reach me those slippers, 
and tread softly.'

Hugh obeyed in silence.

'And harkee, my dear young gentleman,' said Mr Chester, as he put 
them on, 'the next time you dream, don't let it be of me, but of 
some dog or horse with whom you are better acquainted.  Fill the 
glass once--you'll find it and the bottle in the same place--and 
empty it to keep yourself awake.'

Hugh obeyed again even more zealously--and having done so, 
presented himself before his patron.

'Now,' said Mr Chester, 'what do you want with me?'

'There was news to-day,' returned Hugh.  'Your son was at our 
house--came down on horseback.  He tried to see the young woman, 
but couldn't get sight of her.  He left some letter or some message 
which our Joe had charge of, but he and the old one quarrelled 
about it when your son had gone, and the old one wouldn't let it be 
delivered.  He says (that's the old one does) that none of his 
people shall interfere and get him into trouble.  He's a landlord, 
he says, and lives on everybody's custom.'

'He's a jewel,' smiled Mr Chester, 'and the better for being a dull 
one.--Well?'

'Varden's daughter--that's the girl I kissed--'

'--and stole the bracelet from upon the king's highway,' said Mr 
Chester, composedly.  'Yes; what of her?'

'She wrote a note at our house to the young woman, saying she lost 
the letter I brought to you, and you burnt.  Our Joe was to carry 
it, but the old one kept him at home all next day, on purpose that 
he shouldn't.  Next morning he gave it to me to take; and here it 
is.'

'You didn't deliver it then, my good friend?' said Mr Chester, 
twirling Dolly's note between his finger and thumb, and feigning to 
be surprised.

'I supposed you'd want to have it,' retorted Hugh.  'Burn one, burn 
all, I thought.'

'My devil-may-care acquaintance,' said Mr Chester--'really if you 
do not draw some nicer distinctions, your career will be cut short 
with most surprising suddenness.  Don't you know that the letter 
you brought to me, was directed to my son who resides in this very 
place?  And can you descry no difference between his letters and 
those addressed to other people?'

'If you don't want it,' said Hugh, disconcerted by this reproof, 
for he had expected high praise, 'give it me back, and I'll deliver 
it.  I don't know how to please you, master.'

'I shall deliver it,' returned his patron, putting it away after a 
moment's consideration, 'myself.  Does the young lady walk out, on 
fine mornings?'

'Mostly--about noon is her usual time.'

'Alone?'

'Yes, alone.'

'Where?'

'In the grounds before the house.--Them that the footpath crosses.'

'If the weather should be fine, I may throw myself in her way to-
morrow, perhaps,' said Mr Chester, as coolly as if she were one of 
his ordinary acquaintance.  'Mr Hugh, if I should ride up to the 
Maypole door, you will do me the favour only to have seen me once.  
You must suppress your gratitude, and endeavour to forget my 
forbearance in the matter of the bracelet.  It is natural it should 
break out, and it does you honour; but when other folks are by, you 
must, for your own sake and safety, be as like your usual self as 
though you owed me no obligation whatever, and had never stood 
within these walls.  You comprehend me?'

Hugh understood him perfectly.  After a pause he muttered that he 
hoped his patron would involve him in no trouble about this last 
letter; for he had kept it back solely with the view of pleasing 
him.  He was continuing in this strain, when Mr Chester with a 
most beneficent and patronising air cut him short by saying:

'My good fellow, you have my promise, my word, my sealed bond (for 
a verbal pledge with me is quite as good), that I will always 
protect you so long as you deserve it.  Now, do set your mind at 
rest.  Keep it at ease, I beg of you.  When a man puts himself in 
my power so thoroughly as you have done, I really feel as though he 
had a kind of claim upon me.  I am more disposed to mercy and 
forbearance under such circumstances than I can tell you, Hugh.  Do 
look upon me as your protector, and rest assured, I entreat you, 
that on the subject of that indiscretion, you may preserve, as long 
as you and I are friends, the lightest heart that ever beat within 
a human breast.  Fill that glass once more to cheer you on your 
road homewards--I am really quite ashamed to think how far you have 
to go--and then God bless you for the night.'

'They think,' said Hugh, when he had tossed the liquor down, 'that 
I am sleeping soundly in the stable.  Ha ha ha!  The stable door is 
shut, but the steed's gone, master.'

'You are a most convivial fellow,' returned his friend, 'and I love 
your humour of all things.  Good night!  Take the greatest 
possible care of yourself, for my sake!'

It was remarkable that during the whole interview, each had 
endeavoured to catch stolen glances of the other's face, and had 
never looked full at it.  They interchanged one brief and hasty 
glance as Hugh went out, averted their eyes directly, and so 
separated.  Hugh closed the double doors behind him, carefully and 
without noise; and Mr Chester remained in his easy-chair, with his 
gaze intently fixed upon the fire.

'Well!' he said, after meditating for a long time--and said with a 
deep sigh and an uneasy shifting of his attitude, as though he 
dismissed some other subject from his thoughts, and returned to 
that which had held possession of them all the day--the plot 
thickens; I have thrown the shell; it will explode, I think, in 
eight-and-forty hours, and should scatter these good folks 
amazingly.  We shall see!'

He went to bed and fell asleep, but had not slept long when he 
started up and thought that Hugh was at the outer door, calling in 
a strange voice, very different from his own, to be admitted.  The 
delusion was so strong upon him, and was so full of that vague 
terror of the night in which such visions have their being, that he 
rose, and taking his sheathed sword in his hand, opened the door, 
and looked out upon the staircase, and towards the spot where Hugh 
had lain asleep; and even spoke to him by name.  But all was dark 
and quiet, and creeping back to bed again, he fell, after an hour's 
uneasy watching, into a second sleep, and woke no more till 
morning.



Chapter 29


The thoughts of worldly men are for ever regulated by a moral law 
of gravitation, which, like the physical one, holds them down to 
earth.  The bright glory of day, and the silent wonders of a 
starlit night, appeal to their minds in vain.  There are no signs 
in the sun, or in the moon, or in the stars, for their reading.  
They are like some wise men, who, learning to know each planet by 
its Latin name, have quite forgotten such small heavenly 
constellations as Charity, Forbearance, Universal Love, and Mercy, 
although they shine by night and day so brightly that the blind may 
see them; and who, looking upward at the spangled sky, see nothing 
there but the reflection of their own great wisdom and book-
learning.

It is curious to imagine these people of the world, busy in 
thought, turning their eyes towards the countless spheres that 
shine above us, and making them reflect the only images their minds 
contain.  The man who lives but in the breath of princes, has 
nothing his sight but stars for courtiers' breasts.  The envious 
man beholds his neighbours' honours even in the sky; to the money-
hoarder, and the mass of worldly folk, the whole great universe 
above glitters with sterling coin--fresh from the mint--stamped 
with the sovereign's head--coming always between them and heaven, 
turn where they may.  So do the shadows of our own desires stand 
between us and our better angels, and thus their brightness is 
eclipsed.

Everything was fresh and gay, as though the world were but that 
morning made, when Mr Chester rode at a tranquil pace along the 
Forest road.  Though early in the season, it was warm and genial 
weather; the trees were budding into leaf, the hedges and the grass 
were green, the air was musical with songs of birds, and high above 
them all the lark poured out her richest melody.  In shady spots, 
the morning dew sparkled on each young leaf and blade of grass; 
and where the sun was shining, some diamond drops yet glistened 
brightly, as in unwillingness to leave so fair a world, and have 
such brief existence.  Even the light wind, whose rustling was as 
gentle to the ear as softly-falling water, had its hope and 
promise; and, leaving a pleasant fragrance in its track as it went 
fluttering by, whispered of its intercourse with Summer, and of his 
happy coming.

The solitary rider went glancing on among the trees, from sunlight 
into shade and back again, at the same even pace--looking about 
him, certainly, from time to time, but with no greater thought of 
the day or the scene through which he moved, than that he was 
fortunate (being choicely dressed) to have such favourable weather.  
He smiled very complacently at such times, but rather as if he were 
satisfied with himself than with anything else: and so went riding 
on, upon his chestnut cob, as pleasant to look upon as his own 
horse, and probably far less sensitive to the many cheerful 
influences by which he was surrounded.

In the course of time, the Maypole's massive chimneys rose upon his 
view: but he quickened not his pace one jot, and with the same cool 
gravity rode up to the tavern porch.  John Willet, who was toasting 
his red face before a great fire in the bar, and who, with 
surpassing foresight and quickness of apprehension, had been 
thinking, as he looked at the blue sky, that if that state of 
things lasted much longer, it might ultimately become necessary to 
leave off fires and throw the windows open, issued forth to hold 
his stirrup; calling lustily for Hugh.

'Oh, you're here, are you, sir?' said John, rather surprised by the 
quickness with which he appeared.  'Take this here valuable animal 
into the stable, and have more than particular care of him if you 
want to keep your place.  A mortal lazy fellow, sir; he needs a 
deal of looking after.'

'But you have a son,' returned Mr Chester, giving his bridle to 
Hugh as he dismounted, and acknowledging his salute by a careless 
motion of his hand towards his hat.  'Why don't you make HIM 
useful?'

'Why, the truth is, sir,' replied John with great importance, 'that 
my son--what, you're a-listening are you, villain?'

'Who's listening?' returned Hugh angrily.  'A treat, indeed, to 
hear YOU speak!  Would you have me take him in till he's cool?'

'Walk him up and down further off then, sir,' cried old John, 'and 
when you see me and a noble gentleman entertaining ourselves with 
talk, keep your distance.  If you don't know your distance, sir,' 
added Mr Willet, after an enormously long pause, during which he 
fixed his great dull eyes on Hugh, and waited with exemplary 
patience for any little property in the way of ideas that might 
come to him, 'we'll find a way to teach you, pretty soon.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders scornfully, and in his reckless 
swaggering way, crossed to the other side of the little green, and 
there, with the bridle slung loosely over his shoulder, led the 
horse to and fro, glancing at his master every now and then from 
under his bushy eyebrows, with as sinister an aspect as one would 
desire to see.

Mr Chester, who, without appearing to do so, had eyed him 
attentively during this brief dispute, stepped into the porch, and 
turning abruptly to Mr Willet, said,

'You keep strange servants, John.'

'Strange enough to look at, sir, certainly,' answered the host; 
'but out of doors; for horses, dogs, and the likes of that; there 
an't a better man in England than is that Maypole Hugh yonder.  He 
an't fit for indoors,' added Mr Willet, with the confidential air 
of a man who felt his own superior nature.  'I do that; but if that 
chap had only a little imagination, sir--'

'He's an active fellow now, I dare swear,' said Mr Chester, in a 
musing tone, which seemed to suggest that he would have said the 
same had there been nobody to hear him.

'Active, sir!' retorted John, with quite an expression in his face; 
'that chap!  Hallo there!  You, sir!  Bring that horse here, and 
go and hang my wig on the weathercock, to show this gentleman 
whether you're one of the lively sort or not.'

Hugh made no answer, but throwing the bridle to his master, and 
snatching his wig from his head, in a manner so unceremonious and 
hasty that the action discomposed Mr Willet not a little, though 
performed at his own special desire, climbed nimbly to the very 
summit of the maypole before the house, and hanging the wig upon 
the weathercock, sent it twirling round like a roasting jack.  
Having achieved this performance, he cast it on the ground, and 
sliding down the pole with inconceivable rapidity, alighted on his 
feet almost as soon as it had touched the earth.

'There, sir,' said John, relapsing into his usual stolid state, 
'you won't see that at many houses, besides the Maypole, where 
there's good accommodation for man and beast--nor that neither, 
though that with him is nothing.'

This last remark bore reference to his vaulting on horseback, as 
upon Mr Chester's first visit, and quickly disappearing by the 
stable gate.

'That with him is nothing,' repeated Mr Willet, brushing his wig 
with his wrist, and inwardly resolving to distribute a small charge 
for dust and damage to that article of dress, through the various 
items of his guest's bill; 'he'll get out of a'most any winder in 
the house.  There never was such a chap for flinging himself about 
and never hurting his bones.  It's my opinion, sir, that it's 
pretty nearly allowing to his not having any imagination; and that 
if imagination could be (which it can't) knocked into him, he'd 
never be able to do it any more.  But we was a-talking, sir, about 
my son.'

'True, Willet, true,' said his visitor, turning again towards the 
landlord with his accustomed serenity of face.  'My good friend, 
what about him?'

It has been reported that Mr Willet, previously to making answer, 
winked.  But as he was never known to be guilty of such lightness 
of conduct either before or afterwards, this may be looked upon as 
a malicious invention of his enemies--founded, perhaps, upon the 
undisputed circumstance of his taking his guest by the third breast 
button of his coat, counting downwards from the chin, and pouring 
his reply into his ear:

'Sir,' whispered John, with dignity, 'I know my duty.  We want no 
love-making here, sir, unbeknown to parents.  I respect a certain 
young gentleman, taking him in the light of a young gentleman; I 
respect a certain young lady, taking her in the light of a young 
lady; but of the two as a couple, I have no knowledge, sir, none 
whatever.  My son, sir, is upon his patrole.'

'I thought I saw him looking through the corner window but this 
moment,' said Mr Chester, who naturally thought that being on 
patrole, implied walking about somewhere.

'No doubt you did, sir,' returned John.  'He is upon his patrole of 
honour, sir, not to leave the premises.  Me and some friends of 
mine that use the Maypole of an evening, sir, considered what was 
best to be done with him, to prevent his doing anything unpleasant 
in opposing your desires; and we've put him on his patrole.  And 
what's more, sir, he won't be off his patrole for a pretty long 
time to come, I can tell you that.'

When he had communicated this bright idea, which had its origin in 
the perusal by the village cronies of a newspaper, containing, 
among other matters, an account of how some officer pending the 
sentence of some court-martial had been enlarged on parole, Mr 
Willet drew back from his guest's ear, and without any visible 
alteration of feature, chuckled thrice audibly.  This nearest 
approach to a laugh in which he ever indulged (and that but seldom 
and only on extreme occasions), never even curled his lip or 
effected the smallest change in--no, not so much as a slight 
wagging of--his great, fat, double chin, which at these times, as 
at all others, remained a perfect desert in the broad map of his 
face; one changeless, dull, tremendous blank.

Lest it should be matter of surprise to any, that Mr Willet adopted 
this bold course in opposition to one whom he had often 
entertained, and who had always paid his way at the Maypole 
gallantly, it may be remarked that it was his very penetration and 
sagacity in this respect, which occasioned him to indulge in those 
unusual demonstrations of jocularity, just now recorded.  For Mr 
Willet, after carefully balancing father and son in his mental 
scales, had arrived at the distinct conclusion that the old 
gentleman was a better sort of a customer than the young one.  
Throwing his landlord into the same scale, which was already turned 
by this consideration, and heaping upon him, again, his strong 
desires to run counter to the unfortunate Joe, and his opposition 
as a general principle to all matters of love and matrimony, it 
went down to the very ground straightway, and sent the light cause 
of the younger gentleman flying upwards to the ceiling.  Mr 
Chester was not the kind of man to be by any means dim-sighted to 
Mr Willet's motives, but he thanked him as graciously as if he had 
been one of the most disinterested martyrs that ever shone on 
earth; and leaving him, with many complimentary reliances on his 
great taste and judgment, to prepare whatever dinner he might deem 
most fitting the occasion, bent his steps towards the Warren.

Dressed with more than his usual elegance; assuming a gracefulness 
of manner, which, though it was the result of long study, sat 
easily upon him and became him well; composing his features into 
their most serene and prepossessing expression; and setting in 
short that guard upon himself, at every point, which denoted that 
he attached no slight importance to the impression he was about to 
make; he entered the bounds of Miss Haredale's usual walk.  He had 
not gone far, or looked about him long, when he descried coming 
towards him, a female figure.  A glimpse of the form and dress as 
she crossed a little wooden bridge which lay between them, 
satisfied him that he had found her whom he desired to see.  He 
threw himself in her way, and a very few paces brought them close 
together.

He raised his hat from his head, and yielding the path, suffered 
her to pass him.  Then, as if the idea had but that moment 
occurred to him, he turned hastily back and said in an agitated 
voice:

'I beg pardon--do I address Miss Haredale?'

She stopped in some confusion at being so unexpectedly accosted by 
a stranger; and answered 'Yes.'

'Something told me,' he said, LOOKING a compliment to her beauty, 
'that it could be no other.  Miss Haredale, I bear a name which is 
not unknown to you--which it is a pride, and yet a pain to me to 
know, sounds pleasantly in your ears.  I am a man advanced in life, 
as you see.  I am the father of him whom you honour and distinguish 
above all other men.  May I for weighty reasons which fill me with 
distress, beg but a minute's conversation with you here?'

Who that was inexperienced in deceit, and had a frank and youthful 
heart, could doubt the speaker's truth--could doubt it too, when 
the voice that spoke, was like the faint echo of one she knew so 
well, and so much loved to hear?  She inclined her head, and 
stopping, cast her eyes upon the ground.

'A little more apart--among these trees.  It is an old man's hand, 
Miss Haredale; an honest one, believe me.'

She put hers in it as he said these words, and suffered him to lead 
her to a neighbouring seat.

'You alarm me, sir,' she said in a low voice.  'You are not the 
bearer of any ill news, I hope?'

'Of none that you anticipate,' he answered, sitting down beside 
her.  'Edward is well--quite well.  It is of him I wish to speak, 
certainly; but I have no misfortune to communicate.'

She bowed her head again, and made as though she would have begged 
him to proceed; but said nothing.

'I am sensible that I speak to you at a disadvantage, dear Miss 
Haredale.  Believe me that I am not so forgetful of the feelings of 
my younger days as not to know that you are little disposed to view 
me with favour.  You have heard me described as cold-hearted, 
calculating, selfish--'

'I have never, sir,'--she interposed with an altered manner and a 
firmer voice; 'I have never heard you spoken of in harsh or 
disrespectful terms.  You do a great wrong to Edward's nature if 
you believe him capable of any mean or base proceeding.'

'Pardon me, my sweet young lady, but your uncle--'

'Nor is it my uncle's nature either,' she replied, with a 
heightened colour in her cheek.  'It is not his nature to stab in 
the dark, nor is it mine to love such deeds.'

She rose as she spoke, and would have left him; but he detained her 
with a gentle hand, and besought her in such persuasive accents to 
hear him but another minute, that she was easily prevailed upon to 
comply, and so sat down again.

'And it is,' said Mr Chester, looking upward, and apostrophising 
the air; 'it is this frank, ingenuous, noble nature, Ned, that you 
can wound so lightly.  Shame--shame upon you, boy!'

She turned towards him quickly, and with a scornful look and 
flashing eyes.  There were tears in Mr Chester's eyes, but he 
dashed them hurriedly away, as though unwilling that his weakness 
should be known, and regarded her with mingled admiration and 
compassion.

'I never until now,' he said, 'believed, that the frivolous actions 
of a young man could move me like these of my own son.  I never 
knew till now, the worth of a woman's heart, which boys so lightly 
win, and lightly fling away.  Trust me, dear young lady, that I 
never until now did know your worth; and though an abhorrence of 
deceit and falsehood has impelled me to seek you out, and would 
have done so had you been the poorest and least gifted of your sex, 
I should have lacked the fortitude to sustain this interview could 
I have pictured you to my imagination as you really are.'

Oh!  If Mrs Varden could have seen the virtuous gentleman as he 
said these words, with indignation sparkling from his eyes--if she 
could have heard his broken, quavering voice--if she could have 
beheld him as he stood bareheaded in the sunlight, and with 
unwonted energy poured forth his eloquence!

With a haughty face, but pale and trembling too, Emma regarded him 
in silence.  She neither spoke nor moved, but gazed upon him as 
though she would look into his heart.

'I throw off,' said Mr Chester, 'the restraint which natural 
affection would impose on some men, and reject all bonds but those 
of truth and duty.  Miss Haredale, you are deceived; you are 
deceived by your unworthy lover, and my unworthy son.'

Still she looked at him steadily, and still said not one word.

'I have ever opposed his professions of love for you; you will do 
me the justice, dear Miss Haredale, to remember that.  Your uncle 
and myself were enemies in early life, and if I had sought 
retaliation, I might have found it here.  But as we grow older, we 
grow wiser--bitter, I would fain hope--and from the first, I have 
opposed him in this attempt.  I foresaw the end, and would have 
spared you, if I could.'

'Speak plainly, sir,' she faltered.  'You deceive me, or are 
deceived yourself.  I do not believe you--I cannot--I should not.'

'First,' said Mr Chester, soothingly, 'for there may be in your 
mind some latent angry feeling to which I would not appeal, pray 
take this letter.  It reached my hands by chance, and by mistake, 
and should have accounted to you (as I am told) for my son's not 
answering some other note of yours.  God forbid, Miss Haredale,' 
said the good gentleman, with great emotion, 'that there should be 
in your gentle breast one causeless ground of quarrel with him.  
You should know, and you will see, that he was in no fault here.'

There appeared something so very candid, so scrupulously 
honourable, so very truthful and just in this course something 
which rendered the upright person who resorted to it, so worthy of 
belief--that Emma's heart, for the first time, sunk within her.  
She turned away and burst into tears.

'I would,' said Mr Chester, leaning over her, and speaking in mild 
and quite venerable accents; 'I would, dear girl, it were my task 
to banish, not increase, those tokens of your grief.  My son, my 
erring son,--I will not call him deliberately criminal in this, for 
men so young, who have been inconstant twice or thrice before, act 
without reflection, almost without a knowledge of the wrong they 
do,--will break his plighted faith to you; has broken it even now.  
Shall I stop here, and having given you this warning, leave it to 
be fulfilled; or shall I go on?'

'You will go on, sir,' she answered, 'and speak more plainly yet, 
in justice both to him and me.'

'My dear girl,' said Mr Chester, bending over her more 
affectionately still; 'whom I would call my daughter, but the Fates 
forbid, Edward seeks to break with you upon a false and most 
unwarrantable pretence.  I have it on his own showing; in his own 
hand.  Forgive me, if I have had a watch upon his conduct; I am his 
father; I had a regard for your peace and his honour, and no better 
resource was left me.  There lies on his desk at this present 
moment, ready for transmission to you, a letter, in which he tells 
you that our poverty--our poverty; his and mine, Miss Haredale--
forbids him to pursue his claim upon your hand; in which he offers, 
voluntarily proposes, to free you from your pledge; and talks 
magnanimously (men do so, very commonly, in such cases) of being in 
time more worthy of your regard--and so forth.  A letter, to be 
plain, in which he not only jilts you--pardon the word; I would 
summon to your aid your pride and dignity--not only jilts you, I 
fear, in favour of the object whose slighting treatment first 
inspired his brief passion for yourself and gave it birth in 
wounded vanity, but affects to make a merit and a virtue of the 
act.'

She glanced proudly at him once more, as by an involuntary impulse, 
and with a swelling breast rejoined, 'If what you say be true, he 
takes much needless trouble, sir, to compass his design.  He's very 
tender of my peace of mind.  I quite thank him.'

'The truth of what I tell you, dear young lady,' he replied, 'you 
will test by the receipt or non-receipt of the letter of which I 
speak.  Haredale, my dear fellow, I am delighted to see you, 
although we meet under singular circumstances, and upon a 
melancholy occasion.  I hope you are very well.'

At these words the young lady raised her eyes, which were filled 
with tears; and seeing that her uncle indeed stood before them, and 
being quite unequal to the trial of hearing or of speaking one word 
more, hurriedly withdrew, and left them.  They stood looking at 
each other, and at her retreating figure, and for a long time 
neither of them spoke.

'What does this mean?  Explain it,' said Mr Haredale at length.  
'Why are you here, and why with her?'

'My dear friend,' rejoined the other, resuming his accustomed 
manner with infinite readiness, and throwing himself upon the bench 
with a weary air, 'you told me not very long ago, at that 
delightful old tavern of which you are the esteemed proprietor (and 
a most charming establishment it is for persons of rural pursuits 
and in robust health, who are not liable to take cold), that I had 
the head and heart of an evil spirit in all matters of deception.  
I thought at the time; I really did think; you flattered me.  But 
now I begin to wonder at your discernment, and vanity apart, do 
honestly believe you spoke the truth.  Did you ever counterfeit 
extreme ingenuousness and honest indignation?  My dear fellow, you 
have no conception, if you never did, how faint the effort makes 
one.'

Mr Haredale surveyed him with a look of cold contempt.  'You may 
evade an explanation, I know,' he said, folding his arms.  'But I 
must have it.  I can wait.'

'Not at all.  Not at all, my good fellow.  You shall not wait a 
moment,' returned his friend, as he lazily crossed his legs.  'The 
simplest thing in the world.  It lies in a nutshell.  Ned has 
written her a letter--a boyish, honest, sentimental composition, 
which remains as yet in his desk, because he hasn't had the heart 
to send it.  I have taken a liberty, for which my parental 
affection and anxiety are a sufficient excuse, and possessed 
myself of the contents.  I have described them to your niece (a 
most enchanting person, Haredale; quite an angelic creature), with 
a little colouring and description adapted to our purpose.  It's 
done.  You may be quite easy.  It's all over.  Deprived of their 
adherents and mediators; her pride and jealousy roused to the 
utmost; with nobody to undeceive her, and you to confirm me; you 
will find that their intercourse will close with her answer.  If 
she receives Ned's letter by to-morrow noon, you may date their 
parting from to-morrow night.  No thanks, I beg; you owe me none.  
I have acted for myself; and if I have forwarded our compact with 
all the ardour even you could have desired, I have done so 
selfishly, indeed.'

'I curse the compact, as you call it, with my whole heart and 
soul,' returned the other.  'It was made in an evil hour.  I have 
bound myself to a lie; I have leagued myself with you; and though I 
did so with a righteous motive, and though it cost me such an 
effort as haply few men know, I hate and despise myself for the 
deed.'

'You are very warm,' said Mr Chester with a languid smile.

'I AM warm.  I am maddened by your coldness.  'Death, Chester, if 
your blood ran warmer in your veins, and there were no restraints 
upon me, such as those that hold and drag me back--well; it is 
done; you tell me so, and on such a point I may believe you.  When 
I am most remorseful for this treachery, I will think of you and 
your marriage, and try to justify myself in such remembrances, for 
having torn asunder Emma and your son, at any cost.  Our bond is 
cancelled now, and we may part.'

Mr Chester kissed his hand gracefully; and with the same tranquil 
face he had preserved throughout--even when he had seen his 
companion so tortured and transported by his passion that his whole 
frame was shaken--lay in his lounging posture on the seat and 
watched him as he walked away.

'My scapegoat and my drudge at school,' he said, raising his head 
to look after him; 'my friend of later days, who could not keep his 
mistress when he had won her, and threw me in her way to carry off 
the prize; I triumph in the present and the past.  Bark on, ill-
favoured, ill-conditioned cur; fortune has ever been with me--I 
like to hear you.'

The spot where they had met, was in an avenue of trees.  Mr 
Haredale not passing out on either hand, had walked straight on.  
He chanced to turn his head when at some considerable distance, and 
seeing that his late companion had by that time risen and was 
looking after him, stood still as though he half expected him to 
follow and waited for his coming up.

'It MAY come to that one day, but not yet,' said Mr Chester, 
waving his hand, as though they were the best of friends, and 
turning away.  'Not yet, Haredale.  Life is pleasant enough to me; 
dull and full of heaviness to you.  No.  To cross swords with such 
a man--to indulge his humour unless upon extremity--would be weak 
indeed.'

For all that, he drew his sword as he walked along, and in an 
absent humour ran his eye from hilt to point full twenty times.  
But thoughtfulness begets wrinkles; remembering this, he soon put 
it up, smoothed his contracted brow, hummed a gay tune with greater 
gaiety of manner, and was his unruffled self again.



Chapter 30


A homely proverb recognises the existence of a troublesome class of 
persons who, having an inch conceded them, will take an ell.  Not 
to quote the illustrious examples of those heroic scourges of 
mankind, whose amiable path in life has been from birth to death 
through blood, and fire, and ruin, and who would seem to have 
existed for no better purpose than to teach mankind that as the 
absence of pain is pleasure, so the earth, purged of their 
presence, may be deemed a blessed place--not to quote such mighty 
instances, it will be sufficient to refer to old John Willet.

Old John having long encroached a good standard inch, full measure, 
on the liberty of Joe, and having snipped off a Flemish ell in the 
matter of the parole, grew so despotic and so great, that his 
thirst for conquest knew no bounds.  The more young Joe submitted, 
the more absolute old John became.  The ell soon faded into 
nothing.  Yards, furlongs, miles arose; and on went old John in the 
pleasantest manner possible, trimming off an exuberance in this 
place, shearing away some liberty of speech or action in that, and 
conducting himself in his small way with as much high mightiness 
and majesty, as the most glorious tyrant that ever had his statue 
reared in the public ways, of ancient or of modern times.

As great men are urged on to the abuse of power (when they need 
urging, which is not often), by their flatterers and dependents, so 
old John was impelled to these exercises of authority by the 
applause and admiration of his Maypole cronies, who, in the 
intervals of their nightly pipes and pots, would shake their heads 
and say that Mr Willet was a father of the good old English sort; 
that there were no new-fangled notions or modern ways in him; that 
he put them in mind of what their fathers were when they were boys; 
that there was no mistake about him; that it would be well for the 
country if there were more like him, and more was the pity that 
there were not; with many other original remarks of that nature.  
Then they would condescendingly give Joe to understand that it was 
all for his good, and he would be thankful for it one day; and in 
particular, Mr Cobb would acquaint him, that when he was his age, 
his father thought no more of giving him a parental kick, or a box 
on the ears, or a cuff on the head, or some little admonition of 
that sort, than he did of any other ordinary duty of life; and he 
would further remark, with looks of great significance, that but 
for this judicious bringing up, he might have never been the man he 
was at that present speaking; which was probable enough, as he was, 
beyond all question, the dullest dog of the party.  In short, 
between old John and old John's friends, there never was an 
unfortunate young fellow so bullied, badgered, worried, fretted, 
and brow-beaten; so constantly beset, or made so tired of his life, 
as poor Joe Willet.

This had come to be the recognised and established state of things; 
but as John was very anxious to flourish his supremacy before the 
eyes of Mr Chester, he did that day exceed himself, and did so 
goad and chafe his son and heir, that but for Joe's having made a 
solemn vow to keep his hands in his pockets when they were not 
otherwise engaged, it is impossible to say what he might have done 
with them.  But the longest day has an end, and at length Mr 
Chester came downstairs to mount his horse, which was ready at the 
door.

As old John was not in the way at the moment, Joe, who was sitting 
in the bar ruminating on his dismal fate and the manifold 
perfections of Dolly Varden, ran out to hold the guest's stirrup 
and assist him to mount.  Mr Chester was scarcely in the saddle, 
and Joe was in the very act of making him a graceful bow, when old 
John came diving out of the porch, and collared him.

'None of that, sir,' said John, 'none of that, sir.  No breaking of 
patroles.  How dare you come out of the door, sir, without leave?  
You're trying to get away, sir, are you, and to make a traitor of 
yourself again?  What do you mean, sir?'

'Let me go, father,' said Joe, imploringly, as he marked the smile 
upon their visitor's face, and observed the pleasure his disgrace 
afforded him.  'This is too bad.  Who wants to get away?'

'Who wants to get away!' cried John, shaking him.  'Why you do, 
sir, you do.  You're the boy, sir,' added John, collaring with one 
band, and aiding the effect of a farewell bow to the visitor with 
the other, 'that wants to sneak into houses, and stir up 
differences between noble gentlemen and their sons, are you, eh?  
Hold your tongue, sir.'

Joe made no effort to reply.  It was the crowning circumstance of 
his degradation.  He extricated himself from his father's grasp, 
darted an angry look at the departing guest, and returned into the 
house.

'But for her,' thought Joe, as he threw his arms upon a table in 
the common room, and laid his head upon them, 'but for Dolly, who I 
couldn't bear should think me the rascal they would make me out to 
be if I ran away, this house and I should part to-night.'

It being evening by this time, Solomon Daisy, Tom Cobb, and Long 
Parkes, were all in the common room too, and had from the window 
been witnesses of what had just occurred.  Mr Willet joining them 
soon afterwards, received the compliments of the company with great 
composure, and lighting his pipe, sat down among them.

'We'll see, gentlemen,' said John, after a long pause, 'who's the 
master of this house, and who isn't.  We'll see whether boys are to 
govern men, or men are to govern boys.'

'And quite right too,' assented Solomon Daisy with some approving 
nods; 'quite right, Johnny.  Very good, Johnny.  Well said, Mr 
Willet.  Brayvo, sir.'

John slowly brought his eyes to bear upon him, looked at him for a 
long time, and finally made answer, to the unspeakable 
consternation of his hearers, 'When I want encouragement from you, 
sir, I'll ask you for it.  You let me alone, sir.  I can get on 
without you, I hope.  Don't you tackle me, sir, if you please.'

'Don't take it ill, Johnny; I didn't mean any harm,' pleaded the 
little man.

'Very good, sir,' said John, more than usually obstinate after his 
late success.  'Never mind, sir.  I can stand pretty firm of 
myself, sir, I believe, without being shored up by you.'  And 
having given utterance to this retort, Mr Willet fixed his eyes 
upon the boiler, and fell into a kind of tobacco-trance.

The spirits of the company being somewhat damped by this 
embarrassing line of conduct on the part of their host, nothing 
more was said for a long time; but at length Mr Cobb took upon 
himself to remark, as he rose to knock the ashes out of his pipe, 
that he hoped Joe would thenceforth learn to obey his father in all 
things; that he had found, that day, he was not one of the sort of 
men who were to be trifled with; and that he would recommend him, 
poetically speaking, to mind his eye for the future.

'I'd recommend you, in return,' said Joe, looking up with a flushed 
face, 'not to talk to me.'

'Hold your tongue, sir,' cried Mr Willet, suddenly rousing himself, 
and turning round.

'I won't, father,' cried Joe, smiting the table with his fist, so 
that the jugs and glasses rung again; 'these things are hard enough 
to bear from you; from anybody else I never will endure them any 
more.  Therefore I say, Mr Cobb, don't talk to me.'

'Why, who are you,' said Mr Cobb, sneeringly, 'that you're not to 
be talked to, eh, Joe?'

To which Joe returned no answer, but with a very ominous shake of 
the head, resumed his old position, which he would have peacefully 
preserved until the house shut up at night, but that Mr Cobb, 
stimulated by the wonder of the company at the young man's 
presumption, retorted with sundry taunts, which proved too much for 
flesh and blood to bear.  Crowding into one moment the vexation and 
the wrath of years, Joe started up, overturned the table, fell upon 
his long enemy, pummelled him with all his might and main, and 
finished by driving him with surprising swiftness against a heap of 
spittoons in one corner; plunging into which, head foremost, with a 
tremendous crash, he lay at full length among the ruins, stunned 
and motionless.  Then, without waiting to receive the compliments 
of the bystanders on the victory be had won, he retreated to his 
own bedchamber, and considering himself in a state of siege, piled 
all the portable furniture against the door by way of barricade.

'I have done it now,' said Joe, as he sat down upon his bedstead 
and wiped his heated face.  'I knew it would come at last.  The 
Maypole and I must part company.  I'm a roving vagabond--she hates 
me for evermore--it's all over!'



Chapter 31


Pondering on his unhappy lot, Joe sat and listened for a long 
time, expecting every moment to hear their creaking footsteps on 
the stairs, or to be greeted by his worthy father with a summons to 
capitulate unconditionally, and deliver himself up straightway.  
But neither voice nor footstep came; and though some distant 
echoes, as of closing doors and people hurrying in and out of 
rooms, resounding from time to time through the great passages, and 
penetrating to his remote seclusion, gave note of unusual commotion 
downstairs, no nearer sound disturbed his place of retreat, which 
seemed the quieter for these far-off noises, and was as dull and 
full of gloom as any hermit's cell.

It came on darker and darker.  The old-fashioned furniture of the 
chamber, which was a kind of hospital for all the invalided 
movables in the house, grew indistinct and shadowy in its many 
shapes; chairs and tables, which by day were as honest cripples as 
need be, assumed a doubtful and mysterious character; and one old 
leprous screen of faded India leather and gold binding, which had 
kept out many a cold breath of air in days of yore and shut in many 
a jolly face, frowned on him with a spectral aspect, and stood at 
full height in its allotted corner, like some gaunt ghost who 
waited to be questioned.  A portrait opposite the window--a queer, 
old grey-eyed general, in an oval frame--seemed to wink and doze as 
the light decayed, and at length, when the last faint glimmering 
speck of day went out, to shut its eyes in good earnest, and fall 
sound asleep.  There was such a hush and mystery about everything, 
that Joe could not help following its example; and so went off into 
a slumber likewise, and dreamed of Dolly, till the clock of 
Chigwell church struck two.

Still nobody came.  The distant noises in the house had ceased, and 
out of doors all was quiet; save for the occasional barking of some 
deep-mouthed dog, and the shaking of the branches by the night 
wind.  He gazed mournfully out of window at each well-known object 
as it lay sleeping in the dim light of the moon; and creeping back 
to his former seat, thought about the late uproar, until, with long 
thinking of, it seemed to have occurred a month ago.  Thus, between 
dozing, and thinking, and walking to the window and looking out, 
the night wore away; the grim old screen, and the kindred chairs 
and tables, began slowly to reveal themselves in their accustomed 
forms; the grey-eyed general seemed to wink and yawn and rouse 
himself; and at last he was broad awake again, and very 
uncomfortable and cold and haggard he looked, in the dull grey 
light of morning.

The sun had begun to peep above the forest trees, and already flung 
across the curling mist bright bars of gold, when Joe dropped from 
his window on the ground below, a little bundle and his trusty 
stick, and prepared to descend himself.

It was not a very difficult task; for there were so many 
projections and gable ends in the way, that they formed a series of 
clumsy steps, with no greater obstacle than a jump of some few feet 
at last.  Joe, with his stick and bundle on his shoulder, quickly 
stood on the firm earth, and looked up at the old Maypole, it might 
be for the last time.

He didn't apostrophise it, for he was no great scholar.  He didn't 
curse it, for he had little ill-will to give to anything on earth.  
He felt more affectionate and kind to it than ever he had done in 
all his life before, so said with all his heart, 'God bless you!' 
as a parting wish, and turned away.

He walked along at a brisk pace, big with great thoughts of going 
for a soldier and dying in some foreign country where it was very 
hot and sandy, and leaving God knows what unheard-of wealth in 
prize-money to Dolly, who would be very much affected when she came 
to know of it; and full of such youthful visions, which were 
sometimes sanguine and sometimes melancholy, but always had her for 
their main point and centre, pushed on vigorously until the noise 
of London sounded in his ears, and the Black Lion hove in sight.

It was only eight o'clock then, and very much astonished the Black 
Lion was, to see him come walking in with dust upon his feet at 
that early hour, with no grey mare to bear him company.  But as he 
ordered breakfast to be got ready with all speed, and on its being 
set before him gave indisputable tokens of a hearty appetite, the 
Lion received him, as usual, with a hospitable welcome; and treated 
him with those marks of distinction, which, as a regular customer, 
and one within the freemasonry of the trade, he had a right to 
claim.

This Lion or landlord,--for he was called both man and beast, by 
reason of his having instructed the artist who painted his sign, to 
convey into the features of the lordly brute whose effigy it bore, 
as near a counterpart of his own face as his skill could compass 
and devise,--was a gentleman almost as quick of apprehension, and 
of almost as subtle a wit, as the mighty John himself.  But the 
difference between them lay in this: that whereas Mr Willet's 
extreme sagacity and acuteness were the efforts of unassisted 
nature, the Lion stood indebted, in no small amount, to beer; of 
which he swigged such copious draughts, that most of his faculties 
were utterly drowned and washed away, except the one great faculty 
of sleep, which he retained in surprising perfection.  The creaking 
Lion over the house-door was, therefore, to say the truth, rather a 
drowsy, tame, and feeble lion; and as these social representatives 
of a savage class are usually of a conventional character (being 
depicted, for the most part, in impossible attitudes and of 
unearthly colours), he was frequently supposed by the more ignorant 
and uninformed among the neighbours, to be the veritable portrait 
of the host as he appeared on the occasion of some great funeral 
ceremony or public mourning.

'What noisy fellow is that in the next room?' said Joe, when he had 
disposed of his breakfast, and had washed and brushed himself.

'A recruiting serjeant,' replied the Lion.

Joe started involuntarily.  Here was the very thing he had been 
dreaming of, all the way along.

'And I wish,' said the Lion, 'he was anywhere else but here.  The 
party make noise enough, but don't call for much.  There's great 
cry there, Mr Willet, but very little wool.  Your father wouldn't 
like 'em, I know.'

Perhaps not much under any circumstances.  Perhaps if he could have 
known what was passing at that moment in Joe's mind, he would have 
liked them still less.

'Is he recruiting for a--for a fine regiment?' said Joe, glancing 
at a little round mirror that hung in the bar.

'I believe he is,' replied the host.  'It's much the same thing, 
whatever regiment he's recruiting for.  I'm told there an't a deal 
of difference between a fine man and another one, when they're shot 
through and through.'

'They're not all shot,' said Joe.

'No,' the Lion answered, 'not all.  Those that are--supposing it's 
done easy--are the best off in my opinion.'

'Ah!' retorted Joe, 'but you don't care for glory.'

'For what?' said the Lion.

'Glory.'

'No,' returned the Lion, with supreme indifference.  'I don't.  
You're right in that, Mr Willet.  When Glory comes here, and calls 
for anything to drink and changes a guinea to pay for it, I'll give 
it him for nothing.  It's my belief, sir, that the Glory's arms 
wouldn't do a very strong business.'

These remarks were not at all comforting.  Joe walked out, stopped 
at the door of the next room, and listened.  The serjeant was 
describing a military life.  It was all drinking, he said, except 
that there were frequent intervals of eating and love-making.  A 
battle was the finest thing in the world--when your side won it--
and Englishmen always did that.  'Supposing you should be killed, 
sir?' said a timid voice in one corner.  'Well, sir, supposing you 
should be,' said the serjeant, 'what then?  Your country loves you, 
sir; his Majesty King George the Third loves you; your memory is 
honoured, revered, respected; everybody's fond of you, and grateful 
to you; your name's wrote down at full length in a book in the War 
Office.  Damme, gentlemen, we must all die some time, or another, 
eh?'

The voice coughed, and said no more.

Joe walked into the room.  A group of half-a-dozen fellows had 
gathered together in the taproom, and were listening with greedy 
ears.  One of them, a carter in a smockfrock, seemed wavering and 
disposed to enlist.  The rest, who were by no means disposed, 
strongly urged him to do so (according to the custom of mankind), 
backed the serjeant's arguments, and grinned among themselves.  'I 
say nothing, boys,' said the serjeant, who sat a little apart, 
drinking his liquor.  'For lads of spirit'--here he cast an eye on 
Joe--'this is the time.  I don't want to inveigle you.  The king's 
not come to that, I hope.  Brisk young blood is what we want; not 
milk and water.  We won't take five men out of six.  We want top-
sawyers, we do.  I'm not a-going to tell tales out of school, but, 
damme, if every gentleman's son that carries arms in our corps, 
through being under a cloud and having little differences with his 
relations, was counted up'--here his eye fell on Joe again, and so 
good-naturedly, that Joe beckoned him out.  He came directly.

'You're a gentleman, by G--!' was his first remark, as he slapped 
him on the back.  'You're a gentleman in disguise.  So am I.  Let's 
swear a friendship.'

Joe didn't exactly do that, but he shook hands with him, and 
thanked him for his good opinion.

'You want to serve,' said his new friend.  'You shall.  You were 
made for it.  You're one of us by nature.  What'll you take to 
drink?'

'Nothing just now,' replied Joe, smiling faintly.  'I haven't quite 
made up my mind.'

'A mettlesome fellow like you, and not made up his mind!' cried 
the serjeant.  'Here--let me give the bell a pull, and you'll make 
up your mind in half a minute, I know.'

'You're right so far'--answered Joe, 'for if you pull the bell 
here, where I'm known, there'll be an end of my soldiering 
inclinations in no time.  Look in my face.  You see me, do you?'

'I do,' replied the serjeant with an oath, 'and a finer young 
fellow or one better qualified to serve his king and country, I 
never set my--' he used an adjective in this place--'eyes on.

'Thank you,' said Joe, 'I didn't ask you for want of a compliment, 
but thank you all the same.  Do I look like a sneaking fellow or a 
liar?'

The serjeant rejoined with many choice asseverations that he 
didn't; and that if his (the serjeant's) own father were to say he 
did, he would run the old gentleman through the body cheerfully, 
and consider it a meritorious action.

Joe expressed his obligations, and continued, 'You can trust me 
then, and credit what I say.  I believe I shall enlist in your 
regiment to-night.  The reason I don't do so now is, because I 
don't want until to-night, to do what I can't recall.  Where shall 
I find you, this evening?'

His friend replied with some unwillingness, and after much 
ineffectual entreaty having for its object the immediate settlement 
of the business, that his quarters would be at the Crooked Billet 
in Tower Street; where he would be found waking until midnight, and 
sleeping until breakfast time to-morrow.

'And if I do come--which it's a million to one, I shall--when will 
you take me out of London?' demanded Joe.

'To-morrow morning, at half after eight o'clock,' replied the 
serjeant.  'You'll go abroad--a country where it's all sunshine and 
plunder--the finest climate in the world.'

'To go abroad,' said Joe, shaking hands with him, 'is the very 
thing I want.  You may expect me.'

'You're the kind of lad for us,' cried the serjeant, holding Joe's 
hand in his, in the excess of his admiration.  'You're the boy to 
push your fortune.  I don't say it because I bear you any envy, or 
would take away from the credit of the rise you'll make, but if I 
had been bred and taught like you, I'd have been a colonel by this 
time.'

'Tush, man!' said Joe, 'I'm not so young as that.  Needs must when 
the devil drives; and the devil that drives me is an empty pocket 
and an unhappy home.  For the present, good-bye.'

'For king and country!' cried the serjeant, flourishing his cap.

'For bread and meat!' cried Joe, snapping his fingers.  And so they 
parted.

He had very little money in his pocket; so little indeed, that 
after paying for his breakfast (which he was too honest and perhaps 
too proud to score up to his father's charge) he had but a penny 
left.  He had courage, notwithstanding, to resist all the 
affectionate importunities of the serjeant, who waylaid him at 
the door with many protestations of eternal friendship, and did in 
particular request that he would do him the favour to accept of 
only one shilling as a temporary accommodation.  Rejecting his 
offers both of cash and credit, Joe walked away with stick and 
bundle as before, bent upon getting through the day as he best 
could, and going down to the locksmith's in the dusk of the 
evening; for it should go hard, he had resolved, but he would have 
a parting word with charming Dolly Varden.

He went out by Islington and so on to Highgate, and sat on many 
stones and gates, but there were no voices in the bells to bid him 
turn.  Since the time of noble Whittington, fair flower of 
merchants, bells have come to have less sympathy with humankind.  
They only ring for money and on state occasions.  Wanderers have 
increased in number; ships leave the Thames for distant regions, 
carrying from stem to stern no other cargo; the bells are silent; 
they ring out no entreaties or regrets; they are used to it and 
have grown worldly.

Joe bought a roll, and reduced his purse to the condition (with a 
difference) of that celebrated purse of Fortunatus, which, 
whatever were its favoured owner's necessities, had one unvarying 
amount in it.  In these real times, when all the Fairies are dead 
and buried, there are still a great many purses which possess that 
quality.  The sum-total they contain is expressed in arithmetic by 
a circle, and whether it be added to or multiplied by its own 
amount, the result of the problem is more easily stated than any 
known in figures.

Evening drew on at last.  With the desolate and solitary feeling of 
one who had no home or shelter, and was alone utterly in the world 
for the first time, he bent his steps towards the locksmith's 
house.  He had delayed till now, knowing that Mrs Varden sometimes 
went out alone, or with Miggs for her sole attendant, to lectures 
in the evening; and devoutly hoping that this might be one of her 
nights of moral culture.

He had walked up and down before the house, on the opposite side of 
the way, two or three times, when as he returned to it again, he 
caught a glimpse of a fluttering skirt at the door.  It was 
Dolly's--to whom else could it belong? no dress but hers had such a 
flow as that.  He plucked up his spirits, and followed it into the 
workshop of the Golden Key.

His darkening the door caused her to look round.  Oh that face!  
'If it hadn't been for that,' thought Joe, 'I should never have 
walked into poor Tom Cobb.  She's twenty times handsomer than ever.  
She might marry a Lord!'

He didn't say this.  He only thought it--perhaps looked it also.  
Dolly was glad to see him, and was SO sorry her father and mother 
were away from home.  Joe begged she wouldn't mention it on any 
account.

Dolly hesitated to lead the way into the parlour, for there it was 
nearly dark; at the same time she hesitated to stand talking in the 
workshop, which was yet light and open to the street.  They had got 
by some means, too, before the little forge; and Joe having her 
hand in his (which he had no right to have, for Dolly only gave it 
him to shake), it was so like standing before some homely altar 
being married, that it was the most embarrassing state of things in 
the world.

'I have come,' said Joe, 'to say good-bye--to say good-bye for I 
don't know how many years; perhaps for ever.  I am going abroad.'

Now this was exactly what he should not have said.  Here he was, 
talking like a gentleman at large who was free to come and go and 
roam about the world at pleasure, when that gallant coachmaker had 
vowed but the night before that Miss Varden held him bound in 
adamantine chains; and had positively stated in so many words that 
she was killing him by inches, and that in a fortnight more or 
thereabouts he expected to make a decent end and leave the business 
to his mother.

Dolly released her hand and said 'Indeed!'  She remarked in the 
same breath that it was a fine night, and in short, betrayed no 
more emotion than the forge itself.

'I couldn't go,' said Joe, 'without coming to see you.  I hadn't 
the heart to.'

Dolly was more sorry than she could tell, that he should have taken 
so much trouble.  It was such a long way, and he must have such a 
deal to do.  And how WAS Mr Willet--that dear old gentleman--

'Is this all you say!' cried Joe.

All!  Good gracious, what did the man expect!  She was obliged to 
take her apron in her hand and run her eyes along the hem from 
corner to corner, to keep herself from laughing in his face;--not 
because his gaze confused her--not at all.

Joe had small experience in love affairs, and had no notion how 
different young ladies are at different times; he had expected to 
take Dolly up again at the very point where he had left her after 
that delicious evening ride, and was no more prepared for such an 
alteration than to see the sun and moon change places.  He had 
buoyed himself up all day with an indistinct idea that she would 
certainly say 'Don't go,' or 'Don't leave us,' or 'Why do you go?' 
or 'Why do you leave us?' or would give him some little 
encouragement of that sort; he had even entertained the possibility 
of her bursting into tears, of her throwing herself into his arms, 
of her falling down in a fainting fit without previous word or 
sign; but any approach to such a line of conduct as this, had been 
so far from his thoughts that he could only look at her in silent 
wonder.

Dolly in the meanwhile, turned to the corners of her apron, and 
measured the sides, and smoothed out the wrinkles, and was as 
silent as he.  At last after a long pause, Joe said good-bye.  
'Good-bye'--said Dolly--with as pleasant a smile as if he were 
going into the next street, and were coming back to supper; 'good-
bye.'

'Come,' said Joe, putting out both hands, 'Dolly, dear Dolly, don't 
let us part like this.  I love you dearly, with all my heart and 
soul; with as much truth and earnestness as ever man loved woman in 
this world, I do believe.  I am a poor fellow, as you know--poorer 
now than ever, for I have fled from home, not being able to bear it 
any longer, and must fight my own way without help.  You are 
beautiful, admired, are loved by everybody, are well off and happy; 
and may you ever be so!  Heaven forbid I should ever make you 
otherwise; but give me a word of comfort.  Say something kind to 
me.  I have no right to expect it of you, I know, but I ask it 
because I love you, and shall treasure the slightest word from you 
all through my life.  Dolly, dearest, have you nothing to say to 
me?'

No.  Nothing.  Dolly was a coquette by nature, and a spoilt child.  
She had no notion of being carried by storm in this way.  The 
coachmaker would have been dissolved in tears, and would have knelt 
down, and called himself names, and clasped his hands, and beat his 
breast, and tugged wildly at his cravat, and done all kinds of 
poetry.  Joe had no business to be going abroad.  He had no right 
to be able to do it.  If he was in adamantine chains, he couldn't.

'I have said good-bye,' said Dolly, 'twice.  Take your arm away 
directly, Mr Joseph, or I'll call Miggs.'

'I'll not reproach you,' answered Joe, 'it's my fault, no doubt.  I 
have thought sometimes that you didn't quite despise me, but I was 
a fool to think so.  Every one must, who has seen the life I have 
led--you most of all.  God bless you!'

He was gone, actually gone.  Dolly waited a little while, thinking 
he would return, peeped out at the door, looked up the street and 
down as well as the increasing darkness would allow, came in again, 
waited a little longer, went upstairs humming a tune, bolted 
herself in, laid her head down on her bed, and cried as if her 
heart would break.  And yet such natures are made up of so many 
contradictions, that if Joe Willet had come back that night, next 
day, next week, next month, the odds are a hundred to one she would 
have treated him in the very same manner, and have wept for it 
afterwards with the very same distress.

She had no sooner left the workshop than there cautiously peered 
out from behind the chimney of the forge, a face which had already 
emerged from the same concealment twice or thrice, unseen, and 
which, after satisfying itself that it was now alone, was followed 
by a leg, a shoulder, and so on by degrees, until the form of Mr 
Tappertit stood confessed, with a brown-paper cap stuck negligently 
on one side of its head, and its arms very much a-kimbo.

'Have my ears deceived me,' said the 'prentice, 'or do I dream! am 
I to thank thee, Fortun', or to cus thee--which?'

He gravely descended from his elevation, took down his piece of 
looking-glass, planted it against the wall upon the usual bench, 
twisted his head round, and looked closely at his legs.

'If they're a dream,' said Sim, 'let sculptures have such wisions, 
and chisel 'em out when they wake.  This is reality.  Sleep has no 
such limbs as them.  Tremble, Willet, and despair.  She's mine!  
She's mine!'

With these triumphant expressions, he seized a hammer and dealt a 
heavy blow at a vice, which in his mind's eye represented the 
sconce or head of Joseph Willet.  That done, he burst into a peal 
of laughter which startled Miss Miggs even in her distant kitchen, 
and dipping his head into a bowl of water, had recourse to a jack-
towel inside the closet door, which served the double purpose of 
smothering his feelings and drying his face.

Joe, disconsolate and down-hearted, but full of courage too, on 
leaving the locksmith's house made the best of his way to the 
Crooked Billet, and there inquired for his friend the serjeant, 
who, expecting no man less, received him with open arms.  In the 
course of five minutes after his arrival at that house of 
entertainment, he was enrolled among the gallant defenders of his 
native land; and within half an hour, was regaled with a steaming 
supper of boiled tripe and onions, prepared, as his friend assured 
him more than once, at the express command of his most Sacred 
Majesty the King.  To this meal, which tasted very savoury after 
his long fasting, he did ample justice; and when he had followed it 
up, or down, with a variety of loyal and patriotic toasts, he was 
conducted to a straw mattress in a loft over the stable, and 
locked in there for the night.

The next morning, he found that the obliging care of his martial 
friend had decorated his hat with sundry particoloured streamers, 
which made a very lively appearance; and in company with that 
officer, and three other military gentlemen newly enrolled, who 
were under a cloud so dense that it only left three shoes, a boot, 
and a coat and a half visible among them, repaired to the 
riverside.  Here they were joined by a corporal and four more 
heroes, of whom two were drunk and daring, and two sober and 
penitent, but each of whom, like Joe, had his dusty stick and 
bundle.  The party embarked in a passage-boat bound for Gravesend, 
whence they were to proceed on foot to Chatham; the wind was in 
their favour, and they soon left London behind them, a mere dark 
mist--a giant phantom in the air.



Chapter 32


Misfortunes, saith the adage, never come singly.  There is little 
doubt that troubles are exceedingly gregarious in their nature, and 
flying in flocks, are apt to perch capriciously; crowding on the 
heads of some poor wights until there is not an inch of room left 
on their unlucky crowns, and taking no more notice of others who 
offer as good resting-places for the soles of their feet, than if 
they had no existence.  It may have happened that a flight of 
troubles brooding over London, and looking out for Joseph Willet, 
whom they couldn't find, darted down haphazard on the first young 
man that caught their fancy, and settled on him instead.  However 
this may be, certain it is that on the very day of Joe's departure 
they swarmed about the ears of Edward Chester, and did so buzz and 
flap their wings, and persecute him, that he was most profoundly 
wretched.

It was evening, and just eight o'clock, when he and his father, 
having wine and dessert set before them, were left to themselves 
for the first time that day.  They had dined together, but a third 
person had been present during the meal, and until they met at 
table they had not seen each other since the previous night.

Edward was reserved and silent.  Mr Chester was more than usually 
gay; but not caring, as it seemed, to open a conversation with one 
whose humour was so different, he vented the lightness of his 
spirit in smiles and sparkling looks, and made no effort to awaken 
his attention.  So they remained for some time: the father lying on 
a sofa with his accustomed air of graceful negligence; the son 
seated opposite to him with downcast eyes, busied, it was plain, 
with painful and uneasy thoughts.

'My dear Edward,' said Mr Chester at length, with a most engaging 
laugh, 'do not extend your drowsy influence to the decanter.  
Suffer THAT to circulate, let your spirits be never so stagnant.'

Edward begged his pardon, passed it, and relapsed into his former 
state.

'You do wrong not to fill your glass,' said Mr Chester, holding up 
his own before the light.  'Wine in moderation--not in excess, for 
that makes men ugly--has a thousand pleasant influences.  It 
brightens the eye, improves the voice, imparts a new vivacity to 
one's thoughts and conversation: you should try it, Ned.'

'Ah father!' cried his son, 'if--'

'My good fellow,' interposed the parent hastily, as he set down his 
glass, and raised his eyebrows with a startled and horrified 
expression, 'for Heaven's sake don't call me by that obsolete and 
ancient name.  Have some regard for delicacy.  Am I grey, or 
wrinkled, do I go on crutches, have I lost my teeth, that you adopt 
such a mode of address?  Good God, how very coarse!'

'I was about to speak to you from my heart, sir,' returned Edward, 
'in the confidence which should subsist between us; and you check 
me in the outset.'

'Now DO, Ned, DO not,' said Mr Chester, raising his delicate hand 
imploringly, 'talk in that monstrous manner.  About to speak from 
your heart.  Don't you know that the heart is an ingenious part of 
our formation--the centre of the blood-vessels and all that sort of 
thing--which has no more to do with what you say or think, than 
your knees have?  How can you be so very vulgar and absurd?  These 
anatomical allusions should be left to gentlemen of the medical 
profession.  They are really not agreeable in society.  You quite 
surprise me, Ned.'

'Well! there are no such things to wound, or heal, or have regard 
for.  I know your creed, sir, and will say no more,' returned his 
son.

'There again,' said Mr Chester, sipping his wine, 'you are wrong.  
I distinctly say there are such things.  We know there are.  The 
hearts of animals--of bullocks, sheep, and so forth--are cooked and 
devoured, as I am told, by the lower classes, with a vast deal of 
relish.  Men are sometimes stabbed to the heart, shot to the heart; 
but as to speaking from the heart, or to the heart, or being warm-
hearted, or cold-hearted, or broken-hearted, or being all heart, or 
having no heart--pah! these things are nonsense, Ned.'

'No doubt, sir,' returned his son, seeing that he paused for him to 
speak.  'No doubt.'

'There's Haredale's niece, your late flame,' said Mr Chester, as a 
careless illustration of his meaning.  'No doubt in your mind she 
was all heart once.  Now she has none at all.  Yet she is the same 
person, Ned, exactly.'

'She is a changed person, sir,' cried Edward, reddening; 'and 
changed by vile means, I believe.'

'You have had a cool dismissal, have you?' said his father.  'Poor 
Ned!  I told you last night what would happen.--May I ask you for 
the nutcrackers?'

'She has been tampered with, and most treacherously deceived,' 
cried Edward, rising from his seat.  'I never will believe that the 
knowledge of my real position, given her by myself, has worked this 
change.  I know she is beset and tortured.  But though our contract 
is at an end, and broken past all redemption; though I charge upon 
her want of firmness and want of truth, both to herself and me; I 
do not now, and never will believe, that any sordid motive, or her 
own unbiassed will, has led her to this course--never!'

'You make me blush,' returned his father gaily, 'for the folly of 
your nature, in which--but we never know ourselves--I devoutly hope 
there is no reflection of my own.  With regard to the young lady 
herself, she has done what is very natural and proper, my dear 
fellow; what you yourself proposed, as I learn from Haredale; and 
what I predicted--with no great exercise of sagacity--she would do.  
She supposed you to be rich, or at least quite rich enough; and 
found you poor.  Marriage is a civil contract; people marry to 
better their worldly condition and improve appearances; it is an 
affair of house and furniture, of liveries, servants, equipage, and 
so forth.  The lady being poor and you poor also, there is an end 
of the matter.  You cannot enter upon these considerations, and 
have no manner of business with the ceremony.  I drink her health 
in this glass, and respect and honour her for her extreme good 
sense.  It is a lesson to you.  Fill yours, Ned.'

'It is a lesson,' returned his son, 'by which I hope I may never 
profit, and if years and experience impress it on--'

'Don't say on the heart,' interposed his father.

'On men whom the world and its hypocrisy have spoiled,' said Edward 
warmly, 'Heaven keep me from its knowledge.'

'Come, sir,' returned his father, raising himself a little on the 
sofa, and looking straight towards him; 'we have had enough of 
this.  Remember, if you please, your interest, your duty, your 
moral obligations, your filial affections, and all that sort of 
thing, which it is so very delightful and charming to reflect upon; 
or you will repent it.'

'I shall never repent the preservation of my self-respect, sir,' 
said Edward.  'Forgive me if I say that I will not sacrifice it at 
your bidding, and that I will not pursue the track which you would 
have me take, and to which the secret share you have had in this 
late separation tends.'

His father rose a little higher still, and looking at him as though 
curious to know if he were quite resolved and earnest, dropped 
gently down again, and said in the calmest voice--eating his nuts 
meanwhile,

'Edward, my father had a son, who being a fool like you, and, like 
you, entertaining low and disobedient sentiments, he disinherited 
and cursed one morning after breakfast.  The circumstance occurs to 
me with a singular clearness of recollection this evening.  I 
remember eating muffins at the time, with marmalade.  He led a 
miserable life (the son, I mean) and died early; it was a happy 
release on all accounts; he degraded the family very much.  It is a 
sad circumstance, Edward, when a father finds it necessary to 
resort to such strong measures.

'It is,' replied Edward, 'and it is sad when a son, proffering him 
his love and duty in their best and truest sense, finds himself 
repelled at every turn, and forced to disobey.  Dear father,' he 
added, more earnestly though in a gentler tone, 'I have reflected 
many times on what occurred between us when we first discussed this 
subject.  Let there be a confidence between us; not in terms, but 
truth.  Hear what I have to say.'

'As I anticipate what it is, and cannot fail to do so, Edward,' 
returned his father coldly, 'I decline.  I couldn't possibly.  I am 
sure it would put me out of temper, which is a state of mind I 
can't endure.  If you intend to mar my plans for your establishment 
in life, and the preservation of that gentility and becoming pride, 
which our family have so long sustained--if, in short, you are 
resolved to take your own course, you must take it, and my curse 
with it.  I am very sorry, but there's really no alternative.'

'The curse may pass your lips,' said Edward, 'but it will be but 
empty breath.  I do not believe that any man on earth has greater 
power to call one down upon his fellow--least of all, upon his own 
child--than he has to make one drop of rain or flake of snow fall 
from the clouds above us at his impious bidding.  Beware, sir, what 
you do.'

'You are so very irreligious, so exceedingly undutiful, so horribly 
profane,' rejoined his father, turning his face lazily towards 
him, and cracking another nut, 'that I positively must interrupt 
you here.  It is quite impossible we can continue to go on, upon 
such terms as these.  If you will do me the favour to ring the 
bell, the servant will show you to the door.  Return to this roof 
no more, I beg you.  Go, sir, since you have no moral sense 
remaining; and go to the Devil, at my express desire.  Good day.'

Edward left the room without another word or look, and turned his 
back upon the house for ever.

The father's face was slightly flushed and heated, but his manner 
was quite unchanged, as he rang the bell again, and addressed the 
servant on his entrance.

'Peak--if that gentleman who has just gone out--'

'I beg your pardon, sir, Mr Edward?'

'Were there more than one, dolt, that you ask the question?--If 
that gentleman should send here for his wardrobe, let him have it, 
do you hear?  If he should call himself at any time, I'm not at 
home.  You'll tell him so, and shut the door.'


So, it soon got whispered about, that Mr Chester was very 
unfortunate in his son, who had occasioned him great grief and 
sorrow.  And the good people who heard this and told it again, 
marvelled the more at his equanimity and even temper, and said what 
an amiable nature that man must have, who, having undergone so 
much, could be so placid and so calm.  And when Edward's name was 
spoken, Society shook its head, and laid its finger on its lip, and 
sighed, and looked very grave; and those who had sons about his 
age, waxed wrathful and indignant, and hoped, for Virtue's sake, 
that he was dead.  And the world went on turning round, as usual, 
for five years, concerning which this Narrative is silent.



Chapter 33


One wintry evening, early in the year of our Lord one thousand 
seven hundred and eighty, a keen north wind arose as it grew dark, 
and night came on with black and dismal looks.  A bitter storm of 
sleet, sharp, dense, and icy-cold, swept the wet streets, and 
rattled on the trembling windows.  Signboards, shaken past 
endurance in their creaking frames, fell crashing on the pavement; 
old tottering chimneys reeled and staggered in the blast; and many 
a steeple rocked again that night, as though the earth were 
troubled.

It was not a time for those who could by any means get light and 
warmth, to brave the fury of the weather.  In coffee-houses of the 
better sort, guests crowded round the fire, forgot to be political, 
and told each other with a secret gladness that the blast grew 
fiercer every minute.  Each humble tavern by the water-side, had 
its group of uncouth figures round the hearth, who talked of 
vessels foundering at sea, and all hands lost; related many a 
dismal tale of shipwreck and drowned men, and hoped that some they 
knew were safe, and shook their heads in doubt.  In private 
dwellings, children clustered near the blaze; listening with timid 
pleasure to tales of ghosts and goblins, and tall figures clad in 
white standing by bed-sides, and people who had gone to sleep in 
old churches and being overlooked had found themselves alone there 
at the dead hour of the night: until they shuddered at the thought 
of the dark rooms upstairs, yet loved to hear the wind moan too, 
and hoped it would continue bravely.  From time to time these happy 
indoor people stopped to listen, or one held up his finger and 
cried 'Hark!' and then, above the rumbling in the chimney, and the 
fast pattering on the glass, was heard a wailing, rushing sound, 
which shook the walls as though a giant's hand were on them; then a 
hoarse roar as if the sea had risen; then such a whirl and tumult 
that the air seemed mad; and then, with a lengthened howl, the 
waves of wind swept on, and left a moment's interval of rest.

Cheerily, though there were none abroad to see it, shone the 
Maypole light that evening.  Blessings on the red--deep, ruby, 
glowing red--old curtain of the window; blending into one rich 
stream of brightness, fire and candle, meat, drink, and company, 
and gleaming like a jovial eye upon the bleak waste out of doors!  
Within, what carpet like its crunching sand, what music merry as 
its crackling logs, what perfume like its kitchen's dainty breath, 
what weather genial as its hearty warmth!  Blessings on the old 
house, how sturdily it stood!  How did the vexed wind chafe and 
roar about its stalwart roof; how did it pant and strive with its 
wide chimneys, which still poured forth from their hospitable 
throats, great clouds of smoke, and puffed defiance in its face; 
how, above all, did it drive and rattle at the casement, emulous to 
extinguish that cheerful glow, which would not be put down and 
seemed the brighter for the conflict!

The profusion too, the rich and lavish bounty, of that goodly 
tavern!  It was not enough that one fire roared and sparkled on its 
spacious hearth; in the tiles which paved and compassed it, five 
hundred flickering fires burnt brightly also.  It was not enough 
that one red curtain shut the wild night out, and shed its cheerful 
influence on the room.  In every saucepan lid, and candlestick, and 
vessel of copper, brass, or tin that hung upon the walls, were 
countless ruddy hangings, flashing and gleaming with every motion 
of the blaze, and offering, let the eye wander where it might, 
interminable vistas of the same rich colour.  The old oak 
wainscoting, the beams, the chairs, the seats, reflected it in a 
deep, dull glimmer.  There were fires and red curtains in the very 
eyes of the drinkers, in their buttons, in their liquor, in the 
pipes they smoked.

Mr Willet sat in what had been his accustomed place five years 
before, with his eyes on the eternal boiler; and had sat there 
since the clock struck eight, giving no other signs of life than 
breathing with a loud and constant snore (though he was wide 
awake), and from time to time putting his glass to his lips, or 
knocking the ashes out of his pipe, and filling it anew.  It was 
now half-past ten.  Mr Cobb and long Phil Parkes were his 
companions, as of old, and for two mortal hours and a half, none of 
the company had pronounced one word.

Whether people, by dint of sitting together in the same place and 
the same relative positions, and doing exactly the same things for 
a great many years, acquire a sixth sense, or some unknown power of 
influencing each other which serves them in its stead, is a 
question for philosophy to settle.  But certain it is that old 
John Willet, Mr Parkes, and Mr Cobb, were one and all firmly of 
opinion that they were very jolly companions--rather choice spirits 
than otherwise; that they looked at each other every now and then 
as if there were a perpetual interchange of ideas going on among 
them; that no man considered himself or his neighbour by any means 
silent; and that each of them nodded occasionally when he caught 
the eye of another, as if he would say, 'You have expressed 
yourself extremely well, sir, in relation to that sentiment, and I 
quite agree with you.'

The room was so very warm, the tobacco so very good, and the fire 
so very soothing, that Mr Willet by degrees began to doze; but as 
he had perfectly acquired, by dint of long habit, the art of 
smoking in his sleep, and as his breathing was pretty much the 
same, awake or asleep, saving that in the latter case he sometimes 
experienced a slight difficulty in respiration (such as a carpenter 
meets with when he is planing and comes to a knot), neither of his 
companions was aware of the circumstance, until he met with one of 
these impediments and was obliged to try again.

'Johnny's dropped off,' said Mr Parkes in a whisper.

'Fast as a top,' said Mr Cobb.

Neither of them said any more until Mr Willet came to another knot--
one of surpassing obduracy--which bade fair to throw him into 
convulsions, but which he got over at last without waking, by an 
effort quite superhuman.

'He sleeps uncommon hard,' said Mr Cobb.

Mr Parkes, who was possibly a hard-sleeper himself, replied with 
some disdain, 'Not a bit on it;' and directed his eyes towards a 
handbill pasted over the chimney-piece, which was decorated at the 
top with a woodcut representing a youth of tender years running 
away very fast, with a bundle over his shoulder at the end of a 
stick, and--to carry out the idea--a finger-post and a milestone 
beside him.  Mr Cobb likewise turned his eyes in the same 
direction, and surveyed the placard as if that were the first time 
he had ever beheld it.  Now, this was a document which Mr Willet 
had himself indited on the disappearance of his son Joseph, 
acquainting the nobility and gentry and the public in general with 
the circumstances of his having left his home; describing his dress 
and appearance; and offering a reward of five pounds to any person 
or persons who would pack him up and return him safely to the 
Maypole at Chigwell, or lodge him in any of his Majesty's jails 
until such time as his father should come and claim him.  In this 
advertisement Mr Willet had obstinately persisted, despite the 
advice and entreaties of his friends, in describing his son as a 
'young boy;' and furthermore as being from eighteen inches to a 
couple of feet shorter than he really was; two circumstances which 
perhaps accounted, in some degree, for its never having been 
productive of any other effect than the transmission to Chigwell 
at various times and at a vast expense, of some five-and-forty 
runaways varying from six years old to twelve.

Mr Cobb and Mr Parkes looked mysteriously at this composition, at 
each other, and at old John.  From the time he had pasted it up 
with his own hands, Mr Willet had never by word or sign alluded to 
the subject, or encouraged any one else to do so.  Nobody had the 
least notion what his thoughts or opinions were, connected with it; 
whether he remembered it or forgot it; whether he had any idea that 
such an event had ever taken place.  Therefore, even while he 
slept, no one ventured to refer to it in his presence; and for such 
sufficient reasons, these his chosen friends were silent now.

Mr Willet had got by this time into such a complication of knots, 
that it was perfectly clear he must wake or die.  He chose the 
former alternative, and opened his eyes.

'If he don't come in five minutes,' said John, 'I shall have supper 
without him.'

The antecedent of this pronoun had been mentioned for the last time 
at eight o'clock.  Messrs Parkes and Cobb being used to this style 
of conversation, replied without difficulty that to be sure Solomon 
was very late, and they wondered what had happened to detain him.

'He an't blown away, I suppose,' said Parkes.  'It's enough to 
carry a man of his figure off his legs, and easy too.  Do you hear 
it?  It blows great guns, indeed.  There'll be many a crash in the 
Forest to-night, I reckon, and many a broken branch upon the ground 
to-morrow.'

'It won't break anything in the Maypole, I take it, sir,' returned 
old John.  'Let it try.  I give it leave--what's that?'

'The wind,' cried Parkes.  'It's howling like a Christian, and has 
been all night long.'

'Did you ever, sir,' asked John, after a minute's contemplation, 
'hear the wind say "Maypole"?'

'Why, what man ever did?' said Parkes.

'Nor "ahoy," perhaps?' added John.

'No.  Nor that neither.'

'Very good, sir,' said Mr Willet, perfectly unmoved; 'then if that 
was the wind just now, and you'll wait a little time without 
speaking, you'll hear it say both words very plain.'

Mr Willet was right.  After listening for a few moments, they could 
clearly hear, above the roar and tumult out of doors, this shout 
repeated; and that with a shrillness and energy, which denoted that 
it came from some person in great distress or terror.  They looked 
at each other, turned pale, and held their breath.  No man stirred.

It was in this emergency that Mr Willet displayed something of that 
strength of mind and plenitude of mental resource, which rendered 
him the admiration of all his friends and neighbours.  After 
looking at Messrs Parkes and Cobb for some time in silence, he 
clapped his two hands to his cheeks, and sent forth a roar which 
made the glasses dance and rafters ring--a long-sustained, 
discordant bellow, that rolled onward with the wind, and startling 
every echo, made the night a hundred times more boisterous--a deep, 
loud, dismal bray, that sounded like a human gong.  Then, with 
every vein in his head and face swollen with the great exertion, 
and his countenance suffused with a lively purple, he drew a little 
nearer to the fire, and turning his back upon it, said with dignity:

'If that's any comfort to anybody, they're welcome to it.  If it 
an't, I'm sorry for 'em.  If either of you two gentlemen likes to 
go out and see what's the matter, you can.  I'm not curious, 
myself.'

While he spoke the cry drew nearer and nearer, footsteps passed the 
window, the latch of the door was raised, it opened, was violently 
shut again, and Solomon Daisy, with a lighted lantern in his hand, 
and the rain streaming from his disordered dress, dashed into the 
room.

A more complete picture of terror than the little man presented, it 
would be difficult to imagine.  The perspiration stood in beads 
upon his face, his knees knocked together, his every limb trembled, 
the power of articulation was quite gone; and there he stood, 
panting for breath, gazing on them with such livid ashy looks, that 
they were infected with his fear, though ignorant of its occasion, 
and, reflecting his dismayed and horror-stricken visage, stared 
back again without venturing to question him; until old John 
Willet, in a fit of temporary insanity, made a dive at his cravat, 
and, seizing him by that portion of his dress, shook him to and fro 
until his very teeth appeared to rattle in his head.

'Tell us what's the matter, sir,' said John, 'or I'll kill you.  
Tell us what's the matter, sir, or in another second I'll have your 
head under the biler.  How dare you look like that?  Is anybody a-
following of you?  What do you mean?  Say something, or I'll be the 
death of you, I will.'

Mr Willet, in his frenzy, was so near keeping his word to the very 
letter (Solomon Daisy's eyes already beginning to roll in an 
alarming manner, and certain guttural sounds, as of a choking man, 
to issue from his throat), that the two bystanders, recovering in 
some degree, plucked him off his victim by main force, and placed 
the little clerk of Chigwell in a chair.  Directing a fearful gaze 
all round the room, he implored them in a faint voice to give him 
some drink; and above all to lock the house-door and close and bar 
the shutters of the room, without a moment's loss of time.  The 
latter request did not tend to reassure his hearers, or to fill 
them with the most comfortable sensations; they complied with it, 
however, with the greatest expedition; and having handed him a 
bumper of brandy-and-water, nearly boiling hot, waited to hear what 
he might have to tell them.

'Oh, Johnny,' said Solomon, shaking him by the hand.  'Oh, Parkes.  
Oh, Tommy Cobb.  Why did I leave this house to-night!  On the 
nineteenth of March--of all nights in the year, on the nineteenth 
of March!'

They all drew closer to the fire.  Parkes, who was nearest to the 
door, started and looked over his shoulder.  Mr Willet, with great 
indignation, inquired what the devil he meant by that--and then 
said, 'God forgive me,' and glanced over his own shoulder, and came 
a little nearer.

'When I left here to-night,' said Solomon Daisy, 'I little thought 
what day of the month it was.  I have never gone alone into the 
church after dark on this day, for seven-and-twenty years.  I have 
heard it said that as we keep our birthdays when we are alive, so 
the ghosts of dead people, who are not easy in their graves, keep 
the day they died upon.--How the wind roars!'

Nobody spoke.  All eyes were fastened on Solomon.

'I might have known,' he said, 'what night it was, by the foul 
weather.  There's no such night in the whole year round as this is, 
always.  I never sleep quietly in my bed on the nineteenth of 
March.'

'Go on,' said Tom Cobb, in a low voice.  'Nor I neither.'

Solomon Daisy raised his glass to his lips; put it down upon the 
floor with such a trembling hand that the spoon tinkled in it like 
a little bell; and continued thus:

'Have I ever said that we are always brought back to this subject 
in some strange way, when the nineteenth of this month comes round?  
Do you suppose it was by accident, I forgot to wind up the church-
clock?  I never forgot it at any other time, though it's such a 
clumsy thing that it has to be wound up every day.  Why should it 
escape my memory on this day of all others?

'I made as much haste down there as I could when I went from here, 
but I had to go home first for the keys; and the wind and rain 
being dead against me all the way, it was pretty well as much as I 
could do at times to keep my legs.  I got there at last, opened the 
church-door, and went in.  I had not met a soul all the way, and 
you may judge whether it was dull or not.  Neither of you would 
bear me company.  If you could have known what was to come, you'd 
have been in the right.

'The wind was so strong, that it was as much as I could do to shut 
the church-door by putting my whole weight against it; and even as 
it was, it burst wide open twice, with such strength that any of 
you would have sworn, if you had been leaning against it, as I was, 
that somebody was pushing on the other side.  However, I got the 
key turned, went into the belfry, and wound up the clock--which was 
very near run down, and would have stood stock-still in half an 
hour.

'As I took up my lantern again to leave the church, it came upon me 
all at once that this was the nineteenth of March.  It came upon me 
with a kind of shock, as if a hand had struck the thought upon my 
forehead; at the very same moment, I heard a voice outside the 
tower--rising from among the graves.'

Here old John precipitately interrupted the speaker, and begged 
that if Mr Parkes (who was seated opposite to him and was staring 
directly over his head) saw anything, he would have the goodness 
to mention it.  Mr Parkes apologised, and remarked that he was only 
listening; to which Mr Willet angrily retorted, that his listening 
with that kind of expression in his face was not agreeable, and 
that if he couldn't look like other people, he had better put his 
pocket-handkerchief over his head.  Mr Parkes with great submission 
pledged himself to do so, if again required, and John Willet 
turning to Solomon desired him to proceed.  After waiting until a 
violent gust of wind and rain, which seemed to shake even that 
sturdy house to its foundation, had passed away, the little man 
complied:

'Never tell me that it was my fancy, or that it was any other sound 
which I mistook for that I tell you of.  I heard the wind whistle 
through the arches of the church.  I heard the steeple strain and 
creak.  I heard the rain as it came driving against the walls.  I 
felt the bells shake.  I saw the ropes sway to and fro.  And I 
heard that voice.'

'What did it say?' asked Tom Cobb.

'I don't know what; I don't know that it spoke.  It gave a kind of 
cry, as any one of us might do, if something dreadful followed us 
in a dream, and came upon us unawares; and then it died off: 
seeming to pass quite round the church.'

'I don't see much in that,' said John, drawing a long breath, and 
looking round him like a man who felt relieved.

'Perhaps not,' returned his friend, 'but that's not all.'

'What more do you mean to say, sir, is to come?' asked John, 
pausing in the act of wiping his face upon his apron.  'What are 
you a-going to tell us of next?'

'What I saw.'

'Saw!' echoed all three, bending forward.

'When I opened the church-door to come out,' said the little man, 
with an expression of face which bore ample testimony to the 
sincerity of his conviction, 'when I opened the church-door to come 
out, which I did suddenly, for I wanted to get it shut again before 
another gust of wind came up, there crossed me--so close, that by 
stretching out my finger I could have touched it--something in the 
likeness of a man.  It was bare-headed to the storm.  It turned its 
face without stopping, and fixed its eyes on mine.  It was a ghost--
a spirit.'

'Whose?' they all three cried together.

In the excess of his emotion (for he fell back trembling in his 
chair, and waved his hand as if entreating them to question him no 
further), his answer was lost on all but old John Willet, who 
happened to be seated close beside him.

'Who!' cried Parkes and Tom Cobb, looking eagerly by turns at 
Solomon Daisy and at Mr Willet.  'Who was it?'

'Gentlemen,' said Mr Willet after a long pause, 'you needn't ask.  
The likeness of a murdered man.  This is the nineteenth of March.'

A profound silence ensued.

'If you'll take my advice,' said John, 'we had better, one and all, 
keep this a secret.  Such tales would not be liked at the Warren.  
Let us keep it to ourselves for the present time at all events, or 
we may get into trouble, and Solomon may lose his place.  Whether 
it was really as he says, or whether it wasn't, is no matter.  
Right or wrong, nobody would believe him.  As to the probabilities, 
I don't myself think,' said Mr Willet, eyeing the corners of the 
room in a manner which showed that, like some other philosophers, 
he was not quite easy in his theory, 'that a ghost as had been a 
man of sense in his lifetime, would be out a-walking in such 
weather--I only know that I wouldn't, if I was one.'

But this heretical doctrine was strongly opposed by the other 
three, who quoted a great many precedents to show that bad weather 
was the very time for such appearances; and Mr Parkes (who had had 
a ghost in his family, by the mother's side) argued the matter with 
so much ingenuity and force of illustration, that John was only 
saved from having to retract his opinion by the opportune 
appearance of supper, to which they applied themselves with a 
dreadful relish.  Even Solomon Daisy himself, by dint of the 
elevating influences of fire, lights, brandy, and good company, so 
far recovered as to handle his knife and fork in a highly 
creditable manner, and to display a capacity both of eating and 
drinking, such as banished all fear of his having sustained any 
lasting injury from his fright.

Supper done, they crowded round the fire again, and, as is common 
on such occasions, propounded all manner of leading questions 
calculated to surround the story with new horrors and surprises.  
But Solomon Daisy, notwithstanding these temptations, adhered so 
steadily to his original account, and repeated it so often, with 
such slight variations, and with such solemn asseverations of its 
truth and reality, that his hearers were (with good reason) more 
astonished than at first.  As he took John Willet's view of the 
matter in regard to the propriety of not bruiting the tale abroad, 
unless the spirit should appear to him again, in which case it 
would be necessary to take immediate counsel with the clergyman, it 
was solemnly resolved that it should be hushed up and kept quiet.  
And as most men like to have a secret to tell which may exalt their 
own importance, they arrived at this conclusion with perfect 
unanimity.

As it was by this time growing late, and was long past their usual 
hour of separating, the cronies parted for the night.  Solomon 
Daisy, with a fresh candle in his lantern, repaired homewards under 
the escort of long Phil Parkes and Mr Cobb, who were rather more 
nervous than himself.  Mr Willet, after seeing them to the door, 
returned to collect his thoughts with the assistance of the boiler, 
and to listen to the storm of wind and rain, which had not yet 
abated one jot of its fury.



Chapter 34


Before old John had looked at the boiler quite twenty minutes, he 
got his ideas into a focus, and brought them to bear upon Solomon 
Daisy's story.  The more he thought of it, the more impressed he 
became with a sense of his own wisdom, and a desire that Mr 
Haredale should be impressed with it likewise.  At length, to the 
end that he might sustain a principal and important character in 
the affair; and might have the start of Solomon and his two 
friends, through whose means he knew the adventure, with a variety 
of exaggerations, would be known to at least a score of people, and 
most likely to Mr Haredale himself, by breakfast-time to-morrow; he 
determined to repair to the Warren before going to bed.

'He's my landlord,' thought John, as he took a candle in his hand, 
and setting it down in a corner out of the wind's way, opened a 
casement in the rear of the house, looking towards the stables.  
'We haven't met of late years so often as we used to do--changes 
are taking place in the family--it's desirable that I should stand 
as well with them, in point of dignity, as possible--the whispering 
about of this here tale will anger him--it's good to have 
confidences with a gentleman of his natur', and set one's-self 
right besides.  Halloa there!  Hugh--Hugh.  Hal-loa!'

When he had repeated this shout a dozen times, and startled every 
pigeon from its slumbers, a door in one of the ruinous old 
buildings opened, and a rough voice demanded what was amiss now, 
that a man couldn't even have his sleep in quiet.

'What!  Haven't you sleep enough, growler, that you're not to be 
knocked up for once?' said John.

'No,' replied the voice, as the speaker yawned and shook himself.  
'Not half enough.'

'I don't know how you CAN sleep, with the wind a bellowsing and 
roaring about you, making the tiles fly like a pack of cards,' said 
John; 'but no matter for that.  Wrap yourself up in something or 
another, and come here, for you must go as far as the Warren with 
me.  And look sharp about it.'

Hugh, with much low growling and muttering, went back into his 
lair; and presently reappeared, carrying a lantern and a cudgel, 
and enveloped from head to foot in an old, frowzy, slouching horse-
cloth.  Mr Willet received this figure at the back-door, and 
ushered him into the bar, while he wrapped himself in sundry 
greatcoats and capes, and so tied and knotted his face in shawls 
and handkerchiefs, that how he breathed was a mystery.

'You don't take a man out of doors at near midnight in such weather, 
without putting some heart into him, do you, master?' said Hugh.

'Yes I do, sir,' returned Mr Willet.  'I put the heart (as you call 
it) into him when he has brought me safe home again, and his 
standing steady on his legs an't of so much consequence.  So hold 
that light up, if you please, and go on a step or two before, to 
show the way.'

Hugh obeyed with a very indifferent grace, and a longing glance at 
the bottles.  Old John, laying strict injunctions on his cook to 
keep the doors locked in his absence, and to open to nobody but 
himself on pain of dismissal, followed him into the blustering 
darkness out of doors.

The way was wet and dismal, and the night so black, that if Mr 
Willet had been his own pilot, he would have walked into a deep 
horsepond within a few hundred yards of his own house, and would 
certainly have terminated his career in that ignoble sphere of 
action.  But Hugh, who had a sight as keen as any hawk's, and, 
apart from that endowment, could have found his way blindfold to 
any place within a dozen miles, dragged old John along, quite deaf 
to his remonstrances, and took his own course without the slightest 
reference to, or notice of, his master.  So they made head against 
the wind as they best could; Hugh crushing the wet grass beneath 
his heavy tread, and stalking on after his ordinary savage 
fashion; John Willet following at arm's length, picking his 
steps, and looking about him, now for bogs and ditches, and now 
for such stray ghosts as might be wandering abroad, with looks of 
as much dismay and uneasiness as his immovable face was capable of 
expressing.

At length they stood upon the broad gravel-walk before the Warren-
house.  The building was profoundly dark, and none were moving near 
it save themselves.  From one solitary turret-chamber, however, 
there shone a ray of light; and towards this speck of comfort in 
the cold, cheerless, silent scene, Mr Willet bade his pilot lead 
him.

'The old room,' said John, looking timidly upward; 'Mr Reuben's own 
apartment, God be with us!  I wonder his brother likes to sit 
there, so late at night--on this night too.'

'Why, where else should he sit?' asked Hugh, holding the lantern to 
his breast, to keep the candle from the wind, while he trimmed it 
with his fingers.  'It's snug enough, an't it?'

'Snug!' said John indignantly.  'You have a comfortable idea of 
snugness, you have, sir.  Do you know what was done in that room, 
you ruffian?'

'Why, what is it the worse for that!' cried Hugh, looking into 
John's fat face.  'Does it keep out the rain, and snow, and wind, 
the less for that?  Is it less warm or dry, because a man was 
killed there?  Ha, ha, ha!  Never believe it, master.  One man's no 
such matter as that comes to.'

Mr Willet fixed his dull eyes on his follower, and began--by a 
species of inspiration--to think it just barely possible that he 
was something of a dangerous character, and that it might be 
advisable to get rid of him one of these days.  He was too prudent 
to say anything, with the journey home before him; and therefore 
turned to the iron gate before which this brief dialogue had 
passed, and pulled the handle of the bell that hung beside it.  The 
turret in which the light appeared being at one corner of the 
building, and only divided from the path by one of the garden-
walks, upon which this gate opened, Mr Haredale threw up the 
window directly, and demanded who was there.

'Begging pardon, sir,' said John, 'I knew you sat up late, and made 
bold to come round, having a word to say to you.'

'Willet--is it not?'

'Of the Maypole--at your service, sir.'

Mr Haredale closed the window, and withdrew.  He presently appeared 
at a door in the bottom of the turret, and coming across the 
garden-walk, unlocked the gate and let them in.

'You are a late visitor, Willet.  What is the matter?'

'Nothing to speak of, sir,' said John; 'an idle tale, I thought you 
ought to know of; nothing more.'

'Let your man go forward with the lantern, and give me your hand.  
The stairs are crooked and narrow.  Gently with your light, friend.  
You swing it like a censer.'

Hugh, who had already reached the turret, held it more steadily, 
and ascended first, turning round from time to time to shed his 
light downward on the steps.  Mr Haredale following next, eyed his 
lowering face with no great favour; and Hugh, looking down on him, 
returned his glances with interest, as they climbed the winding 
stairs.

It terminated in a little ante-room adjoining that from which they 
had seen the light.  Mr Haredale entered first, and led the way 
through it into the latter chamber, where he seated himself at a 
writing-table from which he had risen when they had rung the bell.

'Come in,' he said, beckoning to old John, who remained bowing at 
the door.  'Not you, friend,' he added hastily to Hugh, who entered 
also.  'Willet, why do you bring that fellow here?'

'Why, sir,' returned John, elevating his eyebrows, and lowering his 
voice to the tone in which the question had been asked him, 'he's a 
good guard, you see.'

'Don't be too sure of that,' said Mr Haredale, looking towards him 
as he spoke.  'I doubt it.  He has an evil eye.'

'There's no imagination in his eye,' returned Mr Willet, glancing 
over his shoulder at the organ in question, 'certainly.'

'There is no good there, be assured,' said Mr Haredale.  'Wait in 
that little room, friend, and close the door between us.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders, and with a disdainful look, which 
showed, either that he had overheard, or that he guessed the 
purport of their whispering, did as he was told.  When he was shut 
out, Mr Haredale turned to John, and bade him go on with what he 
had to say, but not to speak too loud, for there were quick ears 
yonder.

Thus cautioned, Mr Willet, in an oily whisper, recited all that he 
had heard and said that night; laying particular stress upon his 
own sagacity, upon his great regard for the family, and upon his 
solicitude for their peace of mind and happiness.  The story moved 
his auditor much more than he had expected.  Mr Haredale often 
changed his attitude, rose and paced the room, returned again, 
desired him to repeat, as nearly as he could, the very words that 
Solomon had used, and gave so many other signs of being disturbed 
and ill at ease, that even Mr Willet was surprised.

'You did quite right,' he said, at the end of a long conversation, 
'to bid them keep this story secret.  It is a foolish fancy on the 
part of this weak-brained man, bred in his fears and superstition.  
But Miss Haredale, though she would know it to be so, would be 
disturbed by it if it reached her ears; it is too nearly connected 
with a subject very painful to us all, to be heard with 
indifference.  You were most prudent, and have laid me under a 
great obligation.  I thank you very much.'

This was equal to John's most sanguine expectations; but he would 
have preferred Mr Haredale's looking at him when he spoke, as if he 
really did thank him, to his walking up and down, speaking by fits 
and starts, often stopping with his eyes fixed on the ground, 
moving hurriedly on again, like one distracted, and seeming almost 
unconscious of what he said or did.

This, however, was his manner; and it was so embarrassing to John 
that he sat quite passive for a long time, not knowing what to 
do.  At length he rose.  Mr Haredale stared at him for a moment as 
though he had quite forgotten his being present, then shook hands 
with him, and opened the door.  Hugh, who was, or feigned to be, 
fast asleep on the ante-chamber floor, sprang up on their entrance, 
and throwing his cloak about him, grasped his stick and lantern, 
and prepared to descend the stairs.

'Stay,' said Mr Haredale.  'Will this man drink?'

'Drink!  He'd drink the Thames up, if it was strong enough, sir, 
replied John Willet.  'He'll have something when he gets home.  
He's better without it, now, sir.'

'Nay.  Half the distance is done,' said Hugh.  'What a hard master 
you are!  I shall go home the better for one glassful, halfway.  
Come!'

As John made no reply, Mr Haredale brought out a glass of liquor, 
and gave it to Hugh, who, as he took it in his hand, threw part of 
it upon the floor.

'What do you mean by splashing your drink about a gentleman's 
house, sir?' said John.

'I'm drinking a toast,' Hugh rejoined, holding the glass above his 
head, and fixing his eyes on Mr Haredale's face; 'a toast to this 
house and its master.'  With that he muttered something to himself, 
and drank the rest, and setting down the glass, preceded them 
without another word.

John was a good deal scandalised by this observance, but seeing 
that Mr Haredale took little heed of what Hugh said or did, and 
that his thoughts were otherwise employed, he offered no apology, 
and went in silence down the stairs, across the walk, and through 
the garden-gate.  They stopped upon the outer side for Hugh to hold 
the light while Mr Haredale locked it on the inner; and then John 
saw with wonder (as he often afterwards related), that he was very 
pale, and that his face had changed so much and grown so haggard 
since their entrance, that he almost seemed another man.

They were in the open road again, and John Willet was walking on 
behind his escort, as he had come, thinking very steadily of what 
be had just now seen, when Hugh drew him suddenly aside, and almost 
at the same instant three horsemen swept past--the nearest brushed 
his shoulder even then--who, checking their steeds as suddenly as 
they could, stood still, and waited for their coming up.



Chapter 35


When John Willet saw that the horsemen wheeled smartly round, and 
drew up three abreast in the narrow road, waiting for him and his 
man to join them, it occurred to him with unusual precipitation 
that they must be highwaymen; and had Hugh been armed with a 
blunderbuss, in place of his stout cudgel, he would certainly have 
ordered him to fire it off at a venture, and would, while the word 
of command was obeyed, have consulted his own personal safety in 
immediate flight.  Under the circumstances of disadvantage, 
however, in which he and his guard were placed, he deemed it 
prudent to adopt a different style of generalship, and therefore 
whispered his attendant to address them in the most peaceable and 
courteous terms.  By way of acting up to the spirit and letter of 
this instruction, Hugh stepped forward, and flourishing his staff 
before the very eyes of the rider nearest to him, demanded roughly 
what he and his fellows meant by so nearly galloping over them, and 
why they scoured the king's highway at that late hour of night.

The man whom be addressed was beginning an angry reply in the same 
strain, when be was checked by the horseman in the centre, who, 
interposing with an air of authority, inquired in a somewhat loud 
but not harsh or unpleasant voice:

'Pray, is this the London road?'

'If you follow it right, it is,' replied Hugh roughly.

'Nay, brother,' said the same person, 'you're but a churlish 
Englishman, if Englishman you be--which I should much doubt but for 
your tongue.  Your companion, I am sure, will answer me more 
civilly.  How say you, friend?'

'I say it IS the London road, sir,' answered John.  'And I wish,' 
he added in a subdued voice, as he turned to Hugh, 'that you was in 
any other road, you vagabond.  Are you tired of your life, sir, 
that you go a-trying to provoke three great neck-or-nothing chaps, 
that could keep on running over us, back'ards and for'ards, till we 
was dead, and then take our bodies up behind 'em, and drown us ten 
miles off?'

'How far is it to London?' inquired the same speaker.

'Why, from here, sir,' answered John, persuasively, 'it's thirteen 
very easy mile.'

The adjective was thrown in, as an inducement to the travellers to 
ride away with all speed; but instead of having the desired effect, 
it elicited from the same person, the remark, 'Thirteen miles!  
That's a long distance!' which was followed by a short pause of 
indecision.

'Pray,' said the gentleman, 'are there any inns hereabouts?'  At 
the word 'inns,' John plucked up his spirit in a surprising manner; 
his fears rolled off like smoke; all the landlord stirred within 
him.

'There are no inns,' rejoined Mr Willet, with a strong emphasis on 
the plural number; 'but there's a Inn--one Inn--the Maypole Inn.  
That's a Inn indeed.  You won't see the like of that Inn often.'

'You keep it, perhaps?' said the horseman, smiling.

'I do, sir,' replied John, greatly wondering how he had found this 
out.

'And how far is the Maypole from here?'

'About a mile'--John was going to add that it was the easiest mile 
in all the world, when the third rider, who had hitherto kept a 
little in the rear, suddenly interposed:

'And have you one excellent bed, landlord?  Hem!  A bed that you 
can recommend--a bed that you are sure is well aired--a bed that 
has been slept in by some perfectly respectable and unexceptionable 
person?'

'We don't take in no tagrag and bobtail at our house, sir,' 
answered John.  'And as to the bed itself--'

'Say, as to three beds,' interposed the gentleman who had spoken 
before; 'for we shall want three if we stay, though my friend only 
speaks of one.'

'No, no, my lord; you are too good, you are too kind; but your life 
is of far too much importance to the nation in these portentous 
times, to be placed upon a level with one so useless and so poor as 
mine.  A great cause, my lord, a mighty cause, depends on you.  You 
are its leader and its champion, its advanced guard and its van.  
It is the cause of our altars and our homes, our country and our 
faith.  Let ME sleep on a chair--the carpet--anywhere.  No one will 
repine if I take cold or fever.  Let John Grueby pass the night 
beneath the open sky--no one will repine for HIM.  But forty 
thousand men of this our island in the wave (exclusive of women and 
children) rivet their eyes and thoughts on Lord George Gordon; and 
every day, from the rising up of the sun to the going down of the 
same, pray for his health and vigour.  My lord,' said the speaker, 
rising in his stirrups, 'it is a glorious cause, and must not be 
forgotten.  My lord, it is a mighty cause, and must not be 
endangered.  My lord, it is a holy cause, and must not be 
deserted.'

'It IS a holy cause,' exclaimed his lordship, lifting up his hat 
with great solemnity.  'Amen.'

'John Grueby,' said the long-winded gentleman, in a tone of mild 
reproof, 'his lordship said Amen.'

'I heard my lord, sir,' said the man, sitting like a statue on his 
horse.

'And do not YOU say Amen, likewise?'

To which John Grueby made no reply at all, but sat looking straight 
before him.

'You surprise me, Grueby,' said the gentleman.  'At a crisis like 
the present, when Queen Elizabeth, that maiden monarch, weeps 
within her tomb, and Bloody Mary, with a brow of gloom and shadow, 
stalks triumphant--'

'Oh, sir,' cied the man, gruffly, 'where's the use of talking of 
Bloody Mary, under such circumstances as the present, when my 
lord's wet through, and tired with hard riding?  Let's either go on 
to London, sir, or put up at once; or that unfort'nate Bloody Mary 
will have more to answer for--and she's done a deal more harm in 
her grave than she ever did in her lifetime, I believe.'

By this time Mr Willet, who had never beard so many words spoken 
together at one time, or delivered with such volubility and 
emphasis as by the long-winded gentleman; and whose brain, being 
wholly unable to sustain or compass them, had quite given itself up 
for lost; recovered so far as to observe that there was ample 
accommodation at the Maypole for all the party: good beds; neat 
wines; excellent entertainment for man and beast; private rooms for 
large and small parties; dinners dressed upon the shortest notice; 
choice stabling, and a lock-up coach-house; and, in short, to run 
over such recommendatory scraps of language as were painted up on 
various portions of the building, and which in the course of some 
forty years he had learnt to repeat with tolerable correctness.  He 
was considering whether it was at all possible to insert any novel 
sentences to the same purpose, when the gentleman who had spoken 
first, turning to him of the long wind, exclaimed, 'What say you, 
Gashford?  Shall we tarry at this house he speaks of, or press 
forward?  You shall decide.'

'I would submit, my lord, then,' returned the person he appealed 
to, in a silky tone, 'that your health and spirits--so important, 
under Providence, to our great cause, our pure and truthful cause'--
here his lordship pulled off his hat again, though it was raining 
hard--'require refreshment and repose.'

'Go on before, landlord, and show the way,' said Lord George 
Gordon; 'we will follow at a footpace.'

'If you'll give me leave, my lord,' said John Grueby, in a low 
voice, 'I'll change my proper place, and ride before you.  The 
looks of the landlord's friend are not over honest, and it may be 
as well to be cautious with him.'

'John Grueby is quite right,' interposed Mr Gashford, falling back 
hastily.  'My lord, a life so precious as yours must not be put in 
peril.  Go forward, John, by all means.  If you have any reason to 
suspect the fellow, blow his brains out.'

John made no answer, but looking straight before him, as his custom 
seemed to be when the secretary spoke, bade Hugh push on, and 
followed close behind him.  Then came his lordship, with Mr Willet 
at his bridle rein; and, last of all, his lordship's secretary--for 
that, it seemed, was Gashford's office.

Hugh strode briskly on, often looking back at the servant, whose 
horse was close upon his heels, and glancing with a leer at his 
bolster case of pistols, by which he seemed to set great store.  He 
was a square-built, strong-made, bull-necked fellow, of the true 
English breed; and as Hugh measured him with his eye, he measured 
Hugh, regarding him meanwhile with a look of bluff disdain.  He was 
much older than the Maypole man, being to all appearance five-and-
forty; but was one of those self-possessed, hard-headed, 
imperturbable fellows, who, if they are ever beaten at fisticuffs, 
or other kind of warfare, never know it, and go on coolly till they 
win.

'If I led you wrong now,' said Hugh, tauntingly, 'you'd--ha ha ha!--
you'd shoot me through the head, I suppose.'

John Grueby took no more notice of this remark than if he had been 
deaf and Hugh dumb; but kept riding on quite comfortably, with his 
eyes fixed on the horizon.

'Did you ever try a fall with a man when you were young, master?' 
said Hugh.  'Can you make any play at single-stick?'

John Grueby looked at him sideways with the same contented air, but 
deigned not a word in answer.

'--Like this?' said Hugh, giving his cudgel one of those skilful 
flourishes, in which the rustic of that time delighted.  'Whoop!'

'--Or that,' returned John Grueby, beating down his guard with his 
whip, and striking him on the head with its butt end.  'Yes, I 
played a little once.  You wear your hair too long; I should have 
cracked your crown if it had been a little shorter.'

It was a pretty smart, loud-sounding rap, as it was, and evidently 
astonished Hugh; who, for the moment, seemed disposed to drag his 
new acquaintance from his saddle.  But his face betokening neither 
malice, triumph, rage, nor any lingering idea that he had given him 
offence; his eyes gazing steadily in the old direction, and his 
manner being as careless and composed as if he had merely brushed 
away a fly; Hugh was so puzzled, and so disposed to look upon him 
as a customer of almost supernatural toughness, that he merely 
laughed, and cried 'Well done!' then, sheering off a little, led 
the way in silence.

Before the lapse of many minutes the party halted at the Maypole 
door.  Lord George and his secretary quickly dismounting, gave 
their horses to their servant, who, under the guidance of Hugh, 
repaired to the stables.  Right glad to escape from the inclemency 
of the night, they followed Mr Willet into the common room, and 
stood warming themselves and drying their clothes before the 
cheerful fire, while he busied himself with such orders and 
preparations as his guest's high quality required.

As he bustled in and out of the room, intent on these 
arrangements, he had an opportunity of observing the two 
travellers, of whom, as yet, he knew nothing but the voice.  The 
lord, the great personage who did the Maypole so much honour, was 
about the middle height, of a slender make, and sallow complexion, 
with an aquiline nose, and long hair of a reddish brown, combed 
perfectly straight and smooth about his ears, and slightly 
powdered, but without the faintest vestige of a curl.  He was 
attired, under his greatcoat, in a full suit of black, quite free 
from any ornament, and of the most precise and sober cut.  The 
gravity of his dress, together with a certain lankness of cheek 
and stiffness of deportment, added nearly ten years to his age, 
but his figure was that of one not yet past thirty.  As he stood 
musing in the red glow of the fire, it was striking to observe his 
very bright large eye, which betrayed a restlessness of thought and 
purpose, singularly at variance with the studied composure and 
sobriety of his mien, and with his quaint and sad apparel.  It had 
nothing harsh or cruel in its expression; neither had his face, 
which was thin and mild, and wore an air of melancholy; but it was 
suggestive of an indefinable uneasiness; which infected those who 
looked upon him, and filled them with a kind of pity for the man: 
though why it did so, they would have had some trouble to explain.

Gashford, the secretary, was taller, angularly made, high-
shouldered, bony, and ungraceful.  His dress, in imitation of his 
superior, was demure and staid in the extreme; his manner, formal 
and constrained.  This gentleman had an overhanging brow, great 
hands and feet and ears, and a pair of eyes that seemed to have 
made an unnatural retreat into his head, and to have dug themselves 
a cave to hide in.  His manner was smooth and humble, but very sly 
and slinking.  He wore the aspect of a man who was always lying in 
wait for something that WOULDN'T come to pass; but he looked 
patient--very patient--and fawned like a spaniel dog.  Even now, 
while he warmed and rubbed his hands before the blaze, he had the 
air of one who only presumed to enjoy it in his degree as a 
commoner; and though he knew his lord was not regarding him, he 
looked into his face from time to time, and with a meek and 
deferential manner, smiled as if for practice.

Such were the guests whom old John Willet, with a fixed and leaden 
eye, surveyed a hundred times, and to whom he now advanced with a 
state candlestick in each hand, beseeching them to follow him into 
a worthier chamber.  'For my lord,' said John--it is odd enough, 
but certain people seem to have as great a pleasure in pronouncing 
titles as their owners have in wearing them--'this room, my lord, 
isn't at all the sort of place for your lordship, and I have to 
beg your lordship's pardon for keeping you here, my lord, one 
minute.'

With this address, John ushered them upstairs into the state 
apartment, which, like many other things of state, was cold and 
comfortless.  Their own footsteps, reverberating through the 
spacious room, struck upon their hearing with a hollow sound; and 
its damp and chilly atmosphere was rendered doubly cheerless by 
contrast with the homely warmth they had deserted.

It was of no use, however, to propose a return to the place they 
had quitted, for the preparations went on so briskly that there was 
no time to stop them.  John, with the tall candlesticks in his 
hands, bowed them up to the fireplace; Hugh, striding in with a 
lighted brand and pile of firewood, cast it down upon the hearth, 
and set it in a blaze; John Grueby (who had a great blue cockade in 
his hat, which he appeared to despise mightily) brought in the 
portmanteau he had carried on his horse, and placed it on the 
floor; and presently all three were busily engaged in drawing out 
the screen, laying the cloth, inspecting the beds, lighting fires 
in the bedrooms, expediting the supper, and making everything as 
cosy and as snug as might be, on so short a notice.  In less than 
an hour's time, supper had been served, and ate, and cleared away; 
and Lord George and his secretary, with slippered feet, and legs 
stretched out before the fire, sat over some hot mulled wine 
together.

'So ends, my lord,' said Gashford, filling his glass with great 
complacency, 'the blessed work of a most blessed day.'

'And of a blessed yesterday,' said his lordship, raising his head.

'Ah!'--and here the secretary clasped his hands--'a blessed 
yesterday indeed!  The Protestants of Suffolk are godly men and 
true.  Though others of our countrymen have lost their way in 
darkness, even as we, my lord, did lose our road to-night, theirs 
is the light and glory.'

'Did I move them, Gashford ?' said Lord George.

'Move them, my lord!  Move them!  They cried to be led on against 
the Papists, they vowed a dreadful vengeance on their heads, they 
roared like men possessed--'

'But not by devils,' said his lord.

'By devils! my lord!  By angels.'

'Yes--oh surely--by angels, no doubt,' said Lord George, thrusting 
his hands into his pockets, taking them out again to bite his 
nails, and looking uncomfortably at the fire.  'Of course by 
angels--eh Gashford?'

'You do not doubt it, my lord?' said the secretary.

'No--No,' returned his lord.  'No.  Why should I?  I suppose it 
would be decidedly irreligious to doubt it--wouldn't it, Gashford?  
Though there certainly were,' he added, without waiting for an 
answer, 'some plaguy ill-looking characters among them.'

'When you warmed,' said the secretary, looking sharply at the 
other's downcast eyes, which brightened slowly as he spoke; 'when 
you warmed into that noble outbreak; when you told them that you 
were never of the lukewarm or the timid tribe, and bade them take 
heed that they were prepared to follow one who would lead them on, 
though to the very death; when you spoke of a hundred and twenty 
thousand men across the Scottish border who would take their own 
redress at any time, if it were not conceded; when you cried 
"Perish the Pope and all his base adherents; the penal laws against 
them shall never be repealed while Englishmen have hearts and 
hands"--and waved your own and touched your sword; and when they 
cried "No Popery!" and you cried "No; not even if we wade in 
blood," and they threw up their hats and cried "Hurrah! not even if 
we wade in blood; No Popery!  Lord George!  Down with the Papists--
Vengeance on their heads:" when this was said and done, and a word 
from you, my lord, could raise or still the tumult--ah! then I felt 
what greatness was indeed, and thought, When was there ever power 
like this of Lord George Gordon's!'

'It's a great power.  You're right.  It is a great power!' he cried 
with sparkling eyes.  'But--dear Gashford--did I really say all 
that?'

'And how much more!' cried the secretary, looking upwards.  'Ah! 
how much more!'

'And I told them what you say, about the one hundred and forty 
thousand men in Scotland, did I!' he asked with evident delight.  
'That was bold.'

'Our cause is boldness.  Truth is always bold.'

'Certainly.  So is religion.  She's bold, Gashford?'

'The true religion is, my lord.'

'And that's ours,' he rejoined, moving uneasily in his seat, and 
biting his nails as though he would pare them to the quick.  'There 
can be no doubt of ours being the true one.  You feel as certain of 
that as I do, Gashford, don't you?'

'Does my lord ask ME,' whined Gashford, drawing his chair nearer 
with an injured air, and laying his broad flat hand upon the table; 
'ME,' he repeated, bending the dark hollows of his eyes upon him 
with an unwholesome smile, 'who, stricken by the magic of his 
eloquence in Scotland but a year ago, abjured the errors of the 
Romish church, and clung to him as one whose timely hand had 
plucked me from a pit?'

'True.  No--No.  I--I didn't mean it,' replied the other, shaking 
him by the hand, rising from his seat, and pacing restlessly about 
the room.  'It's a proud thing to lead the people, Gashford,' he 
added as he made a sudden halt.

'By force of reason too,' returned the pliant secretary.

'Ay, to be sure.  They may cough and jeer, and groan in Parliament, 
and call me fool and madman, but which of them can raise this human 
sea and make it swell and roar at pleasure?  Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford.

'Which of them can say for his honesty, what I can say for mine; 
which of them has refused a minister's bribe of one thousand 
pounds a year, to resign his seat in favour of another?  Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford again--taking the lion's share of the 
mulled wine between whiles.

'And as we are honest, true, and in a sacred cause, Gashford,' said 
Lord George with a heightened colour and in a louder voice, as he 
laid his fevered hand upon his shoulder, 'and are the only men who 
regard the mass of people out of doors, or are regarded by them, we 
will uphold them to the last; and will raise a cry against these 
un-English Papists which shall re-echo through the country, and 
roll with a noise like thunder.  I will be worthy of the motto on 
my coat of arms, "Called and chosen and faithful."

'Called,' said the secretary, 'by Heaven.'

'I am.'

'Chosen by the people.'

'Yes.'

'Faithful to both.'

'To the block!'

It would be difficult to convey an adequate idea of the excited 
manner in which he gave these answers to the secretary's 
promptings; of the rapidity of his utterance, or the violence of 
his tone and gesture; in which, struggling through his Puritan's 
demeanour, was something wild and ungovernable which broke through 
all restraint.  For some minutes he walked rapidly up and down the 
room, then stopping suddenly, exclaimed,

'Gashford--YOU moved them yesterday too.  Oh yes!  You did.'

'I shone with a reflected light, my lord,' replied the humble 
secretary, laying his hand upon his heart.  'I did my best.'

'You did well,' said his master, 'and are a great and worthy 
instrument.  If you will ring for John Grueby to carry the 
portmanteau into my room, and will wait here while I undress, we 
will dispose of business as usual, if you're not too tired.'

'Too tired, my lord!--But this is his consideration!  Christian 
from head to foot.'  With which soliloquy, the secretary tilted the 
jug, and looked very hard into the mulled wine, to see how much 
remained.

John Willet and John Grueby appeared together.  The one bearing the 
great candlesticks, and the other the portmanteau, showed the 
deluded lord into his chamber; and left the secretary alone, to 
yawn and shake himself, and finally to fall asleep before the fire.

'Now, Mr Gashford sir,' said John Grueby in his ear, after what 
appeared to him a moment of unconsciousness; 'my lord's abed.'

'Oh.  Very good, John,' was his mild reply.  'Thank you, John.  
Nobody need sit up.  I know my room.'

'I hope you're not a-going to trouble your head to-night, or my 
lord's head neither, with anything more about Bloody Mary,' said 
John.  'I wish the blessed old creetur had never been born.'

'I said you might go to bed, John,' returned the secretary.  'You 
didn't hear me, I think.'

'Between Bloody Marys, and blue cockades, and glorious Queen 
Besses, and no Poperys, and Protestant associations, and making of 
speeches,' pursued John Grueby, looking, as usual, a long way off, 
and taking no notice of this hint, 'my lord's half off his head.  
When we go out o' doors, such a set of ragamuffins comes a-
shouting after us, "Gordon forever!" that I'm ashamed of myself 
and don't know where to look.  When we're indoors, they come a-
roaring and screaming about the house like so many devils; and my 
lord instead of ordering them to be drove away, goes out into the 
balcony and demeans himself by making speeches to 'em, and calls 
'em "Men of England," and "Fellow-countrymen," as if he was fond of 
'em and thanked 'em for coming.  I can't make it out, but they're 
all mixed up somehow or another with that unfort'nate Bloody Mary, 
and call her name out till they're hoarse.  They're all Protestants 
too--every man and boy among 'em: and Protestants are very fond of 
spoons, I find, and silver-plate in general, whenever area-gates is 
left open accidentally.  I wish that was the worst of it, and that 
no more harm might be to come; but if you don't stop these ugly 
customers in time, Mr Gashford (and I know you; you're the man that 
blows the fire), you'll find 'em grow a little bit too strong for 
you.  One of these evenings, when the weather gets warmer and 
Protestants are thirsty, they'll be pulling London down,--and I 
never heard that Bloody Mary went as far as THAT.'

Gashford had vanished long ago, and these remarks had been bestowed 
on empty air.  Not at all discomposed by the discovery, John Grueby 
fixed his hat on, wrongside foremost that he might be unconscious 
of the shadow of the obnoxious cockade, and withdrew to bed; 
shaking his head in a very gloomy and prophetic manner until he 
reached his chamber.



Chapter 36


Gashford, with a smiling face, but still with looks of profound 
deference and humility, betook himself towards his master's room, 
smoothing his hair down as he went, and humming a psalm tune.  As 
he approached Lord George's door, he cleared his throat and hummed 
more vigorously.

There was a remarkable contrast between this man's occupation at 
the moment, and the expression of his countenance, which was 
singularly repulsive and malicious.  His beetling brow almost 
obscured his eyes; his lip was curled contemptuously; his very 
shoulders seemed to sneer in stealthy whisperings with his great 
flapped ears.

'Hush!' he muttered softly, as he peeped in at the chamber-door.  
'He seems to be asleep.  Pray Heaven he is!  Too much watching, too 
much care, too much thought--ah! Lord preserve him for a martyr!  
He is a saint, if ever saint drew breath on this bad earth.'

Placing his light upon a table, he walked on tiptoe to the fire, 
and sitting in a chair before it with his back towards the bed, 
went on communing with himself like one who thought aloud:

'The saviour of his country and his country's religion, the friend 
of his poor countrymen, the enemy of the proud and harsh; beloved 
of the rejected and oppressed, adored by forty thousand bold and 
loyal English hearts--what happy slumbers his should be!'  And here 
he sighed, and warmed his hands, and shook his head as men do when 
their hearts are full, and heaved another sigh, and warmed his 
hands again.

'Why, Gashford?' said Lord George, who was lying broad awake, upon 
his side, and had been staring at him from his entrance.

'My--my lord,' said Gashford, starting and looking round as though 
in great surprise.  'I have disturbed you!'

'I have not been sleeping.'

'Not sleeping!' he repeated, with assumed confusion.  'What can I 
say for having in your presence given utterance to thoughts--but 
they were sincere--they were sincere!' exclaimed the secretary, 
drawing his sleeve in a hasty way across his eyes; 'and why should 
I regret your having heard them?'

'Gashford,' said the poor lord, stretching out his hand with 
manifest emotion.  'Do not regret it.  You love me well, I know--
too well.  I don't deserve such homage.'

Gashford made no reply, but grasped the hand and pressed it to his 
lips.  Then rising, and taking from the trunk a little desk, he 
placed it on a table near the fire, unlocked it with a key he 
carried in his pocket, sat down before it, took out a pen, and, 
before dipping it in the inkstand, sucked it--to compose the 
fashion of his mouth perhaps, on which a smile was hovering yet.

'How do our numbers stand since last enrolling-night?' inquired 
Lord George.  'Are we really forty thousand strong, or do we still 
speak in round numbers when we take the Association at that amount?'

'Our total now exceeds that number by a score and three,' Gashford 
replied, casting his eyes upon his papers.

'The funds?'

'Not VERY improving; but there is some manna in the wilderness, my 
lord.  Hem!  On Friday night the widows' mites dropped in.  "Forty 
scavengers, three and fourpence.  An aged pew-opener of St Martin's 
parish, sixpence.  A bell-ringer of the established church, 
sixpence.  A Protestant infant, newly born, one halfpenny.  The 
United Link Boys, three shillings--one bad.  The anti-popish 
prisoners in Newgate, five and fourpence.  A friend in Bedlam, 
half-a-crown.  Dennis the hangman, one shilling."'

'That Dennis,' said his lordship, 'is an earnest man.  I marked him 
in the crowd in Welbeck Street, last Friday.'

'A good man,' rejoined the secretary, 'a staunch, sincere, and 
truly zealous man.'

'He should be encouraged,' said Lord George.  'Make a note of 
Dennis.  I'll talk with him.'

Gashford obeyed, and went on reading from his list:

'"The Friends of Reason, half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Liberty, 
half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Peace, half-a-guinea.  The Friends 
of Charity, half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Mercy, half-a-guinea.  
The Associated Rememberers of Bloody Mary, half-a-guinea.  The 
United Bulldogs, half-a-guinea."'

'The United Bulldogs,' said Lord George, biting his nails most 
horribly, 'are a new society, are they not?'

'Formerly the 'Prentice Knights, my lord.  The indentures of the 
old members expiring by degrees, they changed their name, it seems, 
though they still have 'prentices among them, as well as workmen.'

'What is their president's name?' inquired Lord George.

'President,' said Gashford, reading, 'Mr Simon Tappertit.'

'I remember him.  The little man, who sometimes brings an elderly 
sister to our meetings, and sometimes another female too, who is 
conscientious, I have no doubt, but not well-favoured?'

'The very same, my lord.'

'Tappertit is an earnest man,' said Lord George, thoughtfully.  
'Eh, Gashford?'

'One of the foremost among them all, my lord.  He snuffs the battle 
from afar, like the war-horse.  He throws his hat up in the street 
as if he were inspired, and makes most stirring speeches from the 
shoulders of his friends.'

'Make a note of Tappertit,' said Lord George Gordon.  'We may 
advance him to a place of trust.'

'That,' rejoined the secretary, doing as he was told, 'is all--
except Mrs Varden's box (fourteenth time of opening), seven 
shillings and sixpence in silver and copper, and half-a-guinea in 
gold; and Miggs (being the saving of a quarter's wages), one-and-
threepence.'

'Miggs,' said Lord George.  'Is that a man?'

'The name is entered on the list as a woman,' replied the 
secretary.  'I think she is the tall spare female of whom you spoke 
just now, my lord, as not being well-favoured, who sometimes comes 
to hear the speeches--along with Tappertit and Mrs Varden.'

'Mrs Varden is the elderly lady then, is she?'

The secretary nodded, and rubbed the bridge of his nose with the 
feather of his pen.

'She is a zealous sister,' said Lord George.  'Her collection goes 
on prosperously, and is pursued with fervour.  Has her husband 
joined?'

'A malignant,' returned the secretary, folding up his papers.  
'Unworthy such a wife.  He remains in outer darkness and steadily 
refuses.'

'The consequences be upon his own head!--Gashford!'

'My lord!'

'You don't think,' he turned restlessly in his bed as he spoke, 
'these people will desert me, when the hour arrives?  I have spoken 
boldly for them, ventured much, suppressed nothing.  They'll not 
fall off, will they?'

'No fear of that, my lord,' said Gashford, with a meaning look, 
which was rather the involuntary expression of his own thoughts 
than intended as any confirmation of his words, for the other's 
face was turned away.  'Be sure there is no fear of that.'

'Nor,' he said with a more restless motion than before, 'of their--
but they CAN sustain no harm from leaguing for this purpose.  Right 
is on our side, though Might may be against us.  You feel as sure 
of that as I--honestly, you do?'

The secretary was beginning with 'You do not doubt,' when the other 
interrupted him, and impatiently rejoined:

'Doubt.  No.  Who says I doubt?  If I doubted, should I cast away 
relatives, friends, everything, for this unhappy country's sake; 
this unhappy country,' he cried, springing up in bed, after 
repeating the phrase 'unhappy country's sake' to himself, at least 
a dozen times, 'forsaken of God and man, delivered over to a 
dangerous confederacy of Popish powers; the prey of corruption, 
idolatry, and despotism!  Who says I doubt?  Am I called, and 
chosen, and faithful?  Tell me.  Am I, or am I not?'

'To God, the country, and yourself,' cried Gashford.

'I am.  I will be.  I say again, I will be: to the block.  Who says 
as much!  Do you?  Does any man alive?'

The secretary drooped his head with an expression of perfect 
acquiescence in anything that had been said or might be; and Lord 
George gradually sinking down upon his pillow, fell asleep.

Although there was something very ludicrous in his vehement manner, 
taken in conjunction with his meagre aspect and ungraceful 
presence, it would scarcely have provoked a smile in any man of 
kindly feeling; or even if it had, he would have felt sorry and 
almost angry with himself next moment, for yielding to the impulse.  
This lord was sincere in his violence and in his wavering.  A 
nature prone to false enthusiasm, and the vanity of being a leader, 
were the worst qualities apparent in his composition.  All the rest 
was weakness--sheer weakness; and it is the unhappy lot of 
thoroughly weak men, that their very sympathies, affections, 
confidences--all the qualities which in better constituted minds 
are virtues--dwindle into foibles, or turn into downright vices.

Gashford, with many a sly look towards the bed, sat chuckling at 
his master's folly, until his deep and heavy breathing warned him 
that he might retire.  Locking his desk, and replacing it within 
the trunk (but not before he had taken from a secret lining two 
printed handbills), he cautiously withdrew; looking back, as he 
went, at the pale face of the slumbering man, above whose head the 
dusty plumes that crowned the Maypole couch, waved drearily and 
sadly as though it were a bier.

Stopping on the staircase to listen that all was quiet, and to take 
off his shoes lest his footsteps should alarm any light sleeper who 
might be near at hand, he descended to the ground floor, and thrust 
one of his bills beneath the great door of the house.  That done, 
he crept softly back to his own chamber, and from the window let 
another fall--carefully wrapt round a stone to save it from the 
wind--into the yard below.

They were addressed on the back 'To every Protestant into whose 
hands this shall come,' and bore within what follows:

'Men and Brethren.  Whoever shall find this letter, will take it as 
a warning to join, without delay, the friends of Lord George 
Gordon.  There are great events at hand; and the times are 
dangerous and troubled.  Read this carefully, keep it clean, and 
drop it somewhere else.  For King and Country.  Union.'

'More seed, more seed,' said Gashford as he closed the window.  
'When will the harvest come!'



Chapter 37


To surround anything, however monstrous or ridiculous, with an air 
of mystery, is to invest it with a secret charm, and power of 
attraction which to the crowd is irresistible.  False priests, 
false prophets, false doctors, false patriots, false prodigies of 
every kind, veiling their proceedings in mystery, have always 
addressed themselves at an immense advantage to the popular 
credulity, and have been, perhaps, more indebted to that resource 
in gaining and keeping for a time the upper hand of Truth and 
Common Sense, than to any half-dozen items in the whole catalogue 
of imposture.  Curiosity is, and has been from the creation of the 
world, a master-passion.  To awaken it, to gratify it by slight 
degrees, and yet leave something always in suspense, is to 
establish the surest hold that can be had, in wrong, on the 
unthinking portion of mankind.

If a man had stood on London Bridge, calling till he was hoarse, 
upon the passers-by, to join with Lord George Gordon, although for 
an object which no man understood, and which in that very incident 
had a charm of its own,--the probability is, that he might have 
influenced a score of people in a month.  If all zealous 
Protestants had been publicly urged to join an association for the 
avowed purpose of singing a hymn or two occasionally, and hearing 
some indifferent speeches made, and ultimately of petitioning 
Parliament not to pass an act for abolishing the penal laws against 
Roman Catholic priests, the penalty of perpetual imprisonment 
denounced against those who educated children in that persuasion, 
and the disqualification of all members of the Romish church to 
inherit real property in the United Kingdom by right of purchase or 
descent,--matters so far removed from the business and bosoms of 
the mass, might perhaps have called together a hundred people.  But 
when vague rumours got abroad, that in this Protestant association 
a secret power was mustering against the government for undefined 
and mighty purposes; when the air was filled with whispers of a 
confederacy among the Popish powers to degrade and enslave England, 
establish an inquisition in London, and turn the pens of Smithfield 
market into stakes and cauldrons; when terrors and alarms which no 
man understood were perpetually broached, both in and out of 
Parliament, by one enthusiast who did not understand himself, and 
bygone bugbears which had lain quietly in their graves for 
centuries, were raised again to haunt the ignorant and credulous; 
when all this was done, as it were, in the dark, and secret 
invitations to join the Great Protestant Association in defence of 
religion, life, and liberty, were dropped in the public ways, 
thrust under the house-doors, tossed in at windows, and pressed 
into the hands of those who trod the streets by night; when they 
glared from every wall, and shone on every post and pillar, so that 
stocks and stones appeared infected with the common fear, urging 
all men to join together blindfold in resistance of they knew not 
what, they knew not why;--then the mania spread indeed, and the 
body, still increasing every day, grew forty thousand strong.

So said, at least, in this month of March, 1780, Lord George 
Gordon, the Association's president.  Whether it was the fact or 
otherwise, few men knew or cared to ascertain.  It had never made 
any public demonstration; had scarcely ever been heard of, save 
through him; had never been seen; and was supposed by many to be 
the mere creature of his disordered brain.  He was accustomed to 
talk largely about numbers of men--stimulated, as it was inferred, 
by certain successful disturbances, arising out of the same 
subject, which had occurred in Scotland in the previous year; was 
looked upon as a cracked-brained member of the lower house, who 
attacked all parties and sided with none, and was very little 
regarded.  It was known that there was discontent abroad--there 
always is; he had been accustomed to address the people by placard, 
speech, and pamphlet, upon other questions; nothing had come, in 
England, of his past exertions, and nothing was apprehended from 
his present.  Just as he has come upon the reader, he had come, 
from time to time, upon the public, and been forgotten in a day; as 
suddenly as he appears in these pages, after a blank of five long 
years, did he and his proceedings begin to force themselves, about 
this period, upon the notice of thousands of people, who had 
mingled in active life during the whole interval, and who, without 
being deaf or blind to passing events, had scarcely ever thought of 
him before.

'My lord,' said Gashford in his ear, as he drew the curtains of his 
bed betimes; 'my lord!'

'Yes--who's that?  What is it?'

'The clock has struck nine,' returned the secretary, with meekly 
folded hands.  'You have slept well?  I hope you have slept well?  
If my prayers are heard, you are refreshed indeed.'

'To say the truth, I have slept so soundly,' said Lord George, 
rubbing his eyes and looking round the room, 'that I don't remember 
quite--what place is this?'

'My lord!' cried Gashford, with a smile.

'Oh!' returned his superior.  'Yes.  You're not a Jew then?'

'A Jew!' exclaimed the pious secretary, recoiling.

'I dreamed that we were Jews, Gashford.  You and I--both of us--
Jews with long beards.'

'Heaven forbid, my lord!  We might as well be Papists.'

'I suppose we might,' returned the other, very quickly.  'Eh?  You 
really think so, Gashford?'

'Surely I do,' the secretary cried, with looks of great surprise.

'Humph!' he muttered.  'Yes, that seems reasonable.'

'I hope my lord--' the secretary began.

'Hope!' he echoed, interrupting him.  'Why do you say, you hope?  
There's no harm in thinking of such things.'

'Not in dreams,' returned the Secretary.

'In dreams!  No, nor waking either.'

--'"Called, and chosen, and faithful,"' said Gashford, taking up 
Lord George's watch which lay upon a chair, and seeming to read the 
inscription on the seal, abstractedly.

It was the slightest action possible, not obtruded on his notice, 
and apparently the result of a moment's absence of mind, not worth 
remark.  But as the words were uttered, Lord George, who had been 
going on impetuously, stopped short, reddened, and was silent.  
Apparently quite unconscious of this change in his demeanour, the 
wily Secretary stepped a little apart, under pretence of pulling up 
the window-blind, and returning when the other had had time to 
recover, said:

'The holy cause goes bravely on, my lord.  I was not idle, even 
last night.  I dropped two of the handbills before I went to bed, 
and both are gone this morning.  Nobody in the house has mentioned 
the circumstance of finding them, though I have been downstairs 
full half-an-hour.  One or two recruits will be their first fruit, 
I predict; and who shall say how many more, with Heaven's blessing 
on your inspired exertions!'

'It was a famous device in the beginning,' replied Lord George; 'an 
excellent device, and did good service in Scotland.  It was quite 
worthy of you.  You remind me not to be a sluggard, Gashford, when 
the vineyard is menaced with destruction, and may be trodden down 
by Papist feet.  Let the horses be saddled in half-an-hour.  We 
must be up and doing!'

He said this with a heightened colour, and in a tone of such 
enthusiasm, that the secretary deemed all further prompting 
needless, and withdrew.

--'Dreamed he was a Jew,' he said thoughtfully, as he closed the 
bedroom door.  'He may come to that before he dies.  It's like 
enough.  Well!  After a time, and provided I lost nothing by it, I 
don't see why that religion shouldn't suit me as well as any 
other.  There are rich men among the Jews; shaving is very 
troublesome;--yes, it would suit me well enough.  For the present, 
though, we must be Christian to the core.  Our prophetic motto will 
suit all creeds in their turn, that's a comfort.'  Reflecting on 
this source of consolation, he reached the sitting-room, and rang 
the bell for breakfast.

Lord George was quickly dressed (for his plain toilet was easily 
made), and as he was no less frugal in his repasts than in his 
Puritan attire, his share of the meal was soon dispatched.  The 
secretary, however, more devoted to the good things of this world, 
or more intent on sustaining his strength and spirits for the sake 
of the Protestant cause, ate and drank to the last minute, and 
required indeed some three or four reminders from John Grueby, 
before he could resolve to tear himself away from Mr Willet's 
plentiful providing.

At length he came downstairs, wiping his greasy mouth, and having 
paid John Willet's bill, climbed into his saddle.  Lord George, who 
had been walking up and down before the house talking to himself 
with earnest gestures, mounted his horse; and returning old John 
Willet's stately bow, as well as the parting salutation of a dozen 
idlers whom the rumour of a live lord being about to leave the 
Maypole had gathered round the porch, they rode away, with stout 
John Grueby in the rear.

If Lord George Gordon had appeared in the eyes of Mr Willet, 
overnight, a nobleman of somewhat quaint and odd exterior, the 
impression was confirmed this morning, and increased a hundredfold.  
Sitting bolt upright upon his bony steed, with his long, straight 
hair, dangling about his face and fluttering in the wind; his limbs 
all angular and rigid, his elbows stuck out on either side 
ungracefully, and his whole frame jogged and shaken at every motion 
of his horse's feet; a more grotesque or more ungainly figure can 
hardly be conceived.  In lieu of whip, he carried in his hand a 
great gold-headed cane, as large as any footman carries in these 
days, and his various modes of holding this unwieldy weapon--now 
upright before his face like the sabre of a horse-soldier, now over 
his shoulder like a musket, now between his finger and thumb, but 
always in some uncouth and awkward fashion--contributed in no small 
degree to the absurdity of his appearance.  Stiff, lank, and 
solemn, dressed in an unusual manner, and ostentatiously 
exhibiting--whether by design or accident--all his peculiarities of 
carriage, gesture, and conduct, all the qualities, natural and 
artificial, in which he differed from other men; he might have 
moved the sternest looker-on to laughter, and fully provoked the 
smiles and whispered jests which greeted his departure from the 
Maypole inn.

Quite unconscious, however, of the effect he produced, he trotted 
on beside his secretary, talking to himself nearly all the way, 
until they came within a mile or two of London, when now and then 
some passenger went by who knew him by sight, and pointed him out 
to some one else, and perhaps stood looking after him, or cried in 
jest or earnest as it might be, 'Hurrah Geordie!  No Popery!'  At 
which he would gravely pull off his hat, and bow.  When they 
reached the town and rode along the streets, these notices became 
more frequent; some laughed, some hissed, some turned their heads 
and smiled, some wondered who he was, some ran along the pavement 
by his side and cheered.  When this happened in a crush of carts 
and chairs and coaches, he would make a dead stop, and pulling off 
his hat, cry, 'Gentlemen, No Popery!' to which the gentlemen would 
respond with lusty voices, and with three times three; and then, on 
he would go again with a score or so of the raggedest, following at 
his horse's heels, and shouting till their throats were parched.

The old ladies too--there were a great many old ladies in the 
streets, and these all knew him.  Some of them--not those of the 
highest rank, but such as sold fruit from baskets and carried 
burdens--clapped their shrivelled hands, and raised a weazen, 
piping, shrill 'Hurrah, my lord.'  Others waved their hands or 
handkerchiefs, or shook their fans or parasols, or threw up windows 
and called in haste to those within, to come and see.  All these 
marks of popular esteem, he received with profound gravity and 
respect; bowing very low, and so frequently that his hat was more 
off his head than on; and looking up at the houses as he passed 
along, with the air of one who was making a public entry, and yet 
was not puffed up or proud.

So they rode (to the deep and unspeakable disgust of John Grueby) 
the whole length of Whitechapel, Leadenhall Street, and Cheapside, 
and into St Paul's Churchyard.  Arriving close to the cathedral, he 
halted; spoke to Gashford; and looking upward at its lofty dome, 
shook his head, as though he said, 'The Church in Danger!'  Then to 
be sure, the bystanders stretched their throats indeed; and he went 
on again with mighty acclamations from the mob, and lower bows than 
ever.

So along the Strand, up Swallow Street, into the Oxford Road, and 
thence to his house in Welbeck Street, near Cavendish Square, 
whither he was attended by a few dozen idlers; of whom he took 
leave on the steps with this brief parting, 'Gentlemen, No Popery.  
Good day.  God bless you.'  This being rather a shorter address 
than they expected, was received with some displeasure, and cries 
of 'A speech! a speech!' which might have been complied with, but 
that John Grueby, making a mad charge upon them with all three 
horses, on his way to the stables, caused them to disperse into the 
adjoining fields, where they presently fell to pitch and toss, 
chuck-farthing, odd or even, dog-fighting, and other Protestant 
recreations.

In the afternoon Lord George came forth again, dressed in a black 
velvet coat, and trousers and waistcoat of the Gordon plaid, all of 
the same Quaker cut; and in this costume, which made him look a 
dozen times more strange and singular than before, went down on 
foot to Westminster.  Gashford, meanwhile, bestirred himself in 
business matters; with which he was still engaged when, shortly 
after dusk, John Grueby entered and announced a visitor.

'Let him come in,' said Gashford.

'Here! come in!' growled John to somebody without; 'You're a 
Protestant, an't you?'

'I should think so,' replied a deep, gruff voice.

'You've the looks of it,' said John Grueby.  'I'd have known you 
for one, anywhere.'  With which remark he gave the visitor 
admission, retired, and shut the door.

The man who now confronted Gashford, was a squat, thickset 
personage, with a low, retreating forehead, a coarse shock head of 
hair, and eyes so small and near together, that his broken nose 
alone seemed to prevent their meeting and fusing into one of the 
usual size.  A dingy handkerchief twisted like a cord about his 
neck, left its great veins exposed to view, and they were swollen 
and starting, as though with gulping down strong passions, malice, 
and ill-will.  His dress was of threadbare velveteen--a faded, 
rusty, whitened black, like the ashes of a pipe or a coal fire 
after a day's extinction; discoloured with the soils of many a 
stale debauch, and reeking yet with pot-house odours.  In lieu of 
buckles at his knees, he wore unequal loops of packthread; and in 
his grimy hands he held a knotted stick, the knob of which was 
carved into a rough likeness of his own vile face.  Such was the 
visitor who doffed his three-cornered hat in Gashford's presence, 
and waited, leering, for his notice.

'Ah! Dennis!' cried the secretary.  'Sit down.'

'I see my lord down yonder--' cried the man, with a jerk of his 
thumb towards the quarter that he spoke of, 'and he says to me, 
says my lord, "If you've nothing to do, Dennis, go up to my house 
and talk with Muster Gashford."  Of course I'd nothing to do, you 
know.  These an't my working hours.  Ha ha!  I was a-taking the air 
when I see my lord, that's what I was doing.  I takes the air by 
night, as the howls does, Muster Gashford.'

And sometimes in the day-time, eh?' said the secretary--'when you 
go out in state, you know.'

'Ha ha!' roared the fellow, smiting his leg; 'for a gentleman as 
'ull say a pleasant thing in a pleasant way, give me Muster 
Gashford agin' all London and Westminster!  My lord an't a bad 'un 
at that, but he's a fool to you.  Ah to be sure,--when I go out in 
state.'

'And have your carriage,' said the secretary; 'and your chaplain, 
eh? and all the rest of it?'

'You'll be the death of me,' cried Dennis, with another roar, 'you 
will.  But what's in the wind now, Muster Gashford,' he asked 
hoarsely, 'Eh?  Are we to be under orders to pull down one of them 
Popish chapels--or what?'

'Hush!' said the secretary, suffering the faintest smile to play 
upon his face.  'Hush!  God bless me, Dennis!  We associate, you 
know, for strictly peaceable and lawful purposes.'

'I know, bless you,' returned the man, thrusting his tongue into 
his cheek; 'I entered a' purpose, didn't I!'

'No doubt,' said Gashford, smiling as before.  And when he said so, 
Dennis roared again, and smote his leg still harder, and falling 
into fits of laughter, wiped his eyes with the corner of his 
neckerchief, and cried, 'Muster Gashford agin' all England hollow!'

'Lord George and I were talking of you last night,' said Gashford, 
after a pause.  'He says you are a very earnest fellow.'

'So I am,' returned the hangman.

'And that you truly hate the Papists.'

'So I do,' and he confirmed it with a good round oath.  'Lookye 
here, Muster Gashford,' said the fellow, laying his hat and stick 
upon the floor, and slowly beating the palm of one hand with the 
fingers of the other; 'Ob-serve.  I'm a constitutional officer that 
works for my living, and does my work creditable.  Do I, or do I 
not?'

'Unquestionably.'

'Very good.  Stop a minute.  My work, is sound, Protestant, 
constitutional, English work.  Is it, or is it not?'

'No man alive can doubt it.'

'Nor dead neither.  Parliament says this here--says Parliament, "If 
any man, woman, or child, does anything which goes again a certain 
number of our acts"--how many hanging laws may there be at this 
present time, Muster Gashford?  Fifty?'

'I don't exactly know how many,' replied Gashford, leaning back in 
his chair and yawning; 'a great number though.'

'Well, say fifty.  Parliament says, "If any man, woman, or child, 
does anything again any one of them fifty acts, that man, woman, or 
child, shall be worked off by Dennis."  George the Third steps in 
when they number very strong at the end of a sessions, and says, 
"These are too many for Dennis.  I'll have half for myself and 
Dennis shall have half for himself;" and sometimes he throws me in 
one over that I don't expect, as he did three year ago, when I got 
Mary Jones, a young woman of nineteen who come up to Tyburn with a 
infant at her breast, and was worked off for taking a piece of 
cloth off the counter of a shop in Ludgate Hill, and putting it 
down again when the shopman see her; and who had never done any 
harm before, and only tried to do that, in consequence of her 
husband having been pressed three weeks previous, and she being 
left to beg, with two young children--as was proved upon the trial.  
Ha ha!--Well!  That being the law and the practice of England, is 
the glory of England, an't it, Muster Gashford?'

'Certainly,' said the secretary.

'And in times to come,' pursued the hangman, 'if our grandsons 
should think of their grandfathers' times, and find these things 
altered, they'll say, "Those were days indeed, and we've been going 
down hill ever since."  Won't they, Muster Gashford?'

'I have no doubt they will,' said the secretary.

'Well then, look here,' said the hangman.  'If these Papists gets 
into power, and begins to boil and roast instead of hang, what 
becomes of my work!  If they touch my work that's a part of so many 
laws, what becomes of the laws in general, what becomes of the 
religion, what becomes of the country!--Did you ever go to church, 
Muster Gashford?'

'Ever!' repeated the secretary with some indignation; 'of course.'

'Well,' said the ruffian, 'I've been once--twice, counting the time 
I was christened--and when I heard the Parliament prayed for, and 
thought how many new hanging laws they made every sessions, I 
considered that I was prayed for.  Now mind, Muster Gashford,' said 
the fellow, taking up his stick and shaking it with a ferocious 
air, 'I mustn't have my Protestant work touched, nor this here 
Protestant state of things altered in no degree, if I can help it; 
I mustn't have no Papists interfering with me, unless they come to 
be worked off in course of law; I mustn't have no biling, no 
roasting, no frying--nothing but hanging.  My lord may well call 
me an earnest fellow.  In support of the great Protestant principle 
of having plenty of that, I'll,' and here he beat his club upon the 
ground, 'burn, fight, kill--do anything you bid me, so that it's 
bold and devilish--though the end of it was, that I got hung 
myself.--There, Muster Gashford!'

He appropriately followed up this frequent prostitution of a noble 
word to the vilest purposes, by pouring out in a kind of ecstasy at 
least a score of most tremendous oaths; then wiped his heated face 
upon his neckerchief, and cried, 'No Popery!  I'm a religious man, 
by G--!'

Gashford had leant back in his chair, regarding him with eyes so 
sunken, and so shadowed by his heavy brows, that for aught the 
hangman saw of them, he might have been stone blind.  He remained 
smiling in silence for a short time longer, and then said, slowly 
and distinctly:

'You are indeed an earnest fellow, Dennis--a most valuable fellow--
the staunchest man I know of in our ranks.  But you must calm 
yourself; you must be peaceful, lawful, mild as any lamb.  I am 
sure you will be though.'

'Ay, ay, we shall see, Muster Gashford, we shall see.  You won't 
have to complain of me,' returned the other, shaking his head.

'I am sure I shall not,' said the secretary in the same mild tone, 
and with the same emphasis.  'We shall have, we think, about next 
month, or May, when this Papist relief bill comes before the house, 
to convene our whole body for the first time.  My lord has thoughts 
of our walking in procession through the streets--just as an 
innocent display of strength--and accompanying our petition down to 
the door of the House of Commons.'

'The sooner the better,' said Dennis, with another oath.

'We shall have to draw up in divisions, our numbers being so large; 
and, I believe I may venture to say,' resumed Gashford, affecting 
not to hear the interruption, 'though I have no direct instructions 
to that effect--that Lord George has thought of you as an excellent 
leader for one of these parties.  I have no doubt you would be an 
admirable one.'

'Try me,' said the fellow, with an ugly wink.

'You would be cool, I know,' pursued the secretary, still smiling, 
and still managing his eyes so that he could watch him closely, and 
really not be seen in turn, 'obedient to orders, and perfectly 
temperate.  You would lead your party into no danger, I am certain.'

'I'd lead them, Muster Gashford,'--the hangman was beginning in a 
reckless way, when Gashford started forward, laid his finger on his 
lips, and feigned to write, just as the door was opened by John 
Grueby.

'Oh!' said John, looking in; 'here's another Protestant.'

'Some other room, John,' cried Gashford in his blandest voice.  'I 
am engaged just now.'

But John had brought this new visitor to the door, and he walked in 
unbidden, as the words were uttered; giving to view the form and 
features, rough attire, and reckless air, of Hugh.



Chapter 38


The secretary put his hand before his eyes to shade them from the 
glare of the lamp, and for some moments looked at Hugh with a 
frowning brow, as if he remembered to have seen him lately, but 
could not call to mind where, or on what occasion.  His uncertainty 
was very brief, for before Hugh had spoken a word, he said, as his 
countenance cleared up:

'Ay, ay, I recollect.  It's quite right, John, you needn't wait.  
Don't go, Dennis.'

'Your servant, master,' said Hugh, as Grueby disappeared.

'Yours, friend,' returned the secretary in his smoothest manner.  
'What brings YOU here?  We left nothing behind us, I hope?'

Hugh gave a short laugh, and thrusting his hand into his breast, 
produced one of the handbills, soiled and dirty from lying out of 
doors all night, which he laid upon the secretary's desk after 
flattening it upon his knee, and smoothing out the wrinkles with 
his heavy palm.

'Nothing but that, master.  It fell into good hands, you see.'

'What is this!' said Gashford, turning it over with an air of 
perfectly natural surprise.  'Where did you get it from, my good 
fellow; what does it mean?  I don't understand this at all.'

A little disconcerted by this reception, Hugh looked from the 
secretary to Dennis, who had risen and was standing at the table 
too, observing the stranger by stealth, and seeming to derive the 
utmost satisfaction from his manners and appearance.  Considering 
himself silently appealed to by this action, Mr Dennis shook his 
head thrice, as if to say of Gashford, 'No.  He don't know anything 
at all about it.  I know he don't.  I'll take my oath he don't;' 
and hiding his profile from Hugh with one long end of his frowzy 
neckerchief, nodded and chuckled behind this screen in extreme 
approval of the secretary's proceedings.

'It tells the man that finds it, to come here, don't it?' asked 
Hugh.  'I'm no scholar, myself, but I showed it to a friend, and he 
said it did.'

'It certainly does,' said Gashford, opening his eyes to their 
utmost width; 'really this is the most remarkable circumstance I 
have ever known.  How did you come by this piece of paper, my good 
friend?'

'Muster Gashford,' wheezed the hangman under his breath, 'agin' all 
Newgate!'

Whether Hugh heard him, or saw by his manner that he was being 
played upon, or perceived the secretary's drift of himself, he came 
in his blunt way to the point at once.

'Here!' he said, stretching out his hand and taking it back; 'never 
mind the bill, or what it says, or what it don't say.  You don't 
know anything about it, master,--no more do I,--no more does he,' 
glancing at Dennis.  'None of us know what it means, or where it 
comes from: there's an end of that.  Now I want to make one against 
the Catholics, I'm a No-Popery man, and ready to be sworn in.  
That's what I've come here for.'

'Put him down on the roll, Muster Gashford,' said Dennis 
approvingly.  'That's the way to go to work--right to the end at 
once, and no palaver.'

'What's the use of shooting wide of the mark, eh, old boy!' cried 
Hugh.

'My sentiments all over!' rejoined the hangman.  'This is the sort 
of chap for my division, Muster Gashford.  Down with him, sir.  Put 
him on the roll.  I'd stand godfather to him, if he was to be 
christened in a bonfire, made of the ruins of the Bank of England.'

With these and other expressions of confidence of the like 
flattering kind, Mr Dennis gave him a hearty slap on the back, 
which Hugh was not slow to return.

'No Popery, brother!' cried the hangman.

'No Property, brother!' responded Hugh.

'Popery, Popery,' said the secretary with his usual mildness.

'It's all the same!' cried Dennis.  'It's all right.  Down with 
him, Muster Gashford.  Down with everybody, down with everything!  
Hurrah for the Protestant religion!  That's the time of day, 
Muster Gashford!'

The secretary regarded them both with a very favourable expression 
of countenance, while they gave loose to these and other 
demonstrations of their patriotic purpose; and was about to make 
some remark aloud, when Dennis, stepping up to him, and shading his 
mouth with his hand, said, in a hoarse whisper, as he nudged him 
with his elbow:

'Don't split upon a constitutional officer's profession, Muster 
Gashford.  There are popular prejudices, you know, and he mightn't 
like it.  Wait till he comes to be more intimate with me.  He's a 
fine-built chap, an't he?'

'A powerful fellow indeed!'

'Did you ever, Muster Gashford,' whispered Dennis, with a horrible 
kind of admiration, such as that with which a cannibal might regard 
his intimate friend, when hungry,--'did you ever--and here he drew 
still closer to his ear, and fenced his mouth with both his open 
bands--'see such a throat as his?  Do but cast your eye upon it.  
There's a neck for stretching, Muster Gashford!'

The secretary assented to this proposition with the best grace he 
could assume--it is difficult to feign a true professional relish: 
which is eccentric sometimes--and after asking the candidate a few 
unimportant questions, proceeded to enrol him a member of the Great 
Protestant Association of England.  If anything could have exceeded 
Mr Dennis's joy on the happy conclusion of this ceremony, it would 
have been the rapture with which he received the announcement that 
the new member could neither read nor write: those two arts being 
(as Mr Dennis swore) the greatest possible curse a civilised 
community could know, and militating more against the professional 
emoluments and usefulness of the great constitutional office he had 
the honour to hold, than any adverse circumstances that could 
present themselves to his imagination.

The enrolment being completed, and Hugh having been informed by 
Gashford, in his peculiar manner, of the peaceful and strictly 
lawful objects contemplated by the body to which he now belonged--
during which recital Mr Dennis nudged him very much with his elbow, 
and made divers remarkable faces--the secretary gave them both to 
understand that he desired to be alone.  Therefore they took their 
leaves without delay, and came out of the house together.

'Are you walking, brother?' said Dennis.

'Ay!' returned Hugh.  'Where you will.'

'That's social,' said his new friend.  'Which way shall we take?  
Shall we go and have a look at doors that we shall make a pretty 
good clattering at, before long--eh, brother?'

Hugh answering in the affirmative, they went slowly down to 
Westminster, where both houses of Parliament were then sitting.  
Mingling in the crowd of carriages, horses, servants, chairmen, 
link-boys, porters, and idlers of all kinds, they lounged about; 
while Hugh's new friend pointed out to him significantly the weak 
parts of the building, how easy it was to get into the lobby, and 
so to the very door of the House of Commons; and how plainly, when 
they marched down there in grand array, their roars and shouts 
would be heard by the members inside; with a great deal more to the 
same purpose, all of which Hugh received with manifest delight.

He told him, too, who some of the Lords and Commons were, by name, 
as they came in and out; whether they were friendly to the Papists 
or otherwise; and bade him take notice of their liveries and 
equipages, that he might be sure of them, in case of need.  
Sometimes he drew him close to the windows of a passing carriage, 
that he might see its master's face by the light of the lamps; and, 
both in respect of people and localities, he showed so much 
acquaintance with everything around, that it was plain he had often 
studied there before; as indeed, when they grew a little more 
confidential, he confessed he had.

Perhaps the most striking part of all this was, the number of 
people--never in groups of more than two or three together--who 
seemed to be skulking about the crowd for the same purpose.  To the 
greater part of these, a slight nod or a look from Hugh's companion 
was sufficient greeting; but, now and then, some man would come and 
stand beside him in the throng, and, without turning his head or 
appearing to communicate with him, would say a word or two in a low 
voice, which he would answer in the same cautious manner.  Then 
they would part, like strangers.  Some of these men often 
reappeared again unexpectedly in the crowd close to Hugh, and, as 
they passed by, pressed his hand, or looked him sternly in the 
face; but they never spoke to him, nor he to them; no, not a word.

It was remarkable, too, that whenever they happened to stand where 
there was any press of people, and Hugh chanced to be looking 
downward, he was sure to see an arm stretched out--under his own 
perhaps, or perhaps across him--which thrust some paper into the 
hand or pocket of a bystander, and was so suddenly withdrawn that 
it was impossible to tell from whom it came; nor could he see in 
any face, on glancing quickly round, the least confusion or 
surprise.  They often trod upon a paper like the one he carried in 
his breast, but his companion whispered him not to touch it or to 
take it up,--not even to look towards it,--so there they let them 
lie, and passed on.

When they had paraded the street and all the avenues of the 
building in this manner for near two hours, they turned away, and 
his friend asked him what he thought of what he had seen, and 
whether he was prepared for a good hot piece of work if it should 
come to that.  The hotter the better,' said Hugh, 'I'm prepared for 
anything.'--'So am I,' said his friend, 'and so are many of us; 
and they shook hands upon it with a great oath, and with many 
terrible imprecations on the Papists.

As they were thirsty by this time, Dennis proposed that they should 
repair together to The Boot, where there was good company and 
strong liquor.  Hugh yielding a ready assent, they bent their steps 
that way with no loss of time.

This Boot was a lone house of public entertainment, situated in the 
fields at the back of the Foundling Hospital; a very solitary spot 
at that period, and quite deserted after dark.  The tavern stood at 
some distance from any high road, and was approachable only by a 
dark and narrow lane; so that Hugh was much surprised to find 
several people drinking there, and great merriment going on.  He 
was still more surprised to find among them almost every face that 
had caught his attention in the crowd; but his companion having 
whispered him outside the door, that it was not considered good 
manners at The Boot to appear at all curious about the company, he 
kept his own counsel, and made no show of recognition.

Before putting his lips to the liquor which was brought for them, 
Dennis drank in a loud voice the health of Lord George Gordon, 
President of the Great Protestant Association; which toast Hugh 
pledged likewise, with corresponding enthusiasm.  A fiddler who was 
present, and who appeared to act as the appointed minstrel of the 
company, forthwith struck up a Scotch reel; and that in tones so 
invigorating, that Hugh and his friend (who had both been drinking 
before) rose from their seats as by previous concert, and, to the 
great admiration of the assembled guests, performed an 
extemporaneous No-Popery Dance.



Chapter 39


The applause which the performance of Hugh and his new friend 
elicited from the company at The Boot, had not yet subsided, and 
the two dancers were still panting from their exertions, which had 
been of a rather extreme and violent character, when the party was 
reinforced by the arrival of some more guests, who, being a 
detachment of United Bulldogs, were received with very flattering 
marks of distinction and respect.

The leader of this small party--for, including himself, they were 
but three in number--was our old acquaintance, Mr Tappertit, who 
seemed, physically speaking, to have grown smaller with years 
(particularly as to his legs, which were stupendously little), but 
who, in a moral point of view, in personal dignity and self-esteem, 
had swelled into a giant.  Nor was it by any means difficult for 
the most unobservant person to detect this state of feeling in the 
quondam 'prentice, for it not only proclaimed itself impressively 
and beyond mistake in his majestic walk and kindling eye, but found 
a striking means of revelation in his turned-up nose, which scouted 
all things of earth with deep disdain, and sought communion with 
its kindred skies.

Mr Tappertit, as chief or captain of the Bulldogs, was attended by 
his two lieutenants; one, the tall comrade of his younger life; the 
other, a 'Prentice Knight in days of yore--Mark Gilbert, bound in 
the olden time to Thomas Curzon of the Golden Fleece.  These 
gentlemen, like himself, were now emancipated from their 'prentice 
thraldom, and served as journeymen; but they were, in humble 
emulation of his great example, bold and daring spirits, and 
aspired to a distinguished state in great political events.  Hence 
their connection with the Protestant Association of England, 
sanctioned by the name of Lord George Gordon; and hence their 
present visit to The Boot.

'Gentlemen!' said Mr Tappertit, taking off his hat as a great 
general might in addressing his troops.  'Well met.  My lord does 
me and you the honour to send his compliments per self.'

'You've seen my lord too, have you?' said Dennis.  'I see him this 
afternoon.'

'My duty called me to the Lobby when our shop shut up; and I saw 
him there, sir,' Mr Tappertit replied, as he and his lieutenants 
took their seats.  'How do YOU do?'

'Lively, master, lively,' said the fellow.  'Here's a new brother, 
regularly put down in black and white by Muster Gashford; a credit 
to the cause; one of the stick-at-nothing sort; one arter my own 
heart.  D'ye see him?  Has he got the looks of a man that'll do, do 
you think?' he cried, as he slapped Hugh on the back.

'Looks or no looks,' said Hugh, with a drunken flourish of his arm, 
'I'm the man you want.  I hate the Papists, every one of 'em.  They 
hate me and I hate them.  They do me all the harm they can, and 
I'll do them all the harm I can.  Hurrah!'

'Was there ever,' said Dennis, looking round the room, when the 
echo of his boisterous voice bad died away; 'was there ever such a 
game boy!  Why, I mean to say, brothers, that if Muster Gashford 
had gone a hundred mile and got together fifty men of the common 
run, they wouldn't have been worth this one.'

The greater part of the company implicitly subscribed to this 
opinion, and testified their faith in Hugh by nods and looks of 
great significance.  Mr Tappertit sat and contemplated him for a 
long time in silence, as if he suspended his judgment; then drew a 
little nearer to him, and eyed him over more carefully; then went 
close up to him, and took him apart into a dark corner.

'I say,' he began, with a thoughtful brow, 'haven't I seen you 
before?'

'It's like you may,' said Hugh, in his careless way.  'I don't 
know; shouldn't wonder.'

'No, but it's very easily settled,' returned Sim.  'Look at me.  
Did you ever see ME before?  You wouldn't be likely to forget it, 
you know, if you ever did.  Look at me.  Don't be afraid; I won't 
do you any harm.  Take a good look--steady now.'

The encouraging way in which Mr Tappertit made this request, and 
coupled it with an assurance that he needn't be frightened, amused 
Hugh mightily--so much indeed, that be saw nothing at all of the 
small man before him, through closing his eyes in a fit of hearty 
laughter, which shook his great broad sides until they ached again.

'Come!' said Mr Tappertit, growing a little impatient under this 
disrespectful treatment.  'Do you know me, feller?'

'Not I,' cried Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  Not I!  But I should like to.'

'And yet I'd have wagered a seven-shilling piece," said Mr 
Tappertit, folding his arms, and confronting him with his legs wide 
apart and firmly planted on the ground, 'that you once were hostler 
at the Maypole.'

Hugh opened his eyes on hearing this, and looked at him in great 
surprise.

'--And so you were, too,' said Mr Tappertit, pushing him away with 
a condescending playfulness.  'When did MY eyes ever deceive--
unless it was a young woman!  Don't you know me now?'

'Why it an't--' Hugh faltered.

'An't it?' said Mr Tappertit.  'Are you sure of that?  You remember 
G. Varden, don't you?'

Certainly Hugh did, and he remembered D. Varden too; but that he 
didn't tell him.

'You remember coming down there, before I was out of my time, to 
ask after a vagabond that had bolted off, and left his disconsolate 
father a prey to the bitterest emotions, and all the rest of it--
don't you?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Of course I do!' cried Hugh.  'And I saw you there.'

'Saw me there!' said Mr Tappertit.  'Yes, I should think you did 
see me there.  The place would be troubled to go on without me.  
Don't you remember my thinking you liked the vagabond, and on that 
account going to quarrel with you; and then finding you detested 
him worse than poison, going to drink with you?  Don't you remember 
that?'

'To be sure!' cried Hugh.

'Well! and are you in the same mind now?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes!' roared Hugh.

'You speak like a man,' said Mr Tappertit, 'and I'll shake hands 
with you.'  With these conciliatory expressions he suited the 
action to the word; and Hugh meeting his advances readily, they 
performed the ceremony with a show of great heartiness.

'I find,' said Mr Tappertit, looking round on the assembled guests, 
'that brother What's-his-name and I are old acquaintance.--You 
never heard anything more of that rascal, I suppose, eh?'

'Not a syllable,' replied Hugh.  'I never want to.  I don't believe 
I ever shall.  He's dead long ago, I hope.'

'It's to be hoped, for the sake of mankind in general and the 
happiness of society, that he is,' said Mr Tappertit, rubbing his 
palm upon his legs, and looking at it between whiles.  'Is your 
other hand at all cleaner?  Much the same.  Well, I'll owe you 
another shake.  We'll suppose it done, if you've no objection.'

Hugh laughed again, and with such thorough abandonment to his mad 
humour, that his limbs seemed dislocated, and his whole frame in 
danger of tumbling to pieces; but Mr Tappertit, so far from 
receiving this extreme merriment with any irritation, was pleased 
to regard it with the utmost favour, and even to join in it, so far 
as one of his gravity and station could, with any regard to that 
decency and decorum which men in high places are expected to 
maintain.

Mr Tappertit did not stop here, as many public characters might 
have done, but calling up his brace of lieutenants, introduced Hugh 
to them with high commendation; declaring him to be a man who, at 
such times as those in which they lived, could not be too much 
cherished.  Further, he did him the honour to remark, that he would 
be an acquisition of which even the United Bulldogs might be proud; 
and finding, upon sounding him, that he was quite ready and willing 
to enter the society (for he was not at all particular, and would 
have leagued himself that night with anything, or anybody, for any 
purpose whatsoever), caused the necessary preliminaries to be gone 
into upon the spot.  This tribute to his great merit delighted no 
man more than Mr Dennis, as he himself proclaimed with several rare 
and surprising oaths; and indeed it gave unmingled satisfaction to 
the whole assembly.

'Make anything you like of me!' cried Hugh, flourishing the can he 
had emptied more than once.  'Put me on any duty you please.  I'm 
your man.  I'll do it.  Here's my captain--here's my leader.  Ha ha 
ha!  Let him give me the word of command, and I'll fight the whole 
Parliament House single-handed, or set a lighted torch to the 
King's Throne itself!'  With that, he smote Mr Tappertit on the 
back, with such violence that his little body seemed to shrink into 
a mere nothing; and roared again until the very foundlings near at 
hand were startled in their beds.

In fact, a sense of something whimsical in their companionship 
seemed to have taken entire possession of his rude brain.  The bare 
fact of being patronised by a great man whom he could have crushed 
with one hand, appeared in his eyes so eccentric and humorous, that 
a kind of ferocious merriment gained the mastery over him, and 
quite subdued his brutal nature.  He roared and roared again; 
toasted Mr Tappertit a hundred times; declared himself a Bulldog to 
the core; and vowed to be faithful to him to the last drop of blood 
in his veins.

All these compliments Mr Tappertit received as matters of course--
flattering enough in their way, but entirely attributable to his 
vast superiority.  His dignified self-possession only delighted 
Hugh the more; and in a word, this giant and dwarf struck up a 
friendship which bade fair to be of long continuance, as the one 
held it to be his right to command, and the other considered it an 
exquisite pleasantry to obey.  Nor was Hugh by any means a passive 
follower, who scrupled to act without precise and definite orders; 
for when Mr Tappertit mounted on an empty cask which stood by way 
of rostrum in the room, and volunteered a speech upon the alarming 
crisis then at hand, he placed himself beside the orator, and 
though he grinned from ear to ear at every word he said, threw out 
such expressive hints to scoffers in the management of his cudgel, 
that those who were at first the most disposed to interrupt, became 
remarkably attentive, and were the loudest in their approbation.

It was not all noise and jest, however, at The Boot, nor were the 
whole party listeners to the speech.  There were some men at the 
other end of the room (which was a long, low-roofed chamber) in 
earnest conversation all the time; and when any of this group went 
out, fresh people were sure to come in soon afterwards and sit down 
in their places, as though the others had relieved them on some 
watch or duty; which it was pretty clear they did, for these 
changes took place by the clock, at intervals of half an hour.  
These persons whispered very much among themselves, and kept aloof, 
and often looked round, as jealous of their speech being overheard; 
some two or three among them entered in books what seemed to be 
reports from the others; when they were not thus employed) one of 
them would turn to the newspapers which were strewn upon the table, 
and from the St James's Chronicle, the Herald, Chronicle, or 
Public Advertiser, would read to the rest in a low voice some 
passage having reference to the topic in which they were all so 
deeply interested.  But the great attraction was a pamphlet called 
The Thunderer, which espoused their own opinions, and was supposed 
at that time to emanate directly from the Association.  This was 
always in request; and whether read aloud, to an eager knot of 
listeners, or by some solitary man, was certain to be followed by 
stormy talking and excited looks.

In the midst of all his merriment, and admiration of his captain, 
Hugh was made sensible by these and other tokens, of the presence 
of an air of mystery, akin to that which had so much impressed him 
out of doors.  It was impossible to discard a sense that something 
serious was going on, and that under the noisy revel of the public-
house, there lurked unseen and dangerous matter.  Little affected 
by this, however, he was perfectly satisfied with his quarters and 
would have remained there till morning, but that his conductor rose 
soon after midnight, to go home; Mr Tappertit following his 
example, left him no excuse to stay.  So they all three left the 
house together: roaring a No-Popery song until the fields 
resounded with the dismal noise.

Cheer up, captain!' cried Hugh, when they had roared themselves out 
of breath.  'Another stave!'

Mr Tappertit, nothing loath, began again; and so the three went 
staggering on, arm-in-arm, shouting like madmen, and defying the 
watch with great valour.  Indeed this did not require any unusual 
bravery or boldness, as the watchmen of that time, being selected 
for the office on account of excessive age and extraordinary 
infirmity, had a custom of shutting themselves up tight in their 
boxes on the first symptoms of disturbance, and remaining there 
until they disappeared.  In these proceedings, Mr Dennis, who had a 
gruff voice and lungs of considerable power, distinguished himself 
very much, and acquired great credit with his two companions.

'What a queer fellow you are!' said Mr Tappertit.  'You're so 
precious sly and close.  Why don't you ever tell what trade you're 
of?'

'Answer the captain instantly,' cried Hugh, beating his hat down on 
his head; 'why don't you ever tell what trade you're of?'

'I'm of as gen-teel a calling, brother, as any man in England--as 
light a business as any gentleman could desire.'

'Was you 'prenticed to it?' asked Mr Tappertit.

'No.  Natural genius,' said Mr Dennis.  'No 'prenticing.  It come 
by natur'.  Muster Gashford knows my calling.  Look at that hand of 
mine--many and many a job that hand has done, with a neatness and 
dex-terity, never known afore.  When I look at that hand,' said Mr 
Dennis, shaking it in the air, 'and remember the helegant bits of 
work it has turned off, I feel quite molloncholy to think it should 
ever grow old and feeble.  But sich is life!'

He heaved a deep sigh as he indulged in these reflections, and 
putting his fingers with an absent air on Hugh's throat, and 
particularly under his left ear, as if he were studying the 
anatomical development of that part of his frame, shook his head in 
a despondent manner and actually shed tears.

'You're a kind of artist, I suppose--eh!' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' rejoined Dennis; 'yes--I may call myself a artist--a fancy 
workman--art improves natur'--that's my motto.'

'And what do you call this?' said Mr Tappertit taking his stick out 
of his hand.

'That's my portrait atop,' Dennis replied; 'd'ye think it's like?'

'Why--it's a little too handsome,' said Mr Tappertit.  'Who did it?  
You?'

'I!' repeated Dennis, gazing fondly on his image.  'I wish I had 
the talent.  That was carved by a friend of mine, as is now no 
more.  The very day afore he died, he cut that with his pocket-
knife from memory!  "I'll die game," says my friend, "and my last 
moments shall be dewoted to making Dennis's picter."  That's it.'

'That was a queer fancy, wasn't it?' said Mr Tappertit.

'It WAS a queer fancy,' rejoined the other, breathing on his 
fictitious nose, and polishing it with the cuff of his coat, 'but 
he was a queer subject altogether--a kind of gipsy--one of the 
finest, stand-up men, you ever see.  Ah!  He told me some things 
that would startle you a bit, did that friend of mine, on the 
morning when he died.'

'You were with him at the time, were you?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' he answered with a curious look, 'I was there.  Oh! yes 
certainly, I was there.  He wouldn't have gone off half as 
comfortable without me.  I had been with three or four of his 
family under the same circumstances.  They were all fine fellows.'

'They must have been fond of you,' remarked Mr Tappertit, looking 
at him sideways.

'I don't know that they was exactly fond of me,' said Dennis, with 
a little hesitation, 'but they all had me near 'em when they 
departed.  I come in for their wardrobes too.  This very handkecher 
that you see round my neck, belonged to him that I've been speaking 
of--him as did that likeness.'

Mr Tappertit glanced at the article referred to, and appeared to 
think that the deceased's ideas of dress were of a peculiar and by 
no means an expensive kind.  He made no remark upon the point, 
however, and suffered his mysterious companion to proceed without 
interruption.

'These smalls,' said Dennis, rubbing his legs; 'these very smalls--
they belonged to a friend of mine that's left off sich incumbrances 
for ever: this coat too--I've often walked behind this coat, in the 
street, and wondered whether it would ever come to me: this pair of 
shoes have danced a hornpipe for another man, afore my eyes, full 
half-a-dozen times at least: and as to my hat,' he said, taking it 
off, and whirling it round upon his fist--'Lord! I've seen this hat 
go up Holborn on the box of a hackney-coach--ah, many and many a 
day!'

'You don't mean to say their old wearers are ALL dead, I hope?' 
said Mr Tappertit, falling a little distance from him as he spoke.

'Every one of 'em,' replied Dennis.  'Every man Jack!'

There was something so very ghastly in this circumstance, and it 
appeared to account, in such a very strange and dismal manner, for 
his faded dress--which, in this new aspect, seemed discoloured by 
the earth from graves--that Mr Tappertit abruptly found he was 
going another way, and, stopping short, bade him good night with 
the utmost heartiness.  As they happened to be near the Old Bailey, 
and Mr Dennis knew there were turnkeys in the lodge with whom he 
could pass the night, and discuss professional subjects of common 
interest among them before a rousing fire, and over a social glass, 
he separated from his companions without any great regret, and 
warmly shaking hands with Hugh, and making an early appointment for 
their meeting at The Boot, left them to pursue their road.

'That's a strange sort of man,' said Mr Tappertit, watching the 
hackney-coachman's hat as it went bobbing down the street.  'I 
don't know what to make of him.  Why can't he have his smalls made 
to order, or wear live clothes at any rate?'

'He's a lucky man, captain,' cried Hugh.  'I should like to have 
such friends as his.'

'I hope he don't get 'em to make their wills, and then knock 'em on 
the head,' said Mr Tappertit, musing.  'But come.  The United B.'s 
expect me.  On!--What's the matter?'

'I quite forgot,' said Hugh, who had started at the striking of a 
neighbouring clock.  'I have somebody to see to-night--I must turn 
back directly.  The drinking and singing put it out of my head.  
It's well I remembered it!'

Mr Tappertit looked at him as though he were about to give 
utterance to some very majestic sentiments in reference to this act 
of desertion, but as it was clear, from Hugh's hasty manner, that 
the engagement was one of a pressing nature, he graciously forbore, 
and gave him his permission to depart immediately, which Hugh 
acknowledged with a roar of laughter.

'Good night, captain!' he cried.  'I am yours to the death, 
remember!'

'Farewell!' said Mr Tappertit, waving his hand.  'Be bold and 
vigilant!'

'No Popery, captain!' roared Hugh.

'England in blood first!' cried his desperate leader.  Whereat Hugh 
cheered and laughed, and ran off like a greyhound.

'That man will prove a credit to my corps,' said Simon, turning 
thoughtfully upon his heel.  'And let me see.  In an altered state 
of society--which must ensue if we break out and are victorious--
when the locksmith's child is mine, Miggs must be got rid of 
somehow, or she'll poison the tea-kettle one evening when I'm out.  
He might marry Miggs, if he was drunk enough.  It shall be done.  
I'll make a note of it.'



Chapter 40


Little thinking of the plan for his happy settlement in life which 
had suggested itself to the teeming brain of his provident 
commander, Hugh made no pause until Saint Dunstan's giants struck 
the hour above him, when he worked the handle of a pump which stood 
hard by, with great vigour, and thrusting his head under the spout, 
let the water gush upon him until a little stream ran down from 
every uncombed hair, and he was wet to the waist.  Considerably 
refreshed by this ablution, both in mind and body, and almost 
sobered for the time, he dried himself as he best could; then 
crossed the road, and plied the knocker of the Middle Temple gate.

The night-porter looked through a small grating in the portal with 
a surly eye, and cried 'Halloa!' which greeting Hugh returned in 
kind, and bade him open quickly.

'We don't sell beer here,' cried the man; 'what else do you want?'

'To come in,' Hugh replied, with a kick at the door.

'Where to go?'

'Paper Buildings.'

'Whose chambers?'

'Sir John Chester's.'  Each of which answers, he emphasised with 
another kick.

After a little growling on the other side, the gate was opened, and 
he passed in: undergoing a close inspection from the porter as he 
did so.

'YOU wanting Sir John, at this time of night!' said the man.

'Ay!' said Hugh.  'I!  What of that?'

'Why, I must go with you and see that you do, for I don't believe 
it.'

'Come along then.'

Eyeing him with suspicious looks, the man, with key and lantern, 
walked on at his side, and attended him to Sir John Chester's door, 
at which Hugh gave one knock, that echoed through the dark 
staircase like a ghostly summons, and made the dull light tremble 
in the drowsy lamp.

'Do you think he wants me now?' said Hugh.

Before the man had time to answer, a footstep was heard within, a 
light appeared, and Sir John, in his dressing-gown and slippers, 
opened the door.

'I ask your pardon, Sir John,' said the porter, pulling off his 
hat.  'Here's a young man says he wants to speak to you.  It's late 
for strangers.  I thought it best to see that all was right.'

'Aha!' cried Sir John, raising his eyebrows.  'It's you, 
messenger, is it?  Go in.  Quite right, friend.  I commend your 
prudence highly.  Thank you.  God bless you.  Good night.'

To be commended, thanked, God-blessed, and bade good night by one 
who carried 'Sir' before his name, and wrote himself M.P. to boot, 
was something for a porter.  He withdrew with much humility and 
reverence.  Sir John followed his late visitor into the dressing-
room, and sitting in his easy-chair before the fire, and moving it 
so that he could see him as he stood, hat in hand, beside the door, 
looked at him from head to foot.

The old face, calm and pleasant as ever; the complexion, quite 
juvenile in its bloom and clearness; the same smile; the wonted 
precision and elegance of dress; the white, well-ordered teeth; the 
delicate hands; the composed and quiet manner; everything as it 
used to be: no mark of age or passion, envy, hate, or discontent: 
all unruffled and serene, and quite delightful to behold.

He wrote himself M.P.--but how?  Why, thus.  It was a proud family--
more proud, indeed, than wealthy.  He had stood in danger of 
arrest; of bailiffs, and a jail--a vulgar jail, to which the common 
people with small incomes went.  Gentlemen of ancient houses have 
no privilege of exemption from such cruel laws--unless they are of 
one great house, and then they have.  A proud man of his stock and 
kindred had the means of sending him there.  He offered--not indeed 
to pay his debts, but to let him sit for a close borough until his 
own son came of age, which, if he lived, would come to pass in 
twenty years.  It was quite as good as an Insolvent Act, and 
infinitely more genteel.  So Sir John Chester was a member of 
Parliament.

But how Sir John?  Nothing so simple, or so easy.  One touch with a 
sword of state, and the transformation was effected.  John Chester, 
Esquire, M.P., attended court--went up with an address--headed a 
deputation.  Such elegance of manner, so many graces of deportment, 
such powers of conversation, could never pass unnoticed.  Mr was 
too common for such merit.  A man so gentlemanly should have been--
but Fortune is capricious--born a Duke: just as some dukes should 
have been born labourers.  He caught the fancy of the king, knelt 
down a grub, and rose a butterfly.  John Chester, Esquire, was 
knighted and became Sir John.

'I thought when you left me this evening, my esteemed 
acquaintance,' said Sir John after a pretty long silence, 'that you 
intended to return with all despatch?'

'So I did, master.'

'And so you have?' he retorted, glancing at his watch.  'Is that 
what you would say?'

Instead of replying, Hugh changed the leg on which he leant, 
shuffled his cap from one hand to the other, looked at the ground, 
the wall, the ceiling, and finally at Sir John himself; before 
whose pleasant face he lowered his eyes again, and fixed them on 
the floor.

'And how have you been employing yourself in the meanwhile?' quoth 
Sir John, lazily crossing his legs.  'Where have you been? what 
harm have you been doing?'

'No harm at all, master,' growled Hugh, with humility.  'I have 
only done as you ordered.'

'As I WHAT?' returned Sir John.

'Well then,' said Hugh uneasily, 'as you advised, or said I ought, 
or said I might, or said that you would do, if you was me.  Don't 
be so hard upon me, master.'

Something like an expression of triumph in the perfect control he 
had established over this rough instrument appeared in the knight's 
face for an instant; but it vanished directly, as he said--paring 
his nails while speaking:

'When you say I ordered you, my good fellow, you imply that I 
directed you to do something for me--something I wanted done--
something for my own ends and purposes--you see?  Now I am sure I 
needn't enlarge upon the extreme absurdity of such an idea, however 
unintentional; so please--' and here he turned his eyes upon him--
'to be more guarded.  Will you?'

'I meant to give you no offence,' said Hugh.  'I don't know what to 
say.  You catch me up so very short.'

'You will be caught up much shorter, my good friend--infinitely 
shorter--one of these days, depend upon it,' replied his patron 
calmly.  'By-the-bye, instead of wondering why you have been so 
long, my wonder should be why you came at all.  Why did you?'

'You know, master,' said Hugh, 'that I couldn't read the bill I 
found, and that supposing it to be something particular from the 
way it was wrapped up, I brought it here.'

'And could you ask no one else to read it, Bruin?' said Sir John.

'No one that I could trust with secrets, master.  Since Barnaby 
Rudge was lost sight of for good and all--and that's five years 
ago--I haven't talked with any one but you.'

'You have done me honour, I am sure.'

'I have come to and fro, master, all through that time, when there 
was anything to tell, because I knew that you'd be angry with me if 
I stayed away,' said Hugh, blurting the words out, after an 
embarrassed silence; 'and because I wished to please you if I 
could, and not to have you go against me.  There.  That's the true 
reason why I came to-night.  You know that, master, I am sure.'

'You are a specious fellow,' returned Sir John, fixing his eyes 
upon him, 'and carry two faces under your hood, as well as the 
best.  Didn't you give me in this room, this evening, any other 
reason; no dislike of anybody who has slighted you lately, on all 
occasions, abused you, treated you with rudeness; acted towards 
you, more as if you were a mongrel dog than a man like himself?'

'To be sure I did!' cried Hugh, his passion rising, as the other 
meant it should; 'and I say it all over now, again.  I'd do 
anything to have some revenge on him--anything.  And when you told 
me that he and all the Catholics would suffer from those who joined 
together under that handbill, I said I'd make one of 'em, if their 
master was the devil himself.  I AM one of 'em.  See whether I am 
as good as my word and turn out to be among the foremost, or no.  I 
mayn't have much head, master, but I've head enough to remember 
those that use me ill.  You shall see, and so shall he, and so 
shall hundreds more, how my spirit backs me when the time comes.  
My bark is nothing to my bite.  Some that I know had better have a 
wild lion among 'em than me, when I am fairly loose--they had!'

The knight looked at him with a smile of far deeper meaning than 
ordinary; and pointing to the old cupboard, followed him with his 
eyes while he filled and drank a glass of liquor; and smiled when 
his back was turned, with deeper meaning yet.

'You are in a blustering mood, my friend,' he said, when Hugh 
confronted him again.

'Not I, master!' cried Hugh.  'I don't say half I mean.  I can't.  
I haven't got the gift.  There are talkers enough among us; I'll be 
one of the doers.'

'Oh! you have joined those fellows then?' said Sir John, with an 
air of most profound indifference.

'Yes.  I went up to the house you told me of; and got put down upon 
the muster.  There was another man there, named Dennis--'

'Dennis, eh!' cried Sir John, laughing.  'Ay, ay! a pleasant 
fellow, I believe?'

'A roaring dog, master--one after my own heart--hot upon the matter 
too--red hot.'

'So I have heard,' replied Sir John, carelessly.  'You don't happen 
to know his trade, do you?'

'He wouldn't say,' cried Hugh.  'He keeps it secret.'

'Ha ha!' laughed Sir John.  'A strange fancy--a weakness with some 
persons--you'll know it one day, I dare swear.'

'We're intimate already,' said Hugh.

'Quite natural!  And have been drinking together, eh?' pursued Sir 
John.  'Did you say what place you went to in company, when you 
left Lord George's?'

Hugh had not said or thought of saying, but he told him; and this 
inquiry being followed by a long train of questions, he related all 
that had passed both in and out of doors, the kind of people he had 
seen, their numbers, state of feeling, mode of conversation, 
apparent expectations and intentions.  His questioning was so 
artfully contrived, that he seemed even in his own eyes to 
volunteer all this information rather than to have it wrested from 
him; and he was brought to this state of feeling so naturally, that 
when Mr Chester yawned at length and declared himself quite wearied 
out, he made a rough kind of excuse for having talked so much.

'There--get you gone,' said Sir John, holding the door open in his 
hand.  'You have made a pretty evening's work.  I told you not to 
do this.  You may get into trouble.  You'll have an opportunity of 
revenging yourself on your proud friend Haredale, though, and for 
that, you'd hazard anything, I suppose?'

'I would,' retorted Hugh, stopping in his passage out and looking 
back; 'but what do I risk!  What do I stand a chance of losing, 
master?  Friends, home?  A fig for 'em all; I have none; they are 
nothing to me.  Give me a good scuffle; let me pay off old scores 
in a bold riot where there are men to stand by me; and then use me 
as you like--it don't matter much to me what the end is!'

'What have you done with that paper?' said Sir John.

'I have it here, master.'

'Drop it again as you go along; it's as well not to keep such 
things about you.'

Hugh nodded, and touching his cap with an air of as much respect as 
he could summon up, departed.

Sir John, fastening the doors behind him, went back to his 
dressing-room, and sat down once again before the fire, at which 
he gazed for a long time, in earnest meditation.

'This happens fortunately,' he said, breaking into a smile, 'and 
promises well.  Let me see.  My relative and I, who are the most 
Protestant fellows in the world, give our worst wishes to the Roman 
Catholic cause; and to Saville, who introduces their bill, I have 
a personal objection besides; but as each of us has himself for 
the first article in his creed, we cannot commit ourselves by 
joining with a very extravagant madman, such as this Gordon most 
undoubtedly is.  Now really, to foment his disturbances in secret, 
through the medium of such a very apt instrument as my savage 
friend here, may further our real ends; and to express at all 
becoming seasons, in moderate and polite terms, a disapprobation of 
his proceedings, though we agree with him in principle, will 
certainly be to gain a character for honesty and uprightness of 
purpose, which cannot fail to do us infinite service, and to raise 
us into some importance.  Good!  So much for public grounds.  As to 
private considerations, I confess that if these vagabonds WOULD 
make some riotous demonstration (which does not appear impossible), 
and WOULD inflict some little chastisement on Haredale as a not 
inactive man among his sect, it would be extremely agreeable to my 
feelings, and would amuse me beyond measure.  Good again!  Perhaps 
better!'

When he came to this point, he took a pinch of snuff; then 
beginning slowly to undress, he resumed his meditations, by saying 
with a smile:

'I fear, I DO fear exceedingly, that my friend is following fast in 
the footsteps of his mother.  His intimacy with Mr Dennis is very 
ominous.  But I have no doubt he must have come to that end any 
way.  If I lend him a helping hand, the only difference is, that he 
may, upon the whole, possibly drink a few gallons, or puncheons, or 
hogsheads, less in this life than he otherwise would.  It's no 
business of mine.  It's a matter of very small importance!'

So he took another pinch of snuff, and went to bed.



Chapter 41


From the workshop of the Golden Key, there issued forth a tinkling 
sound, so merry and good-humoured, that it suggested the idea of 
some one working blithely, and made quite pleasant music.  No man 
who hammered on at a dull monotonous duty, could have brought such 
cheerful notes from steel and iron; none but a chirping, healthy, 
honest-hearted fellow, who made the best of everything, and felt 
kindly towards everybody, could have done it for an instant.  He 
might have been a coppersmith, and still been musical.  If he had 
sat in a jolting waggon, full of rods of iron, it seemed as if he 
would have brought some harmony out of it.

Tink, tink, tink--clear as a silver bell, and audible at every 
pause of the streets' harsher noises, as though it said, 'I don't 
care; nothing puts me out; I am resolved to he happy.'  Women 
scolded, children squalled, heavy carts went rumbling by, horrible 
cries proceeded from the lungs of hawkers; still it struck in 
again, no higher, no lower, no louder, no softer; not thrusting 
itself on people's notice a bit the more for having been outdone by 
louder sounds--tink, tink, tink, tink, tink.

It was a perfect embodiment of the still small voice, free from all 
cold, hoarseness, huskiness, or unhealthiness of any kind; foot-
passengers slackened their pace, and were disposed to linger near 
it; neighbours who had got up splenetic that morning, felt good-
humour stealing on them as they heard it, and by degrees became 
quite sprightly; mothers danced their babies to its ringing; still 
the same magical tink, tink, tink, came gaily from the workshop of 
the Golden Key.

Who but the locksmith could have made such music!  A gleam of sun 
shining through the unsashed window, and chequering the dark 
workshop with a broad patch of light, fell full upon him, as though 
attracted by his sunny heart.  There he stood working at his anvil, 
his face all radiant with exercise and gladness, his sleeves turned 
up, his wig pushed off his shining forehead--the easiest, freest, 
happiest man in all the world.  Beside him sat a sleek cat, purring 
and winking in the light, and falling every now and then into an 
idle doze, as from excess of comfort.  Toby looked on from a tall 
bench hard by; one beaming smile, from his broad nut-brown face 
down to the slack-baked buckles in his shoes.  The very locks that 
hung around had something jovial in their rust, and seemed like 
gouty gentlemen of hearty natures, disposed to joke on their 
infirmities.  There was nothing surly or severe in the whole scene.  
It seemed impossible that any one of the innumerable keys could fit 
a churlish strong-box or a prison-door.  Cellars of beer and wine, 
rooms where there were fires, books, gossip, and cheering laughter--
these were their proper sphere of action.  Places of distrust and 
cruelty, and restraint, they would have left quadruple-locked for 
ever.

Tink, tink, tink.  The locksmith paused at last, and wiped his 
brow.  The silence roused the cat, who, jumping softly down, crept 
to the door, and watched with tiger eyes a bird-cage in an opposite 
window.  Gabriel lifted Toby to his mouth, and took a hearty 
draught.

Then, as he stood upright, with his head flung back, and his portly 
chest thrown out, you would have seen that Gabriel's lower man was 
clothed in military gear.  Glancing at the wall beyond, there might 
have been espied, hanging on their several pegs, a cap and feather, 
broadsword, sash, and coat of scarlet; which any man learned in 
such matters would have known from their make and pattern to be the 
uniform of a serjeant in the Royal East London Volunteers.

As the locksmith put his mug down, empty, on the bench whence it 
had smiled on him before, he glanced at these articles with a 
laughing eye, and looking at them with his head a little on one 
side, as though he would get them all into a focus, said, leaning 
on his hammer:

'Time was, now, I remember, when I was like to run mad with the 
desire to wear a coat of that colour.  If any one (except my 
father) had called me a fool for my pains, how I should have fired 
and fumed!  But what a fool I must have been, sure-ly!'

'Ah!' sighed Mrs Varden, who had entered unobserved.  'A fool 
indeed.  A man at your time of life, Varden, should know better 
now.'

'Why, what a ridiculous woman you are, Martha,' said the locksmith, 
turning round with a smile.

'Certainly,' replied Mrs V. with great demureness.  'Of course I 
am.  I know that, Varden.  Thank you.'

'I mean--' began the locksmith.

'Yes,' said his wife, 'I know what you mean.  You speak quite plain 
enough to be understood, Varden.  It's very kind of you to adapt 
yourself to my capacity, I am sure.'

'Tut, tut, Martha,' rejoined the locksmith; 'don't take offence at 
nothing.  I mean, how strange it is of you to run down 
volunteering, when it's done to defend you and all the other women, 
and our own fireside and everybody else's, in case of need.'

'It's unchristian,' cried Mrs Varden, shaking her head.

'Unchristian!' said the locksmith.  'Why, what the devil--'

Mrs Varden looked at the ceiling, as in expectation that the 
consequence of this profanity would be the immediate descent of the 
four-post bedstead on the second floor, together with the best 
sitting-room on the first; but no visible judgment occurring, she 
heaved a deep sigh, and begged her husband, in a tone of 
resignation, to go on, and by all means to blaspheme as much as 
possible, because he knew she liked it.

The locksmith did for a moment seem disposed to gratify her, but he 
gave a great gulp, and mildly rejoined:

'I was going to say, what on earth do you call it unchristian for?  
Which would be most unchristian, Martha--to sit quietly down and 
let our houses be sacked by a foreign army, or to turn out like men 
and drive 'em off?  Shouldn't I be a nice sort of a Christian, if I 
crept into a corner of my own chimney and looked on while a parcel 
of whiskered savages bore off Dolly--or you?'

When he said 'or you,' Mrs Varden, despite herself, relaxed into a 
smile.  There was something complimentary in the idea.  'In such a 
state of things as that, indeed--' she simpered.

'As that!' repeated the locksmith.  'Well, that would be the state 
of things directly.  Even Miggs would go.  Some black tambourine-
player, with a great turban on, would be bearing HER off, and, 
unless the tambourine-player was proof against kicking and 
scratching, it's my belief he'd have the worst of it.  Ha ha ha!  
I'd forgive the tambourine-player.  I wouldn't have him interfered 
with on any account, poor fellow.'  And here the locksmith laughed 
again so heartily, that tears came into his eyes--much to Mrs 
Varden's indignation, who thought the capture of so sound a 
Protestant and estimable a private character as Miggs by a pagan 
negro, a circumstance too shocking and awful for contemplation.

The picture Gabriel had drawn, indeed, threatened serious 
consequences, and would indubitably have led to them, but luckily 
at that moment a light footstep crossed the threshold, and Dolly, 
running in, threw her arms round her old father's neck and hugged 
him tight.

'Here she is at last!' cried Gabriel.  'And how well you look, 
Doll, and how late you are, my darling!'

How well she looked?  Well?  Why, if he had exhausted every 
laudatory adjective in the dictionary, it wouldn't have been praise 
enough.  When and where was there ever such a plump, roguish, 
comely, bright-eyed, enticing, bewitching, captivating, maddening 
little puss in all this world, as Dolly!  What was the Dolly of 
five years ago, to the Dolly of that day!  How many coachmakers, 
saddlers, cabinet-makers, and professors of other useful arts, had 
deserted their fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, and, most of 
all, their cousins, for the love of her!  How many unknown 
gentlemen--supposed to be of mighty fortunes, if not titles--had 
waited round the corner after dark, and tempted Miggs the 
incorruptible, with golden guineas, to deliver offers of marriage 
folded up in love-letters!  How many disconsolate fathers and 
substantial tradesmen had waited on the locksmith for the same 
purpose, with dismal tales of how their sons had lost their 
appetites, and taken to shut themselves up in dark bedrooms, and 
wandering in desolate suburbs with pale faces, and all because of 
Dolly Varden's loveliness and cruelty!  How many young men, in all 
previous times of unprecedented steadiness, had turned suddenly 
wild and wicked for the same reason, and, in an ecstasy of 
unrequited love, taken to wrench off door-knockers, and invert the 
boxes of rheumatic watchmen!  How had she recruited the king's 
service, both by sea and land, through rendering desperate his 
loving subjects between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five!  How 
many young ladies had publicly professed, with tears in their eyes, 
that for their tastes she was much too short, too tall, too bold, 
too cold, too stout, too thin, too fair, too dark--too everything 
but handsome!  How many old ladies, taking counsel together, had 
thanked Heaven their daughters were not like her, and had hoped she 
might come to no harm, and had thought she would come to no good, 
and had wondered what people saw in her, and had arrived at the 
conclusion that she was 'going off' in her looks, or had never come 
on in them, and that she was a thorough imposition and a popular 
mistake!

And yet here was this same Dolly Varden, so whimsical and hard to 
please that she was Dolly Varden still, all smiles and dimples and 
pleasant looks, and caring no more for the fifty or sixty young 
fellows who at that very moment were breaking their hearts to marry 
her, than if so many oysters had been crossed in love and opened 
afterwards.

Dolly hugged her father as has been already stated, and having 
hugged her mother also, accompanied both into the little parlour 
where the cloth was already laid for dinner, and where Miss Miggs--
a trifle more rigid and bony than of yore--received her with a sort 
of hysterical gasp, intended for a smile.  Into the hands of that 
young virgin, she delivered her bonnet and walking dress (all of a 
dreadful, artful, and designing kind), and then said with a laugh, 
which rivalled the locksmith's music, 'How glad I always am to be 
at home again!'

'And how glad we always are, Doll,' said her father, putting back 
the dark hair from her sparkling eyes, 'to have you at home.  Give 
me a kiss.'

If there had been anybody of the male kind there to see her do it--
but there was not--it was a mercy.

'I don't like your being at the Warren,' said the locksmith, 'I 
can't bear to have you out of my sight.  And what is the news over 
yonder, Doll?'

'What news there is, I think you know already,' replied his 
daughter.  'I am sure you do though.'

'Ay?' cried the locksmith.  'What's that?'

'Come, come,' said Dolly, 'you know very well.  I want you to tell 
me why Mr Haredale--oh, how gruff he is again, to be sure!--has 
been away from home for some days past, and why he is travelling 
about (we know he IS travelling, because of his letters) without 
telling his own niece why or wherefore.'

'Miss Emma doesn't want to know, I'll swear,' returned the 
locksmith.

'I don't know that,' said Dolly; 'but I do, at any rate.  Do tell 
me.  Why is he so secret, and what is this ghost story, which 
nobody is to tell Miss Emma, and which seems to be mixed up with 
his going away?  Now I see you know by your colouring so.'

'What the story means, or is, or has to do with it, I know no more 
than you, my dear,' returned the locksmith, 'except that it's some 
foolish fear of little Solomon's--which has, indeed, no meaning in 
it, I suppose.  As to Mr Haredale's journey, he goes, as I believe--'

'Yes,' said Dolly.

'As I believe,' resumed the locksmith, pinching her cheek, 'on 
business, Doll.  What it may be, is quite another matter.  Read 
Blue Beard, and don't be too curious, pet; it's no business of 
yours or mine, depend upon that; and here's dinner, which is much 
more to the purpose.'

Dolly might have remonstrated against this summary dismissal of the 
subject, notwithstanding the appearance of dinner, but at the 
mention of Blue Beard Mrs Varden interposed, protesting she could 
not find it in her conscience to sit tamely by, and hear her child 
recommended to peruse the adventures of a Turk and Mussulman--far 
less of a fabulous Turk, which she considered that potentate to be.  
She held that, in such stirring and tremendous times as those in 
which they lived, it would be much more to the purpose if Dolly 
became a regular subscriber to the Thunderer, where she would have 
an opportunity of reading Lord George Gordon's speeches word for 
word, which would be a greater comfort and solace to her, than a 
hundred and fifty Blue Beards ever could impart.  She appealed in 
support of this proposition to Miss Miggs, then in waiting, who 
said that indeed the peace of mind she had derived from the perusal 
of that paper generally, but especially of one article of the very 
last week as ever was, entitled 'Great Britain drenched in gore,' 
exceeded all belief; the same composition, she added, had also 
wrought such a comforting effect on the mind of a married sister of 
hers, then resident at Golden Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, 
second bell-handle on the right-hand door-post, that, being in a 
delicate state of health, and in fact expecting an addition to her 
family, she had been seized with fits directly after its perusal, 
and had raved of the Inquisition ever since; to the great 
improvement of her husband and friends.  Miss Miggs went on to say 
that she would recommend all those whose hearts were hardened to 
hear Lord George themselves, whom she commended first, in respect 
of his steady Protestantism, then of his oratory, then of his eyes, 
then of his nose, then of his legs, and lastly of his figure 
generally, which she looked upon as fit for any statue, prince, or 
angel, to which sentiment Mrs Varden fully subscribed.

Mrs Varden having cut in, looked at a box upon the mantelshelf, 
painted in imitation of a very red-brick dwelling-house, with a 
yellow roof; having at top a real chimney, down which voluntary 
subscribers dropped their silver, gold, or pence, into the parlour; 
and on the door the counterfeit presentment of a brass plate, 
whereon was legibly inscribed 'Protestant Association:'--and 
looking at it, said, that it was to her a source of poignant misery 
to think that Varden never had, of all his substance, dropped 
anything into that temple, save once in secret--as she afterwards 
discovered--two fragments of tobacco-pipe, which she hoped would 
not be put down to his last account.  That Dolly, she was grieved 
to say, was no less backward in her contributions, better loving, 
as it seemed, to purchase ribbons and such gauds, than to encourage 
the great cause, then in such heavy tribulation; and that she did 
entreat her (her father she much feared could not be moved) not to 
despise, but imitate, the bright example of Miss Miggs, who flung 
her wages, as it were, into the very countenance of the Pope, and 
bruised his features with her quarter's money.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, 'don't relude to that.  I had no intentions, 
mim, that nobody should know.  Such sacrifices as I can make, are 
quite a widder's mite.  It's all I have,' cried Miggs with a great 
burst of tears--for with her they never came on by degrees--'but 
it's made up to me in other ways; it's well made up.'

This was quite true, though not perhaps in the sense that Miggs 
intended.  As she never failed to keep her self-denial full in Mrs 
Varden's view, it drew forth so many gifts of caps and gowns and 
other articles of dress, that upon the whole the red-brick house 
was perhaps the best investment for her small capital she could 
possibly have hit upon; returning her interest, at the rate of 
seven or eight per cent in money, and fifty at least in personal 
repute and credit.

'You needn't cry, Miggs,' said Mrs Varden, herself in tears; 'you 
needn't be ashamed of it, though your poor mistress IS on the same 
side.'

Miggs howled at this remark, in a peculiarly dismal way, and said 
she knowed that master hated her.  That it was a dreadful thing to 
live in families and have dislikes, and not give satisfactions.  
That to make divisions was a thing she could not abear to think of, 
neither could her feelings let her do it.  That if it was master's 
wishes as she and him should part, it was best they should part, 
and she hoped he might be the happier for it, and always wished him 
well, and that he might find somebody as would meet his 
dispositions.  It would be a hard trial, she said, to part from 
such a missis, but she could meet any suffering when her conscience 
told her she was in the rights, and therefore she was willing even 
to go that lengths.  She did not think, she added, that she could 
long survive the separations, but, as she was hated and looked upon 
unpleasant, perhaps her dying as soon as possible would be the best 
endings for all parties.  With this affecting conclusion, Miss 
Miggs shed more tears, and sobbed abundantly.

'Can you bear this, Varden?' said his wife in a solemn voice, 
laying down her knife and fork.

'Why, not very well, my dear,' rejoined the locksmith, 'but I try 
to keep my temper.'

'Don't let there be words on my account, mim,' sobbed Miggs.  'It's 
much the best that we should part.  I wouldn't stay--oh, gracious 
me!--and make dissensions, not for a annual gold mine, and found in 
tea and sugar.'

Lest the reader should be at any loss to discover the cause of Miss 
Miggs's deep emotion, it may be whispered apart that, happening to 
be listening, as her custom sometimes was, when Gabriel and his 
wife conversed together, she had heard the locksmith's joke 
relative to the foreign black who played the tambourine, and 
bursting with the spiteful feelings which the taunt awoke in her 
fair breast, exploded in the manner we have witnessed.  Matters 
having now arrived at a crisis, the locksmith, as usual, and for 
the sake of peace and quietness, gave in.

'What are you crying for, girl?' he said.  'What's the matter with 
you?  What are you talking about hatred for?  I don't hate you; I 
don't hate anybody.  Dry your eyes and make yourself agreeable, in 
Heaven's name, and let us all be happy while we can.'

The allied powers deeming it good generalship to consider this a 
sufficient apology on the part of the enemy, and confession of 
having been in the wrong, did dry their eyes and take it in good 
part.  Miss Miggs observed that she bore no malice, no not to her 
greatest foe, whom she rather loved the more indeed, the greater 
persecution she sustained.  Mrs Varden approved of this meek and 
forgiving spirit in high terms, and incidentally declared as a 
closing article of agreement, that Dolly should accompany her to 
the Clerkenwell branch of the association, that very night.  This 
was an extraordinary instance of her great prudence and policy; 
having had this end in view from the first, and entertaining a 
secret misgiving that the locksmith (who was bold when Dolly was in 
question) would object, she had backed Miss Miggs up to this 
point, in order that she might have him at a disadvantage.  The 
manoeuvre succeeded so well that Gabriel only made a wry face, and 
with the warning he had just had, fresh in his mind, did not dare 
to say one word.

The difference ended, therefore, in Miggs being presented with a 
gown by Mrs Varden and half-a-crown by Dolly, as if she had 
eminently distinguished herself in the paths of morality and 
goodness.  Mrs V., according to custom, expressed her hope that 
Varden would take a lesson from what had passed and learn more 
generous conduct for the time to come; and the dinner being now 
cold and nobody's appetite very much improved by what had passed, 
they went on with it, as Mrs Varden said, 'like Christians.'

As there was to be a grand parade of the Royal East London 
Volunteers that afternoon, the locksmith did no more work; but sat 
down comfortably with his pipe in his mouth, and his arm round his 
pretty daughter's waist, looking lovingly on Mrs V., from time to 
time, and exhibiting from the crown of his head to the sole of his 
foot, one smiling surface of good humour.  And to be sure, when it 
was time to dress him in his regimentals, and Dolly, hanging about 
him in all kinds of graceful winning ways, helped to button and 
buckle and brush him up and get him into one of the tightest coats 
that ever was made by mortal tailor, he was the proudest father in 
all England.

'What a handy jade it is!' said the locksmith to Mrs Varden, who 
stood by with folded hands--rather proud of her husband too--while 
Miggs held his cap and sword at arm's length, as if mistrusting 
that the latter might run some one through the body of its own 
accord; 'but never marry a soldier, Doll, my dear.'

Dolly didn't ask why not, or say a word, indeed, but stooped her 
head down very low to tie his sash.

'I never wear this dress,' said honest Gabriel, 'but I think of 
poor Joe Willet.  I loved Joe; he was always a favourite of mine.  
Poor Joe!--Dear heart, my girl, don't tie me in so tight.'

Dolly laughed--not like herself at all--the strangest little laugh 
that could be--and held her head down lower still.

'Poor Joe!' resumed the locksmith, muttering to himself; 'I always 
wish he had come to me.  I might have made it up between them, if 
he had.  Ah! old John made a great mistake in his way of acting by 
that lad--a great mistake.--Have you nearly tied that sash, my 
dear?'

What an ill-made sash it was!  There it was, loose again and 
trailing on the ground.  Dolly was obliged to kneel down, and 
recommence at the beginning.

'Never mind young Willet, Varden,' said his wife frowning; 'you 
might find some one more deserving to talk about, I think.'

Miss Miggs gave a great sniff to the same effect.

'Nay, Martha,' cried the locksmith, 'don't let us bear too hard 
upon him.  If the lad is dead indeed, we'll deal kindly by his 
memory.'

'A runaway and a vagabond!' said Mrs Varden.

Miss Miggs expressed her concurrence as before.

'A runaway, my dear, but not a vagabond,' returned the locksmith in 
a gentle tone.  'He behaved himself well, did Joe--always--and was 
a handsome, manly fellow.  Don't call him a vagabond, Martha.'

Mrs Varden coughed--and so did Miggs.

'He tried hard to gain your good opinion, Martha, I can tell you,' 
said the locksmith smiling, and stroking his chin.  'Ah! that he 
did.  It seems but yesterday that he followed me out to the Maypole 
door one night, and begged me not to say how like a boy they used 
him--say here, at home, he meant, though at the time, I recollect, 
I didn't understand.  "And how's Miss Dolly, sir?" says Joe,' 
pursued the locksmith, musing sorrowfully, 'Ah!  Poor Joe!'

'Well, I declare,' cried Miggs.  'Oh! Goodness gracious me!'

'What's the matter now?' said Gabriel, turning sharply to her, 
'Why, if here an't Miss Dolly,' said the handmaid, stooping down to 
look into her face, 'a-giving way to floods of tears.  Oh mim! oh 
sir.  Raly it's give me such a turn,' cried the susceptible damsel, 
pressing her hand upon her side to quell the palpitation of her 
heart, 'that you might knock me down with a feather.'

The locksmith, after glancing at Miss Miggs as if he could have 
wished to have a feather brought straightway, looked on with a 
broad stare while Dolly hurried away, followed by that sympathising 
young woman: then turning to his wife, stammered out, 'Is Dolly 
ill?  Have I done anything?  Is it my fault?'

'Your fault!' cried Mrs V. reproachfully.  'There--you had better 
make haste out.'

'What have I done?' said poor Gabriel.  'It was agreed that Mr 
Edward's name was never to be mentioned, and I have not spoken of 
him, have I?'

Mrs Varden merely replied that she had no patience with him, and 
bounced off after the other two.  The unfortunate locksmith wound 
his sash about him, girded on his sword, put on his cap, and walked 
out.

'I am not much of a dab at my exercise,' he said under his breath, 
'but I shall get into fewer scrapes at that work than at this.  
Every man came into the world for something; my department seems to 
be to make every woman cry without meaning it.  It's rather hard!'

But he forgot it before he reached the end of the street, and went 
on with a shining face, nodding to the neighbours, and showering 
about his friendly greetings like mild spring rain.



Chapter 42


The Royal East London Volunteers made a brilliant sight that day: 
formed into lines, squares, circles, triangles, and what not, to 
the beating of drums, and the streaming of flags; and performed a 
vast number of complex evolutions, in all of which Serjeant Varden 
bore a conspicuous share.  Having displayed their military prowess 
to the utmost in these warlike shows, they marched in glittering 
order to the Chelsea Bun House, and regaled in the adjacent taverns 
until dark.  Then at sound of drum they fell in again, and 
returned amidst the shouting of His Majesty's lieges to the place 
from whence they came.

The homeward march being somewhat tardy,--owing to the un-
soldierlike behaviour of certain corporals, who, being gentlemen of 
sedentary pursuits in private life and excitable out of doors, 
broke several windows with their bayonets, and rendered it 
imperative on the commanding officer to deliver them over to a 
strong guard, with whom they fought at intervals as they came 
along,--it was nine o'clock when the locksmith reached home.  A 
hackney-coach was waiting near his door; and as he passed it, Mr 
Haredale looked from the window and called him by his name.

'The sight of you is good for sore eyes, sir,' said the locksmith, 
stepping up to him.  'I wish you had walked in though, rather than 
waited here.'

'There is nobody at home, I find,' Mr Haredale answered; 'besides, 
I desired to be as private as I could.'

'Humph!' muttered the locksmith, looking round at his house.  
'Gone with Simon Tappertit to that precious Branch, no doubt.'

Mr Haredale invited him to come into the coach, and, if he were not 
tired or anxious to go home, to ride with him a little way that 
they might have some talk together.  Gabriel cheerfully complied, 
and the coachman mounting his box drove off.

'Varden,' said Mr Haredale, after a minute's pause, 'you will be 
amazed to hear what errand I am on; it will seem a very strange 
one.'

'I have no doubt it's a reasonable one, sir, and has a meaning in 
it,' replied the locksmith; 'or it would not be yours at all.  Have 
you just come back to town, sir?'

'But half an hour ago.'

'Bringing no news of Barnaby, or his mother?' said the locksmith 
dubiously.  'Ah! you needn't shake your head, sir.  It was a wild-
goose chase.  I feared that, from the first.  You exhausted all 
reasonable means of discovery when they went away.  To begin again 
after so long a time has passed is hopeless, sir--quite hopeless.'

'Why, where are they?' he returned impatiently.  'Where can they 
be?  Above ground?'

'God knows,' rejoined the locksmith, 'many that I knew above it 
five years ago, have their beds under the grass now.  And the world 
is a wide place.  It's a hopeless attempt, sir, believe me.  We 
must leave the discovery of this mystery, like all others, to time, 
and accident, and Heaven's pleasure.'

'Varden, my good fellow,' said Mr Haredale, 'I have a deeper 
meaning in my present anxiety to find them out, than you can 
fathom.  It is not a mere whim; it is not the casual revival of my 
old wishes and desires; but an earnest, solemn purpose.  My 
thoughts and dreams all tend to it, and fix it in my mind.  I have 
no rest by day or night; I have no peace or quiet; I am haunted.'

His voice was so altered from its usual tones, and his manner 
bespoke so much emotion, that Gabriel, in his wonder, could only 
sit and look towards him in the darkness, and fancy the expression 
of his face.

'Do not ask me,' continued Mr Haredale, 'to explain myself.  If I 
were to do so, you would think me the victim of some hideous fancy.  
It is enough that this is so, and that I cannot--no, I can not--lie 
quietly in my bed, without doing what will seem to you 
incomprehensible.'

'Since when, sir,' said the locksmith after a pause, 'has this 
uneasy feeling been upon you?'

Mr Haredale hesitated for some moments, and then replied: 'Since 
the night of the storm.  In short, since the last nineteenth of 
March.'

As though he feared that Varden might express surprise, or reason 
with him, he hastily went on:

'You will think, I know, I labour under some delusion.  Perhaps I 
do.  But it is not a morbid one; it is a wholesome action of the 
mind, reasoning on actual occurrences.  You know the furniture 
remains in Mrs Rudge's house, and that it has been shut up, by my 
orders, since she went away, save once a-week or so, when an old 
neighbour visits it to scare away the rats.  I am on my way there 
now.'

'For what purpose?' asked the locksmith.

'To pass the night there,' he replied; 'and not to-night alone, but 
many nights.  This is a secret which I trust to you in case of any 
unexpected emergency.  You will not come, unless in case of strong 
necessity, to me; from dusk to broad day I shall be there.  Emma, 
your daughter, and the rest, suppose me out of London, as I have 
been until within this hour.  Do not undeceive them.  This is the 
errand I am bound upon.  I know I may confide it to you, and I rely 
upon your questioning me no more at this time.'

With that, as if to change the theme, he led the astounded 
locksmith back to the night of the Maypole highwayman, to the 
robbery of Edward Chester, to the reappearance of the man at Mrs 
Rudge's house, and to all the strange circumstances which 
afterwards occurred.  He even asked him carelessly about the man's 
height, his face, his figure, whether he was like any one he had 
ever seen--like Hugh, for instance, or any man he had known at any 
time--and put many questions of that sort, which the locksmith, 
considering them as mere devices to engage his attention and 
prevent his expressing the astonishment he felt, answered pretty 
much at random.

At length, they arrived at the corner of the street in which the 
house stood, where Mr Haredale, alighting, dismissed the coach.  
'If you desire to see me safely lodged,' he said, turning to the 
locksmith with a gloomy smile, 'you can.'

Gabriel, to whom all former marvels had been nothing in comparison 
with this, followed him along the narrow pavement in silence.  When 
they reached the door, Mr Haredale softly opened it with a key he 
had about him, and closing it when Varden entered, they were left 
in thorough darkness.

They groped their way into the ground-floor room.  Here Mr 
Haredale struck a light, and kindled a pocket taper he had brought 
with him for the purpose.  It was then, when the flame was full 
upon him, that the locksmith saw for the first time how haggard, 
pale, and changed he looked; how worn and thin he was; how 
perfectly his whole appearance coincided with all that he had said 
so strangely as they rode along.  It was not an unnatural impulse 
in Gabriel, after what he had heard, to note curiously the 
expression of his eyes.  It was perfectly collected and rational;--
so much so, indeed, that he felt ashamed of his momentary 
suspicion, and drooped his own when Mr Haredale looked towards him, 
as if he feared they would betray his thoughts.

'Will you walk through the house?' said Mr Haredale, with a glance 
towards the window, the crazy shutters of which were closed and 
fastened.  'Speak low.'

There was a kind of awe about the place, which would have rendered 
it difficult to speak in any other manner.  Gabriel whispered 
'Yes,' and followed him upstairs.

Everything was just as they had seen it last.  There was a sense of 
closeness from the exclusion of fresh air, and a gloom and 
heaviness around, as though long imprisonment had made the very 
silence sad.  The homely hangings of the beds and windows had begun 
to droop; the dust lay thick upon their dwindling folds; and damps 
had made their way through ceiling, wall, and floor.  The boards 
creaked beneath their tread, as if resenting the unaccustomed 
intrusion; nimble spiders, paralysed by the taper's glare, checked 
the motion of their hundred legs upon the wall, or dropped like 
lifeless things upon the ground; the death-watch ticked; and the 
scampering feet of rats and mice rattled behind the wainscot.

As they looked about them on the decaying furniture, it was strange 
to find how vividly it presented those to whom it had belonged, and 
with whom it was once familiar.  Grip seemed to perch again upon 
his high-backed chair; Barnaby to crouch in his old favourite 
corner by the fire; the mother to resume her usual seat, and watch 
him as of old.  Even when they could separate these objects from 
the phantoms of the mind which they invoked, the latter only glided 
out of sight, but lingered near them still; for then they seemed to 
lurk in closets and behind the doors, ready to start out and 
suddenly accost them in well-remembered tones.

They went downstairs, and again into the room they had just now 
left.  Mr Haredale unbuckled his sword and laid it on the table, 
with a pair of pocket pistols; then told the locksmith he would 
light him to the door.

'But this is a dull place, sir,' said Gabriel lingering; 'may no 
one share your watch?'

He shook his head, and so plainly evinced his wish to be alone, 
that Gabriel could say no more.  In another moment the locksmith 
was standing in the street, whence he could see that the light once 
more travelled upstairs, and soon returning to the room below, 
shone brightly through the chinks of the shutters.

If ever man were sorely puzzled and perplexed, the locksmith was, 
that night.  Even when snugly seated by his own fireside, with Mrs 
Varden opposite in a nightcap and night-jacket, and Dolly beside 
him (in a most distracting dishabille) curling her hair, and 
smiling as if she had never cried in all her life and never could--
even then, with Toby at his elbow and his pipe in his mouth, and 
Miggs (but that perhaps was not much) falling asleep in the 
background, he could not quite discard his wonder and uneasiness.  
So in his dreams--still there was Mr Haredale, haggard and 
careworn, listening in the solitary house to every sound that 
stirred, with the taper shining through the chinks until the day 
should turn it pale and end his lonely watching.



Chapter 43


Next morning brought no satisfaction to the locksmith's thoughts, 
nor next day, nor the next, nor many others.  Often after nightfall 
he entered the street, and turned his eyes towards the well-known 
house; and as surely as he did so, there was the solitary light, 
still gleaming through the crevices of the window-shutter, while 
all within was motionless, noiseless, cheerless, as a grave.  
Unwilling to hazard Mr Haredale's favour by disobeying his strict 
injunction, he never ventured to knock at the door or to make his 
presence known in any way.  But whenever strong interest and 
curiosity attracted him to the spot--which was not seldom--the 
light was always there.

If he could have known what passed within, the knowledge would have 
yielded him no clue to this mysterious vigil.  At twilight, Mr 
Haredale shut himself up, and at daybreak he came forth.  He never 
missed a night, always came and went alone, and never varied his 
proceedings in the least degree.

The manner of his watch was this.  At dusk, he entered the house in 
the same way as when the locksmith bore him company, kindled a 
light, went through the rooms, and narrowly examined them.  That 
done, he returned to the chamber on the ground-floor, and laying 
his sword and pistols on the table, sat by it until morning.

He usually had a book with him, and often tried to read, but never 
fixed his eyes or thoughts upon it for five minutes together.  The 
slightest noise without doors, caught his ear; a step upon the 
pavement seemed to make his heart leap.

He was not without some refreshment during the long lonely hours; 
generally carrying in his pocket a sandwich of bread and meat, and 
a small flask of wine.  The latter diluted with large quantities of 
water, he drank in a heated, feverish way, as though his throat 
were dried; but he scarcely ever broke his fast, by so much as a 
crumb of bread.

If this voluntary sacrifice of sleep and comfort had its origin, as 
the locksmith on consideration was disposed to think, in any 
superstitious expectation of the fulfilment of a dream or vision 
connected with the event on which he had brooded for so many years, 
and if he waited for some ghostly visitor who walked abroad when 
men lay sleeping in their beds, he showed no trace of fear or 
wavering.  His stern features expressed inflexible resolution; his 
brows were puckered, and his lips compressed, with deep and settled 
purpose; and when he started at a noise and listened, it was not 
with the start of fear but hope, and catching up his sword as 
though the hour had come at last, he would clutch it in his tight-
clenched hand, and listen with sparkling eyes and eager looks, 
until it died away.

These disappointments were numerous, for they ensued on almost 
every sound, but his constancy was not shaken.  Still, every night 
he was at his post, the same stern, sleepless, sentinel; and still 
night passed, and morning dawned, and he must watch again.

This went on for weeks; he had taken a lodging at Vauxhall in which 
to pass the day and rest himself; and from this place, when the 
tide served, he usually came to London Bridge from Westminster by 
water, in order that he might avoid the busy streets.

One evening, shortly before twilight, he came his accustomed road 
upon the river's bank, intending to pass through Westminster Hall 
into Palace Yard, and there take boat to London Bridge as usual.  
There was a pretty large concourse of people assembled round the 
Houses of Parliament, looking at the members as they entered and 
departed, and giving vent to rather noisy demonstrations of 
approval or dislike, according to their known opinions.  As he made 
his way among the throng, he heard once or twice the No-Popery cry, 
which was then becoming pretty familiar to the ears of most men; 
but holding it in very slight regard, and observing that the idlers 
were of the lowest grade, he neither thought nor cared about it, 
but made his way along, with perfect indifference.

There were many little knots and groups of persons in Westminster 
Hall: some few looking upward at its noble ceiling, and at the rays 
of evening light, tinted by the setting sun, which streamed in 
aslant through its small windows, and growing dimmer by degrees, 
were quenched in the gathering gloom below; some, noisy passengers, 
mechanics going home from work, and otherwise, who hurried quickly 
through, waking the echoes with their voices, and soon darkening 
the small door in the distance, as they passed into the street 
beyond; some, in busy conference together on political or private 
matters, pacing slowly up and down with eyes that sought the 
ground, and seeming, by their attitudes, to listen earnestly from 
head to foot.  Here, a dozen squabbling urchins made a very Babel 
in the air; there, a solitary man, half clerk, half mendicant, 
paced up and down with hungry dejection in his look and gait; at 
his elbow passed an errand-lad, swinging his basket round and 
round, and with his shrill whistle riving the very timbers of the 
roof; while a more observant schoolboy, half-way through, pocketed 
his ball, and eyed the distant beadle as he came looming on.  It 
was that time of evening when, if you shut your eyes and open them 
again, the darkness of an hour appears to have gathered in a 
second.  The smooth-worn pavement, dusty with footsteps, still 
called upon the lofty walls to reiterate the shuffle and the tread 
of feet unceasingly, save when the closing of some heavy door 
resounded through the building like a clap of thunder, and drowned 
all other noises in its rolling sound.

Mr Haredale, glancing only at such of these groups as he passed 
nearest to, and then in a manner betokening that his thoughts were 
elsewhere, had nearly traversed the Hall, when two persons before 
him caught his attention.  One of these, a gentleman in elegant 
attire, carried in his hand a cane, which he twirled in a jaunty 
manner as he loitered on; the other, an obsequious, crouching, 
fawning figure, listened to what he said--at times throwing in a 
humble word himself--and, with his shoulders shrugged up to his 
ears, rubbed his hands submissively, or answered at intervals by an 
inclination of the head, half-way between a nod of acquiescence, 
and a bow of most profound respect.

In the abstract there was nothing very remarkable in this pair, for 
servility waiting on a handsome suit of clothes and a cane--not to 
speak of gold and silver sticks, or wands of office--is common 
enough.  But there was that about the well-dressed man, yes, and 
about the other likewise, which struck Mr Haredale with no pleasant 
feeling.  He hesitated, stopped, and would have stepped aside and 
turned out of his path, but at the moment, the other two faced 
about quickly, and stumbled upon him before he could avoid them.

The gentleman with the cane lifted his hat and had begun to tender 
an apology, which Mr Haredale had begun as hastily to acknowledge 
and walk away, when he stopped short and cried, 'Haredale!  Gad 
bless me, this is strange indeed!'

'It is,' he returned impatiently; 'yes--a--'

'My dear friend,' cried the other, detaining him, 'why such great 
speed?  One minute, Haredale, for the sake of old acquaintance.'

'I am in haste,' he said.  'Neither of us has sought this meeting.  
Let it be a brief one.  Good night!'

'Fie, fie!' replied Sir John (for it was he), 'how very churlish!  
We were speaking of you.  Your name was on my lips--perhaps you 
heard me mention it?  No?  I am sorry for that.  I am really 
sorry.--You know our friend here, Haredale?  This is really a most 
remarkable meeting!'

The friend, plainly very ill at ease, had made bold to press Sir 
John's arm, and to give him other significant hints that he was 
desirous of avoiding this introduction.  As it did not suit Sir 
John's purpose, however, that it should be evaded, he appeared 
quite unconscious of these silent remonstrances, and inclined his 
hand towards him, as he spoke, to call attention to him more 
particularly.

The friend, therefore, had nothing for it, but to muster up the 
pleasantest smile he could, and to make a conciliatory bow, as Mr 
Haredale turned his eyes upon him.  Seeing that he was recognised, 
he put out his hand in an awkward and embarrassed manner, which was 
not mended by its contemptuous rejection.

'Mr Gashford!' said Haredale, coldly.  'It is as I have heard then.  
You have left the darkness for the light, sir, and hate those whose 
opinions you formerly held, with all the bitterness of a renegade.  
You are an honour, sir, to any cause.  I wish the one you espouse 
at present, much joy of the acquisition it has made.'

The secretary rubbed his hands and bowed, as though he would disarm 
his adversary by humbling himself before him.  Sir John Chester 
again exclaimed, with an air of great gaiety, 'Now, really, this is 
a most remarkable meeting!' and took a pinch of snuff with his 
usual self-possession.

'Mr Haredale,' said Gashford, stealthily raising his eyes, and 
letting them drop again when they met the other's steady gaze, is 
too conscientious, too honourable, too manly, I am sure, to attach 
unworthy motives to an honest change of opinions, even though it 
implies a doubt of those he holds himself.  Mr Haredale is too 
just, too generous, too clear-sighted in his moral vision, to--'

'Yes, sir?' he rejoined with a sarcastic smile, finding the 
secretary stopped.  'You were saying'--

Gashford meekly shrugged his shoulders, and looking on the ground 
again, was silent.

'No, but let us really,' interposed Sir John at this juncture, 'let 
us really, for a moment, contemplate the very remarkable character 
of this meeting.  Haredale, my dear friend, pardon me if I think 
you are not sufficiently impressed with its singularity.  Here we 
stand, by no previous appointment or arrangement, three old 
schoolfellows, in Westminster Hall; three old boarders in a 
remarkably dull and shady seminary at Saint Omer's, where you, 
being Catholics and of necessity educated out of England, were 
brought up; and where I, being a promising young Protestant at that 
time, was sent to learn the French tongue from a native of Paris!'

'Add to the singularity, Sir John,' said Mr Haredale, 'that some of 
you Protestants of promise are at this moment leagued in yonder 
building, to prevent our having the surpassing and unheard-of 
privilege of teaching our children to read and write--here--in this 
land, where thousands of us enter your service every year, and to 
preserve the freedom of which, we die in bloody battles abroad, in 
heaps: and that others of you, to the number of some thousands as 
I learn, are led on to look on all men of my creed as wolves and 
beasts of prey, by this man Gashford.  Add to it besides the bare 
fact that this man lives in society, walks the streets in broad 
day--I was about to say, holds up his head, but that he does not--
and it will be strange, and very strange, I grant you.'

'Oh! you are hard upon our friend,' replied Sir John, with an 
engaging smile.  'You are really very hard upon our friend!'

'Let him go on, Sir John,' said Gashford, fumbling with his gloves.  
'Let him go on.  I can make allowances, Sir John.  I am honoured 
with your good opinion, and I can dispense with Mr Haredale's.  Mr 
Haredale is a sufferer from the penal laws, and I can't expect his 
favour.'

'You have so much of my favour, sir,' retorted Mr Haredale, with a 
bitter glance at the third party in their conversation, 'that I am 
glad to see you in such good company.  You are the essence of your 
great Association, in yourselves.'

'Now, there you mistake,' said Sir John, in his most benignant way.  
'There--which is a most remarkable circumstance for a man of your 
punctuality and exactness, Haredale--you fall into error.  I don't 
belong to the body; I have an immense respect for its members, but 
I don't belong to it; although I am, it is certainly true, the 
conscientious opponent of your being relieved.  I feel it my duty 
to be so; it is a most unfortunate necessity; and cost me a bitter 
struggle.--Will you try this box?  If you don't object to a 
trifling infusion of a very chaste scent, you'll find its flavour 
exquisite.'

'I ask your pardon, Sir John,' said Mr Haredale, declining the 
proffer with a motion of his hand, 'for having ranked you among the 
humble instruments who are obvious and in all men's sight.  I 
should have done more justice to your genius.  Men of your capacity 
plot in secrecy and safety, and leave exposed posts to the duller 
wits.'

'Don't apologise, for the world,' replied Sir John sweetly; 'old 
friends like you and I, may be allowed some freedoms, or the deuce 
is in it.'

Gashford, who had been very restless all this time, but had not 
once looked up, now turned to Sir John, and ventured to mutter 
something to the effect that he must go, or my lord would perhaps 
be waiting.

'Don't distress yourself, good sir,' said Mr Haredale, 'I'll take 
my leave, and put you at your ease--' which he was about to do 
without ceremony, when he was stayed by a buzz and murmur at the 
upper end of the hall, and, looking in that direction, saw Lord 
George Gordon coming in, with a crowd of people round him.

There was a lurking look of triumph, though very differently 
expressed, in the faces of his two companions, which made it a 
natural impulse on Mr Haredale's part not to give way before this 
leader, but to stand there while he passed.  He drew himself up 
and, clasping his hands behind him, looked on with a proud and 
scornful aspect, while Lord George slowly advanced (for the press 
was great about him) towards the spot where they were standing.

He had left the House of Commons but that moment, and had come 
straight down into the Hall, bringing with him, as his custom was, 
intelligence of what had been said that night in reference to the 
Papists, and what petitions had been presented in their favour, and 
who had supported them, and when the bill was to be brought in, and 
when it would be advisable to present their own Great Protestant 
petition.  All this he told the persons about him in a loud voice, 
and with great abundance of ungainly gesture.  Those who were 
nearest him made comments to each other, and vented threats and 
murmurings; those who were outside the crowd cried, 'Silence,' and 
Stand back,' or closed in upon the rest, endeavouring to make a 
forcible exchange of places: and so they came driving on in a very 
disorderly and irregular way, as it is the manner of a crowd to do.

When they were very near to where the secretary, Sir John, and Mr 
Haredale stood, Lord George turned round and, making a few remarks 
of a sufliciently violent and incoherent kind, concluded with the 
usual sentiment, and called for three cheers to back it.  While 
these were in the act of being given with great energy, he 
extricated himself from the press, and stepped up to Gashford's 
side.  Both he and Sir John being well known to the populace, they 
fell back a little, and left the four standing together.

'Mr Haredale, Lord George,' said Sir John Chester, seeing that the 
nobleman regarded him with an inquisitive look.  'A Catholic 
gentleman unfortunately--most unhappily a Catholic--but an esteemed 
acquaintance of mine, and once of Mr Gashford's.  My dear Haredale, 
this is Lord George Gordon.'

'I should have known that, had I been ignorant of his lordship's 
person,' said Mr Haredale.  'I hope there is but one gentleman in 
England who, addressing an ignorant and excited throng, would speak 
of a large body of his fellow-subjects in such injurious language 
as I heard this moment.  For shame, my lord, for shame!'

'I cannot talk to you, sir,' replied Lord George in a loud voice, 
and waving his hand in a disturbed and agitated manner; 'we have 
nothing in common.'

'We have much in common--many things--all that the Almighty gave 
us,' said Mr Haredale; 'and common charity, not to say common sense 
and common decency, should teach you to refrain from these 
proceedings.  If every one of those men had arms in their hands at 
this moment, as they have them in their heads, I would not leave 
this place without telling you that you disgrace your station.'

'I don't hear you, sir,' he replied in the same manner as before; 
'I can't hear you.  It is indifferent to me what you say.  Don't 
retort, Gashford,' for the secretary had made a show of wishing to 
do so; 'I can hold no communion with the worshippers of idols.'

As he said this, he glanced at Sir John, who lifted his hands and 
eyebrows, as if deploring the intemperate conduct of Mr Haredale, 
and smiled in admiration of the crowd and of their leader.

'HE retort!' cried Haredale.  'Look you here, my lord.  Do you know 
this man?'

Lord George replied by laying his hand upon the shoulder of his 
cringing secretary, and viewing him with a smile of confidence.

'This man,' said Mr Haredale, eyeing him from top to toe, 'who in 
his boyhood was a thief, and has been from that time to this, a 
servile, false, and truckling knave: this man, who has crawled and 
crept through life, wounding the hands he licked, and biting those 
he fawned upon: this sycophant, who never knew what honour, truth, 
or courage meant; who robbed his benefactor's daughter of her 
virtue, and married her to break her heart, and did it, with 
stripes and cruelty: this creature, who has whined at kitchen 
windows for the broken food, and begged for halfpence at our chapel 
doors: this apostle of the faith, whose tender conscience cannot 
bear the altars where his vicious life was publicly denounced--Do 
you know this man?'

'Oh, really--you are very, very hard upon our friend!' exclaimed 
Sir John.

'Let Mr Haredale go on,' said Gashford, upon whose unwholesome face 
the perspiration had broken out during this speech, in blotches of 
wet; 'I don't mind him, Sir John; it's quite as indifferent to me 
what he says, as it is to my lord.  If he reviles my lord, as you 
have heard, Sir John, how can I hope to escape?'

'Is it not enough, my lord,' Mr Haredale continued, 'that I, as 
good a gentleman as you, must hold my property, such as it is, by a 
trick at which the state connives because of these hard laws; and 
that we may not teach our youth in schools the common principles of 
right and wrong; but must we be denounced and ridden by such men as 
this!  Here is a man to head your No-Popery cry!  For shame.  For 
shame!'

The infatuated nobleman had glanced more than once at Sir John 
Chester, as if to inquire whether there was any truth in these 
statements concerning Gashford, and Sir John had as often plainly 
answered by a shrug or look, 'Oh dear me! no.'  He now said, in the 
same loud key, and in the same strange manner as before:

'I have nothing to say, sir, in reply, and no desire to hear 
anything more.  I beg you won't obtrude your conversation, or these 
personal attacks, upon me.  I shall not be deterred from doing my 
duty to my country and my countrymen, by any such attempts, whether 
they proceed from emissaries of the Pope or not, I assure you.  
Come, Gashford!'

They had walked on a few paces while speaking, and were now at the 
Hall-door, through which they passed together.  Mr Haredale, 
without any leave-taking, turned away to the river stairs, which 
were close at hand, and hailed the only boatman who remained there.

But the throng of people--the foremost of whom had heard every word 
that Lord George Gordon said, and among all of whom the rumour had 
been rapidly dispersed that the stranger was a Papist who was 
bearding him for his advocacy of the popular cause--came pouring 
out pell-mell, and, forcing the nobleman, his secretary, and Sir 
John Chester on before them, so that they appeared to be at their 
head, crowded to the top of the stairs where Mr Haredale waited 
until the boat was ready, and there stood still, leaving him on a 
little clear space by himself.

They were not silent, however, though inactive.  At first some 
indistinct mutterings arose among them, which were followed by a 
hiss or two, and these swelled by degrees into a perfect storm.  
Then one voice said, 'Down with the Papists!' and there was a 
pretty general cheer, but nothing more.  After a lull of a few 
moments, one man cried out, 'Stone him;' another, 'Duck him;' 
another, in a stentorian voice, 'No Popery!'  This favourite cry 
the rest re-echoed, and the mob, which might have been two hundred 
strong, joined in a general shout.

Mr Haredale had stood calmly on the brink of the steps, until they 
made this demonstration, when he looked round contemptuously, and 
walked at a slow pace down the stairs.  He was pretty near the 
boat, when Gashford, as if without intention, turned about, and 
directly afterwards a great stone was thrown by some hand, in the 
crowd, which struck him on the head, and made him stagger like a 
drunken man.

The blood sprung freely from the wound, and trickled down his coat.  
He turned directly, and rushing up the steps with a boldness and 
passion which made them all fall back, demanded:

'Who did that?  Show me the man who hit me.'

Not a soul moved; except some in the rear who slunk off, and, 
escaping to the other side of the way, looked on like indifferent 
spectators.

'Who did that?' he repeated.  'Show me the man who did it.  Dog, 
was it you?  It was your deed, if not your hand--I know you.'

He threw himself on Gashford as he said the words, and hurled him 
to the ground.  There was a sudden motion in the crowd, and some 
laid hands upon him, but his sword was out, and they fell off 
again.

'My lord--Sir John,'--he cried, 'draw, one of you--you are 
responsible for this outrage, and I look to you.  Draw, if you are 
gentlemen.'  With that he struck Sir John upon the breast with the 
flat of his weapon, and with a burning face and flashing eyes stood 
upon his guard; alone, before them all.

For an instant, for the briefest space of time the mind can readily 
conceive, there was a change in Sir John's smooth face, such as no 
man ever saw there.  The next moment, he stepped forward, and laid 
one hand on Mr Haredale's arm, while with the other he endeavoured 
to appease the crowd.

'My dear friend, my good Haredale, you are blinded with passion--
it's very natural, extremely natural--but you don't know friends 
from foes.'

'I know them all, sir, I can distinguish well--' he retorted, 
almost mad with rage.  'Sir John, Lord George--do you hear me?  Are 
you cowards?'

'Never mind, sir,' said a man, forcing his way between and pushing 
him towards the stairs with friendly violence, 'never mind asking 
that.  For God's sake, get away.  What CAN you do against this 
number?  And there are as many more in the next street, who'll be 
round dfrectly,'--indeed they began to pour in as he said the 
words--'you'd be giddy from that cut, in the first heat of a 
scuffle.  Now do retire, sir, or take my word for it you'll be 
worse used than you would be if every man in the crowd was a woman, 
and that woman Bloody Mary.  Come, sir, make haste--as quick as you 
can.'

Mr Haredale, who began to turn faint and sick, felt how sensible 
this advice was, and descended the steps with his unknown friend's 
assistance.  John Grueby (for John it was) helped him into the 
boat, and giving her a shove off, which sent her thirty feet into 
the tide, bade the waterman pull away like a Briton; and walked up 
again as composedly as if he had just landed.

There was at first a slight disposition on the part of the mob to 
resent this interference; but John looking particularly strong and 
cool, and wearing besides Lord George's livery, they thought better 
of it, and contented themselves with sending a shower of small 
missiles after the boat, which plashed harmlessly in the water; 
for she had by this time cleared the bridge, and was darting 
swiftly down the centre of the stream.

From this amusement, they proceeded to giving Protestant knocks at 
the doors of private houses, breaking a few lamps, and assaulting 
some stray constables.  But, it being whispered that a detachment 
of Life Guards had been sent for, they took to their heels with 
great expedition, and left the street quite clear.



Chapter 44


When the concourse separated, and, dividing into chance clusters, 
drew off in various directions, there still remained upon the scene 
of the late disturbance, one man.  This man was Gashford, who, 
bruised by his late fall, and hurt in a much greater degree by the 
indignity he had undergone, and the exposure of which he had been 
the victim, limped up and down, breathing curses and threats of 
vengeance.

It was not the secretary's nature to waste his wrath in words.  
While he vented the froth of his malevolence in those effusions, he 
kept a steady eye on two men, who, having disappeared with the rest 
when the alarm was spread, had since returned, and were now visible 
in the moonlight, at no great distance, as they walked to and fro, 
and talked together.

He made no move towards them, but waited patiently on the dark side 
of the street, until they were tired of strolling backwards and 
forwards and walked away in company.  Then he followed, but at some 
distance: keeping them in view, without appearing to have that 
object, or being seen by them.

They went up Parliament Street, past Saint Martin's church, and 
away by Saint Giles's to Tottenham Court Road, at the back of 
which, upon the western side, was then a place called the Green 
Lanes.  This was a retired spot, not of the choicest kind, leading 
into the fields.  Great heaps of ashes; stagnant pools, overgrown 
with rank grass and duckweed; broken turnstiles; and the upright 
posts of palings long since carried off for firewood, which menaced 
all heedless walkers with their jagged and rusty nails; were the 
leading features of the landscape: while here and there a donkey, 
or a ragged horse, tethered to a stake, and cropping off a wretched 
meal from the coarse stunted turf, were quite in keeping with the 
scene, and would have suggested (if the houses had not done so, 
sufficiently, of themselves) how very poor the people were who 
lived in the crazy huts adjacent, and how foolhardy it might prove 
for one who carried money, or wore decent clothes, to walk that way 
alone, unless by daylight.

Poverty has its whims and shows of taste, as wealth has.  Some of 
these cabins were turreted, some had false windows painted on their 
rotten walls; one had a mimic clock, upon a crazy tower of four 
feet high, which screened the chimney; each in its little patch of 
ground had a rude seat or arbour.  The population dealt in bones, 
in rags, in broken glass, in old wheels, in birds, and dogs.  
These, in their several ways of stowage, filled the gardens; and 
shedding a perfume, not of the most delicious nature, in the air, 
filled it besides with yelps, and screams, and howling.

Into this retreat, the secretary followed the two men whom he had 
held in sight; and here he saw them safely lodged, in one of the 
meanest houses, which was but a room, and that of small dimensions.  
He waited without, until the sound of their voices, joined in a 
discordant song, assured him they were making merry; and then 
approaching the door, by means of a tottering plank which crossed 
the ditch in front, knocked at it with his hand.

'Muster Gashfordl' said the man who opened it, taking his pipe from 
his mouth, in evident surprise.  'Why, who'd have thought of this 
here honour!  Walk in, Muster Gashford--walk in, sir.'

Gashford required no second invitation, and entered with a gracious 
air.  There was a fire in the rusty grate (for though the spring 
was pretty far advanced, the nights were cold), and on a stool 
beside it Hugh sat smoking.  Dennis placed a chair, his only one, 
for the secretary, in front of the hearth; and took his seat again 
upon the stool he had left when he rose to give the visitor 
admission.

'What's in the wind now, Muster Gashford?' he said, as he resumed 
his pipe, and looked at him askew.  'Any orders from head-quarters?  
Are we going to begin?  What is it, Muster Gashford?'

'Oh, nothing, nothing,' rejoined the secretary, with a friendly nod 
to Hugh.  'We have broken the ice, though.  We had a little spurt 
to-day--eh, Dennis?'

'A very little one,' growled the hangman.  'Not half enough for me.'

'Nor me neither!' cried Hugh.  'Give us something to do with life 
in it--with life in it, master.  Ha, ha!'

'Why, you wouldn't,' said the secretary, with his worst expression 
of face, and in his mildest tones, 'have anything to do, with--with 
death in it?'

'I don't know that,' replied Hugh.  'I'm open to orders.  I don't 
care; not I.'

'Nor I!' vociferated Dennis.

'Brave fellows!' said the secretary, in as pastor-like a voice as 
if he were commending them for some uncommon act of valour and 
generosity.  'By the bye'--and here he stopped and warmed his 
hands: then suddenly looked up--'who threw that stone to-day?'

Mr Dennis coughed and shook his head, as who should say, 'A mystery 
indeed!'  Hugh sat and smoked in silence.

'It was well done!' said the secretary, warming his hands again.  
'I should like to know that man.'

'Would you?' said Dennis, after looking at his face to assure 
himself that he was serious.  'Would you like to know that man, 
Muster Gashford?'

'I should indeed,' replied the secretary.

'Why then, Lord love you,' said the hangman, in his hoarest 
chuckle, as he pointed with his pipe to Hugh, 'there he sits.  
That's the man.  My stars and halters, Muster Gashford,' he added 
in a whisper, as he drew his stool close to him and jogged him with 
his elbow, 'what a interesting blade he is!  He wants as much 
holding in as a thorough-bred bulldog.  If it hadn't been for me 
to-day, he'd have had that 'ere Roman down, and made a riot of it, 
in another minute.'

'And why not?' cried Hugh in a surly voice, as he overheard this 
last remark.  'Where's the good of putting things off?  Strike 
while the iron's hot; that's what I say.'

'Ah!' retorted Dennis, shaking his head, with a kind of pity for 
his friend's ingenuous youth; 'but suppose the iron an't hot, 
brother!  You must get people's blood up afore you strike, and have 
'em in the humour.  There wasn't quite enough to provoke 'em to-
day, I tell you.  If you'd had your way, you'd have spoilt the fun 
to come, and ruined us.'

'Dennis is quite right,' said Gashford, smoothly.  'He is 
perfectly correct.  Dennis has great knowledge of the world.'

'I ought to have, Muster Gashford, seeing what a many people I've 
helped out of it, eh?' grinned the hangman, whispering the words 
behind his hand.

The secretary laughed at this jest as much as Dennis could desire, 
and when he had done, said, turning to Hugh:

'Dennis's policy was mine, as you may have observed.  You saw, for 
instance, how I fell when I was set upon.  I made no resistance.  I 
did nothing to provoke an outbreak.  Oh dear no!'

'No, by the Lord Harry!' cried Dennis with a noisy laugh, 'you went 
down very quiet, Muster Gashford--and very flat besides.  I thinks 
to myself at the time "it's all up with Muster Gashford!"  I never 
see a man lay flatter nor more still--with the life in him--than 
you did to-day.  He's a rough 'un to play with, is that 'ere 
Papist, and that's the fact.'

The secretary's face, as Dennis roared with laughter, and turned 
his wrinkled eyes on Hugh who did the like, might have furnished a 
study for the devil's picture.  He sat quite silent until they 
were serious again, and then said, looking round:

'We are very pleasant here; so very pleasant, Dennis, that but for 
my lord's particular desire that I should sup with him, and the 
time being very near at hand, I should he inclined to stay, until 
it would be hardly safe to go homeward.  I come upon a little 
business--yes, I do--as you supposed.  It's very flattering to you; 
being this.  If we ever should be obliged--and we can't tell, you 
know--this is a very uncertain world'--

'I believe you, Muster Gashford,' interposed the hangman with a 
grave nod.  'The uncertainties as I've seen in reference to this 
here state of existence, the unexpected contingencies as have come 
about!--Oh my eye!'  Feeling the subject much too vast for 
expression, he puffed at his pipe again, and looked the rest.

'I say,' resumed the secretary, in a slow, impressive way; 'we 
can't tell what may come to pass; and if we should be obliged, 
against our wills, to have recourse to violence, my lord (who has 
suffered terribly to-day, as far as words can go) consigns to you 
two--bearing in mind my recommendation of you both, as good staunch 
men, beyond all doubt and suspicion--the pleasant task of 
punishing this Haredale.  You may do as you please with him, or 
his, provided that you show no mercy, and no quarter, and leave no 
two beams of his house standing where the builder placed them.  You 
may sack it, burn it, do with it as you like, but it must come 
down; it must be razed to the ground; and he, and all belonging to 
him, left as shelterless as new-born infants whom their mothers 
have exposed.  Do you understand me?' said Gashford, pausing, and 
pressing his hands together gently.

'Understand you, master!' cried Hugh.  'You speak plain now.  Why, 
this is hearty!'

'I knew you would like it,' said Gashford, shaking him by the hand; 
'I thought you would.  Good night!  Don't rise, Dennis: I would 
rather find my way alone.  I may have to make other visits here, 
and it's pleasant to come and go without disturbing you.  I can 
find my way perfectly well.  Good night!'

He was gone, and had shut the door behind him.  They looked at each 
other, and nodded approvingly: Dennis stirred up the fire.

'This looks a little more like business!' he said.

'Ay, indeed!' cried Hugh; 'this suits me!'

'I've heerd it said of Muster Gashford,' said the hangman, 'that 
he'd a surprising memory and wonderful firmness--that he never 
forgot, and never forgave.--Let's drink his health!'

Hugh readily complied--pouring no liquor on the floor when he drank 
this toast--and they pledged the secretary as a man after their own 
hearts, in a bumper.



Chapter 45


While the worst passions of the worst men were thus working in the 
dark, and the mantle of religion, assumed to cover the ugliest 
deformities, threatened to become the shroud of all that was good 
and peaceful in society, a circumstance occurred which once more 
altered the position of two persons from whom this history has long 
been separated, and to whom it must now return.

In a small English country town, the inhabitants of which supported 
themselves by the labour of their hands in plaiting and preparing 
straw for those who made bonnets and other articles of dress and 
ornament from that material,--concealed under an assumed name, and 
living in a quiet poverty which knew no change, no pleasures, and 
few cares but that of struggling on from day to day in one great 
toil for bread,--dwelt Barnaby and his mother.  Their poor cottage 
had known no stranger's foot since they sought the shelter of its 
roof five years before; nor had they in all that time held any 
commerce or communication with the old world from which they had 
fled.  To labour in peace, and devote her labour and her life to 
her poor son, was all the widow sought.  If happiness can be said 
at any time to be the lot of one on whom a secret sorrow preys, she 
was happy now.  Tranquillity, resignation, and her strong love of 
him who needed it so much, formed the small circle of her quiet 
joys; and while that remained unbroken, she was contented.

For Barnaby himself, the time which had flown by, had passed him 
like the wind.  The daily suns of years had shed no brighter gleam 
of reason on his mind; no dawn had broken on his long, dark night.  
He would sit sometimes--often for days together on a low seat by 
the fire or by the cottage door, busy at work (for he had learnt 
the art his mother plied), and listening, God help him, to the 
tales she would repeat, as a lure to keep him in her sight.  He had 
no recollection of these little narratives; the tale of yesterday 
was new to him upon the morrow; but he liked them at the moment; 
and when the humour held him, would remain patiently within doors, 
hearing her stories like a little child, and working cheerfully 
from sunrise until it was too dark to see.

At other times,--and then their scanty earnings were barely 
sufficient to furnish them with food, though of the coarsest sort,--
he would wander abroad from dawn of day until the twilight 
deepened into night.  Few in that place, even of the children, 
could be idle, and he had no companions of his own kind.  Indeed 
there were not many who could have kept up with him in his rambles, 
had there been a legion.  But there were a score of vagabond dogs 
belonging to the neighbours, who served his purpose quite as well.  
With two or three of these, or sometimes with a full half-dozen 
barking at his heels, he would sally forth on some long expedition 
that consumed the day; and though, on their return at nightfall, 
the dogs would come home limping and sore-footed, and almost spent 
with their fatigue, Barnaby was up and off again at sunrise with 
some new attendants of the same class, with whom he would return in 
like manner.  On all these travels, Grip, in his little basket at 
his master's back, was a constant member of the party, and when 
they set off in fine weather and in high spirits, no dog barked 
louder than the raven.

Their pleasures on these excursions were simple enough.  A crust of 
bread and scrap of meat, with water from the brook or spring, 
sufficed for their repast.  Barnaby's enjoyments were, to walk, and 
run, and leap, till he was tired; then to lie down in the long 
grass, or by the growing corn, or in the shade of some tall tree, 
looking upward at the light clouds as they floated over the blue 
surface of the sky, and listening to the lark as she poured out her 
brilliant song.  There were wild-flowers to pluck--the bright red 
poppy, the gentle harebell, the cowslip, and the rose.  There were 
birds to watch; fish; ants; worms; hares or rabbits, as they darted 
across the distant pathway in the wood and so were gone: millions 
of living things to have an interest in, and lie in wait for, and 
clap hands and shout in memory of, when they had disappeared.  In 
default of these, or when they wearied, there was the merry 
sunlight to hunt out, as it crept in aslant through leaves and 
boughs of trees, and hid far down--deep, deep, in hollow places--
like a silver pool, where nodding branches seemed to bathe and 
sport; sweet scents of summer air breathing over fields of beans or 
clover; the perfume of wet leaves or moss; the life of waving 
trees, and shadows always changing.  When these or any of them 
tired, or in excess of pleasing tempted him to shut his eyes, there 
was slumber in the midst of all these soft delights, with the 
gentle wind murmuring like music in his ears, and everything around 
melting into one delicious dream.

Their hut--for it was little more--stood on the outskirts of the 
town, at a short distance from the high road, but in a secluded 
place, where few chance passengers strayed at any season of the 
year.  It had a plot of garden-ground attached, which Barnaby, in 
fits and starts of working, trimmed, and kept in order.  Within 
doors and without, his mother laboured for their common good; and 
hail, rain, snow, or sunshine, found no difference in her.

Though so far removed from the scenes of her past life, and with so 
little thought or hope of ever visiting them again, she seemed to 
have a strange desire to know what happened in the busy world.  Any 
old newspaper, or scrap of intelligence from London, she caught at 
with avidity.  The excitement it produced was not of a pleasurable 
kind, for her manner at such times expressed the keenest anxiety 
and dread; but it never faded in the least degree.  Then, and in 
stormy winter nights, when the wind blew loud and strong, the old 
expression came into her face, and she would be seized with a fit 
of trembling, like one who had an ague.  But Barnaby noted little 
of this; and putting a great constraint upon herself, she usually 
recovered her accustomed manner before the change had caught his 
observation.

Grip was by no means an idle or unprofitable member of the humble 
household.  Partly by dint of Barnaby's tuition, and partly by 
pursuing a species of self-instruction common to his tribe, and 
exerting his powers of observation to the utmost, he had acquired a 
degree of sagacity which rendered him famous for miles round.  His 
conversational powers and surprising performances were the 
universal theme: and as many persons came to see the wonderful 
raven, and none left his exertions unrewarded--when he condescended 
to exhibit, which was not always, for genius is capricious--his 
earnings formed an important item in the common stock.  Indeed, the 
bird himself appeared to know his value well; for though he was 
perfectly free and unrestrained in the presence of Barnaby and his 
mother, he maintained in public an amazing gravity, and never 
stooped to any other gratuitous performances than biting the ankles 
of vagabond boys (an exercise in which he much delighted), killing 
a fowl or two occasionally, and swallowing the dinners of various 
neighbouring dogs, of whom the boldest held him in great awe and 
dread.

Time had glided on in this way, and nothing had happened to disturb 
or change their mode of life, when, one summer's night in June, 
they were in their little garden, resting from the labours of the 
day.  The widow's work was yet upon her knee, and strewn upon the 
ground about her; and Barnaby stood leaning on his spade, gazing at 
the brightness in the west, and singing softly to himself.

'A brave evening, mother!  If we had, chinking in our pockets, but 
a few specks of that gold which is piled up yonder in the sky, we 
should be rich for life.'

'We are better as we are,' returned the widow with a quiet smile.  
'Let us be contented, and we do not want and need not care to have 
it, though it lay shining at our feet.'

'Ay!' said Barnaby, resting with crossed arms on his spade, and 
looking wistfully at the sunset, that's well enough, mother; but 
gold's a good thing to have.  I wish that I knew where to find it.  
Grip and I could do much with gold, be sure of that.'

'What would you do?' she asked.

'What!  A world of things.  We'd dress finely--you and I, I mean; 
not Grip--keep horses, dogs, wear bright colours and feathers, do 
no more work, live delicately and at our ease.  Oh, we'd find uses 
for it, mother, and uses that would do us good.  I would I knew 
where gold was buried.  How hard I'd work to dig it up!'

'You do not know,' said his mother, rising from her seat and laying 
her hand upon his shoulder, 'what men have done to win it, and how 
they have found, too late, that it glitters brightest at a 
distance, and turns quite dim and dull when handled.'

'Ay, ay; so you say; so you think,' he answered, still looking 
eagerly in the same direction.  'For all that, mother, I should 
like to try.'

'Do you not see,' she said, 'how red it is?  Nothing bears so many 
stains of blood, as gold.  Avoid it.  None have such cause to hate 
its name as we have.  Do not so much as think of it, dear love.  It 
has brought such misery and suffering on your head and mine as few 
have known, and God grant few may have to undergo.  I would rather 
we were dead and laid down in our graves, than you should ever come 
to love it.'

For a moment Barnaby withdrew his eyes and looked at her with 
wonder.  Then, glancing from the redness in the sky to the mark 
upon his wrist as if he would compare the two, he seemed about to 
question her with earnestness, when a new object caught his 
wandering attention, and made him quite forgetful of his purpose.

This was a man with dusty feet and garments, who stood, bare-
headed, behind the hedge that divided their patch of garden from 
the pathway, and leant meekly forward as if he sought to mingle 
with their conversation, and waited for his time to speak.  His 
face was turned towards the brightness, too, but the light that 
fell upon it showed that he was blind, and saw it not.

'A blessing on those voices!' said the wayfarer.  'I feel the 
beauty of the night more keenly, when I hear them.  They are like 
eyes to me.  Will they speak again, and cheer the heart of a poor 
traveller?'

'Have you no guide?' asked the widow, after a moment's pause.

'None but that,' he answered, pointing with his staff towards the 
sun; 'and sometimes a milder one at night, but she is idle now.'

'Have you travelled far?'

'A weary way and long,' rejoined the traveller as he shook his 
head.  'A weary, weary, way.  I struck my stick just now upon the 
bucket of your well--be pleased to let me have a draught of water, 
lady.'

'Why do you call me lady?' she returned.  'I am as poor as you.'

'Your speech is soft and gentle, and I judge by that,' replied the 
man.  'The coarsest stuffs and finest silks, are--apart from the 
sense of touch--alike to me.  I cannot judge you by your dress.'

'Come round this way,' said Barnaby, who had passed out at the 
garden-gate and now stood close beside him.  'Put your hand in 
mine.  You're blind and always in the dark, eh?  Are you frightened 
in the dark?  Do you see great crowds of faces, now?  Do they grin 
and chatter?'

'Alas!' returned the other, 'I see nothing.  Waking or sleeping, 
nothing.'

Barnaby looked curiously at his eyes, and touching them with his 
fingers, as an inquisitive child might, led him towards the house.

'You have come a long distance, 'said the widow, meeting him at the 
door.  'How have you found your way so far?'

'Use and necessity are good teachers, as I have heard--the best of 
any,' said the blind man, sitting down upon the chair to which 
Barnaby had led him, and putting his hat and stick upon the red-
tiled floor.  'May neither you nor your son ever learn under them.  
They are rough masters.'

'You have wandered from the road, too,' said the widow, in a tone 
of pity.

'Maybe, maybe,' returned the blind man with a sigh, and yet with 
something of a smile upon his face, 'that's likely.  Handposts and 
milestones are dumb, indeed, to me.  Thank you the more for this 
rest, and this refreshing drink!'

As he spoke, he raised the mug of water to his mouth.  It was 
clear, and cold, and sparkling, but not to his taste nevertheless, 
or his thirst was not very great, for he only wetted his lips and 
put it down again.

He wore, hanging with a long strap round his neck, a kind of scrip 
or wallet, in which to carry food.  The widow set some bread and 
cheese before him, but he thanked her, and said that through the 
kindness of the charitable he had broken his fast once since 
morning, and was not hungry.  When he had made her this reply, he 
opened his wallet, and took out a few pence, which was all it 
appeared to contain.

'Might I make bold to ask,' he said, turning towards where Barnaby 
stood looking on, 'that one who has the gift of sight, would lay 
this out for me in bread to keep me on my way?  Heaven's blessing 
on the young feet that will bestir themselves in aid of one so 
helpless as a sightless man!'

Barnaby looked at his mother, who nodded assent; in another moment 
he was gone upon his charitable errand.  The blind man sat 
listening with an attentive face, until long after the sound of his 
retreating footsteps was inaudible to the widow, and then said, 
suddenly, and in a very altered tone:

'There are various degrees and kinds of blindness, widow.  There 
is the connubial blindness, ma'am, which perhaps you may have 
observed in the course of your own experience, and which is a kind 
of wilful and self-bandaging blindness.  There is the blindness of 
party, ma'am, and public men, which is the blindness of a mad bull 
in the midst of a regiment of soldiers clothed in red.  There is 
the blind confidence of youth, which is the blindness of young 
kittens, whose eyes have not yet opened on the world; and there is 
that physical blindness, ma'am, of which I am, contrairy to my own 
desire, a most illustrious example.  Added to these, ma'am, is that 
blindness of the intellect, of which we have a specimen in your 
interesting son, and which, having sometimes glimmerings and 
dawnings of the light, is scarcely to be trusted as a total 
darkness.  Therefore, ma'am, I have taken the liberty to get him 
out of the way for a short time, while you and I confer together, 
and this precaution arising out of the delicacy of my sentiments 
towards yourself, you will excuse me, ma'am, I know.'

Having delivered himself of this speech with many flourishes of 
manner, he drew from beneath his coat a flat stone bottle, and 
holding the cork between his teeth, qualified his mug of water with 
a plentiful infusion of the liquor it contained.  He politely 
drained the bumper to her health, and the ladies, and setting it 
down empty, smacked his lips with infinite relish.

'I am a citizen of the world, ma'am,' said the blind man, corking 
his bottle, 'and if I seem to conduct myself with freedom, it is 
therefore.  You wonder who I am, ma'am, and what has brought me 
here.  Such experience of human nature as I have, leads me to that 
conclusion, without the aid of eyes by which to read the movements 
of your soul as depicted in your feminine features.  I will 
satisfy your curiosity immediately, ma'am; immediately.'  With 
that he slapped his bottle on its broad back, and having put it 
under his garment as before, crossed his legs and folded his hands, 
and settled himself in his chair, previous to proceeding any 
further.

The change in his manner was so unexpected, the craft and 
wickedness of his deportment were so much aggravated by his 
condition--for we are accustomed to see in those who have lost a 
human sense, something in its place almost divine--and this 
alteration bred so many fears in her whom he addressed, that she 
could not pronounce one word.  After waiting, as it seemed, for 
some remark or answer, and waiting in vain, the visitor resumed:

'Madam, my name is Stagg.  A friend of mine who has desired the 
honour of meeting with you any time these five years past, has 
commissioned me to call upon you.  I should be glad to whisper that 
gentleman's name in your ear.--Zounds, ma'am, are you deaf?  Do you 
hear me say that I should be glad to whisper my friend's name in 
your ear?'

'You need not repeat it,' said the widow, with a stifled groan; 'I 
see too well from whom you come.'

'But as a man of honour, ma'am,' said the blind man, striking 
himself on the breast, 'whose credentials must not be disputed, I 
take leave to say that I WILL mention that gentleman's name.  Ay, 
ay,' he added, seeming to catch with his quick ear the very motion 
of her hand, 'but not aloud.  With your leave, ma'am, I desire the 
favour of a whisper.'

She moved towards him, and stooped down.  He muttered a word in her 
ear; and, wringing her hands, she paced up and down the room like 
one distracted.  The blind man, with perfect composure, produced 
his bottle again, mixed another glassful; put it up as before; and, 
drinking from time to time, followed her with his face in silence.

'You are slow in conversation, widow,' he said after a time, 
pausing in his draught.  'We shall have to talk before your son.'

'What would you have me do?' she answered.  'What do you want?'

'We are poor, widow, we are poor,' he retorted, stretching out his 
right hand, and rubbing his thumb upon its palm.

'Poor!' she cried.  'And what am I?'

'Comparisons are odious,' said the blind man.  'I don't know, I 
don't care.  I say that we are poor.  My friend's circumstances are 
indifferent, and so are mine.  We must have our rights, widow, or 
we must be bought off.  But you know that, as well as I, so where 
is the use of talking?'

She still walked wildly to and fro.  At length, stopping abruptly 
before him, she said:

'Is he near here?'

'He is.  Close at hand.'

'Then I am lost!'

'Not lost, widow,' said the blind man, calmly; 'only found.  Shall 
I call him?'

'Not for the world,' she answered, with a shudder.

'Very good,' he replied, crossing his legs again, for he had made 
as though he would rise and walk to the door.  'As you please, 
widow.  His presence is not necessary that I know of.  But both he 
and I must live; to live, we must eat and drink; to eat and drink, 
we must have money:--I say no more.'

'Do you know how pinched and destitute I am?' she retorted.  'I do 
not think you do, or can.  If you had eyes, and could look around 
you on this poor place, you would have pity on me.  Oh! let your 
heart be softened by your own affliction, friend, and have some 
sympathy with mine.'

The blind man snapped his fingers as he answered:

'--Beside the question, ma'am, beside the question.  I have the 
softest heart in the world, but I can't live upon it.  Many a 
gentleman lives well upon a soft head, who would find a heart of 
the same quality a very great drawback.  Listen to me.  This is a 
matter of business, with which sympathies and sentiments have 
nothing to do.  As a mutual friend, I wish to arrange it in a 
satisfactory manner, if possible; and thus the case stands.--If you 
are very poor now, it's your own choice.  You have friends who, in 
case of need, are always ready to help you.  My friend is in a more 
destitute and desolate situation than most men, and, you and he 
being linked together in a common cause, he naturally looks to you 
to assist him.  He has boarded and lodged with me a long time (for 
as I said just now, I am very soft-hearted), and I quite approve of 
his entertaining this opinion.  You have always had a roof over 
your head; he has always been an outcast.  You have your son to 
comfort and assist you; he has nobody at all.  The advantages must 
not be all one side.  You are in the same boat, and we must divide 
the ballast a little more equally.'

She was about to speak, but he checked her, and went on.

'The only way of doing this, is by making up a little purse now and 
then for my friend; and that's what I advise.  He bears you no 
malice that I know of, ma'am: so little, that although you have 
treated him harshly more than once, and driven him, I may say, out 
of doors, he has that regard for you that I believe even if you 
disappointed him now, he would consent to take charge of your son, 
and to make a man of him.'

He laid a great stress on these latter words, and paused as if to 
find out what effect they had produced.  She only answered by her 
tears.

'He is a likely lad,' said the blind man, thoughtfully, 'for many 
purposes, and not ill-disposed to try his fortune in a little 
change and bustle, if I may judge from what I heard of his talk 
with you to-night.--Come.  In a word, my friend has pressing 
necessity for twenty pounds.  You, who can give up an annuity, can 
get that sum for him.  It's a pity you should be troubled.  You 
seem very comfortable here, and it's worth that much to remain so.  
Twenty pounds, widow, is a moderate demand.  You know where to 
apply for it; a post will bring it you.--Twenty pounds!'

She was about to answer him again, but again he stopped her.

'Don't say anything hastily; you might be sorry for it.  Think of 
it a little while.  Twenty pounds--of other people's money--how 
easy!  Turn it over in your mind.  I'm in no hurry.  Night's coming 
on, and if I don't sleep here, I shall not go far.  Twenty pounds!  
Consider of it, ma'am, for twenty minutes; give each pound a 
minute; that's a fair allowance.  I'll enjoy the air the while, 
which is very mild and pleasant in these parts.'

With these words he groped his way to the door, carrying his chair 
with him.  Then seating himself, under a spreading honeysuckle, and 
stretching his legs across the threshold so that no person could 
pass in or out without his knowledge, he took from his pocket a 
pipe, flint, steel and tinder-box, and began to smoke.  It was a 
lovely evening, of that gentle kind, and at that time of year, when 
the twilight is most beautiful.  Pausing now and then to let his 
smoke curl slowly off, and to sniff the grateful fragrance of the 
flowers, he sat there at his ease--as though the cottage were his 
proper dwelling, and he had held undisputed possession of it all 
his life--waiting for the widow's answer and for Barnaby's return.



Chapter 46


When Barnaby returned with the bread, the sight of the pious old 
pilgrim smoking his pipe and making himself so thoroughly at home, 
appeared to surprise even him; the more so, as that worthy person, 
instead of putting up the loaf in his wallet as a scarce and 
precious article, tossed it carelessly on the table, and producing 
his bottle, bade him sit down and drink.

'For I carry some comfort, you see,' he said.  'Taste that.  Is it 
good?'

The water stood in Barnaby's eyes as he coughed from the strength 
of the draught, and answered in the affirmative.

'Drink some more,' said the blind man; 'don't be afraid of it.  
You don't taste anything like that, often, eh?'

'Often!' cried Barnaby.  'Never!'

'Too poor?' returned the blind man with a sigh.  'Ay.  That's bad.  
Your mother, poor soul, would be happier if she was richer, 
Barnaby.'

'Why, so I tell her--the very thing I told her just before you came 
to-night, when all that gold was in the sky,' said Barnaby, drawing 
his chair nearer to him, and looking eagerly in his face.  'Tell 
me.  Is there any way of being rich, that I could find out?'

'Any way!  A hundred ways.'

'Ay, ay?' he returned.  'Do you say so?  What are they?--Nay, 
mother, it's for your sake I ask; not mine;--for yours, indeed.  
What are they?'

The blind man turned his face, on which there was a smile of 
triumph, to where the widow stood in great distress; and answered,

'Why, they are not to be found out by stay-at-homes, my good 
friend.'

'By stay-at-homes!' cried Barnaby, plucking at his sleeve.  'But I 
am not one.  Now, there you mistake.  I am often out before the 
sun, and travel home when he has gone to rest.  I am away in the 
woods before the day has reached the shady places, and am often 
there when the bright moon is peeping through the boughs, and 
looking down upon the other moon that lives in the water.  As I 
walk along, I try to find, among the grass and moss, some of that 
small money for which she works so hard and used to shed so many 
tears.  As I lie asleep in the shade, I dream of it--dream of 
digging it up in heaps; and spying it out, hidden under bushes; and 
seeing it sparkle, as the dew-drops do, among the leaves.  But I 
never find it.  Tell me where it is.  I'd go there, if the journey 
were a whole year long, because I know she would be happier when I 
came home and brought some with me.  Speak again.  I'll listen to 
you if you talk all night.'

The blind man passed his hand lightly over the poor fellow's face, 
and finding that his elbows were planted on the table, that his 
chin rested on his two hands, that he leaned eagerly forward, and 
that his whole manner expressed the utmost interest and anxiety, 
paused for a minute as though he desired the widow to observe this 
fully, and then made answer:

'It's in the world, bold Barnaby, the merry world; not in solitary 
places like those you pass your time in, but in crowds, and where 
there's noise and rattle.'

'Good! good!' cried Barnaby, rubbing his hands.  'Yes! I love 
that.  Grip loves it too.  It suits us both.  That's brave!'

'--The kind of places,' said the blind man, 'that a young fellow 
likes, and in which a good son may do more for his mother, and 
himself to boot, in a month, than he could here in all his life--
that is, if he had a friend, you know, and some one to advise 
with.'

'You hear this, mother?' cried Barnaby, turning to her with 
delight.  'Never tell me we shouldn't heed it, if it lay shining 
at out feet.  Why do we heed it so much now?  Why do you toil from 
morning until night?'

'Surely,' said the blind man, 'surely.  Have you no answer, widow?  
Is your mind,' he slowly added, 'not made up yet?'

'Let me speak with you,' she answered, 'apart.'

'Lay your hand upon my sleeve,' said Stagg, arising from the table; 
'and lead me where you will.  Courage, bold Barnaby.  We'll talk 
more of this: I've a fancy for you.  Wait there till I come back.  
Now, widow.'

She led him out at the door, and into the little garden, where they 
stopped.

'You are a fit agent,' she said, in a half breathless manner, 'and 
well represent the man who sent you here.'

'I'll tell him that you said so,' Stagg retorted.  'He has a regard 
for you, and will respect me the more (if possible) for your 
praise.  We must have our rights, widow.'

'Rights!  Do you know,' she said, 'that a word from me--'

'Why do you stop?' returned the blind man calmly, after a long 
pause.  'Do I know that a word from you would place my friend in 
the last position of the dance of life?  Yes, I do.  What of that?  
It will never be spoken, widow.'

'You are sure of that?'

'Quite--so sure, that I don't come here to discuss the question.  I 
say we must have our rights, or we must be bought off.  Keep to 
that point, or let me return to my young friend, for I have an 
interest in the lad, and desire to put him in the way of making his 
fortune.  Bah! you needn't speak,' he added hastily; 'I know what 
you would say: you have hinted at it once already.  Have I no 
feeling for you, because I am blind?  No, I have not.  Why do you 
expect me, being in darkness, to be better than men who have their 
sight--why should you?  Is the hand of Heaven more manifest in my 
having no eyes, than in your having two?  It's the cant of you 
folks to be horrified if a blind man robs, or lies, or steals; oh 
yes, it's far worse in him, who can barely live on the few 
halfpence that are thrown to him in streets, than in you, who can 
see, and work, and are not dependent on the mercies of the world.  
A curse on you!  You who have five senses may be wicked at your 
pleasure; we who have four, and want the most important, are to 
live and be moral on our affliction.  The true charity and justice 
of rich to poor, all the world over!'

He paused a moment when he had said these words, and caught the 
sound of money, jingling in her hand.

'Well?' he cried, quickly resuming his former manner.  'That should 
lead to something.  The point, widow?'

'First answer me one question,' she replied.  'You say he is close 
at hand.  Has he left London?'

'Being close at hand, widow, it would seem he has,' returned the 
blind man.

'I mean, for good?  You know that.'

'Yes, for good.  The truth is, widow, that his making a longer stay 
there might have had disagreeable consequences.  He has come away 
for that reason.'

'Listen,' said the widow, telling some money out, upon a bench 
beside them.  'Count.'

'Six,' said the blind man, listening attentively.  'Any more?'

'They are the savings,' she answered, 'of five years.  Six 
guineas.'

He put out his hand for one of the coins; felt it carefully, put it 
between his teeth, rung it on the bench; and nodded to her to 
proceed.

'These have been scraped together and laid by, lest sickness or 
death should separate my son and me.  They have been purchased at 
the price of much hunger, hard labour, and want of rest.  If you 
CAN take them--do--on condition that you leave this place upon the 
instant, and enter no more into that room, where he sits now, 
expecting your return.'

'Six guineas,' said the blind man, shaking his head, 'though of the 
fullest weight that were ever coined, fall very far short of twenty 
pounds, widow.'

'For such a sum, as you know, I must write to a distant part of the 
country.  To do that, and receive an answer, I must have time.'

'Two days?' said Stagg.

'More.'

'Four days?'

'A week.  Return on this day week, at the same hour, but not to the 
house.  Wait at the corner of the lane.'

'Of course,' said the blind man, with a crafty look, 'I shall find 
you there?'

'Where else can I take refuge?  Is it not enough that you have made 
a beggar of me, and that I have sacrificed my whole store, so 
hardly earned, to preserve this home?'

'Humph!' said the blind man, after some consideration.  'Set me 
with my face towards the point you speak of, and in the middle of 
the road.  Is this the spot?'

'It is.'

'On this day week at sunset.  And think of him within doors.--For 
the present, good night.'

She made him no answer, nor did he stop for any.  He went slowly 
away, turning his head from time to time, and stopping to listen, 
as if he were curious to know whether he was watched by any one.  
The shadows of night were closing fast around, and he was soon lost 
in the gloom.  It was not, however, until she had traversed the 
lane from end to end, and made sure that he was gone, that she re-
entered the cottage, and hurriedly barred the door and window.

'Mother!' said Barnaby.  'What is the matter?  Where is the blind 
man?'

'He is gone.'

'Gone!' he cried, starting up.  'I must have more talk with him.  
Which way did he take?'

'I don't know,' she answered, folding her arms about him.  'You 
must not go out to-night.  There are ghosts and dreams abroad.'

'Ay?' said Barnaby, in a frightened whisper.

'It is not safe to stir.  We must leave this place to-morrow.'

'This place!  This cottage--and the little garden, mother!'

'Yes!  To-morrow morning at sunrise.  We must travel to London; 
lose ourselves in that wide place--there would be some trace of us 
in any other town--then travel on again, and find some new abode.'

Little persuasion was required to reconcile Barnaby to anything 
that promised change.  In another minute, he was wild with delight; 
in another, full of grief at the prospect of parting with his 
friends the dogs; in another, wild again; then he was fearful of 
what she had said to prevent his wandering abroad that night, and 
full of terrors and strange questions.  His light-heartedness in 
the end surmounted all his other feelings, and lying down in his 
clothes to the end that he might be ready on the morrow, he soon 
fell fast asleep before the poor turf fire.

His mother did not close her eyes, but sat beside him, watching.  
Every breath of wind sounded in her ears like that dreaded footstep 
at the door, or like that hand upon the latch, and made the calm 
summer night, a night of horror.  At length the welcome day 
appeared.  When she had made the little preparations which were 
needful for their journey, and had prayed upon her knees with many 
tears, she roused Barnaby, who jumped up gaily at her summons.

His clothes were few enough, and to carry Grip was a labour of 
love.  As the sun shed his earliest beams upon the earth, they 
closed the door of their deserted home, and turned away.  The sky 
was blue and bright.  The air was fresh and filled with a thousand 
perfumes.  Barnaby looked upward, and laughed with all his heart.

But it was a day he usually devoted to a long ramble, and one of 
the dogs--the ugliest of them all--came bounding up, and jumping 
round him in the fulness of his joy.  He had to bid him go back in 
a surly tone, and his heart smote him while he did so.  The dog 
retreated; turned with a half-incredulous, half-imploring look; 
came a little back; and stopped.

It was the last appeal of an old companion and a faithful friend--
cast off.  Barnaby could bear no more, and as he shook his head and 
waved his playmate home, he burst into tears.

'Oh mother, mother, how mournful he will be when he scratches at 
the door, and finds it always shut!'

There was such a sense of home in the thought, that though her own 
eyes overflowed she would not have obliterated the recollection of 
it, either from her own mind or from his, for the wealth of the 
whole wide world.



Chapter 47


In the exhaustless catalogue of Heaven's mercies to mankind, the 
power we have of finding some germs of comfort in the hardest 
trials must ever occupy the foremost place; not only because it 
supports and upholds us when we most require to be sustained, but 
because in this source of consolation there is something, we have 
reason to believe, of the divine spirit; something of that goodness 
which detects amidst our own evil doings, a redeeming quality; 
something which, even in our fallen nature, we possess in common 
with the angels; which had its being in the old time when they trod 
the earth, and lingers on it yet, in pity.

How often, on their journey, did the widow remember with a grateful 
heart, that out of his deprivation Barnaby's cheerfulness and 
affection sprung!  How often did she call to mind that but for 
that, he might have been sullen, morose, unkind, far removed from 
her--vicious, perhaps, and cruel!  How often had she cause for 
comfort, in his strength, and hope, and in his simple nature!  
Those feeble powers of mind which rendered him so soon forgetful of 
the past, save in brief gleams and flashes,--even they were a 
comfort now.  The world to him was full of happiness; in every 
tree, and plant, and flower, in every bird, and beast, and tiny 
insect whom a breath of summer wind laid low upon the ground, he 
had delight.  His delight was hers; and where many a wise son would 
have made her sorrowful, this poor light-hearted idiot filled her 
breast with thankfulness and love.

Their stock of money was low, but from the hoard she had told into 
the blind man's hand, the widow had withheld one guinea.  This, 
with the few pence she possessed besides, was to two persons of 
their frugal habits, a goodly sum in bank.  Moreover they had Grip 
in company; and when they must otherwise have changed the guinea, 
it was but to make him exhibit outside an alehouse door, or in a 
village street, or in the grounds or gardens of a mansion of the 
better sort, and scores who would have given nothing in charity, 
were ready to bargain for more amusement from the talking bird.

One day--for they moved slowly, and although they had many rides in 
carts and waggons, were on the road a week--Barnaby, with Grip upon 
his shoulder and his mother following, begged permission at a trim 
lodge to go up to the great house, at the other end of the avenue, 
and show his raven.  The man within was inclined to give them 
admittance, and was indeed about to do so, when a stout gentleman 
with a long whip in his hand, and a flushed face which seemed to 
indicate that he had had his morning's draught, rode up to the 
gate, and called in a loud voice and with more oaths than the 
occasion seemed to warrant to have it opened directly.

'Who hast thou got here?' said the gentleman angrily, as the man 
threw the gate wide open, and pulled off his hat, 'who are these?  
Eh? art a beggar, woman?'

The widow answered with a curtsey, that they were poor travellers.

'Vagrants,' said the gentleman, 'vagrants and vagabonds.  Thee 
wish to be made acquainted with the cage, dost thee--the cage, the 
stocks, and the whipping-post?  Where dost come from?'

She told him in a timid manner,--for he was very loud, hoarse, and 
red-faced,--and besought him not to be angry, for they meant no 
harm, and would go upon their way that moment.

'Don't he too sure of that,' replied the gentleman, 'we don't allow 
vagrants to roam about this place.  I know what thou want'st---
stray linen drying on hedges, and stray poultry, eh?  What hast 
got in that basket, lazy hound?'

'Grip, Grip, Grip--Grip the clever, Grip the wicked, Grip the 
knowing--Grip, Grip, Grip,' cried the raven, whom Barnaby had shut 
up on the approach of this stern personage.  'I'm a devil I'm a 
devil I'm a devil, Never say die Hurrah Bow wow wow, Polly put the 
kettle on we'll all have tea.'

'Take the vermin out, scoundrel,' said the gentleman, 'and let me 
see him.'

Barnaby, thus condescendingly addressed, produced his bird, but not 
without much fear and trembling, and set him down upon the ground; 
which he had no sooner done than Grip drew fifty corks at least, 
and then began to dance; at the same time eyeing the gentleman with 
surprising insolence of manner, and screwing his head so much on 
one side that he appeared desirous of screwing it off upon the spot.

The cork-drawing seemed to make a greater impression on the 
gentleman's mind, than the raven's power of speech, and was indeed 
particularly adapted to his habits and capacity.  He desired to 
have that done again, but despite his being very peremptory, and 
notwithstanding that Barnaby coaxed to the utmost, Grip turned a 
deaf ear to the request, and preserved a dead silence.

'Bring him along,' said the gentleman, pointing to the house.  But 
Grip, who had watched the action, anticipated his master, by 
hopping on before them;--constantly flapping his wings, and 
screaming 'cook!' meanwhile, as a hint perhaps that there was 
company coming, and a small collation would be acceptable.

Barnaby and his mother walked on, on either side of the gentleman 
on horseback, who surveyed each of them from time to time in a 
proud and coarse manner, and occasionally thundered out some 
question, the tone of which alarmed Barnaby so much that he could 
find no answer, and, as a matter of course, could make him no 
reply.  On one of these occasions, when the gentleman appeared 
disposed to exercise his horsewhip, the widow ventured to inform 
him in a low voice and with tears in her eyes, that her son was of 
weak mind.

'An idiot, eh?' said the gentleman, looking at Barnaby as he spoke.  
'And how long hast thou been an idiot?'

'She knows,' was Barnaby's timid answer, pointing to his mother--
'I--always, I believe.'

'From his birth,' said the widow.

'I don't believe it,' cried the gentleman, 'not a bit of it.  It's 
an excuse not to work.  There's nothing like flogging to cure that 
disorder.  I'd make a difference in him in ten minutes, I'll be 
bound.'

'Heaven has made none in more than twice ten years, sir,' said the 
widow mildly.

'Then why don't you shut him up? we pay enough for county 
institutions, damn 'em.  But thou'd rather drag him about to 
excite charity--of course.  Ay, I know thee.'

Now, this gentleman had various endearing appellations among his 
intimate friends.  By some he was called 'a country gentleman of 
the true school,' by some 'a fine old country gentleman,' by some 
'a sporting gentleman,' by some 'a thorough-bred Englishman,' by 
some 'a genuine John Bull;' but they all agreed in one respect, and 
that was, that it was a pity there were not more like him, and that 
because there were not, the country was going to rack and ruin 
every day.  He was in the commission of the peace, and could write 
his name almost legibly; but his greatest qualifications were, that 
he was more severe with poachers, was a better shot, a harder 
rider, had better horses, kept better dogs, could eat more solid 
food, drink more strong wine, go to bed every night more drunk and 
get up every morning more sober, than any man in the county.  In 
knowledge of horseflesh he was almost equal to a farrier, in stable 
learning he surpassed his own head groom, and in gluttony not a pig 
on his estate was a match for him.  He had no seat in Parliament 
himself, but he was extremely patriotic, and usually drove his 
voters up to the poll with his own hands.  He was warmly attached 
to church and state, and never appointed to the living in his gift 
any but a three-bottle man and a first-rate fox-hunter.  He 
mistrusted the honesty of all poor people who could read and write, 
and had a secret jealousy of his own wife (a young lady whom he had 
married for what his friends called 'the good old English reason,' 
that her father's property adjoined his own) for possessing those 
accomplishments in a greater degree than himself.  In short, 
Barnaby being an idiot, and Grip a creature of mere brute instinct, 
it would be very hard to say what this gentleman was.

He rode up to the door of a handsome house approached by a great 
flight of steps, where a man was waiting to take his horse, and led 
the way into a large hall, which, spacious as it was, was tainted 
with the fumes of last night's stale debauch.  Greatcoats, riding-
whips, bridles, top-boots, spurs, and such gear, were strewn about 
on all sides, and formed, with some huge stags' antlers, and a few 
portraits of dogs and horses, its principal embellishments.

Throwing himself into a great chair (in which, by the bye, he often 
snored away the night, when he had been, according to his admirers, 
a finer country gentleman than usual) he bade the man to tell his 
mistress to come down: and presently there appeared, a little 
flurried, as it seemed, by the unwonted summons, a lady much 
younger than himself, who had the appearance of being in delicate 
health, and not too happy.

'Here!  Thou'st no delight in following the hounds as an 
Englishwoman should have,' said the gentleman.  'See to this 
here.  That'll please thee perhaps.'

The lady smiled, sat down at a little distance from him, and 
glanced at Barnaby with a look of pity.

'He's an idiot, the woman says,' observed the gentleman, shaking 
his head; 'I don't believe it.'

'Are you his mother?' asked the lady.

She answered yes.

'What's the use of asking HER?' said the gentleman, thrusting his 
hands into his breeches pockets.  'She'll tell thee so, of course.  
Most likely he's hired, at so much a day.  There.  Get on.  Make 
him do something.'

Grip having by this time recovered his urbanity, condescended, at 
Barnaby's solicitation, to repeat his various phrases of speech, 
and to go through the whole of his performances with the utmost 
success.  The corks, and the never say die, afforded the gentleman 
so much delight that he demanded the repetition of this part of the 
entertainment, until Grip got into his basket, and positively 
refused to say another word, good or bad.  The lady too, was much 
amused with him; and the closing point of his obstinacy so 
delighted her husband that he burst into a roar of laughter, and 
demanded his price.

Barnaby looked as though he didn't understand his meaning.  
Probably he did not.

'His price,' said the gentleman, rattling the money in his pockets, 
'what dost want for him?  How much?'

'He's not to be sold,' replied Barnaby, shutting up the basket in a 
great hurry, and throwing the strap over his shoulder.  'Mother, 
come away.'

'Thou seest how much of an idiot he is, book-learner,' said the 
gentleman, looking scornfully at his wife.  'He can make a bargain.  
What dost want for him, old woman?'

'He is my son's constant companion,' said the widow.  'He is not to 
be sold, sir, indeed.'

'Not to be sold!' cried the gentleman, growing ten times redder, 
hoarser, and louder than before.  'Not to be sold!'

'Indeed no,' she answered.  'We have never thought of parting with 
him, sir, I do assure you.'

He was evidently about to make a very passionate retort, when a few 
murmured words from his wife happening to catch his ear, he turned 
sharply round, and said, 'Eh?  What?'

'We can hardly expect them to sell the bird, against their own 
desire,' she faltered.  'If they prefer to keep him--'

'Prefer to keep him!' he echoed.  'These people, who go tramping 
about the country a-pilfering and vagabondising on all hands, 
prefer to keep a bird, when a landed proprietor and a justice asks 
his price!  That old woman's been to school.  I know she has.  
Don't tell me no,' he roared to the widow, 'I say, yes.'

Barnaby's mother pleaded guilty to the accusation, and hoped there 
was no harm in it.

'No harm!' said the gentleman.  'No.  No harm.  No harm, ye old 
rebel, not a bit of harm.  If my clerk was here, I'd set ye in the 
stocks, I would, or lay ye in jail for prowling up and down, on the 
look-out for petty larcenies, ye limb of a gipsy.  Here, Simon, put 
these pilferers out, shove 'em into the road, out with 'em!  Ye 
don't want to sell the bird, ye that come here to beg, don't ye?  
If they an't out in double-quick, set the dogs upon 'em!'

They waited for no further dismissal, but fled precipitately, 
leaving the gentleman to storm away by himself (for the poor lady 
had already retreated), and making a great many vain attempts to 
silence Grip, who, excited by the noise, drew corks enough for a 
city feast as they hurried down the avenue, and appeared to 
congratulate himself beyond measure on having been the cause of the 
disturbance.  When they had nearly reached the lodge, another 
servant, emerging from the shrubbery, feigned to be very active 
in ordering them off, but this man put a crown into the widow's 
hand, and whispering that his lady sent it, thrust them gently from 
the gate.

This incident only suggested to the widow's mind, when they halted 
at an alehouse some miles further on, and heard the justice's 
character as given by his friends, that perhaps something more than 
capacity of stomach and tastes for the kennel and the stable, were 
required to form either a perfect country gentleman, a thoroughbred 
Englishman, or a genuine John Bull; and that possibly the terms 
were sometimes misappropriated, not to say disgraced.  She little 
thought then, that a circumstance so slight would ever influence 
their future fortunes; but time and experience enlightened her in 
this respect.

'Mother,' said Barnaby, as they were sitting next day in a waggon 
which was to take them within ten miles of the capital, 'we're 
going to London first, you said.  Shall we see that blind man 
there?'

She was about to answer 'Heaven forbid!' but checked herself, and 
told him No, she thought not; why did he ask?

'He's a wise man,' said Barnaby, with a thoughtful countenance.  'I 
wish that we may meet with him again.  What was it that he said of 
crowds?  That gold was to be found where people crowded, and not 
among the trees and in such quiet places?  He spoke as if he loved 
it; London is a crowded place; I think we shall meet him there.'

'But why do you desire to see him, love?' she asked.

'Because,' said Barnaby, looking wistfully at her, 'he talked to me 
about gold, which is a rare thing, and say what you will, a thing 
you would like to have, I know.  And because he came and went away 
so strangely--just as white-headed old men come sometimes to my 
bed's foot in the night, and say what I can't remember when the 
bright day returns.  He told me he'd come back.  I wonder why he 
broke his word!'

'But you never thought of being rich or gay, before, dear Barnaby.  
You have always been contented.'

He laughed and bade her say that again, then cried, 'Ay ay--oh 
yes,' and laughed once more.  Then something passed that caught his 
fancy, and the topic wandered from his mind, and was succeeded by 
another just as fleeting.

But it was plain from what he had said, and from his returning to 
the point more than once that day, and on the next, that the blind 
man's visit, and indeed his words, had taken strong possession of 
his mind.  Whether the idea of wealth had occurred to him for the 
first time on looking at the golden clouds that evening--and images 
were often presented to his thoughts by outward objects quite as 
remote and distant; or whether their poor and humble way of life 
had suggested it, by contrast, long ago; or whether the accident 
(as he would deem it) of the blind man's pursuing the current of 
his own remarks, had done so at the moment; or he had been 
impressed by the mere circumstance of the man being blind, and, 
therefore, unlike any one with whom he had talked before; it was 
impossible to tell.  She tried every means to discover, but in 
vain; and the probability is that Barnaby himself was equally in 
the dark.

It filled her with uneasiness to find him harping on this string, 
but all that she could do, was to lead him quickly to some other 
subject, and to dismiss it from his brain.  To caution him against 
their visitor, to show any fear or suspicion in reference to him, 
would only be, she feared, to increase that interest with which 
Barnaby regarded him, and to strengthen his desire to meet him once 
again.  She hoped, by plunging into the crowd, to rid herself of 
her terrible pursuer, and then, by journeying to a distance and 
observing increased caution, if that were possible, to live again 
unknown, in secrecy and peace.

They reached, in course of time, their halting-place within ten 
miles of London, and lay there for the night, after bargaining to 
be carried on for a trifle next day, in a light van which was 
returning empty, and was to start at five o'clock in the morning.  
The driver was punctual, the road good--save for the dust, the 
weather being very hot and dry--and at seven in the forenoon of 
Friday the second of June, one thousand seven hundred and eighty, 
they alighted at the foot of Westminster Bridge, bade their 
conductor farewell, and stood alone, together, on the scorching 
pavement.  For the freshness which night sheds upon such busy 
thoroughfares had already departed, and the sun was shining with 
uncommon lustre.



Chapter 48


Uncertain where to go next, and bewildered by the crowd of people 
who were already astir, they sat down in one of the recesses on the 
bridge, to rest.  They soon became aware that the stream of life 
was all pouring one way, and that a vast throng of persons were 
crossing the river from the Middlesex to the Surrey shore, in 
unusual haste and evident excitement.  They were, for the most 
part, in knots of two or three, or sometimes half-a-dozen; they 
spoke little together--many of them were quite silent; and hurried 
on as if they had one absorbing object in view, which was common to 
them all.

They were surprised to see that nearly every man in this great 
concourse, which still came pouring past, without slackening in the 
least, wore in his hat a blue cockade; and that the chance 
passengers who were not so decorated, appeared timidly anxious to 
escape observation or attack, and gave them the wall as if they 
would conciliate them.  This, however, was natural enough, 
considering their inferiority in point of numbers; for the 
proportion of those who wore blue cockades, to those who were 
dressed as usual, was at least forty or fifty to one.  There was no 
quarrelling, however: the blue cockades went swarming on, passing 
each other when they could, and making all the speed that was 
possible in such a multitude; and exchanged nothing more than 
looks, and very often not even those, with such of the passers-by 
as were not of their number.

At first, the current of people had been confined to the two 
pathways, and but a few more eager stragglers kept the road.  But 
after half an hour or so, the passage was completely blocked up by 
the great press, which, being now closely wedged together, and 
impeded by the carts and coaches it encountered, moved but slowly, 
and was sometimes at a stand for five or ten minutes together.

After the lapse of nearly two hours, the numbers began to diminish 
visibly, and gradually dwindling away, by little and little, left 
the bridge quite clear, save that, now and then, some hot and dusty 
man, with the cockade in his hat, and his coat thrown over his 
shoulder, went panting by, fearful of being too late, or stopped to 
ask which way his friends had taken, and being directed, hastened 
on again like one refreshed.  In this comparative solitude, which 
seemed quite strange and novel after the late crowd, the widow had 
for the first time an opportunity of inquiring of an old man who 
came and sat beside them, what was the meaning of that great 
assemblage.

'Why, where have you come from,' he returned, 'that you haven't 
heard of Lord George Gordon's great association?  This is the day 
that he presents the petition against the Catholics, God bless 
him!'

'What have all these men to do with that?' she said.

'What have they to do with it!' the old man replied.  'Why, how you 
talk!  Don't you know his lordship has declared he won't present it 
to the house at all, unless it is attended to the door by forty 
thousand good and true men at least?  There's a crowd for you!'

'A crowd indeed!' said Barnaby.  'Do you hear that, mother!'

'And they're mustering yonder, as I am told,' resumed the old man, 
'nigh upon a hundred thousand strong.  Ah!  Let Lord George alone.  
He knows his power.  There'll be a good many faces inside them 
three windows over there,' and he pointed to where the House of 
Commons overlooked the river, 'that'll turn pale when good Lord 
George gets up this afternoon, and with reason too!  Ay, ay.  Let 
his lordship alone.  Let him alone.  HE knows!'  And so, with much 
mumbling and chuckling and shaking of his forefinger, he rose, with 
the assistance of his stick, and tottered off.

'Mother!' said Barnaby, 'that's a brave crowd he talks of.  Come!'

'Not to join it!' cried his mother.

'Yes, yes,' he answered, plucking at her sleeve.  'Why not?  Come!'

'You don't know,' she urged, 'what mischief they may do, where they 
may lead you, what their meaning is.  Dear Barnaby, for my sake--'

'For your sake!' he cried, patting her hand.  'Well! It IS for your 
sake, mother.  You remember what the blind man said, about the 
gold.  Here's a brave crowd!  Come!  Or wait till I come back--yes, 
yes, wait here.'

She tried with all the earnestness her fears engendered, to turn 
him from his purpose, but in vain.  He was stooping down to buckle 
on his shoe, when a hackney-coach passed them rather quickly, and a 
voice inside called to the driver to stop.

'Young man,' said a voice within.

'Who's that?' cried Barnaby, looking up.

'Do you wear this ornament?' returned the stranger, holding out a 
blue cockade.

'In Heaven's name, no.  Pray do not give it him!' exclaimed the 
widow.

'Speak for yourself, woman,' said the man within the coach, coldly.  
'Leave the young man to his choice; he's old enough to make it, and 
to snap your apron-strings.  He knows, without your telling, 
whether he wears the sign of a loyal Englishman or not.'

Barnaby, trembling with impatience, cried, 'Yes! yes, yes, I do,' 
as he had cried a dozen times already.  The man threw him a 
cockade, and crying, 'Make haste to St George's Fields,' ordered 
the coachman to drive on fast; and left them.

With hands that trembled with his eagerness to fix the bauble in 
his hat, Barnaby was adjusting it as he best could, and hurriedly 
replying to the tears and entreaties of his mother, when two 
gentlemen passed on the opposite side of the way.  Observing them, 
and seeing how Barnaby was occupied, they stopped, whispered 
together for an instant, turned back, and came over to them.

'Why are you sitting here?' said one of them, who was dressed in a 
plain suit of black, wore long lank hair, and carried a great cane.  
'Why have you not gone with the rest?'

'I am going, sir,' replied Barnaby, finishing his task, and putting 
his hat on with an air of pride.  'I shall be there directly.'

'Say "my lord," young man, when his lordship does you the honour of 
speaking to you,' said the second gentleman mildly.  'If you don't 
know Lord George Gordon when you see him, it's high time you 
should.'

'Nay, Gashford,' said Lord George, as Barnaby pulled off his hat 
again and made him a low bow, 'it's no great matter on a day like 
this, which every Englishman will remember with delight and pride.  
Put on your hat, friend, and follow us, for you lag behind and are 
late.  It's past ten now.  Didn't you know that the hour for 
assembling was ten o'clock?'

Barnaby shook his head and looked vacantly from one to the other.

'You might have known it, friend,' said Gashford, 'it was perfectly 
understood.  How came you to be so ill informed?'

'He cannot tell you, sir,' the widow interposed.  'It's of no use 
to ask him.  We are but this morning come from a long distance in 
the country, and know nothing of these matters.'

'The cause has taken a deep root, and has spread its branches far 
and wide,' said Lord George to his secretary.  'This is a pleasant 
hearing.  I thank Heaven for it!'

'Amen!' cried Gashford with a solemn face.

'You do not understand me, my lord,' said the widow.  'Pardon me, 
but you cruelly mistake my meaning.  We know nothing of these 
matters.  We have no desire or right to join in what you are about 
to do.  This is my son, my poor afflicted son, dearer to me than my 
own life.  In mercy's name, my lord, go your way alone, and do not 
tempt him into danger!'

'My good woman,' said Gashford, 'how can you!--Dear me!--What do 
you mean by tempting, and by danger?  Do you think his lordship is 
a roaring lion, going about and seeking whom he may devour?  God 
bless me!'

'No, no, my lord, forgive me,' implored the widow, laying both her 
hands upon his breast, and scarcely knowing what she did, or said, 
in the earnestness of her supplication, 'but there are reasons why 
you should hear my earnest, mother's prayer, and leave my son with 
me.  Oh do!  He is not in his right senses, he is not, indeed!'

'It is a bad sign of the wickedness of these times,' said Lord 
George, evading her touch, and colouring deeply, 'that those who 
cling to the truth and support the right cause, are set down as 
mad.  Have you the heart to say this of your own son, unnatural 
mother!'

'I am astonished at you!' said Gashford, with a kind of meek 
severity.  'This is a very sad picture of female depravity.'

'He has surely no appearance,' said Lord George, glancing at 
Barnaby, and whispering in his secretary's ear, 'of being deranged?  
And even if he had, we must not construe any trifling peculiarity 
into madness.  Which of us'--and here he turned red again--'would 
be safe, if that were made the law!'

'Not one,' replied the secretary; 'in that case, the greater the 
zeal, the truth, and talent; the more direct the call from above; 
the clearer would be the madness.  With regard to this young man, 
my lord,' he added, with a lip that slightly curled as he looked at 
Barnaby, who stood twirling his hat, and stealthily beckoning them 
to come away, 'he is as sensible and self-possessed as any one I 
ever saw.'

'And you desire to make one of this great body?' said Lord George, 
addressing him; 'and intended to make one, did you?'

'Yes--yes,' said Barnaby, with sparkling eyes.  'To be sure I did!  
I told her so myself.'

'I see,' replied Lord George, with a reproachful glance at the 
unhappy mother.  'I thought so.  Follow me and this gentleman, and 
you shall have your wish.'

Barnaby kissed his mother tenderly on the cheek, and bidding her be 
of good cheer, for their fortunes were both made now, did as he was 
desired.  She, poor woman, followed too--with how much fear and 
grief it would be hard to tell.

They passed quickly through the Bridge Road, where the shops were 
all shut up (for the passage of the great crowd and the expectation 
of their return had alarmed the tradesmen for their goods and 
windows), and where, in the upper stories, all the inhabitants were 
congregated, looking down into the street below, with faces 
variously expressive of alarm, of interest, expectancy, and 
indignation.  Some of these applauded, and some hissed; but 
regardless of these interruptions--for the noise of a vast 
congregation of people at a little distance, sounded in his ears 
like the roaring of the sea--Lord George Gordon quickened his pace, 
and presently arrived before St George's Fields.

They were really fields at that time, and of considerable extent.  
Here an immense multitude was collected, bearing flags of various 
kinds and sizes, but all of the same colour--blue, like the 
cockades--some sections marching to and fro in military array, and 
others drawn up in circles, squares, and lines.  A large portion, 
both of the bodies which paraded the ground, and of those which 
remained stationary, were occupied in singing hymns or psalms.  
With whomsoever this originated, it was well done; for the sound of 
so many thousand voices in the air must have stirred the heart of 
any man within him, and could not fail to have a wonderful effect 
upon enthusiasts, however mistaken.

Scouts had been posted in advance of the great body, to give notice 
of their leader's coming.  These falling back, the word was quickly 
passed through the whole host, and for a short interval there 
ensued a profound and deathlike silence, during which the mass was 
so still and quiet, that the fluttering of a banner caught the eye, 
and became a circumstance of note.  Then they burst into a 
tremendous shout, into another, and another; and the air seemed 
rent and shaken, as if by the discharge of cannon.

'Gashford!' cried Lord George, pressing his secretary's arm tight 
within his own, and speaking with as much emotion in his voice, as 
in his altered face, 'I arn called indeed, now.  I feel and know 
it.  I am the leader of a host.  If they summoned me at this moment 
with one voice to lead them on to death, I'd do it--Yes, and fall 
first myself!'

'It is a proud sight,' said the secretary.  'It is a noble day for 
England, and for the great cause throughout the world.  Such 
homage, my lord, as I, an humble but devoted man, can render--'

'What are you doing?' cried his master, catching him by both hands; 
for he had made a show of kneeling at his feet.  'Do not unfit me, 
dear Gashford, for the solemn duty of this glorious day--' the 
tears stood in the eyes of the poor gentleman as he said the 
words.--'Let us go among them; we have to find a place in some 
division for this new recruit--give me your hand.'

Gashford slid his cold insidious palm into his master's grasp, and 
so, hand in hand, and followed still by Barnaby and by his mother 
too, they mingled with the concourse.

They had by this time taken to their singing again, and as their 
leader passed between their ranks, they raised their voices to 
their utmost.  Many of those who were banded together to support 
the religion of their country, even unto death, had never heard a 
hymn or psalm in all their lives.  But these fellows having for the 
most part strong lungs, and being naturally fond of singing, 
chanted any ribaldry or nonsense that occurred to them, feeling 
pretty certain that it would not be detected in the general chorus, 
and not caring much if it were.  Many of these voluntaries were 
sung under the very nose of Lord George Gordon, who, quite 
unconscious of their burden, passed on with his usual stiff and 
solemn deportment, very much edified and delighted by the pious 
conduct of his followers.

So they went on and on, up this line, down that, round the exterior 
of this circle, and on every side of that hollow square; and still 
there were lines, and squares, and circles out of number to review.  
The day being now intensely hot, and the sun striking down his 
fiercest rays upon the field, those who carried heavy banners began 
to grow faint and weary; most of the number assembled were fain to 
pull off their neckcloths, and throw their coats and waistcoats 
open; and some, towards the centre, quite overpowered by the 
excessive heat, which was of course rendered more unendurable by 
the multitude around them, lay down upon the grass, and offered all 
they had about them for a drink of water.  Still, no man left the 
ground, not even of those who were so distressed; still Lord 
George, streaming from every pore, went on with Gashford; and still 
Barnaby and his mother followed close behind them.

They had arrived at the top of a long line of some eight hundred 
men in single file, and Lord George had turned his head to look 
back, when a loud cry of recognition--in that peculiar and half-
stifled tone which a voice has, when it is raised in the open air 
and in the midst of a great concourse of persons--was heard, and a 
man stepped with a shout of laughter from the rank, and smote 
Barnaby on the shoulders with his heavy hand.

'How now!' he cried.  'Barnaby Rudge!  Why, where have you been 
hiding for these hundred years?'

Barnaby had been thinking within himself that the smell of the 
trodden grass brought back his old days at cricket, when he was a 
young boy and played on Chigwell Green.  Confused by this sudden 
and boisterous address, he stared in a bewildered manner at the 
man, and could scarcely say 'What! Hugh!'

'Hugh!' echoed the other; 'ay, Hugh--Maypole Hugh!  You remember my 
dog?  He's alive now, and will know you, I warrant.  What, you wear 
the colour, do you?  Well done!  Ha ha ha!'

'You know this young man, I see,' said Lord George.

'Know him, my lord! as well as I know my own right hand.  My 
captain knows him.  We all know him.'

'Will you take him into your division?'

'It hasn't in it a better, nor a nimbler, nor a more active man, 
than Barnaby Rudge,' said Hugh.  'Show me the man who says it has!  
Fall in, Barnaby.  He shall march, my lord, between me and Dennis; 
and he shall carry,' he added, taking a flag from the hand of a 
tired man who tendered it, 'the gayest silken streamer in this 
valiant army.'

'In the name of God, no!' shrieked the widow, darting forward.  
'Barnaby--my lord--see--he'll come back--Barnaby--Barnaby!'

'Women in the field!' cried Hugh, stepping between them, and 
holding her off.  'Holloa!  My captain there!'

'What's the matter here?' cried Simon Tappertit, bustling up in a 
great heat.  'Do you call this order?'

'Nothing like it, captain,' answered Hugh, still holding her back 
with his outstretched hand.  'It's against all orders.  Ladies are 
carrying off our gallant soldiers from their duty.  The word of 
command, captain!  They're filing off the ground.  Quick!'

'Close!' cried Simon, with the whole power of his lungs.  'Form!  
March!'

She was thrown to the ground; the whole field was in motion; 
Barnaby was whirled away into the heart of a dense mass of men, and 
she saw him no more.



Chapter 49


The mob had been divided from its first assemblage into four 
divisions; the London, the Westminster, the Southwark, and the 
Scotch.  Each of these divisions being subdivided into various 
bodies, and these bodies being drawn up in various forms and 
figures, the general arrangement was, except to the few chiefs and 
leaders, as unintelligible as the plan of a great battle to the 
meanest soldier in the field.  It was not without its method, 
however; for, in a very short space of time after being put in 
motion, the crowd had resolved itself into three great parties, and 
were prepared, as had been arranged, to cross the river by 
different bridges, and make for the House of Commons in separate 
detachments.

At the head of that division which had Westminster Bridge for its 
approach to the scene of action, Lord George Gordon took his post; 
with Gashford at his right hand, and sundry ruffians, of most 
unpromising appearance, forming a kind of staff about him.  The 
conduct of a second party, whose route lay by Blackfriars, was 
entrusted to a committee of management, including perhaps a dozen 
men: while the third, which was to go by London Bridge, and through 
the main streets, in order that their numbers and their serious 
intentions might be the better known and appreciated by the 
citizens, were led by Simon Tappertit (assisted by a few 
subalterns, selected from the Brotherhood of United Bulldogs), 
Dennis the hangman, Hugh, and some others.

The word of command being given, each of these great bodies took 
the road assigned to it, and departed on its way, in perfect order 
and profound silence.  That which went through the City greatly 
exceeded the others in number, and was of such prodigious extent 
that when the rear began to move, the front was nearly four miles 
in advance, notwithstanding that the men marched three abreast and 
followed very close upon each other.

At the head of this party, in the place where Hugh, in the madness 
of his humour, had stationed him, and walking between that 
dangerous companion and the hangman, went Barnaby; as many a man 
among the thousands who looked on that day afterwards remembered 
well.  Forgetful of all other things in the ecstasy of the moment, 
his face flushed and his eyes sparkling with delight, heedless of 
the weight of the great banner he carried, and mindful only of its 
flashing in the sun and rustling in the summer breeze, on he went, 
proud, happy, elated past all telling:--the only light-hearted, 
undesigning creature, in the whole assembly.

'What do you think of this?' asked Hugh, as they passed through the 
crowded streets, and looked up at the windows which were thronged 
with spectators.  'They have all turned out to see our flags and 
streamers?  Eh, Barnaby?  Why, Barnaby's the greatest man of all 
the pack!  His flag's the largest of the lot, the brightest too.  
There's nothing in the show, like Barnaby.  All eyes are turned on 
him.  Ha ha ha!'

'Don't make that din, brother,' growled the hangman, glancing with 
no very approving eyes at Barnaby as he spoke: 'I hope he don't 
think there's nothing to be done, but carrying that there piece of 
blue rag, like a boy at a breaking up.  You're ready for action I 
hope, eh?  You, I mean,' he added, nudging Barnaby roughly with 
his elbow.  'What are you staring at?  Why don't you speak?'

Barnaby had been gazing at his flag, and looked vacantly from his 
questioner to Hugh.

'He don't understand your way,' said the latter.  'Here, I'll 
explain it to him.  Barnaby old boy, attend to me.'

'I'll attend,' said Barnaby, looking anxiously round; 'but I wish 
I could see her somewhere.'

'See who?' demanded Dennis in a gruff tone.  'You an't in love I 
hope, brother?  That an't the sort of thing for us, you know.  We 
mustn't have no love here.'

'She would be proud indeed to see me now, eh Hugh?' said Barnaby.  
'Wouldn't it make her glad to see me at the head of this large 
show?  She'd cry for joy, I know she would.  Where CAN she be?  She 
never sees me at my best, and what do I care to be gay and fine if 
SHE'S not by?'

'Why, what palaver's this?' asked Mr Dennis with supreme disdain.  
'We an't got no sentimental members among us, I hope.'

'Don't be uneasy, brother,' cried Hugh, 'he's only talking of his 
mother.'

'Of his what?' said Mr Dennis with a strong oath.

'His mother.'

'And have I combined myself with this here section, and turned out 
on this here memorable day, to hear men talk about their mothers!' 
growled Mr Dennis with extreme disgust.  'The notion of a man's 
sweetheart's bad enough, but a man's mother!'--and here his disgust 
was so extreme that he spat upon the ground, and could say no more.

'Barnaby's right,' cried Hugh with a grin, 'and I say it.  Lookee, 
bold lad.  If she's not here to see, it's because I've provided for 
her, and sent half-a-dozen gentlemen, every one of 'em with a 
blue flag (but not half as fine as yours), to take her, in state, 
to a grand house all hung round with gold and silver banners, and 
everything else you please, where she'll wait till you come, and 
want for nothing.'

'Ay!' said Barnaby, his face beaming with delight: 'have you 
indeed?  That's a good hearing.  That's fine!  Kind Hugh!'

'But nothing to what will come, bless you,' retorted Hugh, with a 
wink at Dennis, who regarded his new companion in arms with great 
astonishment.

'No, indeed?' cried Barnaby.

'Nothing at all,' said Hugh.  'Money, cocked hats and feathers, red 
coats and gold lace; all the fine things there are, ever were, or 
will be; will belong to us if we are true to that noble gentleman--
the best man in the world--carry our flags for a few days, and keep 
'em safe.  That's all we've got to do.'

'Is that all?' cried Barnaby with glistening eyes, as he clutched 
his pole the tighter; 'I warrant you I keep this one safe, then.  
You have put it in good hands.  You know me, Hugh.  Nobody shall 
wrest this flag away.'

'Well said!' cried Hugh.  'Ha ha!  Nobly said!  That's the old 
stout Barnaby, that I have climbed and leaped with, many and many a 
day--I knew I was not mistaken in Barnaby.--Don't you see, man,' he 
added in a whisper, as he slipped to the other side of Dennis, 
'that the lad's a natural, and can be got to do anything, if you 
take him the right way?  Letting alone the fun he is, he's worth a 
dozen men, in earnest, as you'd find if you tried a fall with him.  
Leave him to me.  You shall soon see whether he's of use or not.'

Mr Dennis received these explanatory remarks with many nods and 
winks, and softened his behaviour towards Barnaby from that moment.  
Hugh, laying his finger on his nose, stepped back into his former 
place, and they proceeded in silence.

It was between two and three o'clock in the afternoon when the 
three great parties met at Westminster, and, uniting into one huge 
mass, raised a tremendous shout.  This was not only done in token 
of their presence, but as a signal to those on whom the task 
devolved, that it was time to take possession of the lobbies of 
both Houses, and of the various avenues of approach, and of the 
gallery stairs.  To the last-named place, Hugh and Dennis, still 
with their pupil between them, rushed straightway; Barnaby having 
given his flag into the hands of one of their own party, who kept 
them at the outer door.  Their followers pressing on behind, they 
were borne as on a great wave to the very doors of the gallery, 
whence it was impossible to retreat, even if they had been so 
inclined, by reason of the throng which choked up the passages.  It 
is a familiar expression in describing a great crowd, that a person 
might have walked upon the people's heads.  In this case it was 
actually done; for a boy who had by some means got among the 
concourse, and was in imminent danger of suffocation, climbed to 
the shoulders of a man beside him and walked upon the people's hats 
and heads into the open street; traversing in his passage the whole 
length of two staircases and a long gallery.  Nor was the swarm 
without less dense; for a basket which had been tossed into the 
crowd, was jerked from head to head, and shoulder to shoulder, and 
went spinning and whirling on above them, until it was lost to 
view, without ever once falling in among them or coming near the 
ground.

Through this vast throng, sprinkled doubtless here and there with 
honest zealots, but composed for the most part of the very scum and 
refuse of London, whose growth was fostered by bad criminal laws, 
bad prison regulations, and the worst conceivable police, such of 
the members of both Houses of Parliament as had not taken the 
precaution to be already at their posts, were compelled to fight 
and force their way.  Their carriages were stopped and broken; the 
wheels wrenched off; the glasses shivered to atoms; the panels 
beaten in; drivers, footmen, and masters, pulled from their seats 
and rolled in the mud.  Lords, commoners, and reverend bishops, 
with little distinction of person or party, were kicked and pinched 
and hustled; passed from hand to hand through various stages of 
ill-usage; and sent to their fellow-senators at last with their 
clothes hanging in ribands about them, their bagwigs torn off, 
themselves speechless and breathless, and their persons covered 
with the powder which had been cuffed and beaten out of their hair.  
One lord was so long in the hands of the populace, that the Peers 
as a body resolved to sally forth and rescue him, and were in the 
act of doing so, when he happily appeared among them covered with 
dirt and bruises, and hardly to be recognised by those who knew him 
best.  The noise and uproar were on the increase every moment.  The 
air was filled with execrations, hoots, and howlings.  The mob 
raged and roared, like a mad monster as it was, unceasingly, and 
each new outrage served to swell its fury.

Within doors, matters were even yet more threatening.  Lord George--
preceded by a man who carried the immense petition on a porter's 
knot through the lobby to the door of the House of Commons, where 
it was received by two officers of the house who rolled it up to 
the table ready for presentation--had taken his seat at an early 
hour, before the Speaker went to prayers.  His followers pouring in 
at the same time, the lobby and all the avenues were immediately 
filled, as we have seen.  Thus the members were not only attacked 
in their passage through the streets, but were set upon within the 
very walls of Parliament; while the tumult, both within and 
without, was so great, that those who attempted to speak could 
scarcely hear their own voices: far less, consult upon the course 
it would be wise to take in such extremity, or animate each other 
to dignified and firm resistance.  So sure as any member, just 
arrived, with dress disordered and dishevelled hair, came 
struggling through the crowd in the lobby, it yelled and screamed 
in triumph; and when the door of the House, partially and 
cautiously opened by those within for his admission, gave them a 
momentary glimpse of the interior, they grew more wild and savage, 
like beasts at the sight of prey, and made a rush against the 
portal which strained its locks and bolts in their staples, and 
shook the very beams.

The strangers' gallery, which was immediately above the door of the 
House, had been ordered to be closed on the first rumour of 
disturbance, and was empty; save that now and then Lord George took 
his seat there, for the convenience of coming to the head of the 
stairs which led to it, and repeating to the people what had passed 
within.  It was on these stairs that Barnaby, Hugh, and Dennis were 
posted.  There were two flights, short, steep, and narrow, running 
parallel to each other, and leading to two little doors 
communicating with a low passage which opened on the gallery.  
Between them was a kind of well, or unglazed skylight, for the 
admission of light and air into the lobby, which might be some 
eighteen or twenty feet below.

Upon one of these little staircases--not that at the head of which 
Lord George appeared from time to time, but the other--Gashford 
stood with his elbow on the bannister, and his cheek resting on his 
hand, with his usual crafty aspect.  Whenever he varied this 
attitude in the slightest degree--so much as by the gentlest motion 
of his arm--the uproar was certain to increase, not merely there, 
but in the lobby below; from which place no doubt, some man who 
acted as fugleman to the rest, was constantly looking up and 
watching him.

'Order!' cried Hugh, in a voice which made itself heard even above 
the roar and tumult, as Lord George appeared at the top of the 
staircase.  'News!  News from my lord!'

The noise continued, notwithstanding his appearance, until Gashford 
looked round.  There was silence immediately--even among the people 
in the passages without, and on the other staircases, who could 
neither see nor hear, but to whom, notwithstanding, the signal was 
conveyed with marvellous rapidity.

'Gentlemen,' said Lord George, who was very pale and agitated, we 
must be firm.  They talk of delays, but we must have no delays.  
They talk of taking your petition into consideration next Tuesday, 
but we must have it considered now.  Present appearances look bad 
for our success, but we must succeed and will!'

'We must succeed and will!' echoed the crowd.  And so among their 
shouts and cheers and other cries, he bowed to them and retired, 
and presently came back again.  There was another gesture from 
Gashford, and a dead silence directly.

'I am afraid,' he said, this time, 'that we have little reason, 
gentlemen, to hope for any redress from the proceedings of 
Parliament.  But we must redress our own grievances, we must meet 
again, we must put our trust in Providence, and it will bless our 
endeavours.'

This speech being a little more temperate than the last, was not so 
favourably received.  When the noise and exasperation were at their 
height, he came back once more, and told them that the alarm had 
gone forth for many miles round; that when the King heard of their 
assembling together in that great body, he had no doubt, His 
Majesty would send down private orders to have their wishes 
complied with; and--with the manner of his speech as childish, 
irresolute, and uncertain as his matter--was proceeding in this 
strain, when two gentlemen suddenly appeared at the door where he 
stood, and pressing past him and coming a step or two lower down 
upon the stairs, confronted the people.

The boldness of this action quite took them by surprise.  They were 
not the less disconcerted, when one of the gentlemen, turning to 
Lord George, spoke thus--in a loud voice that they might hear him 
well, but quite coolly and collectedly:

'You may tell these people, if you please, my lord, that I am 
General Conway of whom they have heard; and that I oppose this 
petition, and all their proceedings, and yours.  I am a soldier, 
you may tell them, and I will protect the freedom of this place 
with my sword.  You see, my lord, that the members of this House 
are all in arms to-day; you know that the entrance to it is a 
narrow one; you cannot be ignorant that there are men within these 
walls who are determined to defend that pass to the last, and 
before whom many lives must fall if your adherents persevere.  Have 
a care what you do.'

'And my Lord George,' said the other gentleman, addressing him in 
like manner, 'I desire them to hear this, from me--Colonel Gordon--
your near relation.  If a man among this crowd, whose uproar 
strikes us deaf, crosses the threshold of the House of Commons, I 
swear to run my sword that moment--not into his, but into your 
body!'

With that, they stepped back again, keeping their faces towards the 
crowd; took each an arm of the misguided nobleman; drew him into 
the passage, and shut the door; which they directly locked and 
fastened on the inside.

This was so quickly done, and the demeanour of both gentlemen--who 
were not young men either--was so gallant and resolute, that the 
crowd faltered and stared at each other with irresolute and timid 
looks.  Many tried to turn towards the door; some of the faintest-
hearted cried they had best go back, and called to those behind to 
give way; and the panic and confusion were increasing rapidly, when 
Gashford whispered Hugh.

'What now!' Hugh roared aloud, turning towards them.  'Why go back?  
Where can you do better than here, boys!  One good rush against 
these doors and one below at the same time, will do the business.  
Rush on, then!  As to the door below, let those stand back who are 
afraid.  Let those who are not afraid, try who shall be the first 
to pass it.  Here goes!  Look out down there!'

Without the delay of an instant, he threw himself headlong over the 
bannisters into the lobby below.  He had hardly touched the ground 
when Barnaby was at his side.  The chaplain's assistant, and some 
members who were imploring the people to retire, immediately 
withdrew; and then, with a great shout, both crowds threw 
themselves against the doors pell-mell, and besieged the House in 
earnest.

At that moment, when a second onset must have brought them into 
collision with those who stood on the defensive within, in which 
case great loss of life and bloodshed would inevitably have 
ensued,--the hindmost portion of the crowd gave way, and the rumour 
spread from mouth to mouth that a messenger had been despatched by 
water for the military, who were forming in the street.  Fearful of 
sustaining a charge in the narrow passages in which they were so 
closely wedged together, the throng poured out as impetuously as 
they had flocked in.  As the whole stream turned at once, Barnaby 
and Hugh went with it: and so, fighting and struggling and 
trampling on fallen men and being trampled on in turn themselves, 
they and the whole mass floated by degrees into the open street, 
where a large detachment of the Guards, both horse and foot, came 
hurrying up; clearing the ground before them so rapidly that the 
people seemed to melt away as they advanced.

The word of command to halt being given, the soldiers formed across 
the street; the rioters, breathless and exhausted with their late 
exertions, formed likewise, though in a very irregular and 
disorderly manner.  The commanding officer rode hastily into the 
open space between the two bodies, accompanied by a magistrate and 
an officer of the House of Commons, for whose accommodation a 
couple of troopers had hastily dismounted.  The Riot Act was read, 
but not a man stirred.

In the first rank of the insurgents, Barnaby and Hugh stood side by 
side.  Somebody had thrust into Barnaby's hands when he came out 
into the street, his precious flag; which, being now rolled up and 
tied round the pole, looked like a giant quarter-staff as he 
grasped it firmly and stood upon his guard.  If ever man believed 
with his whole heart and soul that he was engaged in a just cause, 
and that he was bound to stand by his leader to the last, poor 
Barnaby believed it of himself and Lord George Gordon.

After an ineffectual attempt to make himself heard, the magistrate 
gave the word and the Horse Guards came riding in among the crowd.  
But, even then, he galloped here and there, exhorting the people to 
disperse; and, although heavy stones were thrown at the men, and 
some were desperately cut and bruised, they had no orders but to 
make prisoners of such of the rioters as were the most active, and 
to drive the people back with the flat of their sabres.  As the 
horses came in among them, the throng gave way at many points, and 
the Guards, following up their advantage, were rapidly clearing the 
ground, when two or three of the foremost, who were in a manner cut 
off from the rest by the people closing round them, made straight 
towards Barnaby and Hugh, who had no doubt been pointed out as the 
two men who dropped into the lobby: laying about them now with some 
effect, and inflicting on the more turbulent of their opponents, a 
few slight flesh wounds, under the influence of which a man 
dropped, here and there, into the arms of his fellows, amid much 
groaning and confusion.

At the sight of gashed and bloody faces, seen for a moment in the 
crowd, then hidden by the press around them, Barnaby turned pale 
and sick.  But he stood his ground, and grasping his pole more 
firmly yet, kept his eye fixed upon the nearest soldier--nodding 
his head meanwhile, as Hugh, with a scowling visage, whispered in 
his ear.

The soldier came spurring on, making his horse rear as the people 
pressed about him, cutting at the hands of those who would have 
grasped his rein and forced his charger back, and waving to his 
comrades to follow--and still Barnaby, without retreating an inch, 
waited for his coming.  Some called to him to fly, and some were in 
the very act of closing round him, to prevent his being taken, when 
the pole swept into the air above the people's heads, and the man's 
saddle was empty in an instant.

Then, he and Hugh turned and fled, the crowd opening to let them 
pass, and closing up again so quickly that there was no clue to the 
course they had taken.  Panting for breath, hot, dusty, and 
exhausted with fatigue, they reached the riverside in safety, and 
getting into a boat with all despatch were soon out of any 
immediate danger.

As they glided down the river, they plainly heard the people 
cheering; and supposing they might have forced the soldiers to 
retreat, lay upon their oars for a few minutes, uncertain whether 
to return or not.  But the crowd passing along Westminster Bridge, 
soon assured them that the populace were dispersing; and Hugh 
rightly guessed from this, that they had cheered the magistrate for 
offering to dismiss the military on condition of their immediate 
departure to their several homes, and that he and Barnaby were 
better where they were.  He advised, therefore, that they should 
proceed to Blackfriars, and, going ashore at the bridge, make the 
best of their way to The Boot; where there was not only good 
entertainment and safe lodging, but where they would certainly be 
joined by many of their late companions.  Barnaby assenting, they 
decided on this course of action, and pulled for Blackfriars 
accordingly.

They landed at a critical time, and fortunately for themselves at 
the right moment.  For, coming into Fleet Street, they found it in 
an unusual stir; and inquiring the cause, were told that a body of 
Horse Guards had just galloped past, and that they were escorting 
some rioters whom they had made prisoners, to Newgate for safety.  
Not at all ill-pleased to have so narrowly escaped the cavalcade, 
they lost no more time in asking questions, but hurried to The Boot 
with as much speed as Hugh considered it prudent to make, without 
appearing singular or attracting an inconvenient share of public 
notice.


Chapter 50


They were among the first to reach the tavern, but they had not 
been there many minutes, when several groups of men who had formed 
part of the crowd, came straggling in.  Among them were Simon 
Tappertit and Mr Dennis; both of whom, but especially the latter, 
greeted Barnaby with the utmost warmth, and paid him many 
compliments on the prowess he had shown.

'Which,' said Dennis, with an oath, as he rested his bludgeon in a 
corner with his hat upon it, and took his seat at the same table 
with them, 'it does me good to think of.  There was a opportunity!  
But it led to nothing.  For my part, I don't know what would.  
There's no spirit among the people in these here times.  Bring 
something to eat and drink here.  I'm disgusted with humanity.'

'On what account?' asked Mr Tappertit, who had been quenching his 
fiery face in a half-gallon can.  'Don't you consider this a good 
beginning, mister?'

'Give me security that it an't a ending,' rejoined the hangman.  
'When that soldier went down, we might have made London ours; but 
no;--we stand, and gape, and look on--the justice (I wish he had 
had a bullet in each eye, as he would have had, if we'd gone to 
work my way) says, "My lads, if you'll give me your word to 
disperse, I'll order off the military," our people sets up a 
hurrah, throws up the game with the winning cards in their hands, 
and skulks away like a pack of tame curs as they are.  Ah,' said 
the hangman, in a tone of deep disgust, 'it makes me blush for my 
feller creeturs.  I wish I had been born a ox, I do!'

'You'd have been quite as agreeable a character if you had been, I 
think,' returned Simon Tappertit, going out in a lofty manner.

'Don't be too sure of that,' rejoined the hangman, calling after 
him; 'if I was a horned animal at the present moment, with the 
smallest grain of sense, I'd toss every man in this company, 
excepting them two,' meaning Hugh and Barnaby, 'for his manner of 
conducting himself this day.'

With which mournful review of their proceedings, Mr Dennis sought 
consolation in cold boiled beef and beer; but without at all 
relaxing the grim and dissatisfied expression of his face, the 
gloom of which was rather deepened than dissipated by their 
grateful influence.

The company who were thus libelled might have retaliated by strong 
words, if not by blows, but they were dispirited and worn out.  The 
greater part of them had fasted since morning; all had suffered 
extremely from the excessive heat; and between the day's shouting, 
exertion, and excitement, many had quite lost their voices, and so 
much of their strength that they could hardly stand.  Then they 
were uncertain what to do next, fearful of the consequences of what 
they had done already, and sensible that after all they had carried 
no point, but had indeed left matters worse than they had found 
them.  Of those who had come to The Boot, many dropped off within 
an hour; such of them as were really honest and sincere, never, 
after the morning's experience, to return, or to hold any 
communication with their late companions.  Others remained but to 
refresh themselves, and then went home desponding; others who had 
theretofore been regular in their attendance, avoided the place 
altogether.  The half-dozen prisoners whom the Guards had taken, 
were magnified by report into half-a-hundred at least; and their 
friends, being faint and sober, so slackened in their energy, and 
so drooped beneath these dispiriting influences, that by eight 
o'clock in the evening, Dennis, Hugh, and Barnaby, were left alone.  
Even they were fast asleep upon the benches, when Gashford's 
entrance roused them.

'Oh! you ARE here then?' said the Secretary.  'Dear me!'

'Why, where should we be, Muster Gashford!' Dennis rejoined as he 
rose into a sitting posture.

'Oh nowhere, nowhere,' he returned with excessive mildness.  'The 
streets are filled with blue cockades.  I rather thought you might 
have been among them.  I am glad you are not.'

'You have orders for us, master, then?' said Hugh.

'Oh dear, no.  Not I.  No orders, my good fellow.  What orders 
should I have?  You are not in my service.'

'Muster Gashford,' remonstrated Dennis, 'we belong to the cause, 
don't we?'

'The cause!' repeated the secretary, looking at him in a sort of 
abstraction.  'There is no cause.  The cause is lost.'

'Lost!'

'Oh yes.  You have heard, I suppose?  The petition is rejected by a 
hundred and ninety-two, to six.  It's quite final.  We might have 
spared ourselves some trouble.  That, and my lord's vexation, are 
the only circumstances I regret.  I am quite satisfied in all other 
respects.'

As he said this, he took a penknife from his pocket, and putting 
his hat upon his knee, began to busy himself in ripping off the 
blue cockade which he had worn all day; at the same time humming a 
psalm tune which had been very popular in the morning, and dwelling 
on it with a gentle regret.

His two adherents looked at each other, and at him, as if they 
were at a loss how to pursue the subject.  At length Hugh, after 
some elbowing and winking between himself and Mr Dennis, ventured 
to stay his hand, and to ask him why he meddled with that riband in 
his hat.

'Because,' said the secretary, looking up with something between a 
snarl and a smile; 'because to sit still and wear it, or to fall 
asleep and wear it, is a mockery.  That's all, friend.'

'What would you have us do, master!' cried Hugh.

'Nothing,' returned Gashford, shrugging his shoulders, 'nothing.  
When my lord was reproached and threatened for standing by you, I, 
as a prudent man, would have had you do nothing.  When the soldiers 
were trampling you under their horses' feet, I would have had you 
do nothing.  When one of them was struck down by a daring hand, and 
I saw confusion and dismay in all their faces, I would have had you 
do nothing--just what you did, in short.  This is the young man who 
had so little prudence and so much boldness.  Ah! I am sorry for him.'

'Sorry, master!' cried Hugh.

'Sorry, Muster Gashford!' echoed Dennis.

'In case there should be a proclamation out to-morrow, offering 
five hundred pounds, or some such trifle, for his apprehension; and 
in case it should include another man who dropped into the lobby 
from the stairs above,' said Gashford, coldly; 'still, do nothing.'

'Fire and fury, master!' cried Hugh, starting up.  'What have we 
done, that you should talk to us like this!'

'Nothing,' returned Gashford with a sneer.  'If you are cast into 
prison; if the young man--' here he looked hard at Barnaby's 
attentive face--'is dragged from us and from his friends; perhaps 
from people whom he loves, and whom his death would kill; is thrown 
into jail, brought out and hanged before their eyes; still, do 
nothing.  You'll find it your best policy, I have no doubt.'

'Come on!' cried Hugh, striding towards the door.  'Dennis--
Barnaby--come on!'

'Where?  To do what?' said Gashford, slipping past him, and 
standing with his back against it.

'Anywhere!  Anything!' cried Hugh.  'Stand aside, master, or the 
window will serve our turn as well.  Let us out!'

'Ha ha ha!  You are of such--of such an impetuous nature,' said 
Gashford, changing his manner for one of the utmost good fellowship 
and the pleasantest raillery; 'you are such an excitable creature--
but you'll drink with me before you go?'

'Oh, yes--certainly,' growled Dennis, drawing his sleeve across his 
thirsty lips.  'No malice, brother.  Drink with Muster Gashford!'

Hugh wiped his heated brow, and relaxed into a smile.  The artful 
secretary laughed outright.

'Some liquor here!  Be quick, or he'll not stop, even for that.  He 
is a man of such desperate ardour!' said the smooth secretary, whom 
Mr Dennis corroborated with sundry nods and muttered oaths--'Once 
roused, he is a fellow of such fierce determination!'

Hugh poised his sturdy arm aloft, and clapping Barnaby on the back, 
bade him fear nothing.  They shook hands together--poor Barnaby 
evidently possessed with the idea that he was among the most 
virtuous and disinterested heroes in the world--and Gashford 
laughed again.

'I hear,' he said smoothly, as he stood among them with a great 
measure of liquor in his hand, and filled their glasses as quickly 
and as often as they chose, 'I hear--but I cannot say whether it be 
true or false--that the men who are loitering in the streets to-
night are half disposed to pull down a Romish chapel or two, and 
that they only want leaders.  I even heard mention of those in Duke 
Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and in Warwick Street, Golden 
Square; but common report, you know--You are not going?'

--'To do nothing, rnaster, eh?' cried Hugh.  'No jails and halter 
for Barnaby and me.  They must be frightened out of that.  Leaders 
are wanted, are they?  Now boys!'

'A most impetuous fellow!' cried the secretary.  'Ha ha!  A 
courageous, boisterous, most vehement fellow!  A man who--'

There was no need to finish the sentence, for they had rushed out 
of the house, and were far beyond hearing.  He stopped in the 
middle of a laugh, listened, drew on his gloves, and, clasping his 
hands behind him, paced the deserted room for a long time, then 
bent his steps towards the busy town, and walked into the streets.

They were filled with people, for the rumour of that day's 
proceedings had made a great noise.  Those persons who did not care 
to leave home, were at their doors or windows, and one topic of 
discourse prevailed on every side.  Some reported that the riots 
were effectually put down; others that they had broken out again: 
some said that Lord George Gordon had been sent under a strong 
guard to the Tower; others that an attempt had been made upon the 
King's life, that the soldiers had been again called out, and that 
the noise of musketry in a distant part of the town had been 
plainly heard within an hour.  As it grew darker, these stories 
became more direful and mysterious; and often, when some 
frightened passenger ran past with tidings that the rioters were 
not far off, and were coming up, the doors were shut and barred, 
lower windows made secure, and as much consternation engendered, as 
if the city were invaded by a foreign army.

Gashford walked stealthily about, listening to all he heard, and 
diffusing or confirming, whenever he had an opportunity, such false 
intelligence as suited his own purpose; and, busily occupied in 
this way, turned into Holborn for the twentieth time, when a great 
many women and children came flying along the street--often panting 
and looking back--and the confused murmur of numerous voices struck 
upon his ear.  Assured by these tokens, and by the red light which 
began to flash upon the houses on either side, that some of his 
friends were indeed approaching, he begged a moment's shelter at a 
door which opened as he passed, and running with some other 
persons to an upper window, looked out upon the crowd.

They had torches among them, and the chief faces were distinctly 
visible.  That they had been engaged in the destruction of some 
building was sufficiently apparent, and that it was a Catholic 
place of worship was evident from the spoils they bore as trophies, 
which were easily recognisable for the vestments of priests, and 
rich fragments of altar furniture.  Covered with soot, and dirt, 
and dust, and lime; their garments torn to rags; their hair hanging 
wildly about them; their hands and faces jagged and bleeding with 
the wounds of rusty nails; Barnaby, Hugh, and Dennis hurried on 
before them all, like hideous madmen.  After them, the dense throng 
came fighting on: some singing; some shouting in triumph; some 
quarrelling among themselves; some menacing the spectators as they 
passed; some with great wooden fragments, on which they spent their 
rage as if they had been alive, rending them limb from limb, and 
hurling the scattered morsels high into the air; some in a drunken 
state, unconscious of the hurts they had received from falling 
bricks, and stones, and beams; one borne upon a shutter, in the 
very midst, covered with a dingy cloth, a senseless, ghastly heap.  
Thus--a vision of coarse faces, with here and there a blot of 
flaring, smoky light; a dream of demon heads and savage eyes, and 
sticks and iron bars uplifted in the air, and whirled about; a 
bewildering horror, in which so much was seen, and yet so little, 
which seemed so long, and yet so short, in which there were so many 
phantoms, not to be forgotten all through life, and yet so many 
things that could not be observed in one distracting glimpse--it 
flitted onward, and was gone.

As it passed away upon its work of wrath and ruin, a piercing 
scream was heard.  A knot of persons ran towards the spot; 
Gashford, who just then emerged into the street, among them.  He 
was on the outskirts of the little concourse, and could not see or 
hear what passed within; but one who had a better place, informed 
him that a widow woman had descried her son among the rioters.

'Is that all?' said the secretary, turning his face homewards.  
'Well! I think this looks a little more like business!'



Chapter 51


Promising as these outrages were to Gashford's view, and much like 
business as they looked, they extended that night no farther.  The 
soldiers were again called out, again they took half-a-dozen 
prisoners, and again the crowd dispersed after a short and 
bloodless scuffle.  Hot and drunken though they were, they had not 
yet broken all bounds and set all law and government at defiance.  
Something of their habitual deference to the authority erected by 
society for its own preservation yet remained among them, and had 
its majesty been vindicated in time, the secretary would have had 
to digest a bitter disappointment.

By midnight, the streets were clear and quiet, and, save that there 
stood in two parts of the town a heap of nodding walls and pile of 
rubbish, where there had been at sunset a rich and handsome 
building, everything wore its usual aspect.  Even the Catholic 
gentry and tradesmen, of whom there were many resident in different 
parts of the City and its suburbs, had no fear for their lives or 
property, and but little indignation for the wrong they had already 
sustained in the plunder and destruction of their temples of 
worship.  An honest confidence in the government under whose 
protection they had lived for many years, and a well-founded 
reliance on the good feeling and right thinking of the great mass 
of the community, with whom, notwithstanding their religious 
differences, they were every day in habits of confidential, 
affectionate, and friendly intercourse, reassured them, even under 
the excesses that had been committed; and convinced them that they 
who were Protestants in anything but the name, were no more to be 
considered as abettors of these disgraceful occurrences, than they 
themselves were chargeable with the uses of the block, the rack, 
the gibbet, and the stake in cruel Mary's reign.

The clock was on the stroke of one, when Gabriel Varden, with his 
lady and Miss Miggs, sat waiting in the little parlour.  This fact; 
the toppling wicks of the dull, wasted candles; the silence that 
prevailed; and, above all, the nightcaps of both maid and matron, 
were sufficient evidence that they had been prepared for bed some 
time ago, and had some reason for sitting up so far beyond their 
usual hour.

If any other corroborative testimony had been required, it would 
have been abundantly furnished in the actions of Miss Miggs, who, 
having arrived at that restless state and sensitive condition of 
the nervous system which are the result of long watching, did, by a 
constant rubbing and tweaking of her nose, a perpetual change of 
position (arising from the sudden growth of imaginary knots and 
knobs in her chair), a frequent friction of her eyebrows, the 
incessant recurrence of a small cough, a small groan, a gasp, a 
sigh, a sniff, a spasmodic start, and by other demonstrations of 
that nature, so file down and rasp, as it were, the patience of the 
locksmith, that after looking at her in silence for some time, he 
at last broke out into this apostrophe:--

'Miggs, my good girl, go to bed--do go to bed.  You're really worse 
than the dripping of a hundred water-butts outside the window, or 
the scratching of as many mice behind the wainscot.  I can't bear 
it.  Do go to bed, Miggs.  To oblige me--do.'

'You haven't got nothing to untie, sir,' returned Miss Miggs, 'and 
therefore your requests does not surprise me.  But missis has--and 
while you sit up, mim'--she added, turning to the locksmith's wife, 
'I couldn't, no, not if twenty times the quantity of cold water was 
aperiently running down my back at this moment, go to bed with a 
quiet spirit.'

Having spoken these words, Miss Miggs made divers efforts to rub 
her shoulders in an impossible place, and shivered from head to 
foot; thereby giving the beholders to understand that the imaginary 
cascade was still in full flow, but that a sense of duty upheld her 
under that and all other sufferings, and nerved her to endurance.

Mrs Varden being too sleepy to speak, and Miss Miggs having, as the 
phrase is, said her say, the locksmith had nothing for it but to 
sigh and be as quiet as he could.

But to be quiet with such a basilisk before him was impossible.  
If he looked another way, it was worse to feel that she was rubbing 
her cheek, or twitching her ear, or winking her eye, or making all 
kinds of extraordinary shapes with her nose, than to see her do it.  
If she was for a moment free from any of these complaints, it was 
only because of her foot being asleep, or of her arm having got the 
fidgets, or of her leg being doubled up with the cramp, or of some 
other horrible disorder which racked her whole frame.  If she did 
enjoy a moment's ease, then with her eyes shut and her mouth wide 
open, she would be seen to sit very stiff and upright in her chair; 
then to nod a little way forward, and stop with a jerk; then to nod 
a little farther forward, and stop with another jerk; then to 
recover herself; then to come forward again--lower--lower--lower--
by very slow degrees, until, just as it seemed impossible that she 
could preserve her balance for another instant, and the locksmith 
was about to call out in an agony, to save her from dashing down 
upon her forehead and fracturing her skull, then all of a sudden 
and without the smallest notice, she would come upright and rigid 
again with her eyes open, and in her countenance an expression of 
defiance, sleepy but yet most obstinate, which plainly said, 'I've 
never once closed 'em since I looked at you last, and I'll take my 
oath of it!'

At length, after the clock had struck two, there was a sound at the 
street door, as if somebody had fallen against the knocker by 
accident.  Miss Miggs immediately jumping up and clapping her 
hands, cried with a drowsy mingling of the sacred and profane, 
'Ally Looyer, mim! there's Simmuns's knock!'

'Who's there?' said Gabriel.

'Me!' cried the well-known voice of Mr Tappertit.  Gabriel opened 
the door, and gave him admission.

He did not cut a very insinuating figure, for a man of his stature 
suffers in a crowd; and having been active in yesterday morning's 
work, his dress was literally crushed from head to foot: his hat 
being beaten out of all shape, and his shoes trodden down at heel 
like slippers.  His coat fluttered in strips about him, the buckles 
were torn away both from his knees and feet, half his neckerchief 
was gone, and the bosom of his shirt was rent to tatters.  Yet 
notwithstanding all these personal disadvantages; despite his being 
very weak from heat and fatigue; and so begrimed with mud and dust 
that he might have been in a case, for anything of the real texture 
(either of his skin or apparel) that the eye could discern; he 
stalked haughtily into the parlour, and throwing himself into a 
chair, and endeavouring to thrust his hands into the pockets of his 
small-clothes, which were turned inside out and displayed upon his 
legs, like tassels, surveyed the household with a gloomy dignity.

'Simon,' said the locksmith gravely, 'how comes it that you return 
home at this time of night, and in this condition?  Give me an 
assurance that you have not been among the rioters, and I am 
satisfied.'

'Sir,' replied Mr Tappertit, with a contemptuous look, 'I wonder at 
YOUR assurance in making such demands.'

'You have been drinking,' said the locksmith.

'As a general principle, and in the most offensive sense of the 
words, sir,' returned his journeyman with great self-possession, 
'I consider you a liar.  In that last observation you have 
unintentionally--unintentionally, sir,--struck upon the truth.'

'Martha,' said the locksmith, turning to his wife, and shaking his 
head sorrowfully, while a smile at the absurd figure beside him 
still played upon his open face, 'I trust it may turn out that this 
poor lad is not the victim of the knaves and fools we have so often 
had words about, and who have done so much harm to-day.  If he has 
been at Warwick Street or Duke Street to-night--'

'He has been at neither, sir,' cried Mr Tappertit in a loud voice, 
which he suddenly dropped into a whisper as he repeated, with eyes 
fixed upon the locksmith, 'he has been at neither.'

'I am glad of it, with all my heart,' said the locksmith in a 
serious tone; 'for if he had been, and it could be proved against 
him, Martha, your Great Association would have been to him the cart 
that draws men to the gallows and leaves them hanging in the air.  
It would, as sure as we're alive!'

Mrs Varden was too much scared by Simon's altered manner and 
appearance, and by the accounts of the rioters which had reached 
her ears that night, to offer any retort, or to have recourse to 
her usual matrimonial policy.  Miss Miggs wrung her hands, and 
wept.

'He was not at Duke Street, or at Warwick Street, G. Varden,' said 
Simon, sternly; 'but he WAS at Westminster.  Perhaps, sir, he 
kicked a county member, perhaps, sir, he tapped a lord--you may 
stare, sir, I repeat it--blood flowed from noses, and perhaps he 
tapped a lord.  Who knows?  This,' he added, putting his hand into 
his waistcoat-pocket, and taking out a large tooth, at the sight of 
which both Miggs and Mrs Varden screamed, 'this was a bishop's.  
Beware, G. Varden!'

'Now, I would rather,' said the locksmith hastily, 'have paid five 
hundred pounds, than had this come to pass.  You idiot, do you know 
what peril you stand in?'

'I know it, sir,' replied his journeyman, 'and it is my glory.  I 
was there, everybody saw me there.  I was conspicuous, and 
prominent.  I will abide the consequences.'

The locksmith, really disturbed and agitated, paced to and fro in 
silence--glancing at his former 'prentice every now and then--and 
at length stopping before him, said:

'Get to bed, and sleep for a couple of hours that you may wake 
penitent, and with some of your senses about you.  Be sorry for 
what you have done, and we will try to save you.  If I call him by 
five o'clock,' said Varden, turning hurriedly to his wife, and he 
washes himself clean and changes his dress, he may get to the Tower 
Stairs, and away by the Gravesend tide-boat, before any search is 
made for him.  From there he can easily get on to Canterbury, 
where your cousin will give him work till this storm has blown 
over.  I am not sure that I do right in screening him from the 
punishment he deserves, but he has lived in this house, man and 
boy, for a dozen years, and I should be sorry if for this one day's 
work he made a miserable end.  Lock the front-door, Miggs, and show 
no light towards the street when you go upstairs.  Quick, Simon!  
Get to bed!'

'And do you suppose, sir,' retorted Mr Tappertit, with a thickness 
and slowness of speech which contrasted forcibly with the rapidity 
and earnestness of his kind-hearted master--'and do you suppose, 
sir, that I am base and mean enough to accept your servile 
proposition?--Miscreant!'

'Whatever you please, Sim, but get to bed.  Every minute is of 
consequence.  The light here, Miggs!'

'Yes yes, oh do!  Go to bed directly,' cried the two women 
together.

Mr Tappertit stood upon his feet, and pushing his chair away to 
show that he needed no assistance, answered, swaying himself to and 
fro, and managing his head as if it had no connection whatever with 
his body:

'You spoke of Miggs, sir--Miggs may be smothered!'

'Oh Simmun!' ejaculated that young lady in a faint voice.  'Oh mim!  
Oh sir!  Oh goodness gracious, what a turn he has give me!'

'This family may ALL be smothered, sir,' returned Mr Tappertit, 
after glancing at her with a smile of ineffable disdain, 'excepting 
Mrs V.  I have come here, sir, for her sake, this night.  Mrs 
Varden, take this piece of paper.  It's a protection, ma'am.  You 
may need it.'

With these words he held out at arm's length, a dirty, crumpled 
scrap of writing.  The locksmith took it from him, opened it, and 
read as follows:


'All good friends to our cause, I hope will be particular, and do 
no injury to the property of any true Protestant.  I am well 
assured that the proprietor of this house is a staunch and worthy 
friend to the cause.

GEORGE GORDON.'


'What's this!' said the locksmith, with an altered face.

'Something that'll do you good service, young feller,' replied his 
journeyman, 'as you'll find.  Keep that safe, and where you can 
lay your hand upon it in an instant.  And chalk "No Popery" on your 
door to-morrow night, and for a week to come--that's all.'

'This is a genuine document,' said the locksmith, 'I know, for I 
have seen the hand before.  What threat does it imply?  What devil 
is abroad?'

'A fiery devil,' retorted Sim; 'a flaming, furious devil.  Don't 
you put yourself in its way, or you're done for, my buck.  Be 
warned in time, G. Varden.  Farewell!'

But here the two women threw themselves in his way--especially Miss 
Miggs, who fell upon him with such fervour that she pinned him 
against the wall--and conjured him in moving words not to go forth 
till he was sober; to listen to reason; to think of it; to take 
some rest, and then determine.

'I tell you,' said Mr Tappertit, 'that my mind is made up.  My 
bleeding country calls me and I go!  Miggs, if you don't get out of 
the way, I'll pinch you.'

Miss Miggs, still clinging to the rebel, screamed once 
vociferously--but whether in the distraction of her mind, or 
because of his having executed his threat, is uncertain.

'Release me,' said Simon, struggling to free himself from her 
chaste, but spider-like embrace.  'Let me go!  I have made 
arrangements for you in an altered state of society, and mean to 
provide for you comfortably in life--there!  Will that satisfy 
you?'

'Oh Simmun!' cried Miss Miggs.  'Oh my blessed Simmun!  Oh mim! 
what are my feelings at this conflicting moment!'

Of a rather turbulent description, it would seem; for her nightcap 
had been knocked off in the scuffle, and she was on her knees upon 
the floor, making a strange revelation of blue and yellow curl-
papers, straggling locks of hair, tags of staylaces, and strings of 
it's impossible to say what; panting for breath, clasping her 
hands, turning her eyes upwards, shedding abundance of tears, and 
exhibiting various other symptoms of the acutest mental suffering.

'I leave,' said Simon, turning to his master, with an utter 
disregard of Miggs's maidenly affliction, 'a box of things 
upstairs.  Do what you like with 'em.  I don't want 'em.  I'm never 
coming back here, any more.  Provide yourself, sir, with a 
journeyman; I'm my country's journeyman; henceforward that's MY 
line of business.'

'Be what you like in two hours' time, but now go up to bed,' 
returned the locksmith, planting himself in the doorway.  'Do you 
hear me?  Go to bed!'

'I hear you, and defy you, Varden,' rejoined Simon Tappertit.  
'This night, sir, I have been in the country, planning an 
expedition which shall fill your bell-hanging soul with wonder and 
dismay.  The plot demands my utmost energy.  Let me pass!'

'I'll knock you down if you come near the door,' replied the 
locksmith.  'You had better go to bed!'

Simon made no answer, but gathering himself up as straight as he 
could, plunged head foremost at his old master, and the two went 
driving out into the workshop together, plying their hands and feet 
so briskly that they looked like half-a-dozen, while Miggs and Mrs 
Varden screamed for twelve.

It would have been easy for Varden to knock his old 'prentice down, 
and bind him hand and foot; but as he was loth to hurt him in his 
then defenceless state, he contented himself with parrying his 
blows when he could, taking them in perfect good part when he could 
not, and keeping between him and the door, until a favourable 
opportunity should present itself for forcing him to retreat up-
stairs, and shutting him up in his own room.  But, in the goodness 
of his heart, he calculated too much upon his adversary's weakness, 
and forgot that drunken men who have lost the power of walking 
steadily, can often run.  Watching his time, Simon Tappertit made a 
cunning show of falling back, staggered unexpectedly forward, 
brushed past him, opened the door (he knew the trick of that lock 
well), and darted down the street like a mad dog.  The locksmith 
paused for a moment in the excess of his astonishment, and then 
gave chase.

It was an excellent season for a run, for at that silent hour the 
streets were deserted, the air was cool, and the flying figure 
before him distinctly visible at a great distance, as it sped away, 
with a long gaunt shadow following at its heels.  But the short-
winded locksmith had no chance against a man of Sim's youth and 
spare figure, though the day had been when he could have run him 
down in no time.  The space between them rapidly increased, and as 
the rays of the rising sun streamed upon Simon in the act of 
turning a distant corner, Gabriel Varden was fain to give up, and 
sit down on a doorstep to fetch his breath.  Simon meanwhile, 
without once stopping, fled at the same degree of swiftness to The 
Boot, where, as he well knew, some of his company were lying, and 
at which respectable hostelry--for he had already acquired the 
distinction of being in great peril of the law--a friendly watch 
had been expecting him all night, and was even now on the look-out 
for his coming.

'Go thy ways, Sim, go thy ways,' said the locksmith, as soon as he 
could speak.  'I have done my best for thee, poor lad, and would 
have saved thee, but the rope is round thy neck, I fear.'

So saying, and shaking his head in a very sorrowful and 
disconsolate manner, he turned back, and soon re-entered his own 
house, where Mrs Varden and the faithful Miggs had been anxiously 
expecting his return.

Now Mrs Varden (and by consequence Miss Miggs likewise) was 
impressed with a secret misgiving that she had done wrong; that she 
had, to the utmost of her small means, aided and abetted the growth 
of disturbances, the end of which it was impossible to foresee; 
that she had led remotely to the scene which had just passed; and 
that the locksmith's time for triumph and reproach had now arrived 
indeed.  And so strongly did Mrs Varden feel this, and so 
crestfallen was she in consequence, that while her husband was 
pursuing their lost journeyman, she secreted under her chair the 
little red-brick dwelling-house with the yellow roof, lest it 
should furnish new occasion for reference to the painful theme; and 
now hid the same still more, with the skirts of her dress.

But it happened that the locksmith had been thinking of this very 
article on his way home, and that, coming into the room and not 
seeing it, he at once demanded where it was.

Mrs Varden had no resource but to produce it, which she did with 
many tears, and broken protestations that if she could have known--

'Yes, yes,' said Varden, 'of course--I know that.  I don't mean to 
reproach you, my dear.  But recollect from this time that all good 
things perverted to evil purposes, are worse than those which are 
naturally bad.  A thoroughly wicked woman, is wicked indeed.  When 
religion goes wrong, she is very wrong, for the same reason.  Let 
us say no more about it, my dear.'

So he dropped the red-brick dwelling-house on the floor, and 
setting his heel upon it, crushed it into pieces.  The halfpence, 
and sixpences, and other voluntary contributions, rolled about in 
all directions, but nobody offered to touch them, or to take them 
up.

'That,' said the locksmith, 'is easily disposed of, and I would to 
Heaven that everything growing out of the same society could be 
settled as easily.'

'It happens very fortunately, Varden,' said his wife, with her 
handkerchief to her eyes, 'that in case any more disturbances 
should happen--which I hope not; I sincerely hope not--'

'I hope so too, my dear.'

'--That in case any should occur, we have the piece of paper which 
that poor misguided young man brought.'

'Ay, to be sure,' said the locksmith, turning quickly round.  
'Where is that piece of paper?'

Mrs Varden stood aghast as he took it from her outstretched band, 
tore it into fragments, and threw them under the grate.

'Not use it?' she said.

'Use it!' cried the locksmith.  No!  Let them come and pull the 
roof about our ears; let them burn us out of house and home; I'd 
neither have the protection of their leader, nor chalk their howl 
upon my door, though, for not doing it, they shot me on my own 
threshold.  Use it!  Let them come and do their worst.  The first 
man who crosses my doorstep on such an errand as theirs, had better 
be a hundred miles away.  Let him look to it.  The others may have 
their will.  I wouldn't beg or buy them off, if, instead of every 
pound of iron in the place, there was a hundred weight of gold.  
Get you to bed, Martha.  I shall take down the shutters and go to 
work.'

'So early!' said his wife.

'Ay,' replied the locksmith cheerily, 'so early.  Come when they 
may, they shall not find us skulking and hiding, as if we feared to 
take our portion of the light of day, and left it all to them.  So 
pleasant dreams to you, my dear, and cheerful sleep!'

With that he gave his wife a hearty kiss, and bade her delay no 
longer, or it would be time to rise before she lay down to rest.  
Mrs Varden quite amiably and meekly walked upstairs, followed by 
Miggs, who, although a good deal subdued, could not refrain from 
sundry stimulative coughs and sniffs by the way, or from holding up 
her hands in astonishment at the daring conduct of master.



Chapter 52


A mob is usually a creature of very mysterious existence, 
particularly in a large city.  Where it comes from or whither it 
goes, few men can tell.  Assembling and dispersing with equal 
suddenness, it is as difficult to follow to its various sources as 
the sea itself; nor does the parallel stop here, for the ocean is 
not more fickle and uncertain, more terrible when roused, more 
unreasonable, or more cruel.

The people who were boisterous at Westminster upon the Friday 
morning, and were eagerly bent upon the work of devastation in Duke 
Street and Warwick Street at night, were, in the mass, the same.  
Allowing for the chance accessions of which any crowd is morally 
sure in a town where there must always be a large number of idle 
and profligate persons, one and the same mob was at both places.  
Yet they spread themselves in various directions when they 
dispersed in the afternoon, made no appointment for reassembling, 
had no definite purpose or design, and indeed, for anything they 
knew, were scattered beyond the hope of future union.

At The Boot, which, as has been shown, was in a manner the head-
quarters of the rioters, there were not, upon this Friday night, a 
dozen people.  Some slept in the stable and outhouses, some in the 
common room, some two or three in beds.  The rest were in their 
usual homes or haunts.  Perhaps not a score in all lay in the 
adjacent fields and lanes, and under haystacks, or near the warmth 
of brick-kilns, who had not their accustomed place of rest beneath 
the open sky.  As to the public ways within the town, they had 
their ordinary nightly occupants, and no others; the usual amount 
of vice and wretchedness, but no more.

The experience of one evening, however, had taught the reckless 
leaders of disturbance, that they had but to show themselves in the 
streets, to be immediately surrounded by materials which they could 
only have kept together when their aid was not required, at great 
risk, expense, and trouble.  Once possessed of this secret, they 
were as confident as if twenty thousand men, devoted to their will, 
had been encamped about them, and assumed a confidence which could 
not have been surpassed, though that had really been the case.  All 
day, Saturday, they remained quiet.  On Sunday, they rather studied 
how to keep their men within call, and in full hope, than to follow 
out, by any fierce measure, their first day's proceedings.

'I hope,' said Dennis, as, with a loud yawn, he raised his body 
from a heap of straw on which he had been sleeping, and supporting 
his head upon his hand, appealed to Hugh on Sunday morning, 'that 
Muster Gashford allows some rest?  Perhaps he'd have us at work 
again already, eh?'

'It's not his way to let matters drop, you may be sure of that,' 
growled Hugh in answer.  'I'm in no humour to stir yet, though.  
I'm as stiff as a dead body, and as full of ugly scratches as if I 
had been fighting all day yesterday with wild cats.'

'You've so much enthusiasm, that's it,' said Dennis, looking with 
great admiration at the uncombed head, matted beard, and torn hands 
and face of the wild figure before him; 'you're such a devil of a 
fellow.  You hurt yourself a hundred times more than you need, 
because you will be foremost in everything, and will do more than 
the rest.'

'For the matter of that,' returned Hugh, shaking back his ragged 
hair and glancing towards the door of the stable in which they lay; 
'there's one yonder as good as me.  What did I tell you about him?  
Did I say he was worth a dozen, when you doubted him?'

Mr Dennis rolled lazily over upon his breast, and resting his chin 
upon his hand in imitation of the attitude in which Hugh lay, said, 
as he too looked towards the door:

'Ay, ay, you knew him, brother, you knew him.  But who'd suppose to 
look at that chap now, that he could be the man he is!  Isn't it a 
thousand cruel pities, brother, that instead of taking his nat'ral 
rest and qualifying himself for further exertions in this here 
honourable cause, he should be playing at soldiers like a boy?  And 
his cleanliness too!' said Mr Dennis, who certainly had no reason 
to entertain a fellow feeling with anybody who was particular on 
that score; 'what weaknesses he's guilty of; with respect to his 
cleanliness!  At five o'clock this morning, there he was at the 
pump, though any one would think he had gone through enough, the 
day before yesterday, to be pretty fast asleep at that time.  But 
no--when I woke for a minute or two, there he was at the pump, and 
if you'd seen him sticking them peacock's feathers into his hat 
when he'd done washing--ah! I'm sorry he's such a imperfect 
character, but the best on us is incomplete in some pint of view or 
another.'

The subject of this dialogue and of these concluding remarks, which 
were uttered in a tone of philosophical meditation, was, as the 
reader will have divined, no other than Barnaby, who, with his flag 
in hand, stood sentry in the little patch of sunlight at the 
distant door, or walked to and fro outside, singing softly to 
himself; and keeping time to the music of some clear church bells.  
Whether he stood still, leaning with both hands on the flagstaff, 
or, bearing it upon his shoulder, paced slowly up and down, the 
careful arrangement of his poor dress, and his erect and lofty 
bearing, showed how high a sense he had of the great importance of 
his trust, and how happy and how proud it made him.  To Hugh and 
his companion, who lay in a dark corner of the gloomy shed, he, and 
the sunlight, and the peaceful Sabbath sound to which he made 
response, seemed like a bright picture framed by the door, and set 
off by the stable's blackness.  The whole formed such a contrast to 
themselves, as they lay wallowing, like some obscene animals, in 
their squalor and wickedness on the two heaps of straw, that for a 
few moments they looked on without speaking, and felt almost 
ashamed.

'Ah!'said Hugh at length, carrying it off with a laugh: 'He's a 
rare fellow is Barnaby, and can do more, with less rest, or meat, 
or drink, than any of us.  As to his soldiering, I put him on duty 
there.'

'Then there was a object in it, and a proper good one too, I'll be 
sworn,' retorted Dennis with a broad grin, and an oath of the same 
quality.  'What was it, brother?'

'Why, you see,' said Hugh, crawling a little nearer to him, 'that 
our noble captain yonder, came in yesterday morning rather the 
worse for liquor, and was--like you and me--ditto last night.'

Dennis looked to where Simon Tappertit lay coiled upon a truss of 
hay, snoring profoundly, and nodded.

'And our noble captain,' continued Hugh with another laugh, 'our 
noble captain and I, have planned for to-morrow a roaring 
expedition, with good profit in it.'

'Again the Papists?' asked Dennis, rubbing his hands.

'Ay, against the Papists--against one of 'em at least, that some of 
us, and I for one, owe a good heavy grudge to.'

'Not Muster Gashford's friend that he spoke to us about in my 
house, eh?' said Dennis, brimfull of pleasant expectation.

'The same man,' said Hugh.

'That's your sort,' cried Mr Dennis, gaily shaking hands with him, 
'that's the kind of game.  Let's have revenges and injuries, and 
all that, and we shall get on twice as fast.  Now you talk, 
indeed!'

'Ha ha ha!  The captain,' added Hugh, 'has thoughts of carrying off 
a woman in the bustle, and--ha ha ha!--and so have I!'

Mr Dennis received this part of the scheme with a wry face, 
observing that as a general principle he objected to women 
altogether, as being unsafe and slippery persons on whom there was 
no calculating with any certainty, and who were never in the same 
mind for four-and-twenty hours at a stretch.  He might have 
expatiated on this suggestive theme at much greater length, but 
that it occurred to him to ask what connection existed between the 
proposed expedition and Barnaby's being posted at the stable-door 
as sentry; to which Hugh cautiously replied in these words:

'Why, the people we mean to visit, were friends of his, once upon a 
time, and I know that much of him to feel pretty sure that if he 
thought we were going to do them any harm, he'd be no friend to our 
side, but would lend a ready hand to the other.  So I've persuaded 
him (for I know him of old) that Lord George has picked him out to 
guard this place to-morrow while we're away, and that it's a great 
honour--and so he's on duty now, and as proud of it as if he was a 
general.  Ha ha!  What do you say to me for a careful man as well 
as a devil of a one?'

Mr Dennis exhausted himself in compliments, and then added,

'But about the expedition itself--'

'About that,' said Hugh, 'you shall hear all particulars from me 
and the great captain conjointly and both together--for see, he's 
waking up.  Rouse yourself, lion-heart.  Ha ha!  Put a good face 
upon it, and drink again.  Another hair of the dog that bit you, 
captain!  Call for drink!  There's enough of gold and silver cups 
and candlesticks buried underneath my bed,' he added, rolling back 
the straw, and pointing to where the ground was newly turned, 'to 
pay for it, if it was a score of casks full.  Drink, captain!'

Mr Tappertit received these jovial promptings with a very bad 
grace, being much the worse, both in mind and body, for his two 
nights of debauch, and but indifferently able to stand upon his 
legs.  With Hugh's assistance, however, he contrived to stagger to 
the pump; and having refreshed himself with an abundant draught of 
cold water, and a copious shower of the same refreshing liquid on 
his head and face, he ordered some rum and milk to be served; and 
upon that innocent beverage and some biscuits and cheese made a 
pretty hearty meal.  That done, he disposed himself in an easy 
attitude on the ground beside his two companions (who were 
carousing after their own tastes), and proceeded to enlighten Mr 
Dennis in reference to to-morrow's project.

That their conversation was an interesting one, was rendered 
manifest by its length, and by the close attention of all three.  
That it was not of an oppressively grave character, but was 
enlivened by various pleasantries arising out of the subject, was 
clear from their loud and frequent roars of laughter, which 
startled Barnaby on his post, and made him wonder at their levity.  
But he was not summoned to join them, until they had eaten, and 
drunk, and slept, and talked together for some hours; not, indeed, 
until the twilight; when they informed him that they were about to 
make a slight demonstration in the streets--just to keep the 
people's hands in, as it was Sunday night, and the public might 
otherwise be disappointed--and that he was free to accompany them 
if he would.

Without the slightest preparation, saving that they carried clubs 
and wore the blue cockade, they sallied out into the streets; and, 
with no more settled design than that of doing as much mischief as 
they could, paraded them at random.  Their numbers rapidly 
increasing, they soon divided into parties; and agreeing to meet 
by-and-by, in the fields near Welbeck Street, scoured the town in 
various directions.  The largest body, and that which augmented 
with the greatest rapidity, was the one to which Hugh and Barnaby 
belonged.  This took its way towards Moorfields, where there was a 
rich chapel, and in which neighbourhood several Catholic families 
were known to reside.

Beginning with the private houses so occupied, they broke open the 
doors and windows; and while they destroyed the furniture and left 
but the bare walls, made a sharp search for tools and engines of 
destruction, such as hammers, pokers, axes, saws, and such like 
instruments.  Many of the rioters made belts of cord, of 
handkerchiefs, or any material they found at hand, and wore these 
weapons as openly as pioneers upon a field-day.  There was not the 
least disguise or concealment--indeed, on this night, very little 
excitement or hurry.  From the chapels, they tore down and took 
away the very altars, benches, pulpits, pews, and flooring; from 
the dwelling-houses, the very wainscoting and stairs.  This Sunday 
evening's recreation they pursued like mere workmen who had a 
certain task to do, and did it.  Fifty resolute men might have 
turned them at any moment; a single company of soldiers could have 
scattered them like dust; but no man interposed, no authority 
restrained them, and, except by the terrified persons who fled from 
their approach, they were as little heeded as if they were pursuing 
their lawful occupations with the utmost sobriety and good 
conduct.

In the same manner, they marched to the place of rendezvous agreed 
upon, made great fires in the fields, and reserving the most 
valuable of their spoils, burnt the rest.  Priestly garments, 
images of saints, rich stuffs and ornaments, altar-furniture and 
household goods, were cast into the flames, and shed a glare on the 
whole country round; but they danced and howled, and roared about 
these fires till they were tired, and were never for an instant 
checked.

As the main body filed off from this scene of action, and passed 
down Welbeck Street, they came upon Gashford, who had been a 
witness of their proceedings, and was walking stealthily along the 
pavement.  Keeping up with him, and yet not seeming to speak, Hugh 
muttered in his ear:

'Is this better, master?'

'No,' said Gashford.  'It is not.'

'What would you have?' said Hugh.  'Fevers are never at their 
height at once.  They must get on by degrees.'

'I would have you,' said Gashford, pinching his arm with such 
malevolence that his nails seemed to meet in the skin; 'I would 
have you put some meaning into your work.  Fools!  Can you make no 
better bonfires than of rags and scraps?  Can you burn nothing 
whole?'

'A little patience, master,' said Hugh.  'Wait but a few hours, and 
you shall see.  Look for a redness in the sky, to-morrow night.'

With that, he fell back into his place beside Barnaby; and when the 
secretary looked after him, both were lost in the crowd.



Chapter 53


The next day was ushered in by merry peals of bells, and by the 
firing of the Tower guns; flags were hoisted on many of the church-
steeples; the usual demonstrations were made in honour of the 
anniversary of the King's birthday; and every man went about his 
pleasure or business as if the city were in perfect order, and 
there were no half-smouldering embers in its secret places, which, 
on the approach of night, would kindle up again and scatter ruin 
and dismay abroad.  The leaders of the riot, rendered still more 
daring by the success of last night and by the booty they had 
acquired, kept steadily together, and only thought of implicating 
the mass of their followers so deeply that no hope of pardon or 
reward might tempt them to betray their more notorious confederates 
into the hands of justice.

Indeed, the sense of having gone too far to be forgiven, held the 
timid together no less than the bold.  Many who would readily have 
pointed out the foremost rioters and given evidence against them, 
felt that escape by that means was hopeless, when their every act 
had been observed by scores of people who had taken no part in the 
disturbances; who had suffered in their persons, peace, or 
property, by the outrages of the mob; who would be most willing 
witnesses; and whom the government would, no doubt, prefer to any 
King's evidence that might be offered.  Many of this class had 
deserted their usual occupations on the Saturday morning; some had 
been seen by their employers active in the tumult; others knew they 
must be suspected, and that they would be discharged if they 
returned; others had been desperate from the beginning, and 
comforted themselves with the homely proverb, that, being hanged at 
all, they might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb.  They all 
hoped and believed, in a greater or less degree, that the 
government they seemed to have paralysed, would, in its terror, 
come to terms with them in the end, and suffer them to make their 
own conditions.  The least sanguine among them reasoned with 
himself that, at the worst, they were too many to be all punished, 
and that he had as good a chance of escape as any other man.  The 
great mass never reasoned or thought at all, but were stimulated by 
their own headlong passions, by poverty, by ignorance, by the love 
of mischief, and the hope of plunder.

One other circumstance is worthy of remark; and that is, that from 
the moment of their first outbreak at Westminster, every symptom of 
order or preconcerted arrangement among them vanished.  When they 
divided into parties and ran to different quarters of the town, it 
was on the spontaneous suggestion of the moment.  Each party 
swelled as it went along, like rivers as they roll towards the sea; 
new leaders sprang up as they were wanted, disappeared when the 
necessity was over, and reappeared at the next crisis.  Each tumult 
took shape and form from the circumstances of the moment; sober 
workmen, going home from their day's labour, were seen to cast down 
their baskets of tools and become rioters in an instant; mere boys 
on errands did the like.  In a word, a moral plague ran through the 
city.  The noise, and hurry, and excitement, had for hundreds and 
hundreds an attraction they had no firmness to resist.  The 
contagion spread like a dread fever: an infectious madness, as yet 
not near its height, seized on new victims every hour, and society 
began to tremble at their ravings.

It was between two and three o'clock in the afternoon when 
Gashford looked into the lair described in the last chapter, and 
seeing only Barnaby and Dennis there, inquired for Hugh.

He was out, Barnaby told him; had gone out more than an hour ago; 
and had not yet returned.

'Dennis!' said the smiling secretary, in his smoothest voice, as he 
sat down cross-legged on a barrel, 'Dennis!'

The hangman struggled into a sitting posture directly, and with his 
eyes wide open, looked towards him.

'How do you do, Dennis?' said Gashford, nodding.  'I hope you have 
suffered no inconvenience from your late exertions, Dennis?'

'I always will say of you, Muster Gashford,' returned the hangman, 
staring at him, 'that that 'ere quiet way of yours might almost 
wake a dead man.  It is,' he added, with a muttered oath--still 
staring at him in a thoughtful manner--'so awful sly!'

'So distinct, eh Dennis?'

'Distinct!' he answered, scratching his head, and keeping his eyes 
upon the secretary's face; 'I seem to hear it, Muster Gashford, in 
my wery bones.'

'I am very glad your sense of hearing is so sharp, and that I 
succeed in making myself so intelligible,' said Gashford, in his 
unvarying, even tone.  'Where is your friend?'

Mr Dennis looked round as in expectation of beholding him asleep 
upon his bed of straw; then remembering he had seen him go out, 
replied:

'I can't say where he is, Muster Gashford, I expected him back 
afore now.  I hope it isn't time that we was busy, Muster 
Gashford?'

'Nay,' said the secretary, 'who should know that as well as you?  
How can I tell you, Dennis?  You are perfect master of your own 
actions, you know, and accountable to nobody--except sometimes to 
the law, eh?'

Dennis, who was very much baffled by the cool matter-of-course 
manner of this reply, recovered his self-possession on his 
professional pursuits being referred to, and pointing towards 
Barnaby, shook his head and frowned.

'Hush!' cried Barnaby.

'Ah!  Do hush about that, Muster Gashford,' said the hangman in a 
low voice, 'pop'lar prejudices--you always forget--well, Barnaby, 
my lad, what's the matter?'

'I hear him coming,' he answered: 'Hark!  Do you mark that?  That's 
his foot!  Bless you, I know his step, and his dog's too.  Tramp, 
tramp, pit-pat, on they come together, and, ha ha ha!--and here 
they are!' he cried, joyfully welcoming Hugh with both hands, and 
then patting him fondly on the back, as if instead of being the 
rough companion he was, he had been one of the most prepossessing 
of men.  'Here he is, and safe too!  I am glad to see him back 
again, old Hugh!'

'I'm a Turk if he don't give me a warmer welcome always than any 
man of sense,' said Hugh, shaking hands with him with a kind of 
ferocious friendship, strange enough to see.  'How are you, boy?'

'Hearty!' cried Barnaby, waving his hat.  'Ha ha ha!  And merrry 
too, Hugh!  And ready to do anything for the good cause, and the 
right, and to help the kind, mild, pale-faced gentleman--the lord 
they used so ill--eh, Hugh?'

'Ay!' returned his friend, dropping his hand, and looking at 
Gashford for an instant with a changed expression before he spoke 
to him.  'Good day, master!'

'And good day to you,' replied the secretary, nursing his leg.

'And many good days--whole years of them, I hope.  You are heated.'

'So would you have been, master,' said Hugh, wiping his face, 'if 
you'd been running here as fast as I have.'

'You know the news, then?  Yes, I supposed you would have heard it.'

'News! what news?'

'You don't?' cried Gashford, raising his eyebrows with an 
exclamation of surprise.  'Dear me!  Come; then I AM the first to 
make you acquainted with your distinguished position, after all.  
Do you see the King's Arms a-top?' he smilingly asked, as he took a 
large paper from his pocket, unfolded it, and held it out for 
Hugh's inspection.

'Well!' said Hugh.  'What's that to me?'

'Much.  A great deal,' replied the secretary.  'Read it.'

'I told you, the first time I saw you, that I couldn't read,' said 
Hugh, impatiently.  'What in the Devil's name's inside of it?'

'It is a proclamation from the King in Council,' said Gashford, 
'dated to-day, and offering a reward of five hundred pounds--five 
hundred pounds is a great deal of money, and a large temptation to 
some people--to any one who will discover the person or persons 
most active in demolishing those chapels on Saturday night.'

'Is that all?' cried Hugh, with an indifferent air.  'I knew of 
that.'

'Truly I might have known you did,' said Gashford, smiling, and 
folding up the document again.  'Your friend, I might have guessed--
indeed I did guess--was sure to tell you.'

'My friend!' stammered Hugh, with an unsuccessful effort to appear 
surprised.  'What friend?'

'Tut tut--do you suppose I don't know where you have been?' 
retorted Gashford, rubbing his hands, and beating the back of one 
on the palm of the other, and looking at him with a cunning eye.  
'How dull you think me!  Shall I say his name?'

'No,' said Hugh, with a hasty glance towards Dennis.

'You have also heard from him, no doubt,' resumed the secretary, 
after a moment's pause, 'that the rioters who have been taken (poor 
fellows) are committed for trial, and that some very active 
witnesses have had the temerity to appear against them.  Among 
others--' and here he clenched his teeth, as if he would suppress 
by force some violent words that rose upon his tongue; and spoke 
very slowly.  'Among others, a gentleman who saw the work going on 
in Warwick Street; a Catholic gentleman; one Haredale.'

Hugh would have prevented his uttering the word, but it was out 
already.  Hearing the name, Barnaby turned swiftly round.

'Duty, duty, bold Barnaby!' cried Hugh, assuming his wildest and 
most rapid manner, and thrusting into his hand his staff and flag 
which leant against the wall.  'Mount guard without loss of time, 
for we are off upon our expedition.  Up, Dennis, and get ready!  
Take care that no one turns the straw upon my bed, brave Barnaby; 
we know what's underneath it--eh?  Now, master, quick!  What you 
have to say, say speedily, for the little captain and a cluster of 
'em are in the fields, and only waiting for us.  Sharp's the word, 
and strike's the action.  Quick!'

Barnaby was not proof against this bustle and despatch.  The look 
of mingled astonishtnent and anger which had appeared in his face 
when he turned towards them, faded from it as the words passed from 
his memory, like breath from a polished mirror; and grasping the 
weapon which Hugh forced upon him, he proudly took his station at 
the door, beyond their hearing.

'You might have spoiled our plans, master,' said Hugh.  'YOU, too, 
of all men!'

'Who would have supposed that HE would be so quick?' urged 
Gashford.

'He's as quick sometimes--I don't mean with his hands, for that you 
know, but with his head--as you or any man,' said Hugh.  'Dennis, 
it's time we were going; they're waiting for us; I came to tell 
you.  Reach me my stick and belt.  Here!  Lend a hand, master.  
Fling this over my shoulder, and buckle it behind, will you?'

'Brisk as ever!' said the secretary, adjusting it for him as he 
desired.

'A man need be brisk to-day; there's brisk work a-foot.'

'There is, is there?' said Gashford.  He said it with such a 
provoking assumption of ignorance, that Hugh, looking over his 
shoulder and angrily down upon him, replied:

'Is there!  You know there is!  Who knows better than you, master, 
that the first great step to be taken is to make examples of these 
witnesses, and frighten all men from appearing against us or any of 
our body, any more?'

'There's one we know of,' returned Gashford, with an expressive 
smile, 'who is at least as well informed upon that subject as you 
or I.'

'If we mean the same gentleman, as I suppose we do,' Hugh rejoined 
softly, 'I tell you this--he's as good and quick information about 
everything as--' here he paused and looked round, as if to make 
sure that the person in question was not within hearing, 'as Old 
Nick himself.  Have you done that, master?  How slow you are!'

'It's quite fast now,' said Gashford, rising.  'I say--you didn't 
find that your friend disapproved of to-day's little expedition?  
Ha ha ha!  It is fortunate it jumps so well with the witness 
policy; for, once planned, it must have been carried out.  And now 
you are going, eh?'

'Now we are going, master!' Hugh replied.  'Any parting words?'

'Oh dear, no,' said Gashford sweetly.  'None!'

'You're sure?' cried Hugh, nudging the grinning Dennis.

'Quite sure, eh, Muster Gashford?' chuckled the hangman.

Gashford paused a moment, struggling with his caution and his 
malice; then putting himself between the two men, and laying a hand 
upon the arm of each, said, in a cramped whisper:

'Do not, my good friends--I am sure you will not--forget our talk 
one night--in your house, Dennis--about this person.  No mercy, no 
quarter, no two beams of his house to be left standing where the 
builder placed them!  Fire, the saying goes, is a good servant, but 
a bad master.  Makes it HIS master; he deserves no better.  But I 
am sure you will be firm, I am sure you will be very resolute, I am 
sure you will remember that he thirsts for your lives, and those of 
all your brave companions.  If you ever acted like staunch 
fellows, you will do so to-day.  Won't you, Dennis--won't you, 
Hugh?'

The two looked at him, and at each other; then bursting into a roar 
of laughter, brandished their staves above their heads, shook 
hands, and hurried out.

When they had been gone a little time, Gashford followed.  They 
were yet in sight, and hastening to that part of the adjacent 
fields in which their fellows had already mustered; Hugh was 
looking back, and flourishing his hat to Barnaby, who, delighted 
with his trust, replied in the same way, and then resumed his 
pacing up and down before the stable-door, where his feet had worn 
a path already.  And when Gashford himself was far distant, and 
looked back for the last time, he was still walking to and fro, 
with the same measured tread; the most devoted and the blithest 
champion that ever maintained a post, and felt his heart lifted up 
with a brave sense of duty, and determination to defend it to the 
last.

Smiling at the simplicity of the poor idiot, Gashford betook 
himself to Welbeck Street by a different path from that which he 
knew the rioters would take, and sitting down behind a curtain in 
one of the upper windows of Lord George Gordon's house, waited 
impatiently for their coming.  They were so long, that although he 
knew it had been settled they should come that way, he had a 
misgiving they must have changed their plans and taken some other 
route.  But at length the roar of voices was heard in the 
neighbouring fields, and soon afterwards they came thronging past, 
in a great body.

However, they were not all, nor nearly all, in one body, but were, 
as he soon found, divided into four parties, each of which stopped 
before the house to give three cheers, and then went on; the 
leaders crying out in what direction they were going, and calling 
on the spectators to join them.  The first detachment, carrying, by 
way of banners, some relics of the havoc they had made in 
Moorfields, proclaimed that they were on their way to Chelsea, 
whence they would return in the same order, to make of the spoil 
they bore, a great bonfire, near at hand.  The second gave out that 
they were bound for Wapping, to destroy a chapel; the third, that 
their place of destination was East Smithfield, and their object 
the same.  All this was done in broad, bright, summer day.  Gay 
carriages and chairs stopped to let them pass, or turned back to 
avoid them; people on foot stood aside in doorways, or perhaps 
knocked and begged permission to stand at a window, or in the hall, 
until the rioters had passed: but nobody interfered with them; and 
when they had gone by, everything went on as usual.

There still remained the fourth body, and for that the secretary 
looked with a most intense eagerness.  At last it came up.  It was 
numerous, and composed of picked men; for as he gazed down among 
them, he recognised many upturned faces which he knew well--those 
of Simon Tappertit, Hugh, and Dennis in the front, of course.  They 
halted and cheered, as the others had done; but when they moved 
again, they did not, like them, proclaim what design they had.  
Hugh merely raised his hat upon the bludgeon he carried, and 
glancing at a spectator on the opposite side of the way, was gone.

Gashford followed the direction of his glance instinctively, and 
saw, standing on the pavement, and wearing the blue cockade, Sir 
John Chester.  He held his hat an inch or two above his head, to 
propitiate the mob; and, resting gracefully on his cane, smiling 
pleasantly, and displaying his dress and person to the very best 
advantage, looked on in the most tranquil state imaginable.  For 
all that, and quick and dexterous as he was, Gashford had seen him 
recognise Hugh with the air of a patron.  He had no longer any eyes 
for the crowd, but fixed his keen regards upon Sir John.

He stood in the same place and posture until the last man in the 
concourse had turned the corner of the street; then very 
deliberately took the blue cockade out of his hat; put it carefully 
in his pocket, ready for the next emergency; refreshed himself with 
a pinch of snuff; put up his box; and was walking slowly off, when 
a passing carriage stopped, and a lady's hand let down the glass.  
Sir John's hat was off again immediately.  After a minute's 
conversation at the carriage-window, in which it was apparent that 
he was vastly entertaining on the subject of the mob, he stepped 
lightly in, and was driven away.

The secretary smiled, but he had other thoughts to dwell upon, and 
soon dismissed the topic.  Dinner was brought him, but he sent it 
down untasted; and, in restless pacings up and down the room, and 
constant glances at the clock, and many futile efforts to sit down 
and read, or go to sleep, or look out of the window, consumed four 
weary hours.  When the dial told him thus much time had crept away, 
he stole upstairs to the top of the house, and coming out upon the 
roof sat down, with his face towards the east.

Heedless of the fresh air that blew upon his heated brow, of the 
pleasant meadows from which he turned, of the piles of roofs and 
chimneys upon which he looked, of the smoke and rising mist he 
vainly sought to pierce, of the shrill cries of children at their 
evening sports, the distant hum and turmoil of the town, the 
cheerful country breath that rustled past to meet it, and to droop, 
and die; he watched, and watched, till it was dark save for the 
specks of light that twinkled in the streets below and far away--
and, as the darkness deepened, strained his gaze and grew more 
eager yet.

'Nothing but gloom in that direction, still!' he muttered 
restlessly.  'Dog! where is the redness in the sky, you promised 
me!'



Chapter 54


Rumours of the prevailing disturbances had, by this time, begun to 
be pretty generally circulated through the towns and villages round 
London, and the tidings were everywhere received with that appetite 
for the marvellous and love of the terrible which have probably 
been among the natural characteristics of mankind since the 
creation of the world.  These accounts, however, appeared, to many 
persons at that day--as they would to us at the present, but that 
we know them to be matter of history--so monstrous and improbable, 
that a great number of those who were resident at a distance, and 
who were credulous enough on other points, were really unable to 
bring their minds to believe that such things could be; and 
rejected the intelligence they received on all hands, as wholly 
fabulous and absurd.

Mr Willet--not so much, perhaps, on account of his having argued 
and settled the matter with himself, as by reason of his 
constitutional obstinacy--was one of those who positively refused 
to entertain the current topic for a moment.  On this very evening, 
and perhaps at the very time when Gashford kept his solitary watch, 
old John was so red in the face with perpetually shaking his head 
in contradiction of his three ancient cronies and pot companions, 
that he was quite a phenomenon to behold, and lighted up the 
Maypole Porch wherein they sat together, like a monstrous carbuncle 
in a fairy tale.

'Do you think, sir,' said Mr Willet, looking hard at Solomon 
Daisy--for it was his custom in cases of personal altercation to 
fasten upon the smallest man in the party--'do you think, sir, that 
I'm a born fool?'

'No, no, Johnny,' returned Solomon, looking round upon the little 
circle of which he formed a part: 'We all know better than that.  
You're no fool, Johnny.  No, no!'

Mr Cobb and Mr Parkes shook their heads in unison, muttering, 'No, 
no, Johnny, not you!'  But as such compliments had usually the 
effect of making Mr Willet rather more dogged than before, he 
surveyed them with a look of deep disdain, and returned for answer:

'Then what do you mean by coming here, and telling me that this 
evening you're a-going to walk up to London together--you three--
you--and have the evidence of your own senses?  An't,' said Mr 
Willet, putting his pipe in his mouth with an air of solemn 
disgust, 'an't the evidence of MY senses enough for you?'

'But we haven't got it, Johnny,' pleaded Parkes, humbly.

'You haven't got it, sir?' repeated Mr Willet, eyeing him from top 
to toe.  'You haven't got it, sir?  You HAVE got it, sir.  Don't I 
tell you that His blessed Majesty King George the Third would no 
more stand a rioting and rollicking in his streets, than he'd stand 
being crowed over by his own Parliament?'

'Yes, Johnny, but that's your sense--not your senses,' said the 
adventurous Mr Parkes.

'How do you know?  'retorted John with great dignity.  'You're a 
contradicting pretty free, you are, sir.  How do YOU know which it 
is?  I'm not aware I ever told you, sir.'

Mr Parkes, finding himself in the position of having got into 
metaphysics without exactly seeing his way out of them, stammered 
forth an apology and retreated from the argument.  There then 
ensued a silence of some ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, at 
the expiration of which period Mr Willet was observed to rumble and 
shake with laughter, and presently remarked, in reference to his 
late adversary, 'that he hoped he had tackled him enough.'  
Thereupon Messrs Cobb and Daisy laughed, and nodded, and Parkes was 
looked upon as thoroughly and effectually put down.

'Do you suppose if all this was true, that Mr Haredale would be 
constantly away from home, as he is?' said John, after another 
silence.  'Do you think he wouldn't be afraid to leave his house 
with them two young women in it, and only a couple of men, or so?'

'Ay, but then you know,' returned Solomon Daisy, 'his house is a 
goodish way out of London, and they do say that the rioters won't 
go more than two miles, or three at the farthest, off the stones.  
Besides, you know, some of the Catholic gentlefolks have actually 
sent trinkets and suchlike down here for safety--at least, so the 
story goes.'

'The story goes!' said Mr Willet testily.  'Yes, sir.  The story 
goes that you saw a ghost last March.  But nobody believes it.'

'Well!' said Solomon, rising, to divert the attention of his two 
friends, who tittered at this retort: 'believed or disbelieved, 
it's true; and true or not, if we mean to go to London, we must be 
going at once.  So shake hands, Johnny, and good night.'

'I shall shake hands,' returned the landlord, putting his into his 
pockets, 'with no man as goes to London on such nonsensical 
errands.'

The three cronies were therefore reduced to the necessity of 
shaking his elbows; having performed that ceremony, and brought 
from the house their hats, and sticks, and greatcoats, they bade 
him good night and departed; promising to bring him on the morrow 
full and true accounts of the real state of the city, and if it 
were quiet, to give him the full merit of his victory.

John Willet looked after them, as they plodded along the road in 
the rich glow of a summer evening; and knocking the ashes out of 
his pipe, laughed inwardly at their folly, until his sides were 
sore.  When he had quite exhausted himself--which took some time, 
for he laughed as slowly as he thought and spoke--he sat himself 
comfortably with his back to the house, put his legs upon the 
bench, then his apron over his face, and fell sound asleep.

How long he slept, matters not; but it was for no brief space, for 
when he awoke, the rich light had faded, the sombre hues of night 
were falling fast upon the landscape, and a few bright stars were 
already twinkling overhead.  The birds were all at roost, the 
daisies on the green had closed their fairy hoods, the honeysuckle 
twining round the porch exhaled its perfume in a twofold degree, as 
though it lost its coyness at that silent time and loved to shed 
its fragrance on the night; the ivy scarcely stirred its deep green 
leaves.  How tranquil, and how beautiful it was!

Was there no sound in the air, besides the gentle rustling of the 
trees and the grasshopper's merry chirp?  Hark!  Something very 
faint and distant, not unlike the murmuring in a sea-shell.  Now it 
grew louder, fainter now, and now it altogether died away.  
Presently, it came again, subsided, came once more, grew louder, 
fainter--swelled into a roar.  It was on the road, and varied with 
its windings.  All at once it burst into a distinct sound--the 
voices, and the tramping feet of many men.

It is questionable whether old John Willet, even then, would have 
thought of the rioters but for the cries of his cook and housemaid, 
who ran screaming upstairs and locked themselves into one of the 
old garrets,--shrieking dismally when they had done so, by way of 
rendering their place of refuge perfectly secret and secure.  These 
two females did afterwards depone that Mr Willet in his 
consternation uttered but one word, and called that up the stairs 
in a stentorian voice, six distinct times.  But as this word was a 
monosyllable, which, however inoffensive when applied to the 
quadruped it denotes, is highly reprehensible when used in 
connection with females of unimpeachable character, many persons 
were inclined to believe that the young women laboured under some 
hallucination caused by excessive fear; and that their ears 
deceived them.

Be this as it may, John Willet, in whom the very uttermost extent 
of dull-headed perplexity supplied the place of courage, stationed 
himself in the porch, and waited for their coming up.  Once, it 
dimly occurred to him that there was a kind of door to the house, 
which had a lock and bolts; and at the same time some shadowy ideas 
of shutters to the lower windows, flitted through his brain.  But 
he stood stock still, looking down the road in the direction in 
which the noise was rapidly advancing, and did not so much as take 
his hands out of his pockets.

He had not to wait long.  A dark mass, looming through a cloud of 
dust, soon became visible; the mob quickened their pace; shouting 
and whooping like savages, they came rushing on pell mell; and in a 
few seconds he was bandied from hand to hand, in the heart of a 
crowd of men.

'Halloa!' cried a voice he knew, as the man who spoke came cleaving 
through the throng.  'Where is he?  Give him to me.  Don't hurt 
him.  How now, old Jack!  Ha ha ha!'

Mr Willet looked at him, and saw it was Hugh; but he said nothing, 
and thought nothing.

'These lads are thirsty and must drink!' cried Hugh, thrusting him 
back towards the house.  'Bustle, Jack, bustle.  Show us the best--
the very best--the over-proof that you keep for your own drinking, 
Jack!'

John faintly articulated the words, 'Who's to pay?'

'He says "Who's to pay?"' cried Hugh, with a roar of laughter which 
was loudly echoed by the crowd.  Then turning to John, he added, 
'Pay! Why, nobody.'

John stared round at the mass of faces--some grinning, some fierce, 
some lighted up by torches, some indistinct, some dusky and 
shadowy: some looking at him, some at his house, some at each 
other--and while he was, as he thought, in the very act of doing 
so, found himself, without any consciousness of having moved, in 
the bar; sitting down in an arm-chair, and watching the destruction 
of his property, as if it were some queer play or entertainment, of 
an astonishing and stupefying nature, but having no reference to 
himself--that he could make out--at all.

Yes.  Here was the bar--the bar that the boldest never entered 
without special invitation--the sanctuary, the mystery, the 
hallowed ground: here it was, crammed with men, clubs, sticks, 
torches, pistols; filled with a deafening noise, oaths, shouts, 
screams, hootings; changed all at once into a bear-garden, a 
madhouse, an infernal temple: men darting in and out, by door and 
window, smashing the glass, turning the taps, drinking liquor out 
of China punchbowls, sitting astride of casks, smoking private and 
personal pipes, cutting down the sacred grove of lemons, hacking 
and hewing at the celebrated cheese, breaking open inviolable 
drawers, putting things in their pockets which didn't belong to 
them, dividing his own money before his own eyes, wantonly wasting, 
breaking, pulling down and tearing up: nothing quiet, nothing 
private: men everywhere--above, below, overhead, in the bedrooms, 
in the kitchen, in the yard, in the stables--clambering in at 
windows when there were doors wide open; dropping out of windows 
when the stairs were handy; leaping over the bannisters into chasms 
of passages: new faces and figures presenting themselves every 
instant--some yelling, some singing, some fighting, some breaking 
glass and crockery, some laying the dust with the liquor they 
couldn't drink, some ringing the bells till they pulled them down, 
others beating them with pokers till they beat them into fragments: 
more men still--more, more, more--swarming on like insects: noise, 
smoke, light, darkness, frolic, anger, laughter, groans, plunder, 
fear, and ruin!

Nearly all the time while John looked on at this bewildering scene, 
Hugh kept near him; and though he was the loudest, wildest, most 
destructive villain there, he saved his old master's bones a score 
of times.  Nay, even when Mr Tappertit, excited by liquor, came up, 
and in assertion of his prerogative politely kicked John Willet on 
the shins, Hugh bade him return the compliment; and if old John had 
had sufficient presence of mind to understand this whispered 
direction, and to profit by it, he might no doubt, under Hugh's 
protection, have done so with impunity.

At length the band began to reassemble outside the house, and to 
call to those within, to join them, for they were losing time.  
These murmurs increasing, and attaining a high pitch, Hugh, and 
some of those who yet lingered in the bar, and who plainly were the 
leaders of the troop, took counsel together, apart, as to what was 
to be done with John, to keep him quiet until their Chigwell work 
was over.  Some proposed to set the house on fire and leave him in 
it; others, that he should be reduced to a state of temporary 
insensibility, by knocking on the head; others, that he should be 
sworn to sit where he was until to-morrow at the same hour; others 
again, that he should be gagged and taken off with them, under a 
sufficient guard.  All these propositions being overruled, it was 
concluded, at last, to bind him in his chair, and the word was 
passed for Dennis.

'Look'ee here, Jack!' said Hugh, striding up to him: 'We are going 
to tie you, hand and foot, but otherwise you won't be hurt.  D'ye 
hear?'

John Willet looked at another man, as if he didn't know which was 
the speaker, and muttered something about an ordinary every Sunday 
at two o'clock.

'You won't be hurt I tell you, Jack--do you hear me?' roared Hugh, 
impressing the assurance upon him by means of a heavy blow on the 
back.  'He's so dead scared, he's woolgathering, I think.  Give him 
a drop of something to drink here.  Hand over, one of you.'

A glass of liquor being passed forward, Hugh poured the contents 
down old John's throat.  Mr Willet feebly smacked his lips, thrust 
his hand into his pocket, and inquired what was to pay; adding, as 
he looked vacantly round, that he believed there was a trifle of 
broken glass--

'He's out of his senses for the time, it's my belief,' said Hugh, 
after shaking him, without any visible effect upon his system, 
until his keys rattled in his pocket.  'Where's that Dennis?'

The word was again passed, and presently Mr Dennis, with a long 
cord bound about his middle, something after the manner of a friar, 
came hurrying in, attended by a body-guard of half-a-dozen of his 
men.

'Come!  Be alive here!' cried Hugh, stamping his foot upon the 
ground.  'Make haste!'

Dennis, with a wink and a nod, unwound the cord from about his 
person, and raising his eyes to the ceiling, looked all over it, 
and round the walls and cornice, with a curious eye; then shook his 
head.

'Move, man, can't you!' cried Hugh, with another impatient stamp of 
his foot.  'Are we to wait here, till the cry has gone for ten 
miles round, and our work's interrupted?'

'It's all very fine talking, brother,' answered Dennis, stepping 
towards him; 'but unless--' and here he whispered in his ear--
'unless we do it over the door, it can't be done at all in this 
here room.'

'What can't?' Hugh demanded.

'What can't!' retorted Dennis.  'Why, the old man can't.'

'Why, you weren't going to hang him!' cried Hugh.

'No, brother?' returned the hangman with a stare.  'What else?'

Hugh made no answer, but snatching the rope from his companion's 
hand, proceeded to bind old John himself; but his very first move 
was so bungling and unskilful, that Mr Dennis entreated, almost 
with tears in his eyes, that he might be permitted to perform the 
duty.  Hugh consenting, be achieved it in a twinkling.

'There,' he said, looking mournfully at John Willet, who displayed 
no more emotion in his bonds than he had shown out of them.  
'That's what I call pretty and workmanlike.  He's quite a picter 
now.  But, brother, just a word with you--now that he's ready 
trussed, as one may say, wouldn't it be better for all parties if 
we was to work him off?  It would read uncommon well in the 
newspapers, it would indeed.  The public would think a great deal 
more on us!'

Hugh, inferring what his companion meant, rather from his gestures 
than his technical mode of expressing himself (to which, as he was 
ignorant of his calling, he wanted the clue), rejected this 
proposition for the second time, and gave the word 'Forward!' which 
was echoed by a hundred voices from without.

'To the Warren!' shouted Dennis as he ran out, followed by the 
rest.  'A witness's house, my lads!'

A loud yell followed, and the whole throng hurried off, mad for 
pillage and destruction.  Hugh lingered behind for a few moments to 
stimulate himself with more drink, and to set all the taps running, 
a few of which had accidentally been spared; then, glancing round 
the despoiled and plundered room, through whose shattered window 
the rioters had thrust the Maypole itself,--for even that had been 
sawn down,--lighted a torch, clapped the mute and motionless John 
Willet on the back, and waving his light above his head, and 
uttering a fierce shout, hastened after his companions.



Chapter 55


John Willet, left alone in his dismantled bar, continued to sit 
staring about him; awake as to his eyes, certainly, but with all 
his powers of reason and reflection in a sound and dreamless 
sleep.  He looked round upon the room which had been for years, 
and was within an hour ago, the pride of his heart; and not a 
muscle of his face was moved.  The night, without, looked black and 
cold through the dreary gaps in the casement; the precious liquids, 
now nearly leaked away, dripped with a hollow sound upon the floor; 
the Maypole peered ruefully in through the broken window, like the 
bowsprit of a wrecked ship; the ground might have been the bottom 
of the sea, it was so strewn with precious fragments.  Currents of 
air rushed in, as the old doors jarred and creaked upon their 
hinges; the candles flickered and guttered down, and made long 
winding-sheets; the cheery deep-red curtains flapped and fluttered 
idly in the wind; even the stout Dutch kegs, overthrown and lying 
empty in dark corners, seemed the mere husks of good fellows whose 
jollity had departed, and who could kindle with a friendly glow no 
more.  John saw this desolation, and yet saw it not.  He was 
perfectly contented to sit there, staring at it, and felt no more 
indignation or discomfort in his bonds than if they had been robes 
of honour.  So far as he was personally concerned, old Time lay 
snoring, and the world stood still.

Save for the dripping from the barrels, the rustling of such light 
fragments of destruction as the wind affected, and the dull 
creaking of the open doors, all was profoundly quiet: indeed, 
these sounds, like the ticking of the death-watch in the night, 
only made the silence they invaded deeper and more apparent.  But 
quiet or noisy, it was all one to John.  If a train of heavy 
artillery could have come up and commenced ball practice outside 
the window, it would have been all the same to him.  He was a long 
way beyond surprise.  A ghost couldn't have overtaken him.

By and by he heard a footstep--a hurried, and yet cautious 
footstep--coming on towards the house.  It stopped, advanced again, 
then seemed to go quite round it.  Having done that, it came 
beneath the window, and a head looked in.

It was strongly relieved against the darkness outside by the glare 
of the guttering candles.  A pale, worn, withered face; the eyes--
but that was owing to its gaunt condition--unnaturally large and 
bright; the hair, a grizzled black.  It gave a searching glance all 
round the room, and a deep voice said:

'Are you alone in this house?'

John made no sign, though the question was repeated twice, and he 
heard it distinctly.  After a moment's pause, the man got in at the 
window.  John was not at all surprised at this, either.  There had 
been so much getting in and out of window in the course of the last 
hour or so, that he had quite forgotten the door, and seemed to 
have lived among such exercises from infancy.

The man wore a large, dark, faded cloak, and a slouched hat; he 
walked up close to John, and looked at him.  John returned the 
compliment with interest.

'How long have you been sitting thus?' said the man.

John considered, but nothing came of it.

'Which way have the party gone?'

Some wandering speculations relative to the fashion of the 
stranger's boots, got into Mr Willet's mind by some accident or 
other, but they got out again in a hurry, and left him in his 
former state.

'You would do well to speak,' said the man; 'you may keep a whole 
skin, though you have nothing else left that can be hurt.  Which 
way have the party gone?'

'That!' said John, finding his voice all at once, and nodding with 
perfect good faith--he couldn't point; he was so tightly bound--in 
exactly the opposite direction to the right one.

'You lie!' said the man angrily, and with a threatening gesture.  
'I came that way.  You would betray me.'

It was so evident that John's imperturbability was not assumed, but 
was the result of the late proceedings under his roof, that the man 
stayed his hand in the very act of striking him, and turned away.

John looked after him without so much as a twitch in a single nerve 
of his face.  He seized a glass, and holding it under one of the 
little casks until a few drops were collected, drank them greedily 
off; then throwing it down upon the floor impatiently, he took the 
vessel in his hands and drained it into his throat.  Some scraps of 
bread and meat were scattered about, and on these he fell next; 
eating them with voracity, and pausing every now and then to 
listen for some fancied noise outside.  When he had refreshed 
himself in this manner with violent haste, and raised another 
barrel to his lips, he pulled his hat upon his brow as though he 
were about to leave the house, and turned to John.

'Where are your servants?'

Mr Willet indistinctly remembered to have heard the rioters calling 
to them to throw the key of the room in which they were, out of 
window, for their keeping.  He therefore replied, 'Locked up.'

'Well for them if they remain quiet, and well for you if you do the 
like,' said the man.  'Now show me the way the party went.'

This time Mr Willet indicated it correctly.  The man was hurrying 
to the door, when suddenly there came towards them on the wind, the 
loud and rapid tolling of an alarm-bell, and then a bright and 
vivid glare streamed up, which illumined, not only the whole 
chamber, but all the country.

It was not the sudden change from darkness to this dreadful light, 
it was not the sound of distant shrieks and shouts of triumph, it 
was not this dread invasion of the serenity and peace of night, 
that drove the man back as though a thunderbolt had struck him.  It 
was the Bell.  If the ghastliest shape the human mind has ever 
pictured in its wildest dreams had risen up before him, he could 
not have staggered backward from its touch, as he did from the 
first sound of that loud iron voice.  With eyes that started from 
his head, his limbs convulsed, his face most horrible to see, he 
raised one arm high up into the air, and holding something 
visionary back and down, with his other hand, drove at it as though 
he held a knife and stabbed it to the heart.  He clutched his hair, 
and stopped his ears, and travelled madly round and round; then 
gave a frightful cry, and with it rushed away: still, still, the 
Bell tolled on and seemed to follow him--louder and louder, hotter 
and hotter yet.  The glare grew brighter, the roar of voices 
deeper; the crash of heavy bodies falling, shook the air; bright 
streams of sparks rose up into the sky; but louder than them all--
rising faster far, to Heaven--a million times more fierce and 
furious--pouring forth dreadful secrets after its long silence--
speaking the language of the dead--the Bell--the Bell!

What hunt of spectres could surpass that dread pursuit and flight!  
Had there been a legion of them on his track, he could have better 
borne it.  They would have had a beginning and an end, but here all 
space was full.  The one pursuing voice was everywhere: it sounded 
in the earth, the air; shook the long grass, and howled among the 
trembling trees.  The echoes caught it up, the owls hooted as it 
flew upon the breeze, the nightingale was silent and hid herself 
among the thickest boughs: it seemed to goad and urge the angry 
fire, and lash it into madness; everything was steeped in one 
prevailing red; the glow was everywhere; nature was drenched in 
blood: still the remorseless crying of that awful voice--the Bell, 
the Bell!

It ceased; but not in his ears.  The knell was at his heart.  No 
work of man had ever voice like that which sounded there, and 
warned him that it cried unceasingly to Heaven.  Who could hear 
that hell, and not know what it said!  There was murder in its 
every note--cruel, relentless, savage murder--the murder of a 
confiding man, by one who held his every trust.  Its ringing 
summoned phantoms from their graves.  What face was that, in which 
a friendly smile changed to a look of half incredulous horror, 
which stiffened for a moment into one of pain, then changed again 
into an imploring glance at Heaven, and so fell idly down with 
upturned eyes, like the dead stags' he had often peeped at when a 
little child: shrinking and shuddering--there was a dreadful thing 
to think of now!--and clinging to an apron as he looked!  He sank 
upon the ground, and grovelling down as if he would dig himself a 
place to hide in, covered his face and ears: but no, no, no,--a 
hundred walls and roofs of brass would not shut out that bell, for 
in it spoke the wrathful voice of God, and from that voice, the 
whole wide universe could not afford a refuge!

While he rushed up and down, not knowing where to turn, and while 
he lay crouching there, the work went briskly on indeed.  When 
they left the Maypole, the rioters formed into a solid body, and 
advanced at a quick pace towards the Warren.  Rumour of their 
approach having gone before, they found the garden-doors fast 
closed, the windows made secure, and the house profoundly dark: not 
a light being visible in any portion of the building.  After some 
fruitless ringing at the bells, and beating at the iron gates, they 
drew off a few paces to reconnoitre, and confer upon the course it 
would be best to take.

Very little conference was needed, when all were bent upon one 
desperate purpose, infuriated with liquor, and flushed with 
successful riot.  The word being given to surround the house, some 
climbed the gates, or dropped into the shallow trench and scaled 
the garden wall, while others pulled down the solid iron fence, and 
while they made a breach to enter by, made deadly weapons of the 
bars.  The house being completely encircled, a small number of men 
were despatched to break open a tool-shed in the garden; and during 
their absence on this errand, the remainder contented themselves 
with knocking violently at the doors, and calling to those within, 
to come down and open them on peril of their lives.

No answer being returned to this repeated summons, and the 
detachment who had been sent away, coming back with an accession of 
pickaxes, spades, and hoes, they,--together with those who had such 
arms already, or carried (as many did) axes, poles, and crowbars,--
struggled into the foremost rank, ready to beset the doors and 
windows.  They had not at this time more than a dozen lighted 
torches among them; but when these preparations were completed, 
flaming links were distributed and passed from hand to hand with 
such rapidity, that, in a minute's time, at least two-thirds of the 
whole roaring mass bore, each man in his hand, a blazing brand.  
Whirling these about their heads they raised a loud shout, and fell 
to work upon the doors and windows.

Amidst the clattering of heavy blows, the rattling of broken glass, 
the cries and execrations of the mob, and all the din and turmoil 
of the scene, Hugh and his friends kept together at the turret-door 
where Mr Haredale had last admitted him and old John Willet; and 
spent their united force on that.  It was a strong old oaken door, 
guarded by good bolts and a heavy bar, but it soon went crashing in 
upon the narrow stairs behind, and made, as it were, a platform to 
facilitate their tearing up into the rooms above.  Almost at the 
same moment, a dozen other points were forced, and at every one the 
crowd poured in like water.

A few armed servant-men were posted in the hall, and when the 
rioters forced an entrance there, they fired some half-a-dozen 
shots.  But these taking no effect, and the concourse coming on 
like an army of devils, they only thought of consulting their own 
safety, and retreated, echoing their assailants' cries, and hoping 
in the confusion to be taken for rioters themselves; in which 
stratagem they succeeded, with the exception of one old man who was 
never heard of again, and was said to have had his brains beaten 
out with an iron bar (one of his fellows reported that he had seen 
the old man fall), and to have been afterwards burnt in the flames.

The besiegers being now in complete possession of the house, spread 
themselves over it from garret to cellar, and plied their demon 
labours fiercely.  While some small parties kindled bonfires 
underneath the windows, others broke up the furniture and cast the 
fragments down to feed the flames below; where the apertures in 
the wall (windows no longer) were large enough, they threw out 
tables, chests of drawers, beds, mirrors, pictures, and flung them 
whole into the fire; while every fresh addition to the blazing 
masses was received with shouts, and howls, and yells, which added 
new and dismal terrors to the conflagration.  Those who had axes 
and had spent their fury on the movables, chopped and tore down the 
doors and window frames, broke up the flooring, hewed away the 
rafters, and buried men who lingered in the upper rooms, in heaps 
of ruins.  Some searched the drawers, the chests, the boxes, 
writing-desks, and closets, for jewels, plate, and money; while 
others, less mindful of gain and more mad for destruction, cast 
their whole contents into the courtyard without examination, and 
called to those below, to heap them on the blaze.  Men who had 
been into the cellars, and had staved the casks, rushed to and fro 
stark mad, setting fire to all they saw--often to the dresses of 
their own friends--and kindling the building in so many parts that 
some had no time for escape, and were seen, with drooping hands and 
blackened faces, hanging senseless on the window-sills to which 
they had crawled, until they were sucked and drawn into the 
burning gulf.  The more the fire crackled and raged, the wilder and 
more cruel the men grew; as though moving in that element they 
became fiends, and changed their earthly nature for the qualities 
that give delight in hell.

The burning pile, revealing rooms and passages red hot, through 
gaps made in the crumbling walls; the tributary fires that licked 
the outer bricks and stones, with their long forked tongues, and 
ran up to meet the glowing mass within; the shining of the flames 
upon the villains who looked on and fed them; the roaring of the 
angry blaze, so bright and high that it seemed in its rapacity to 
have swallowed up the very smoke; the living flakes the wind bore 
rapidly away and hurried on with, like a storm of fiery snow; the 
noiseless breaking of great beams of wood, which fell like feathers 
on the heap of ashes, and crumbled in the very act to sparks and 
powder; the lurid tinge that overspread the sky, and the darkness, 
very deep by contrast, which prevailed around; the exposure to the 
coarse, common gaze, of every little nook which usages of home had 
made a sacred place, and the destruction by rude hands of every 
little household favourite which old associations made a dear and 
precious thing: all this taking place--not among pitying looks and 
friendly murmurs of compassion, but brutal shouts and exultations, 
which seemed to make the very rats who stood by the old house too 
long, creatures with some claim upon the pity and regard of those 
its roof had sheltered:--combined to form a scene never to be 
forgotten by those who saw it and were not actors in the work, so 
long as life endured.

And who were they?  The alarm-bell rang--and it was pulled by no 
faint or hesitating hands--for a long time; but not a soul was 
seen.  Some of the insurgents said that when it ceased, they heard 
the shrieks of women, and saw some garments fluttering in the air, 
as a party of men bore away no unresisting burdens.  No one could 
say that this was true or false, in such an uproar; but where was 
Hugh?  Who among them had seen him, since the forcing of the doors?  
The cry spread through the body.  Where was Hugh!

'Here!' he hoarsely cried, appearing from the darkness; out of 
breath, and blackened with the smoke.  'We have done all we can; 
the fire is burning itself out; and even the corners where it 
hasn't spread, are nothing but heaps of ruins.  Disperse, my lads, 
while the coast's clear; get back by different ways; and meet as 
usual!'  With that, he disappeared again,--contrary to his wont, 
for he was always first to advance, and last to go away,--leaving 
them to follow homewards as they would.

It was not an easy task to draw off such a throng.  If Bedlam gates 
had been flung wide open, there would not have issued forth such 
maniacs as the frenzy of that night had made.  There were men 
there, who danced and trampled on the beds of flowers as though 
they trod down human enemies, and wrenched them from the stalks, 
like savages who twisted human necks.  There were men who cast 
their lighted torches in the air, and suffered them to fall upon 
their heads and faces, blistering the skin with deep unseemly 
burns.  There were men who rushed up to the fire, and paddled in it 
with their hands as if in water; and others who were restrained by 
force from plunging in, to gratify their deadly longing.  On the 
skull of one drunken lad--not twenty, by his looks--who lay upon 
the ground with a bottle to his mouth, the lead from the roof came 
streaming down in a shower of liquid fire, white hot; melting his 
head like wax.  When the scattered parties were collected, men--
living yet, but singed as with hot irons--were plucked out of the 
cellars, and carried off upon the shoulders of others, who strove 
to wake them as they went along, with ribald jokes, and left them, 
dead, in the passages of hospitals.  But of all the howling throng 
not one learnt mercy from, or sickened at, these sights; nor was 
the fierce, besotted, senseless rage of one man glutted.

Slowly, and in small clusters, with hoarse hurrahs and repetitions 
of their usual cry, the assembly dropped away.  The last few red-
eyed stragglers reeled after those who had gone before; the distant 
noise of men calling to each other, and whistling for others whom 
they missed, grew fainter and fainter; at length even these sounds 
died away, and silence reigned alone.

Silence indeed!  The glare of the flames had sunk into a fitful, 
flashing light; and the gentle stars, invisible till now, looked 
down upon the blackening heap.  A dull smoke hung upon the ruin, as 
though to hide it from those eyes of Heaven; and the wind forbore 
to move it.  Bare walls, roof open to the sky--chambers, where the 
beloved dead had, many and many a fair day, risen to new life and 
energy; where so many dear ones had been sad and merry; which were 
connected with so many thoughts and hopes, regrets and changes--all 
gone.  Nothing left but a dull and dreary blank--a smouldering heap 
of dust and ashes--the silence and solitude of utter desolation.



Chapter 56


The Maypole cronies, little drearning of the change so soon to come 
upon their favourite haunt, struck through the Forest path upon 
their way to London; and avoiding the main road, which was hot and 
dusty, kept to the by-paths and the fields.  As they drew nearer to 
their destination, they began to make inquiries of the people whom 
they passed, concerning the riots, and the truth or falsehood of 
the stories they had heard.  The answers went far beyond any 
intelligence that had spread to quiet Chigwell.  One man told them 
that that afternoon the Guards, conveying to Newgate some rioters 
who had been re-examined, had been set upon by the mob and 
compelled to retreat; another, that the houses of two witnesses 
near Clare Market were about to be pulled down when he came away; 
another, that Sir George Saville's house in Leicester Fields was to 
be burned that night, and that it would go hard with Sir George if 
he fell into the people's hands, as it was he who had brought in 
the Catholic bill.  All accounts agreed that the mob were out, in 
stronger numbers and more numerous parties than had yet appeared; 
that the streets were unsafe; that no man's house or life was worth 
an hour's purchase; that the public consternation was increasing 
every moment; and that many families had already fled the city.  
One fellow who wore the popular colour, damned them for not having 
cockades in their hats, and bade them set a good watch to-morrow 
night upon their prison doors, for the locks would have a 
straining; another asked if they were fire-proof, that they 
walked abroad without the distinguishing mark of all good and true 
men;--and a third who rode on horseback, and was quite alone, 
ordered them to throw each man a shilling, in his hat, towards the 
support of the rioters.  Although they were afraid to refuse 
compliance with this demand, and were much alarmed by these 
reports, they agreed, having come so far, to go forward, and see 
the real state of things with their own eyes.  So they pushed on 
quicker, as men do who are excited by portentous news; and 
ruminating on what they had heard, spoke little to each other.

It was now night, and as they came nearer to the city they had 
dismal confirmation of this intelligence in three great fires, all 
close together, which burnt fiercely and were gloomily reflected in 
the sky.  Arriving in the immediate suburbs, they found that almost 
every house had chalked upon its door in large characters 'No 
Popery,' that the shops were shut, and that alarm and anxiety were 
depicted in every face they passed.

Noting these things with a degree of apprehension which neither of 
the three cared to impart, in its full extent, to his companions, 
they came to a turnpike-gate, which was shut.  They were passing 
through the turnstile on the path, when a horseman rode up from 
London at a hard gallop, and called to the toll-keeper in a voice 
of great agitation, to open quickly in the name of God.

The adjuration was so earnest and vehement, that the man, with a 
lantern in his hand, came running out--toll-keeper though he was--
and was about to throw the gate open, when happening to look behind 
him, he exclaimed, 'Good Heaven, what's that!  Another fire!'

At this, the three turned their heads, and saw in the distance--
straight in the direction whence they had come--a broad sheet of 
flame, casting a threatening light upon the clouds, which glimmered 
as though the conflagration were behind them, and showed like a 
wrathful sunset.

'My mind misgives me,' said the horseman, 'or I know from what far 
building those flames come.  Don't stand aghast, my good fellow.  
Open the gate!'

'Sir,' cried the man, laying his hand upon his horse's bridle as he 
let him through: 'I know you now, sir; be advised by me; do not go 
on.  I saw them pass, and know what kind of men they are.  You will 
be murdered.'

'So be it!' said the horseman, looking intently towards the fire, 
and not at him who spoke.

'But sir--sir,' cried the man, grasping at his rein more tightly 
yet, 'if you do go on, wear the blue riband.  Here, sir,' he added, 
taking one from his own hat, 'it's necessity, not choice, that 
makes me wear it; it's love of life and home, sir.  Wear it for 
this one night, sir; only for this one night.'

'Do!' cried the three friends, pressing round his horse.  'Mr 
Haredale--worthy sir--good gentleman--pray be persuaded.'

'Who's that?' cried Mr Haredale, stooping down to look.  'Did I 
hear Daisy's voice?'

'You did, sir,' cried the little man.  'Do be persuaded, sir.  This 
gentleman says very true.  Your life may hang upon it.'

'Are you,' said Mr Haredale abruptly, 'afraid to come with me?'

'I, sir?--N-n-no.'

'Put that riband in your hat.  If we meet the rioters, swear that I 
took you prisoner for wearing it.  I will tell them so with my own 
lips; for as I hope for mercy when I die, I will take no quarter 
from them, nor shall they have quarter from me, if we come hand to 
hand to-night.  Up here--behind me--quick!  Clasp me tight round 
the body, and fear nothing.'

In an instant they were riding away, at full gallop, in a dense 
cloud of dust, and speeding on, like hunters in a dream.

It was well the good horse knew the road he traversed, for never 
once--no, never once in all the journey--did Mr Haredale cast his 
eyes upon the ground, or turn them, for an instant, from the light 
towards which they sped so madly.  Once he said in a low voice, 'It 
is my house,' but that was the only time he spoke.  When they came 
to dark and doubtful places, he never forgot to put his hand upon 
the little man to hold him more securely in his seat, but he kept 
his head erect and his eyes fixed on the fire, then, and always.

The road was dangerous enough, for they went the nearest way--
headlong--far from the highway--by lonely lanes and paths, where 
waggon-wheels had worn deep ruts; where hedge and ditch hemmed in 
the narrow strip of ground; and tall trees, arching overhead, made 
it profoundly dark.  But on, on, on, with neither stop nor stumble, 
till they reached the Maypole door, and could plainly see that the 
fire began to fade, as if for want of fuel.

'Down--for one moment--for but one moment,' said Mr Haredale, 
helping Daisy to the ground, and following himself.  'Willet--
Willet--where are my niece and servants--Willet!'

Crying to him distractedly, he rushed into the bar.--The landlord 
bound and fastened to his chair; the place dismantled, stripped, 
and pulled about his ears;--nobody could have taken shelter here.

He was a strong man, accustomed to restrain himself, and suppress 
his strong emotions; but this preparation for what was to follow--
though he had seen that fire burning, and knew that his house must 
be razed to the ground--was more than he could bear.  He covered 
his face with his hands for a moment, and turned away his head.

'Johnny, Johnny,' said Solomon--and the simple-hearted fellow 
cried outright, and wrung his hands--'Oh dear old Johnny, here's a 
change!  That the Maypole bar should come to this, and we should 
live to see it!  The old Warren too, Johnny--Mr Haredale--oh, 
Johnny, what a piteous sight this is!'

Pointing to Mr Haredale as he said these words, little Solomon 
Daisy put his elbows on the back of Mr Willet's chair, and fairly 
blubbered on his shoulder.

While Solomon was speaking, old John sat, mute as a stock-fish, 
staring at him with an unearthly glare, and displaying, by every 
possible symptom, entire and complete unconsciousness.  But when 
Solomon was silent again, John followed,with his great round eyes, 
the direction of his looks, and did appear to have some dawning 
distant notion that somebody had come to see him.

'You know us, don't you, Johnny?' said the little clerk, rapping 
himself on the breast.  'Daisy, you know--Chigwell Church--bell-
ringer--little desk on Sundays--eh, Johnny?'

Mr Willet reflected for a few moments, and then muttered, as it 
were mechanically: 'Let us sing to the praise and glory of--'

'Yes, to be sure,' cried the little man, hastily; 'that's it--
that's me, Johnny.  You're all right now, an't you?  Say you're all 
right, Johnny.'

'All right?' pondered Mr Willet, as if that were a matter entirely 
between himself and his conscience.  'All right?  Ah!'

'They haven't been misusing you with sticks, or pokers, or any 
other blunt instruments--have they, Johnny?' asked Solomon, with a 
very anxious glance at Mr Willet's head.  'They didn't beat you, 
did they?'

John knitted his brow; looked downwards, as if he were mentally 
engaged in some arithmetical calculation; then upwards, as if the 
total would not come at his call; then at Solomon Daisy, from his 
eyebrow to his shoe-buckle; then very slowly round the bar.  And 
then a great, round, leaden-looking, and not at all transparent 
tear, came rolling out of each eye, and he said, as he shook his 
head:

'If they'd only had the goodness to murder me, I'd have thanked 'em 
kindly.'

'No, no, no, don't say that, Johnny,' whimpered his little friend.  
'It's very, very bad, but not quite so bad as that.  No, no!'

'Look'ee here, sir!' cried John, turning his rueful eyes on Mr 
Haredale, who had dropped on one knee, and was hastily beginning to 
untie his bonds.  'Look'ee here, sir!  The very Maypole--the old 
dumb Maypole--stares in at the winder, as if it said, "John Willet, 
John Willet, let's go and pitch ourselves in the nighest pool of 
water as is deep enough to hold us; for our day is over!"'

'Don't, Johnny, don't,' cried his friend: no less affected with 
this mournful effort of Mr Willet's imagination, than by the 
sepulchral tone in which he had spoken of the Maypole.  'Please 
don't, Johnny!'

'Your loss is great, and your misfortune a heavy one,' said Mr 
Haredale, looking restlessly towards the door: 'and this is not a 
time to comfort you.  If it were, I am in no condition to do so.  
Before I leave you, tell me one thing, and try to tell me plainly, 
I implore you.  Have you seen, or heard of Emma?'

'No!' said Mr Willet.

'Nor any one but these bloodhounds?'

'No!'

'They rode away, I trust in Heaven, before these dreadful scenes 
began,' said Mr Haredale, who, between his agitation, his eagerness 
to mount his horse again, and the dexterity with which the cords 
were tied, had scarcely yet undone one knot.  'A knife, Daisy!'

'You didn't,' said John, looking about, as though he had lost his 
pocket-handkerchief, or some such slight article--'either of you 
gentlemen--see a--a coffin anywheres, did you?'

'Willet!' cried Mr Haredale.  Solomon dropped the knife, and 
instantly becoming limp from head to foot, exclaimed 'Good 
gracious!'

'--Because,' said John, not at all regarding them, 'a dead man 
called a little time ago, on his way yonder.  I could have told you 
what name was on the plate, if he had brought his coffin with him, 
and left it behind.  If he didn't, it don't signify.'

His landlord, who had listened to these words with breathless 
attention, started that moment to his feet; and, without a word, 
drew Solomon Daisy to the door, mounted his horse, took him up 
behind again, and flew rather than galloped towards the pile of 
ruins, which that day's sun had shone upon, a stately house.  Mr 
Willet stared after them, listened, looked down upon himself to 
make quite sure that he was still unbound, and, without any 
manifestation of impatience, disappointment, or surprise, gently 
relapsed into the condition from which he had so imperfectly 
recovered.

Mr Haredale tied his horse to the trunk of a tree, and grasping his 
companion's arm, stole softly along the footpath, and into what had 
been the garden of his house.  He stopped for an instant to look 
upon its smoking walls, and at the stars that shone through roof 
and floor upon the heap of crumbling ashes.  Solomon glanced 
timidly in his face, but his lips were tightly pressed together, a 
resolute and stern expression sat upon his brow, and not a tear, a 
look, or gesture indicating grief, escaped him.

He drew his sword; felt for a moment in his breast, as though he 
carried other arms about him; then grasping Solomon by the wrist 
again, went with a cautious step all round the house.  He looked 
into every doorway and gap in the wall; retraced his steps at every 
rustling of the air among the leaves; and searched in every 
shadowed nook with outstretched hands.  Thus they made the circuit 
of the building: but they returned to the spot from which they had 
set out, without encountering any human being, or finding the least 
trace of any concealed straggler.

After a short pause, Mr Haredale shouted twice or thrice.  Then 
cried aloud, 'Is there any one in hiding here, who knows my voice!  
There is nothing to fear now.  If any of my people are near, I 
entreat them to answer!'  He called them all by name; his voice was 
echoed in many mournful tones; then all was silent as before.

They were standing near the foot of the turret, where the alarm-
bell hung.  The fire had raged there, and the floors had been sawn, 
and hewn, and beaten down, besides.  It was open to the night; but 
a part of the staircase still remained, winding upward from a great 
mound of dust and cinders.  Fragments of the jagged and broken 
steps offered an insecure and giddy footing here and there, and 
then were lost again, behind protruding angles of the wall, or in 
the deep shadows cast upon it by other portions of the ruin; for by 
this time the moon had risen, and shone brightly.

As they stood here, listening to the echoes as they died away, and 
hoping in vain to hear a voice they knew, some of the ashes in this 
turret slipped and rolled down.  Startled by the least noise in 
that melancholy place, Solomon looked up in his companion's face, 
and saw that he had turned towards the spot, and that he watched 
and listened keenly.

He covered the little man's mouth with his hand, and looked again.  
Instantly, with kindling eyes, he bade him on his life keep still, 
and neither speak nor move.  Then holding his breath, and stooping 
down, he stole into the turret, with his drawn sword in his hand, 
and disappeared.

Terrified to be left there by himself, under such desolate 
circumstances, and after all he had seen and heard that night, 
Solomon would have followed, but there had been something in Mr 
Haredale's manner and his look, the recollection of which held him 
spellbound.  He stood rooted to the spot; and scarcely venturing to 
breathe, looked up with mingled fear and wonder.

Again the ashes slipped and rolled--very, very softly--again--and 
then again, as though they crumbled underneath the tread of a 
stealthy foot.  And now a figure was dimly visible; climbing very 
softly; and often stopping to look down; now it pursued its 
difficult way; and now it was hidden from the view again.

It emerged once more, into the shadowy and uncertain light--higher 
now, but not much, for the way was steep and toilsome, and its 
progress very slow.  What phantom of the brain did he pursue; and 
why did he look down so constantly?  He knew he was alone.  Surely 
his mind was not affected by that night's loss and agony.  He was 
not about to throw himself headlong from the summit of the 
tottering wall.  Solomon turned sick, and clasped his hands.  His 
limbs trembled beneath him, and a cold sweat broke out upon his 
pallid face.

If he complied with Mr Haredale's last injunction now, it was 
because he had not the power to speak or move.  He strained his 
gaze, and fixed it on a patch of moonlight, into which, if he 
continued to ascend, he must soon emerge.  When he appeared there, 
he would try to call to him.

Again the ashes slipped and crumbled; some stones rolled down, and 
fell with a dull, heavy sound upon the ground below.  He kept his 
eyes upon the piece of moonlight.  The figure was coming on, for 
its shadow was already thrown upon the wall.  Now it appeared--and 
now looked round at him--and now--

The horror-stricken clerk uttered a scream that pierced the air, 
and cried, 'The ghost!  The ghost!'

Long before the echo of his cry had died away, another form rushed 
out into the light, flung itself upon the foremost one, knelt down 
upon its breast, and clutched its throat with both hands.

'Villain!' cried Mr Haredale, in a terrible voice--for it was he.  
'Dead and buried, as all men supposed through your infernal arts, 
but reserved by Heaven for this--at last--at last I have you.  You, 
whose hands are red with my brother's blood, and that of his 
faithful servant, shed to conceal your own atrocious guilt--You, 
Rudge, double murderer and monster, I arrest you in the name of 
God, who has delivered you into my hands.  No.  Though you had the 
strength of twenty men,' he added, as the murderer writhed and 
struggled, you could not escape me or loosen my grasp to-night!'



Chapter 57


Barnaby, armed as we have seen, continued to pace up and down 
before the stable-door; glad to be alone again, and heartily 
rejoicing in the unaccustomed silence and tranquillity.  After the 
whirl of noise and riot in which the last two days had been passed, 
the pleasures of solitude and peace were enhanced a thousandfold.  
He felt quite happy; and as he leaned upon his staff and mused, a 
bright smile overspread his face, and none but cheerful visions 
floated into his brain.

Had he no thoughts of her, whose sole delight he was, and whom he 
had unconsciously plunged in such bitter sorrow and such deep 
affliction?  Oh, yes.  She was at the heart of all his cheerful 
hopes and proud reflections.  It was she whom all this honour and 
distinction were to gladden; the joy and profit were for her.  What 
delight it gave her to hear of the bravery of her poor boy!  Ah!  
He would have known that, without Hugh's telling him.  And what a 
precious thing it was to know she lived so happily, and heard with 
so much pride (he pictured to himself her look when they told her) 
that he was in such high esteem: bold among the boldest, and 
trusted before them all!  And when these frays were over, and the 
good lord had conquered his enemies, and they were all at peace 
again, and he and she were rich, what happiness they would have in 
talking of these troubled times when he was a great soldier: and 
when they sat alone together in the tranquil twilight, and she had 
no longer reason to be anxious for the morrow, what pleasure would 
he have in the reflection that this was his doing--his--poor 
foolish Barnaby's; and in patting her on the cheek, and saying with 
a merry laugh, 'Am I silly now, mother--am I silly now?'

With a lighter heart and step, and eyes the brighter for the happy 
tear that dimmed them for a moment, Barnaby resumed his walk; and 
singing gaily to himself, kept guard upon his quiet post.

His comrade Grip, the partner of his watch, though fond of basking 
in the sunshine, preferred to-day to walk about the stable; having 
a great deal to do in the way of scattering the straw, hiding under 
it such small articles as had been casually left about, and 
haunting Hugh's bed, to which he seemed to have taken a particular 
attachment.  Sometimes Barnaby looked in and called him, and then 
he came hopping out; but he merely did this as a concession to his 
master's weakness, and soon returned again to his own grave 
pursuits: peering into the straw with his bill, and rapidly 
covering up the place, as if, Midas-like, he were whispering 
secrets to the earth and burying them; constantly busying himself 
upon the sly; and affecting, whenever Barnaby came past, to look up 
in the clouds and have nothing whatever on his mind: in short, 
conducting himself, in many respects, in a more than usually 
thoughtful, deep, and mysterious manner.

As the day crept on, Barnaby, who had no directions forbidding him 
to eat and drink upon his post, but had been, on the contrary, 
supplied with a bottle of beer and a basket of provisions, 
determined to break his fast, which he had not done since morning.  
To this end, he sat down on the ground before the door, and putting 
his staff across his knees in case of alarm or surprise, summoned 
Grip to dinner.

This call, the bird obeyed with great alacrity; crying, as he 
sidled up to his master, 'I'm a devil, I'm a Polly, I'm a kettle, 
I'm a Protestant, No Popery!'  Having learnt this latter sentiment 
from the gentry among whom he had lived of late, he delivered it 
with uncommon emphasis.

'Well said, Grip!' cried his master, as he fed him with the 
daintiest bits.  'Well said, old boy!'

'Never say die, bow wow wow, keep up your spirits, Grip Grip Grip, 
Holloa!  We'll all have tea, I'm a Protestant kettle, No Popery!' 
cried the raven.

'Gordon for ever, Grip!' cried Barnaby.

The raven, placing his head upon the ground, looked at his master 
sideways, as though he would have said, 'Say that again!'  
Perfectly understanding his desire, Barnaby repeated the phrase a 
great many times.  The bird listened with profound attention; 
sometimes repeating the popular cry in a low voice, as if to 
compare the two, and try if it would at all help him to this new 
accomplishment; sometimes flapping his wings, or barking; and 
sometimes in a kind of desperation drawing a multitude of corks, 
with extraordinary viciousness.

Barnaby was so intent upon his favourite, that he was not at first 
aware of the approach of two persons on horseback, who were riding 
at a foot-pace, and coming straight towards his post.  When he 
perceived them, however, which he did when they were within some 
fifty yards of him, he jumped hastily up, and ordering Grip within 
doors, stood with both hands on his staff, waiting until he should 
know whether they were friends or foes.

He had hardly done so, when he observed that those who advanced 
were a gentleman and his servant; almost at the same moment he 
recognised Lord George Gordon, before whom he stood uncovered, with 
his eyes turned towards the ground.

'Good day!' said Lord George, not reining in his horse until he was 
close beside him.  'Well!'

'All quiet, sir, all safe!' cried Barnaby.  'The rest are away--
they went by that path--that one.  A grand party!'

'Ay?' said Lord George, looking thoughtfully at him.  'And you?'

'Oh!  They left me here to watch--to mount guard--to keep 
everything secure till they come back.  I'll do it, sir, for your 
sake.  You're a good gentleman; a kind gentleman--ay, you are.  
There are many against you, but we'll be a match for them, never 
fear!'

'What's that?' said Lord George--pointing to the raven who was 
peeping out of the stable-door--but still looking thoughtfully, and 
in some perplexity, it seemed, at Barnaby.

'Why, don't you know!' retorted Barnaby, with a wondering laugh.  
'Not know what HE is!  A bird, to be sure.  My bird--my friend--
Grip.'

'A devil, a kettle, a Grip, a Polly, a Protestant, no Popery!' 
cried the raven.

'Though, indeed,' added Barnaby, laying his hand upon the neck of 
Lord George's horse, and speaking softly: 'you had good reason to 
ask me what he is, for sometimes it puzzles me--and I am used to 
him--to think he's only a bird.  He's my brother, Grip is--always 
with me--always talking--always merry--eh, Grip?'

The raven answered by an affectionate croak, and hopping on his 
master's arm, which he held downward for that purpose, submitted 
with an air of perfect indifference to be fondled, and turned his 
restless, curious eye, now upon Lord George, and now upon his man.

Lord George, biting his nails in a discomfited manner, regarded 
Barnaby for some time in silence; then beckoning to his servant, 
said:

'Come hither, John.'

John Grueby touched his hat, and came.

'Have you ever seen this young man before?' his master asked in a 
low voice.

'Twice, my lord,' said John.  'I saw him in the crowd last night 
and Saturday.'

'Did--did it seem to you that his manner was at all wild or 
strange?' Lord George demanded, faltering.

'Mad,' said John, with emphatic brevity.

'And why do you think him mad, sir?' said his master, speaking in a 
peevish tone.  'Don't use that word too freely.  Why do you think 
him mad?'

'My lord,' John Grueby answered, 'look at his dress, look at his 
eyes, look at his restless way, hear him cry "No Popery!"  Mad, my 
lord.'

'So because one man dresses unlike another,' returned his angry 
master, glancing at himself; 'and happens to differ from other men 
in his carriage and manner, and to advocate a great cause which the 
corrupt and irreligious desert, he is to be accounted mad, is he?'

'Stark, staring, raving, roaring mad, my lord,' returned the 
unmoved John.

'Do you say this to my face?' cried his master, turning sharply 
upon him.

'To any man, my lord, who asks me,' answered John.

'Mr Gashford, I find, was right,' said Lord George; 'I thought him 
prejudiced, though I ought to have known a man like him better than 
to have supposed it possible!'

'I shall never have Mr Gashford's good word, my lord,' replied 
John, touching his hat respectfully, 'and I don't covet it.'

'You are an ill-conditioned, most ungrateful fellow,' said Lord 
George: 'a spy, for anything I know.  Mr Gashford is perfectly 
correct, as I might have felt convinced he was.  I have done wrong 
to retain you in my service.  It is a tacit insult to him as my 
choice and confidential friend to do so, remembering the cause you 
sided with, on the day he was maligned at Westminster.  You will 
leave me to-night--nay, as soon as we reach home.  The sooner the 
better.'

'If it comes to that, I say so too, my lord.  Let Mr Gashford have 
his will.  As to my being a spy, my lord, you know me better than 
to believe it, I am sure.  I don't know much about causes.  My 
cause is the cause of one man against two hundred; and I hope it 
always will be.'

'You have said quite enough,' returned Lord George, motioning him 
to go back.  'I desire to hear no more.'

'If you'll let me have another word, my lord,' returned John 
Grueby, 'I'd give this silly fellow a caution not to stay here by 
himself.  The proclamation is in a good many hands already, and 
it's well known that he was concerned in the business it relates 
to.  He had better get to a place of safety if he can, poor 
creature.'

'You hear what this man says?' cried Lord George, addressing 
Barnaby, who had looked on and wondered while this dialogue passed.  
'He thinks you may be afraid to remain upon your post, and are kept 
here perhaps against your will.  What do you say?'

'I think, young man,' said John, in explanation, 'that the soldiers 
may turn out and take you; and that if they do, you will certainly 
be hung by the neck till you're dead--dead--dead.  And I think you 
had better go from here, as fast as you can.  That's what I think.'

'He's a coward, Grip, a coward!' cried Barnaby, putting the raven 
on the ground, and shouldering his staff.  'Let them come!  Gordon 
for ever!  Let them come!'

'Ay!' said Lord George, 'let them!  Let us see who will venture to 
attack a power like ours; the solemn league of a whole people.  
THIS a madman!  You have said well, very well.  I am proud to be 
the leader of such men as you.'

Bamaby's heart swelled within his bosom as he heard these words.  
He took Lord George's hand and carried it to his lips; patted his 
horse's crest, as if the affection and admiration he had conceived 
for the man extended to the animal he rode; then unfurling his 
flag, and proudly waving it, resumed his pacing up and down.

Lord George, with a kindling eye and glowing cheek, took off his 
hat, and flourishing it above his head, bade him exultingly 
Farewell!--then cantered off at a brisk pace; after glancing 
angrily round to see that his servant followed.  Honest John set 
spurs to his horse and rode after his master, but not before he had 
again warned Barnaby to retreat, with many significant gestures, 
which indeed he continued to make, and Barnaby to resist, until the 
windings of the road concealed them from each other's view.

Left to himself again with a still higher sense of the importance 
of his post, and stimulated to enthusiasm by the special notice and 
encouragement of his leader, Barnaby walked to and fro in a 
delicious trance rather than as a waking man.  The sunshine which 
prevailed around was in his mind.  He had but one desire 
ungratified.  If she could only see him now!

The day wore on; its heat was gently giving place to the cool of 
evening; a light wind sprung up, fanning his long hair, and making 
the banner rustle pleasantly above his head.  There was a freedom 
and freshness in the sound and in the time, which chimed exactly 
with his mood.  He was happier than ever.

He was leaning on his staff looking towards the declining sun, and 
reflecting with a smile that he stood sentinel at that moment over 
buried gold, when two or three figures appeared in the distance, 
making towards the house at a rapid pace, and motioning with their 
hands as though they urged its inmates to retreat from some 
approaching danger.  As they drew nearer, they became more earnest 
in their gestures; and they were no sooner within hearing, than the 
foremost among them cried that the soldiers were coming up.

At these words, Barnaby furled his flag, and tied it round the 
pole.  His heart beat high while he did so, but he had no more fear 
or thought of retreating than the pole itself.  The friendly 
stragglers hurried past him, after giving him notice of his danger, 
and quickly passed into the house, where the utmost confusion 
immediately prevailed.  As those within hastily closed the windows 
and the doors, they urged him by looks and signs to fly without 
loss of time, and called to him many times to do so; but he only 
shook his head indignantly in answer, and stood the firmer on his 
post.  Finding that he was not to be persuaded, they took care of 
themselves; and leaving the place with only one old woman in it, 
speedily withdrew.

As yet there had been no symptom of the news having any better 
foundation than in the fears of those who brought it, but The Boot 
had not been deserted five minutes, when there appeared, coming 
across the fields, a body of men who, it was easy to see, by the 
glitter of their arms and ornaments in the sun, and by their 
orderly and regular mode of advancing--for they came on as one 
man--were soldiers.  In a very little time, Barnaby knew that they 
were a strong detachment of the Foot Guards, having along with them 
two gentlemen in private clothes, and a small party of Horse; the 
latter brought up the rear, and were not in number more than six or 
eight.

They advanced steadily; neither quickening their pace as they came 
nearer, nor raising any cry, nor showing the least emotion or 
anxiety.  Though this was a matter of course in the case of regular 
troops, even to Barnaby, there was something particularly 
impressive and disconcerting in it to one accustomed to the noise 
and tumult of an undisciplined mob.  For all that, he stood his 
ground not a whit the less resolutely, and looked on undismayed.

Presently, they marched into the yard, and halted.  The 
commanding-officer despatched a messenger to the horsemen, one of 
whom came riding back.  Some words passed between them, and they 
glanced at Barnaby; who well remembered the man he had unhorsed at 
Westminster, and saw him now before his eyes.  The man being 
speedily dismissed, saluted, and rode back to his comrades, who 
were drawn up apart at a short distance.

The officer then gave the word to prime and load.  The heavy 
ringing of the musket-stocks upon the ground, and the sharp and 
rapid rattling of the ramrods in their barrels, were a kind of 
relief to Batnahy, deadly though he knew the purport of such sounds 
to be.  When this was done, other commands were given, and the 
soldiers instantaneously formed in single file all round the house 
and stables; completely encircling them in every part, at a 
distance, perhaps, of some half-dozen yards; at least that seemed 
in Barnaby's eyes to be about the space left between himself and 
those who confronted him.  The horsemen remained drawn up by 
themselves as before.

The two gentlemen in private clothes who had kept aloof, now rode 
forward, one on either side the officer.  The proclamation having 
been produced and read by one of them, the officer called on 
Barnaby to surrender.

He made no answer, but stepping within the door, before which he 
had kept guard, held his pole crosswise to protect it.  In the 
midst of a profound silence, he was again called upon to yield.

Still he offered no reply.  Indeed he had enough to do, to run his 
eye backward and forward along the half-dozen men who immediately 
fronted him, and settle hurriedly within himself at which of them 
he would strike first, when they pressed on him.  He caught the eye 
of one in the centre, and resolved to hew that fellow down, though 
he died for it.

Again there was a dead silence, and again the same voice called 
upon him to deliver himself up.

Next moment he was back in the stable, dealing blows about him like 
a madman.  Two of the men lay stretched at his feet: the one he 
had marked, dropped first--he had a thought for that, even in the 
hot blood and hurry of the struggle.  Another blow--another!  Down, 
mastered, wounded in the breast by a heavy blow from the butt-end 
of a gun (he saw the weapon in the act of falling)--breathless--and 
a prisoner.

An exclamation of surprise from the officer recalled him, in some 
degree, to himself.  He looked round.  Grip, after working in 
secret all the afternoon, and with redoubled vigour while 
everybody's attention was distracted, had plucked away the straw 
from Hugh's bed, and turned up the loose ground with his iron bill.  
The hole had been recklessly filled to the brim, and was merely 
sprinkled with earth.  Golden cups, spoons, candlesticks, coined 
guineas--all the riches were revealed.

They brought spades and a sack; dug up everything that was hidden 
there; and carried away more than two men could lift.  They 
handcuffed him and bound his arms, searched him, and took away all 
he had.  Nobody questioned or reproached him, or seemed to have 
much curiosity about him.  The two men he had stunned, were carried 
off by their companions in the same business-like way in which 
everything else was done.  Finally, he was left under a guard of 
four soldiers with fixed bayonets, while the officer directed in 
person the search of the house and the other buildings connected 
with it.

This was soon completed.  The soldiers formed again in the yard; he 
was marched out, with his guard about him; and ordered to fall in, 
where a space was left.  The others closed up all round, and so 
they moved away, with the prisoner in the centre.

When they came into the streets, he felt he was a sight; and 
looking up as they passed quickly along, could see people running 
to the windows a little too late, and throwing up the sashes to 
look after him.  Sometimes he met a staring face beyond the heads 
about him, or under the arms of his conductors, or peering down 
upon him from a waggon-top or coach-box; but this was all he saw, 
being surrounded by so many men.  The very noises of the streets 
seemed muffled and subdued; and the air came stale and hot upon 
him, like the sickly breath of an oven.

Tramp, tramp.  Tramp, tramp.  Heads erect, shoulders square, every 
man stepping in exact time--all so orderly and regular--nobody 
looking at him--nobody seeming conscious of his presence,--he could 
hardly believe he was a Prisoner.  But at the word, though only 
thought, not spoken, he felt the handcuffs galling his wrists, the 
cord pressing his arms to his sides: the loaded guns levelled at 
his head; and those cold, bright, sharp, shining points turned 
towards him: the mere looking down at which, now that he was bound 
and helpless, made the warm current of his life run cold.



Chapter 58


They were not long in reaching the barracks, for the officer who 
commanded the party was desirous to avoid rousing the people by the 
display of military force in the streets, and was humanely anxious 
to give as little opportunity as possible for any attempt at 
rescue; knowing that it must lead to bloodshed and loss of life, 
and that if the civil authorities by whom he was accompanied, 
empowered him to order his men to fire, many innocent persons would 
probably fall, whom curiosity or idleness had attracted to the 
spot.  He therefore led the party briskly on, avoiding with a 
merciful prudence the more public and crowded thoroughfares, and 
pursuing those which he deemed least likely to be infested by 
disorderly persons.  This wise proceeding not only enabled them to 
gain their quarters without any interruption, but completely 
baffled a body of rioters who had assembled in one of the main 
streets, through which it was considered certain they would pass, 
and who remained gathered together for the purpose of releasing the 
prisoner from their hands, long after they had deposited him in a 
place of security, closed the barrack-gates, and set a double guard 
at every entrance for its better protection.

Arrived at this place, poor Barnaby was marched into a stone-
floored room, where there was a very powerful smell of tobacco, a 
strong thorough draught of air, and a great wooden bedstead, large 
enough for a score of men.  Several soldiers in undress were 
lounging about, or eating from tin cans; military accoutrements 
dangled on rows of pegs along the whitewashed wall; and some half-
dozen men lay fast asleep upon their backs, snoring in concert.  
After remaining here just long enough to note these things, he was 
marched out again, and conveyed across the parade-ground to another 
portion of the building.

Perhaps a man never sees so much at a glance as when he is in a 
situation of extremity.  The chances are a hundred to one, that if 
Barnaby had lounged in at the gate to look about him, he would have 
lounged out again with a very imperfect idea of the place, and 
would have remembered very little about it.  But as he was taken 
handcuffed across the gravelled area, nothing escaped his notice.  
The dry, arid look of the dusty square, and of the bare brick 
building; the clothes hanging at some of the windows; and the men 
in their shirt-sleeves and braces, lolling with half their bodies 
out of the others; the green sun-blinds at the officers' quarters, 
and the little scanty trees in front; the drummer-boys practising 
in a distant courtyard; the men at drill on the parade; the two 
soldiers carrying a basket between them, who winked to each other 
as he went by, and slily pointed to their throats; the spruce 
serjeant who hurried past with a cane in his hand, and under his 
arm a clasped book with a vellum cover; the fellows in the ground-
floor rooms, furbishing and brushing up their different articles of 
dress, who stopped to look at him, and whose voices as they spoke 
together echoed loudly through the empty galleries and passages;--
everything, down to the stand of muskets before the guard-house, 
and the drum with a pipe-clayed belt attached, in one corner, 
impressed itself upon his observation, as though he had noticed 
them in the same place a hundred times, or had been a whole day 
among them, in place of one brief hurried minute.

He was taken into a small paved back yard, and there they opened a 
great door, plated with iron, and pierced some five feet above the 
ground with a few holes to let in air and light.  Into this dungeon 
he was walked straightway; and having locked him up there, and 
placed a sentry over him, they left him to his meditations.

The cell, or black hole, for it had those words painted on the 
door, was very dark, and having recently accommodated a drunken 
deserter, by no means clean.  Barnaby felt his way to some straw at 
the farther end, and looking towards the door, tried to accustom 
himself to the gloom, which, coming from the bright sunshine out of 
doors, was not an easy task.

There was a kind of portico or colonnade outside, and this 
obstructed even the little light that at the best could have found 
its way through the small apertures in the door.  The footsteps of 
the sentinel echoed monotonously as he paced its stone pavement to 
and fro (reminding Barnaby of the watch he had so lately kept 
himself); and as he passed and repassed the door, he made the cell 
for an instant so black by the interposition of his body, that his 
going away again seemed like the appearance of a new ray of light, 
and was quite a circumstance to look for.

When the prisoner had sat sometime upon the ground, gazing at the 
chinks, and listening to the advancing and receding footsteps of 
his guard, the man stood still upon his post.  Barnaby, quite 
unable to think, or to speculate on what would be done with him, 
had been lulled into a kind of doze by his regular pace; but his 
stopping roused him; and then he became aware that two men were in 
conversation under the colonnade, and very near the door of his 
cell.

How long they had been talking there, he could not tell, for he had 
fallen into an unconsciousness of his real position, and when the 
footsteps ceased, was answering aloud some question which seemed to 
have been put to him by Hugh in the stable, though of the fancied 
purport, either of question or reply, notwithstanding that he awoke 
with the latter on his lips, he had no recollection whatever.  The 
first words that reached his ears, were these:

'Why is he brought here then, if he has to be taken away again so 
soon?'

'Why where would you have him go!  Damme, he's not as safe anywhere 
as among the king's troops, is he?  What WOULD you do with him?  
Would you hand him over to a pack of cowardly civilians, that shake 
in their shoes till they wear the soles out, with trembling at the 
threats of the ragamuffins he belongs to?'

'That's true enough.'

'True enough!--I'll tell you what.  I wish, Tom Green, that I was a 
commissioned instead of a non-commissioned officer, and that I had 
the command of two companies--only two companies--of my own 
regiment.  Call me out to stop these riots--give me the needful 
authority, and half-a-dozen rounds of ball cartridge--'

'Ay!' said the other voice.  'That's all very well, but they won't 
give the needful authority.  If the magistrate won't give the 
word, what's the officer to do?'

Not very well knowing, as it seemed, how to overcome this 
difficulty, the other man contented himself with damning the 
magistrates.

'With all my heart,' said his friend.

'Where's the use of a magistrate?' returned the other voice.  
'What's a magistrate in this case, but an impertinent, unnecessary, 
unconstitutional sort of interference?  Here's a proclamation.  
Here's a man referred to in that proclamation.  Here's proof 
against him, and a witness on the spot.  Damme!  Take him out and 
shoot him, sir.  Who wants a magistrate?'

'When does he go before Sir John Fielding?' asked the man who had 
spoken first.

'To-night at eight o'clock,' returned the other.  'Mark what 
follows.  The magistrate commits him to Newgate.  Our people take 
him to Newgate.  The rioters pelt our people.  Our people retire 
before the rioters.  Stones are thrown, insults are offered, not a 
shot's fired.  Why?  Because of the magistrates.  Damn the 
magistrates!'

When he had in some degree relieved his mind by cursing the 
magistrates in various other forms of speech, the man was silent, 
save for a low growling, still having reference to those 
authorities, which from time to time escaped him.

Barnaby, who had wit enough to know that this conversation 
concerned, and very nearly concerned, himself, remained perfectly 
quiet until they ceased to speak, when he groped his way to the 
door, and peeping through the air-holes, tried to make out what 
kind of men they were, to whom he had been listening.

The one who condemned the civil power in such strong terms, was a 
serjeant--engaged just then, as the streaming ribands in his cap 
announced, on the recruiting service.  He stood leaning sideways 
against a pillar nearly opposite the door, and as he growled to 
himself, drew figures on the pavement with his cane.  The other 
man had his back towards the dungeon, and Barnaby could only see 
his form.  To judge from that, he was a gallant, manly, handsome 
fellow, but he had lost his left arm.  It had been taken off 
between the elbow and the shoulder, and his empty coat-sleeve hung 
across his breast.

It was probably this circumstance which gave him an interest beyond 
any that his companion could boast of, and attracted Barnaby's 
attention.  There was something soldierly in his bearing, and he 
wore a jaunty cap and jacket.  Perhaps he had been in the service 
at one time or other.  If he had, it could not have been very long 
ago, for he was but a young fellow now.

'Well, well,' he said thoughtfully; 'let the fault be where it may, 
it makes a man sorrowful to come back to old England, and see her 
in this condition.'

'I suppose the pigs will join 'em next,' said the serjeant, with an 
imprecation on the rioters, 'now that the birds have set 'em the 
example.'

'The birds!' repeated Tom Green.

'Ah--birds,' said the serjeant testily; 'that's English, an't it?'

'I don't know what you mean.'

'Go to the guard-house, and see.  You'll find a bird there, that's 
got their cry as pat as any of 'em, and bawls "No Popery," like a 
man--or like a devil, as he says he is.  I shouldn't wonder.  The 
devil's loose in London somewhere.  Damme if I wouldn't twist his 
neck round, on the chance, if I had MY way.'

The young man had taken two or three steps away, as if to go and 
see this creature, when he was arrested by the voice of Barnaby.

'It's mine,' he called out, half laughing and half weeping--'my 
pet, my friend Grip.  Ha ha ha!  Don't hurt him, he has done no 
harm.  I taught him; it's my fault.  Let me have him, if you 
please.  He's the only friend I have left now.  He'll not dance, or 
talk, or whistle for you, I know; but he will for me, because he 
knows me and loves me--though you wouldn't think it--very well.  
You wouldn't hurt a bird, I'm sure.  You're a brave soldier, sir, 
and wouldn't harm a woman or a child--no, no, nor a poor bird, I'm 
certain.'

This latter adjuration was addressed to the serjeant, whom Barnaby 
judged from his red coat to be high in office, and able to seal 
Grip's destiny by a word.  But that gentleman, in reply, surlily 
damned him for a thief and rebel as he was, and with many 
disinterested imprecations on his own eyes, liver, blood, and body, 
assured him that if it rested with him to decide, he would put a 
final stopper on the bird, and his master too.

'You talk boldly to a caged man,' said Barnaby, in anger.  'If I 
was on the other side of the door and there were none to part us, 
you'd change your note--ay, you may toss your head--you would!  
Kill the bird--do.  Kill anything you can, and so revenge yourself 
on those who with their bare hands untied could do as much to you!'

Having vented his defiance, he flung himself into the furthest 
corner of his prison, and muttering, 'Good bye, Grip--good bye, 
dear old Grip!' shed tears for the first time since he had been 
taken captive; and hid his face in the straw.

He had had some fancy at first, that the one-armed man would help 
him, or would give him a kind word in answer.  He hardly knew why, 
but he hoped and thought so.  The young fellow had stopped when he 
called out, and checking himself in the very act of turning round, 
stood listening to every word he said.  Perhaps he built his feeble 
trust on this; perhaps on his being young, and having a frank and 
honest manner.  However that might be, he built on sand.  The other 
went away directly he had finished speaking, and neither answered 
him, nor returned.  No matter.  They were all against him here: he 
might have known as much.  Good bye, old Grip, good bye!

After some time, they came and unlocked the door, and called to him 
to come out.  He rose directly, and complied, for he would not have 
THEM think he was subdued or frightened.  He walked out like a man, 
and looked from face to face.

None of them returned his gaze or seemed to notice it.  They 
marched him back to the parade by the way they had brought him, and 
there they halted, among a body of soldiers, at least twice as 
numerous as that which had taken him prisoner in the afternoon.  
The officer he had seen before, bade him in a few brief words take 
notice that if he attempted to escape, no matter how favourable a 
chance he might suppose he had, certain of the men had orders to 
fire upon him, that moment.  They then closed round him as before, 
and marched him off again.

In the same unbroken order they arrived at Bow Street, followed and 
beset on all sides by a crowd which was continually increasing.  
Here he was placed before a blind gentleman, and asked if he wished 
to say anything.  Not he.  What had he got to tell them?  After a 
very little talking, which he was careless of and quite indifferent 
to, they told him he was to go to Newgate, and took him away.

He went out into the street, so surrounded and hemmed in on every 
side by soldiers, that he could see nothing; but he knew there was 
a great crowd of people, by the murmur; and that they were not 
friendly to the soldiers, was soon rendered evident by their yells 
and hisses.  How often and how eagerly he listened for the voice of 
Hugh!  There was not a voice he knew among them all.  Was Hugh a 
prisoner too?  Was there no hope!

As they came nearer and nearer to the prison, the hootings of the 
people grew more violent; stones were thrown; and every now and 
then, a rush was made against the soldiers, which they staggered 
under.  One of them, close before him, smarting under a blow upon 
the temple, levelled his musket, but the officer struck it upwards 
with his sword, and ordered him on peril of his life to desist.  
This was the last thing he saw with any distinctness, for directly 
afterwards he was tossed about, and beaten to and fro, as though in 
a tempestuous sea.  But go where he would, there were the same 
guards about him.  Twice or thrice he was thrown down, and so were 
they; but even then, he could not elude their vigilance for a 
moment.  They were up again, and had closed about him, before he, 
with his wrists so tightly bound, could scramble to his feet.  
Fenced in, thus, he felt himself hoisted to the top of a low flight 
of steps, and then for a moment he caught a glimpse of the fighting 
in the crowd, and of a few red coats sprinkled together, here and 
there, struggling to rejoin their fellows.  Next moment, everything 
was dark and gloomy, and he was standing in the prison lobby; the 
centre of a group of men.

A smith was speedily in attendance, who riveted upon him a set of 
heavy irons.  Stumbling on as well as he could, beneath the unusual 
burden of these fetters, he was conducted to a strong stone cell, 
where, fastening the door with locks, and bolts, and chains, they 
left him, well secured; having first, unseen by him, thrust in 
Grip, who, with his head drooping and his deep black plumes rough 
and rumpled, appeared to comprehend and to partake, his master's 
fallen fortunes.



Chapter 59


It is necessary at this juncture to return to Hugh, who, having, as 
we have seen, called to the rioters to disperse from about the 
Warren, and meet again as usual, glided back into the darkness from 
which he had emerged, and reappeared no more that night.

He paused in the copse which sheltered him from the observation of 
his mad companions, and waited to ascertain whether they drew off 
at his bidding, or still lingered and called to him to join them.  
Some few, he saw, were indisposed to go away without him, and made 
towards the spot where he stood concealed as though they were about 
to follow in his footsteps, and urge him to come back; but these 
men, being in their turn called to by their friends, and in truth 
not greatly caring to venture into the dark parts of the grounds, 
where they might be easily surprised and taken, if any of the 
neighbours or retainers of the family were watching them from among 
the trees, soon abandoned the idea, and hastily assembling such men 
as they found of their mind at the moment, straggled off.

When he was satisfied that the great mass of the insurgents were 
imitating this example, and that the ground was rapidly clearing, 
he plunged into the thickest portion of the little wood; and, 
crashing the branches as he went, made straight towards a distant 
light: guided by that, and by the sullen glow of the fire behind 
him.

As he drew nearer and nearer to the twinkling beacon towards which 
he bent his course, the red glare of a few torches began to reveal 
itself, and the voices of men speaking together in a subdued tone 
broke the silence which, save for a distant shouting now and then, 
already prevailed.  At length he cleared the wood, and, springing 
across a ditch, stood in a dark lane, where a small body of ill-
looking vagabonds, whom he had left there some twenty minutes 
before, waited his coming with impatience.

They were gathered round an old post-chaise or chariot, driven by 
one of themselves, who sat postilion-wise upon the near horse.  The 
blinds were drawn up, and Mr Tappertit and Dennis kept guard at the 
two windows.  The former assumed the command of the party, for he 
challenged Hugh as he advanced towards them; and when he did so, 
those who were resting on the ground about the carriage rose to 
their feet and clustered round him.

'Well!' said Simon, in a low voice; 'is all right?'

'Right enough,' replied Hugh, in the same tone.  'They're 
dispersing now--had begun before I came away.'

'And is the coast clear?'

'Clear enough before our men, I take it,' said Hugh.  'There are 
not many who, knowing of their work over yonder, will want to 
meddle with 'em to-night.--Who's got some drink here?'

Everybody had some plunder from the cellar; half-a-dozen flasks and 
bottles were offered directly.  He selected the largest, and 
putting it to his mouth, sent the wine gurgling down his throat.  
Having emptied it, he threw it down, and stretched out his hand for 
another, which he emptied likewise, at a draught.  Another was 
given him, and this he half emptied too.  Reserving what remained 
to finish with, he asked:

'Have you got anything to eat, any of you?  I'm as ravenous as a 
hungry wolf.  Which of you was in the larder--come?'

'I was, brother,' said Dennis, pulling off his hat, and fumbling in 
the crown.  'There's a matter of cold venison pasty somewhere or 
another here, if that'll do.'

'Do!' cried Hugh, seating himself on the pathway.  'Bring it out! 
Quick!  Show a light here, and gather round!  Let me sup in state, 
my lads!  Ha ha ha!'

Entering into his boisterous humour, for they all had drunk deeply, 
and were as wild as he, they crowded about him, while two of their 
number who had torches, held them up, one on either side of him, 
that his banquet might not be despatched in the dark.  Mr Dennis, 
having by this time succeeded in extricating from his hat a great 
mass of pasty, which had been wedged in so tightly that it was not 
easily got out, put it before him; and Hugh, having borrowed a 
notched and jagged knife from one of the company, fell to work upon 
it vigorously.

'I should recommend you to swallow a little fire every day, about 
an hour afore dinner, brother,' said Dennis, after a pause.  'It 
seems to agree with you, and to stimulate your appetite.'

Hugh looked at him, and at the blackened faces by which he was 
surrounded, and, stopping for a moment to flourish his knife above 
his head, answered with a roar of laughter.

'Keep order, there, will you?' said Simon Tappertit.

'Why, isn't a man allowed to regale himself, noble captain,' 
retorted his lieutenant, parting the men who stood between them, 
with his knife, that he might see him,--'to regale himself a little 
bit after such work as mine?  What a hard captain!  What a strict 
captain!  What a tyrannical captain!  Ha ha ha!'

'I wish one of you fellers would hold a bottle to his mouth to keep 
him quiet,' said Simon, 'unless you want the military to be down 
upon us.'

'And what if they are down upon us!' retorted Hugh.  'Who cares?  
Who's afraid?  Let 'em come, I say, let 'em come.  The more, the 
merrier.  Give me bold Barnaby at my side, and we two will settle 
the military, without troubling any of you.  Barnaby's the man for 
the military.  Barnaby's health!'

But as the majority of those present were by no means anxious for 
a second engagement that night, being already weary and exhausted, 
they sided with Mr Tappertit, and pressed him to make haste with 
his supper, for they had already delayed too long.  Knowing, even 
in the height of his frenzy, that they incurred great danger by 
lingering so near the scene of the late outrages, Hugh made an end 
of his meal without more remonstrance, and rising, stepped up to Mr 
Tappertit, and smote him on the back.

'Now then,' he cried, 'I'm ready.  There are brave birds inside 
this cage, eh?  Delicate birds,--tender, loving, little doves.  I 
caged 'em--I caged 'em--one more peep!'

He thrust the little man aside as he spoke, and mounting on the 
steps, which were half let down, pulled down the blind by force, 
and stared into the chaise like an ogre into his larder.

'Ha ha ha! and did you scratch, and pinch, and struggle, pretty 
mistress?' he cried, as he grasped a little hand that sought in 
vain to free itself from his grip: 'you, so bright-eyed, and 
cherry-lipped, and daintily made?  But I love you better for it, 
mistress.  Ay, I do.  You should stab me and welcome, so that it 
pleased you, and you had to cure me afterwards.  I love to see you 
proud and scornful.  It makes you handsomer than ever; and who so 
handsome as you at any time, my pretty one!'

'Come!' said Mr Tappertit, who had waited during this speech with 
considerable impatience.  'There's enough of that.  Come down.'

The little hand seconded this admonition by thrusting Hugh's great 
head away with all its force, and drawing up the blind, amidst his 
noisy laughter, and vows that he must have another look, for the 
last glimpse of that sweet face had provoked him past all bearing.  
However, as the suppressed impatience of the party now broke out 
into open murmurs, he abandoned this design, and taking his seat 
upon the bar, contented himself with tapping at the front windows 
of the carriage, and trying to steal a glance inside; Mr Tappertit, 
mounting the steps and hanging on by the door, issued his 
directions to the driver with a commanding voice and attitude; the 
rest got up behind, or ran by the side of the carriage, as they 
could; some, in imitation of Hugh, endeavoured to see the face he 
had praised so highly, and were reminded of their impertinence by 
hints from the cudgel of Mr Tappertit.  Thus they pursued their 
journey by circuitous and winding roads; preserving, except when 
they halted to take breath, or to quarrel about the best way of 
reaching London, pretty good order and tolerable silence.

In the mean time, Dolly--beautiful, bewitching, captivating little 
Dolly--her hair dishevelled, her dress torn, her dark eyelashes wet 
with tears, her bosom heaving--her face, now pale with fear, now 
crimsoned with indignation--her whole self a hundred times more 
beautiful in this heightened aspect than ever she had been before--
vainly strove to comfort Emma Haredale, and to impart to her the 
consolation of which she stood in so much need herself.  The 
soldiers were sure to come; they must be rescued; it would be 
impossible to convey them through the streets of London when they 
set the threats of their guards at defiance, and shrieked to the 
passengers for help.  If they did this when they came into the more 
frequented ways, she was certain--she was quite certain--they must 
be released.  So poor Dolly said, and so poor Dolly tried to think; 
but the invariable conclusion of all such arguments was, that Dolly 
burst into tears; cried, as she wrung her hands, what would they do 
or think, or who would comfort them, at home, at the Golden Key; 
and sobbed most piteously.

Miss Haredale, whose feelings were usually of a quieter kind than 
Dolly's, and not so much upon the surface, was dreadfully 
alarmed, and indeed had only just recovered from a swoon.  She was 
very pale, and the hand which Dolly held was quite cold; but she 
bade her, nevertheless, remember that, under Providence, much must 
depend upon their own discretion; that if they remained quiet and 
lulled the vigilance of the ruffians into whose hands they had 
fallen, the chances of their being able to procure assistance when 
they reached the town, were very much increased; that unless 
society were quite unhinged, a hot pursuit must be immediately 
commenced; and that her uncle, she might be sure, would never rest 
until he had found them out and rescued them.  But as she said 
these latter words, the idea that he had fallen in a general 
massacre of the Catholics that night--no very wild or improbable 
supposition after what they had seen and undergone--struck her 
dumb; and, lost in the horrors they had witnessed, and those they 
might be yet reserved for, she sat incapable of thought, or speech, 
or outward show of grief: as rigid, and almost as white and cold, 
as marble.

Oh, how many, many times, in that long ride, did Dolly think of her 
old lover,--poor, fond, slighted Joe!  How many, many times, did 
she recall that night when she ran into his arms from the very man 
now projecting his hateful gaze into the darkness where she sat, 
and leering through the glass in monstrous admiration!  And when 
she thought of Joe, and what a brave fellow he was, and how he 
would have rode boldly up, and dashed in among these villains now, 
yes, though they were double the number--and here she clenched her 
little hand, and pressed her foot upon the ground--the pride she 
felt for a moment in having won his heart, faded in a burst of 
tears, and she sobbed more bitterly than ever.

As the night wore on, and they proceeded by ways which were quite 
unknown to them--for they could recognise none of the objects of 
which they sometimes caught a hurried glimpse--their fears 
increased; nor were they without good foundation; it was not 
difficult for two beautiful young women to find, in their being 
borne they knew not whither by a band of daring villains who eyed 
them as some among these fellows did, reasons for the worst alarm.  
When they at last entered London, by a suburb with which they were 
wholly unacquainted, it was past midnight, and the streets were 
dark and empty.  Nor was this the worst, for the carriage stopping 
in a lonely spot, Hugh suddenly opened the door, jumped in, and 
took his seat between them.

It was in vain they cried for help.  He put his arm about the neck 
of each, and swore to stifle them with kisses if they were not as 
silent as the grave.

'I come here to keep you quiet,' he said, 'and that's the means I 
shall take.  So don't be quiet, pretty mistresses--make a noise--
do--and I shall like it all the better.'

They were proceeding at a rapid pace, and apparently with fewer 
attendants than before, though it was so dark (the torches being 
extinguished) that this was mere conjecture.  They shrunk from his 
touch, each into the farthest corner of the carriage; but shrink as 
Dolly would, his arm encircled her waist, and held her fast.  She 
neither cried nor spoke, for terror and disgust deprived her of the 
power; but she plucked at his hand as though she would die in the 
effort to disengage herself; and crouching on the ground, with her 
head averted and held down, repelled him with a strength she 
wondered at as much as he.  The carriage stopped again.

'Lift this one out,' said Hugh to the man who opened the door, as 
he took Miss Haredale's hand, and felt how heavily it fell.  'She's 
fainted.'

'So much the better,' growled Dennis--it was that amiable 
gentleman.  'She's quiet.  I always like 'em to faint, unless 
they're very tender and composed.'

'Can you take her by yourself?' asked Hugh.

'I don't know till I try.  I ought to be able to; I've lifted up a 
good many in my time,' said the hangman.  'Up then!  She's no small 
weight, brother; none of these here fine gals are.  Up again!  Now 
we have her.'

Having by this time hoisted the young lady into his arms, he 
staggered off with his burden.

'Look ye, pretty bird,' said Hugh, drawing Dolly towards him.  
'Remember what I told you--a kiss for every cry.  Scream, if you 
love me, darling.  Scream once, mistress.  Pretty mistress, only 
once, if you love me.'

Thrusting his face away with all her force, and holding down her 
head, Dolly submitted to be carried out of the chaise, and borne 
after Miss Haredale into a miserable cottage, where Hugh, after 
hugging her to his breast, set her gently down upon the floor.

Poor Dolly!  Do what she would, she only looked the better for it, 
and tempted them the more.  When her eyes flashed angrily, and her 
ripe lips slightly parted, to give her rapid breathing vent, who 
could resist it?  When she wept and sobbed as though her heart 
would break, and bemoaned her miseries in the sweetest voice that 
ever fell upon a listener's ear, who could be insensible to the 
little winning pettishness which now and then displayed itself, 
even in the sincerity and earnestness of her grief?  When, 
forgetful for a moment of herself, as she was now, she fell on her 
knees beside her friend, and bent over her, and laid her cheek to 
hers, and put her arms about her, what mortal eyes could have 
avoided wandering to the delicate bodice, the streaming hair, the 
neglected dress, the perfect abandonment and unconsciousness of the 
blooming little beauty?  Who could look on and see her lavish 
caresses and endearments, and not desire to be in Emma Haredale's 
place; to be either her or Dolly; either the hugging or the hugged?  
Not Hugh.  Not Dennis.

'I tell you what it is, young women,' said Mr Dennis, 'I an't much 
of a lady's man myself, nor am I a party in the present business 
further than lending a willing hand to my friends: but if I see 
much more of this here sort of thing, I shall become a principal 
instead of a accessory.  I tell you candid.'

'Why have you brought us here?' said Emma.  'Are we to be 
murdered?'

'Murdered!' cried Dennis, sitting down upon a stool, and regarding 
her with great favour.  'Why, my dear, who'd murder sich 
chickabiddies as you?  If you was to ask me, now, whether you was 
brought here to be married, there might be something in it.'

And here he exchanged a grin with Hugh, who removed his eyes from 
Dolly for the purpose.

'No, no,' said Dennis, 'there'll be no murdering, my pets.  Nothing 
of that sort.  Quite the contrairy.'

'You are an older man than your companion, sir,' said Emma, 
trembling.  'Have you no pity for us?  Do you not consider that we 
are women?'

'I do indeed, my dear,' retorted Dennis.  'It would be very hard 
not to, with two such specimens afore my eyes.  Ha ha!  Oh yes , I 
consider that.  We all consider that, miss.'

He shook his head waggishly, leered at Hugh again, and laughed very 
much, as if he had said a noble thing, and rather thought he was 
coming out.

'There'll be no murdering, my dear.  Not a bit on it.  I tell you 
what though, brother,' said Dennis, cocking his hat for the 
convenience of scratching his head, and looking gravely at Hugh, 
'it's worthy of notice, as a proof of the amazing equalness and 
dignity of our law, that it don't make no distinction between men 
and women.  I've heerd the judge say, sometimes, to a highwayman or 
housebreaker as had tied the ladies neck and heels--you'll excuse 
me making mention of it, my darlings--and put 'em in a cellar, that 
he showed no consideration to women.  Now, I say that there judge 
didn't know his business, brother; and that if I had been that 
there highwayman or housebreaker, I should have made answer: "What 
are you a talking of, my lord?  I showed the women as much 
consideration as the law does, and what more would you have me do?"  
If you was to count up in the newspapers the number of females as 
have been worked off in this here city alone, in the last ten 
year,' said Mr Dennis thoughtfully, 'you'd be surprised at the 
total--quite amazed, you would.  There's a dignified and equal 
thing; a beautiful thing!  But we've no security for its lasting.  
Now that they've begun to favour these here Papists, I shouldn't 
wonder if they went and altered even THAT, one of these days.  Upon 
my soul, I shouldn't.'

The subject, perhaps from being of too exclusive and professional a 
nature, failed to interest Hugh as much as his friend had 
anticipated.  But he had no time to pursue it, for at this crisis 
Mr Tappertit entered precipitately; at sight of whom Dolly uttered 
a scream of joy, and fairly threw herself into his arms.

'I knew it, I was sure of it!' cried Dolly.  'My dear father's at 
the door.  Thank God, thank God!  Bless you, Sim.  Heaven bless you 
for this!'

Simon Tappertit, who had at first implicitly believed that the 
locksmith's daughter, unable any longer to suppress her secret 
passion for himself, was about to give it full vent in its 
intensity, and to declare that she was his for ever, looked 
extremely foolish when she said these words;--the more so, as they 
were received by Hugh and Dennis with a loud laugh, which made her 
draw back, and regard him with a fixed and earnest look.

'Miss Haredale,' said Sim, after a very awkward silence, 'I hope 
you're as comfortable as circumstances will permit of.  Dolly 
Varden, my darling--my own, my lovely one--I hope YOU'RE pretty 
comfortable likewise.'

Poor little Dolly!  She saw how it was; hid her face in her hands; 
and sobbed more bitterly than ever.

'You meet in me, Miss V.,' said Simon, laying his hand upon his 
breast, 'not a 'prentice, not a workman, not a slave, not the 
wictim of your father's tyrannical behaviour, but the leader of a 
great people, the captain of a noble band, in which these gentlemen 
are, as I may say, corporals and serjeants.  You behold in me, not 
a private individual, but a public character; not a mender of 
locks, but a healer of the wounds of his unhappy country.  Dolly 
V., sweet Dolly V., for how many years have I looked forward to 
this present meeting!  For how many years has it been my intention 
to exalt and ennoble you!  I redeem it.  Behold in me, your 
husband.  Yes, beautiful Dolly--charmer--enslaver--S. Tappertit is 
all your own!'

As he said these words he advanced towards her.  Dolly retreated 
till she could go no farther, and then sank down upon the floor.  
Thinking it very possible that this might be maiden modesty, Simon 
essayed to raise her; on which Dolly, goaded to desperation, wound 
her hands in his hair, and crying out amidst her tears that he was 
a dreadful little wretch, and always had been, shook, and pulled, 
and beat him, until he was fain to call for help, most lustily.  
Hugh had never admired her half so much as at that moment.

'She's in an excited state to-night,' said Simon, as he smoothed 
his rumpled feathers, 'and don't know when she's well off.  Let her 
be by herself till to-morrow, and that'll bring her down a little.  
Carry her into the next house!'

Hugh had her in his arms directly.  It might be that Mr Tappertit's 
heart was really softened by her distress, or it might be that he 
felt it in some degree indecorous that his intended bride should be 
struggling in the grasp of another man.  He commanded him, on 
second thoughts, to put her down again, and looked moodily on as 
she flew to Miss Haredale's side, and clinging to her dress, hid 
her flushed face in its folds.

'They shall remain here together till to-morrow,' said Simon, who 
had now quite recovered his dignity--'till to-morrow.  Come away!'

'Ay!' cried Hugh.  'Come away, captain.  Ha ha ha!'

'What are you laughing at?' demanded Simon sternly.

'Nothing, captain, nothing,' Hugh rejoined; and as he spoke, and 
clapped his hand upon the shoulder of the little man, he laughed 
again, for some unknown reason, with tenfold violence.

Mr Tappertit surveyed him from head to foot with lofty scorn (this 
only made him laugh the more), and turning to the prisoners, said:

'You'll take notice, ladies, that this place is well watched on 
every side, and that the least noise is certain to be attended with 
unpleasant consequences.  You'll hear--both of you--more of our 
intentions to-morrow.  In the mean time, don't show yourselves at 
the window, or appeal to any of the people you may see pass it; for 
if you do, it'll be known directly that you come from a Catholic 
house, and all the exertions our men can make, may not be able to 
save your lives.'

With this last caution, which was true enough, he turned to the 
door, followed by Hugh and Dennis.  They paused for a moment, going 
out, to look at them clasped in each other's arms, and then left 
the cottage; fastening the door, and setting a good watch upon it, 
and indeed all round the house.

'I say,' growled Dennis, as they walked away in company, 'that's a 
dainty pair.  Muster Gashford's one is as handsome as the other, 
eh?'

'Hush!' said Hugh, hastily.  'Don't you mention names.  It's a bad 
habit.'

'I wouldn't like to be HIM, then (as you don't like names), when he 
breaks it out to her; that's all,' said Dennis.  'She's one of them 
fine, black-eyed, proud gals, as I wouldn't trust at such times 
with a knife too near 'em.  I've seen some of that sort, afore now.  
I recollect one that was worked off, many year ago--and there was a 
gentleman in that case too--that says to me, with her lip a 
trembling, but her hand as steady as ever I see one: "Dennis, I'm 
near my end, but if I had a dagger in these fingers, and he was 
within my reach, I'd strike him dead afore me;"--ah, she did--and 
she'd have done it too!'

Strike who dead?' demanded Hugh.

'How should I know, brother?' answered Dennis.  'SHE never said; 
not she.'

Hugh looked, for a moment, as though he would have made some 
further inquiry into this incoherent recollection; but Simon 
Tappertit, who had been meditating deeply, gave his thoughts a new 
direction.

'Hugh!' said Sim.  'You have done well to-day.  You shall be 
rewarded.  So have you, Dennis.--There's no young woman YOU want to 
carry off, is there?'

'N--no,' returned that gentleman, stroking his grizzly beard, which 
was some two inches long.  'None in partickler, I think.'

'Very good,' said Sim; 'then we'll find some other way of making it 
up to you.  As to you, old boy'--he turned to Hugh--'you shall have 
Miggs (her that I promised you, you know) within three days.  Mind.  
I pass my word for it.'

Hugh thanked him heartily; and as he did so, his laughing fit 
returned with such violence that he was obliged to hold his side 
with one hand, and to lean with the other on the shoulder of his 
small captain, without whose support he would certainly have rolled 
upon the ground.



Chapter 60


The three worthies turned their faces towards The Boot, with the 
intention of passing the night in that place of rendezvous, and of 
seeking the repose they so much needed in the shelter of their old 
den; for now that the mischief and destruction they had purposed 
were achieved, and their prisoners were safely bestowed for the 
night, they began to be conscious of exhaustion, and to feel the 
wasting effects of the madness which had led to such deplorable 
results.

Notwithstanding the lassitude and fatigue which oppressed him now, 
in common with his two companions, and indeed with all who had 
taken an active share in that night's work, Hugh's boisterous 
merriment broke out afresh whenever he looked at Simon Tappertit, 
and vented itself--much to that gentleman's indignation--in such 
shouts of laughter as bade fair to bring the watch upon them, and 
involve them in a skirmish, to which in their present worn-out 
condition they might prove by no means equal.  Even Mr Dennis, who 
was not at all particular on the score of gravity or dignity, and 
who had a great relish for his young friend's eccentric humours, 
took occasion to remonstrate with him on this imprudent behaviour, 
which he held to be a species of suicide, tantamount to a man's 
working himself off without being overtaken by the law, than which 
he could imagine nothing more ridiculous or impertinent.

Not abating one jot of his noisy mirth for these remonstrances, 
Hugh reeled along between them, having an arm of each, until they 
hove in sight of The Boot, and were within a field or two of that 
convenient tavern.  He happened by great good luck to have roared 
and shouted himself into silence by this time.  They were 
proceeding onward without noise, when a scout who had been creeping 
about the ditches all night, to warn any stragglers from 
encroaching further on what was now such dangerous ground, peeped 
cautiously from his hiding-place, and called to them to stop.

'Stop! and why?' said Hugh.

Because (the scout replied) the house was filled with constables 
and soldiers; having been surprised that afternoon.  The inmates 
had fled or been taken into custody, he could not say which.  He 
had prevented a great many people from approaching nearer, and he 
believed they had gone to the markets and such places to pass the 
night.  He had seen the distant fires, but they were all out now.  
He had heard the people who passed and repassed, speaking of them 
too, and could report that the prevailing opinion was one of 
apprehension and dismay.  He had not heard a word of Barnaby--
didn't even know his name--but it had been said in his hearing that 
some man had been taken and carried off to Newgate.  Whether this 
was true or false, he could not affirm.

The three took counsel together, on hearing this, and debated what 
it might be best to do.  Hugh, deeming it possible that Barnaby was 
in the hands of the soldiers, and at that moment under detention at 
The Boot, was for advancing stealthily, and firing the house; but 
his companions, who objected to such rash measures unless they had 
a crowd at their backs, represented that if Barnaby were taken he 
had assuredly been removed to a stronger prison; they would never 
have dreamed of keeping him all night in a place so weak and open 
to attack.  Yielding to this reasoning, and to their persuasions, 
Hugh consented to turn back and to repair to Fleet Market; for 
which place, it seemed, a few of their boldest associates had 
shaped their course, on receiving the same intelligence.

Feeling their strength recruited and their spirits roused, now that 
there was a new necessity for action, they hurried away, quite 
forgetful of the fatigue under which they had been sinking but a 
few minutes before; and soon arrived at their new place of 
destination.

Fleet Market, at that time, was a long irregular row of wooden 
sheds and penthouses, occupying the centre of what is now called 
Farringdon Street.  They were jumbled together in a most unsightly 
fashion, in the middle of the road; to the great obstruction of the 
thoroughfare and the annoyance of passengers, who were fain to make 
their way, as they best could, among carts, baskets, barrows, 
trucks, casks, bulks, and benches, and to jostle with porters, 
hucksters, waggoners, and a motley crowd of buyers, sellers, pick-
pockets, vagrants, and idlers.  The air was perfumed with the 
stench of rotten leaves and faded fruit; the refuse of the 
butchers' stalls, and offal and garbage of a hundred kinds.  It was 
indispensable to most public conveniences in those days, that they 
should be public nuisances likewise; and Fleet Market maintained 
the principle to admiration.

To this place, perhaps because its sheds and baskets were a 
tolerable substitute for beds, or perhaps because it afforded the 
means of a hasty barricade in case of need, many of the rioters had 
straggled, not only that night, but for two or three nights before.  
It was now broad day, but the morning being cold, a group of them 
were gathered round a fire in a public-house, drinking hot purl, 
and smoking pipes, and planning new schemes for to-morrow.

Hugh and his two friends being known to most of these men, were 
received with signal marks of approbation, and inducted into the 
most honourable seats.  The room-door was closed and fastened to 
keep intruders at a distance, and then they proceeded to exchange 
news.

'The soldiers have taken possession of The Boot, I hear,' said 
Hugh.  'Who knows anything about it?'

Several cried that they did; but the majority of the company 
having been engaged in the assault upon the Warren, and all 
present having been concerned in one or other of the night's 
expeditions, it proved that they knew no more than Hugh himself; 
having been merely warned by each other, or by the scout, and 
knowing nothing of their own knowledge.

'We left a man on guard there to-day,' said Hugh, looking round 
him, 'who is not here.  You know who it is--Barnaby, who brought 
the soldier down, at Westminster.  Has any man seen or heard of 
him?'

They shook their heads, and murmured an answer in the negative, as 
each man looked round and appealed to his fellow; when a noise was 
heard without, and a man was heard to say that he wanted Hugh--that 
he must see Hugh.

'He is but one man,' cried Hugh to those who kept the door; 'let 
him come in.'

'Ay, ay!' muttered the others.  'Let him come in.  Let him come 
in.'

The door was accordingly unlocked and opened.  A one-armed man, 
with his head and face tied up with a bloody cloth, as though he 
had been severely beaten, his clothes torn, and his remaining hand 
grasping a thick stick, rushed in among them, and panting for 
breath, demanded which was Hugh.

'Here he is,' replied the person he inquired for.  'I am Hugh.  
What do you want with me?'

'I have a message for you,' said the man.  'You know one Barnaby.'

'What of him?  Did he send the message?'

'Yes.  He's taken.  He's in one of the strong cells in Newgate.  He 
defended himself as well as he could, but was overpowered by 
numbers.  That's his message.'

'When did you see him?' asked Hugh, hastily.

'On his way to prison, where he was taken by a party of soldiers.  
They took a by-road, and not the one we expected.  I was one of 
the few who tried to rescue him, and he called to me, and told me 
to tell Hugh where he was.  We made a good struggle, though it 
failed.  Look here!'

He pointed to his dress and to his bandaged head, and still panting 
for breath, glanced round the room; then faced towards Hugh again.

'I know you by sight,' he said, 'for I was in the crowd on Friday, 
and on Saturday, and yesterday, but I didn't know your name.  
You're a bold fellow, I know.  So is he.  He fought like a lion 
tonight, but it was of no use.  I did my best, considering that I 
want this limb.'

Again he glanced inquisitively round the room or seemed to do so, 
for his face was nearly hidden by the bandage--and again facing 
sharply towards Hugh, grasped his stick as if he half expected to 
be set upon, and stood on the defensive.

If he had any such apprehension, however, he was speedily reassured 
by the demeanour of all present.  None thought of the bearer of the 
tidings.  He was lost in the news he brought.  Oaths, threats, and 
execrations, were vented on all sides.  Some cried that if they 
bore this tamely, another day would see them all in jail; some, 
that they should have rescued the other prisoners, and this would 
not have happened.  One man cried in a loud voice, 'Who'll follow 
me to Newgate!' and there was a loud shout and general rush towards 
the door.

But Hugh and Dennis stood with their backs against it, and kept 
them back, until the clamour had so far subsided that their voices 
could be heard, when they called to them together that to go now, 
in broad day, would be madness; and that if they waited until night 
and arranged a plan of attack, they might release, not only their 
own companions, but all the prisoners, and burn down the jail.

'Not that jail alone,' cried Hugh, 'but every jail in London.  They 
shall have no place to put their prisoners in.  We'll burn them all 
down; make bonfires of them every one!  Here!' he cried, catching 
at the hangman's hand.  'Let all who're men here, join with us.  
Shake hands upon it.  Barnaby out of jail, and not a jail left 
standing!  Who joins?'

Every man there.  And they swore a great oath to release their 
friends from Newgate next night; to force the doors and burn the 
jail; or perish in the fire themselves.



Chapter 61


On that same night--events so crowd upon each other in convulsed 
and distracted times, that more than the stirring incidents of a 
whole life often become compressed into the compass of four-and-
twenty hours--on that same night, Mr Haredale, having strongly 
bound his prisoner, with the assistance of the sexton, and forced 
him to mount his horse, conducted him to Chigwell; bent upon 
procuring a conveyance to London from that place, and carrying him 
at once before a justice.  The disturbed state of the town would 
be, he knew, a sufficient reason for demanding the murderer's 
committal to prison before daybreak, as no man could answer for the 
security of any of the watch-houses or ordinary places of 
detention; and to convey a prisoner through the streets when the 
mob were again abroad, would not only be a task of great danger and 
hazard, but would be to challenge an attempt at rescue.  Directing 
the sexton to lead the horse, he walked close by the murderer's 
side, and in this order they reached the village about the middle 
of the night.

The people were all awake and up, for they were fearful of being 
burnt in their beds, and sought to comfort and assure each other by 
watching in company.  A few of the stoutest-hearted were armed and 
gathered in a body on the green.  To these, who knew him well, Mr 
Haredale addressed himself, briefly narrating what had happened, 
and beseeching them to aid in conveying the criminal to London 
before the dawn of day.

But not a man among them dared to help him by so much as the motion 
of a finger.  The rioters, in their passage through the village, 
had menaced with their fiercest vengeance, any person who should 
aid in extinguishing the fire, or render the least assistance to 
him, or any Catholic whomsoever.  Their threats extended to their 
lives and all they possessed.  They were assembled for their own 
protection, and could not endanger themselves by lending any aid to 
him.  This they told him, not without hesitation and regret, as 
they kept aloof in the moonlight and glanced fearfully at the 
ghostly rider, who, with his head drooping on his breast and his 
hat slouched down upon his brow, neither moved nor spoke.

Finding it impossible to persuade them, and indeed hardly knowing 
how to do so after what they had seen of the fury of the crowd, Mr 
Haredale besought them that at least they would leave him free to 
act for himself, and would suffer him to take the only chaise and 
pair of horses that the place afforded.  This was not acceded to 
without some difficulty, but in the end they told him to do what he 
would, and go away from them in heaven's name.

Leaving the sexton at the horse's bridle, he drew out the chaise 
with his own hands, and would have harnessed the horses, but that 
the post-boy of the village--a soft-hearted, good-for-nothing, 
vagabond kind of fellow--was moved by his earnestness and passion, 
and, throwing down a pitchfork with which he was armed, swore that 
the rioters might cut him into mincemeat if they liked, but he 
would not stand by and see an honest gentleman who had done no 
wrong, reduced to such extremity, without doing what he could to 
help him.  Mr Haredale shook him warmly by the hand, and thanked 
him from his heart.  In five minutes' time the chaise was ready, 
and this good scapegrace in his saddle.  The murderer was put 
inside, the blinds were drawn up, the sexton took his seat upon the 
bar, Mr Haredale mounted his horse and rode close beside the door; 
and so they started in the dead of night, and in profound silence, 
for London.

The consternation was so extreme that even the horses which had 
escaped the flames at the Warren, could find no friends to shelter 
them.  They passed them on the road, browsing on the stunted grass; 
and the driver told them, that the poor beasts had wandered to the 
village first, but had been driven away, lest they should bring 
the vengeance of the crowd on any of the inhabitants.

Nor was this feeling confined to such small places, where the 
people were timid, ignorant, and unprotected.  When they came near 
London they met, in the grey light of morning, more than one poor 
Catholic family who, terrified by the threats and warnings of 
their neighbours, were quitting the city on foot, and who told them 
they could hire no cart or horse for the removal of their goods, 
and had been compelled to leave them behind, at the mercy of the 
crowd.  Near Mile End they passed a house, the master of which, a 
Catholic gentleman of small means, having hired a waggon to remove 
his furniture by midnight, had had it all brought down into the 
street, to wait the vehicle's arrival, and save time in the 
packing.  But the man with whom he made the bargain, alarmed by the 
fires that night, and by the sight of the rioters passing his 
door, had refused to keep it: and the poor gentleman, with his wife 
and servant and their little children, were sitting trembling among 
their goods in the open street, dreading the arrival of day and not 
knowing where to turn or what to do.

It was the same, they heard, with the public conveyances.  The 
panic was so great that the mails and stage-coaches were afraid to 
carry passengers who professed the obnoxious religion.  If the 
drivers knew them, or they admitted that they held that creed, they 
would not take them, no, though they offered large sums; and 
yesterday, people had been afraid to recognise Catholic 
acquaintance in the streets, lest they should be marked by spies, 
and burnt out, as it was called, in consequence.  One mild old man--
a priest, whose chapel was destroyed; a very feeble, patient, 
inoffensive creature--who was trudging away, alone, designing to 
walk some distance from town, and then try his fortune with the 
coaches, told Mr Haredale that he feared he might not find a 
magistrate who would have the hardihood to commit a prisoner to 
jail, on his complaint.  But notwithstanding these discouraging 
accounts they went on, and reached the Mansion House soon after 
sunrise.

Mr Haredale threw himself from his horse, but he had no need to 
knock at the door, for it was already open, and there stood upon 
the step a portly old man, with a very red, or rather purple face, 
who with an anxious expression of countenance, was remonstrating 
with some unseen personage upstairs, while the porter essayed to 
close the door by degrees and get rid of him.  With the intense 
impatience and excitement natural to one in his condition, Mr 
Haredale thrust himself forward and was about to speak, when the 
fat old gentleman interposed:

'My good sir,' said he, 'pray let me get an answer.  This is the 
sixth time I have been here.  I was here five times yesterday.  My 
house is threatened with destruction.  It is to be burned down to-
night, and was to have been last night, but they had other business 
on their hands.  Pray let me get an answer.'

'My good sir,' returned Mr Haredale, shaking his head, 'my house 
is burned to the ground.  But heaven forbid that yours should be.  
Get your answer.  Be brief, in mercy to me.'

'Now, you hear this, my lord?'--said the old gentleman, calling up 
the stairs, to where the skirt of a dressing-gown fluttered on the 
landing-place.  'Here is a gentleman here, whose house was actually 
burnt down last night.'

'Dear me, dear me,' replied a testy voice, 'I am very sorry for 
it, but what am I to do?  I can't build it up again.  The chief 
magistrate of the city can't go and be a rebuilding of people's 
houses, my good sir.  Stuff and nonsense!'

'But the chief magistrate of the city can prevent people's houses 
from having any need to be rebuilt, if the chief magistrate's a 
man, and not a dummy--can't he, my lord?' cried the old gentleman 
in a choleric manner.

'You are disrespectable, sir,' said the Lord Mayor--'leastways, 
disrespectful I mean.'

'Disrespectful, my lord!' returned the old gentleman.  'I was 
respectful five times yesterday.  I can't be respectful for ever.  
Men can't stand on being respectful when their houses are going to 
be burnt over their heads, with them in 'em.  What am I to do, my 
lord?  AM I to have any protection!'

'I told you yesterday, sir,' said the Lord Mayor, 'that you might 
have an alderman in your house, if you could get one to come.'

'What the devil's the good of an alderman?' returned the choleric 
old gentleman.

'--To awe the crowd, sir,' said the Lord Mayor.

'Oh Lord ha' mercy!' whimpered the old gentleman, as he wiped his 
forehead in a state of ludicrous distress, 'to think of sending an 
alderman to awe a crowd!  Why, my lord, if they were even so many 
babies, fed on mother's milk, what do you think they'd care for an 
alderman!  Will YOU come?'

'I!' said the Lord Mayor, most emphatically: 'Certainly not.'

'Then what,' returned the old gentleman, 'what am I to do?  Am I a 
citizen of England?  Am I to have the benefit of the laws?  Am I to 
have any return for the King's taxes?'

'I don't know, I am sure,' said the Lord Mayor; 'what a pity it is 
you're a Catholic!  Why couldn't you be a Protestant, and then you 
wouldn't have got yourself into such a mess?  I'm sure I don't know 
what's to be done.--There are great people at the bottom of these 
riots.--Oh dear me, what a thing it is to be a public character!--
You must look in again in the course of the day.--Would a javelin-
man do?--Or there's Philips the constable,--HE'S disengaged,--he's 
not very old for a man at his time of life, except in his legs, and 
if you put him up at a window he'd look quite young by candle-
light, and might frighten 'em very much.--Oh dear!--well!--we'll 
see about it.'

'Stop!' cried Mr Haredale, pressing the door open as the porter 
strove to shut it, and speaking rapidly, 'My Lord Mayor, I beg you 
not to go away.  I have a man here, who committed a murder eight-
and-twenty years ago.  Half-a-dozen words from me, on oath, will 
justify you in committing him to prison for re-examination.  I only 
seek, just now, to have him consigned to a place of safety.  The 
least delay may involve his being rescued by the rioters.'

'Oh dear me!' cried the Lord Mayor.  'God bless my soul--and body--
oh Lor!--well I!--there are great people at the bottom of these 
riots, you know.--You really mustn't.'

'My lord,' said Mr Haredale, 'the murdered gentleman was my 
brother; I succeeded to his inheritance; there were not wanting 
slanderous tongues at that time, to whisper that the guilt of this 
most foul and cruel deed was mine--mine, who loved him, as he 
knows, in Heaven, dearly.  The time has come, after all these years 
of gloom and misery, for avenging him, and bringing to light a 
crime so artful and so devilish that it has no parallel.  Every 
second's delay on your part loosens this man's bloody hands again, 
and leads to his escape.  My lord, I charge you hear me, and 
despatch this matter on the instant.'

'Oh dear me!' cried the chief magistrate; 'these an't business 
hours, you know--I wonder at you--how ungentlemanly it is of you--
you mustn't--you really mustn't.--And I suppose you are a Catholic 
too?'

'I am,' said Mr Haredale.

'God bless my soul, I believe people turn Catholics a'purpose to 
vex and worrit me,' cried the Lord Mayor.  'I wish you wouldn't 
come here; they'll be setting the Mansion House afire next, and we 
shall have you to thank for it.  You must lock your prisoner up, 
sir--give him to a watchman--and--call again at a proper time.  
Then we'll see about it!'

Before Mr Haredale could answer, the sharp closing of a door and 
drawing of its bolts, gave notice that the Lord Mayor had retreated 
to his bedroom, and that further remonstrance would be unavailing.  
The two clients retreated likewise, and the porter shut them out 
into the street.

'That's the way he puts me off,' said the old gentleman, 'I can 
get no redress and no help.  What are you going to do, sir?'

'To try elsewhere,' answered Mr Haredale, who was by this time on 
horseback.

'I feel for you, I assure you--and well I may, for we are in a 
common cause,' said the old gentleman.  'I may not have a house to 
offer you to-night; let me tender it while I can.  On second 
thoughts though,' he added, putting up a pocket-book he had 
produced while speaking, 'I'll not give you a card, for if it was 
found upon you, it might get you into trouble.  Langdale--that's my 
name--vintner and distiller--Holborn Hill--you're heartily welcome, 
if you'll come.'

Mr Haredale bowed, and rode off, close beside the chaise as before; 
determining to repair to the house of Sir John Fielding, who had 
the reputation of being a bold and active magistrate, and fully 
resolved, in case the rioters should come upon them, to do 
execution on the murderer with his own hands, rather than suffer 
him to be released.

They arrived at the magistrate's dwelling, however, without 
molestation (for the mob, as we have seen, were then intent on 
deeper schemes), and knocked at the door.  As it had been pretty 
generally rumoured that Sir John was proscribed by the rioters, a 
body of thief-takers had been keeping watch in the house all night.  
To one of them Mr Haredale stated his business, which appearing to 
the man of sufficient moment to warrant his arousing the justice, 
procured him an immediate audience.

No time was lost in committing the murderer to Newgate; then a new 
building, recently completed at a vast expense, and considered to 
be of enormous strength.  The warrant being made out, three of the 
thief-takers bound him afresh (he had been struggling, it seemed, 
in the chaise, and had loosened his manacles); gagged him lest they 
should meet with any of the mob, and he should call to them for 
help; and seated themselves, along with him, in the carriage.  
These men being all well armed, made a formidable escort; but they 
drew up the blinds again, as though the carriage were empty, and 
directed Mr Haredale to ride forward, that he might not attract 
attention by seeming to belong to it.

The wisdom of this proceeding was sufficiently obvious, for as they 
hurried through the city they passed among several groups of men, 
who, if they had not supposed the chaise to be quite empty, would 
certainly have stopped it.  But those within keeping quite close, 
and the driver tarrying to be asked no questions, they reached the 
prison without interruption, and, once there, had him out, and safe 
within its gloomy walls, in a twinkling.

With eager eyes and strained attention, Mr Haredale saw him 
chained, and locked and barred up in his cell.  Nay, when he had 
left the jail, and stood in the free street, without, he felt the 
iron plates upon the doors, with his hands, and drew them over the 
stone wall, to assure himself that it was real; and to exult in its 
being so strong, and rough, and cold.  It was not until he turned 
his back upon the jail, and glanced along the empty streets, so 
lifeless and quiet in the bright morning, that he felt the weight 
upon his heart; that he knew he was tortured by anxiety for those 
he had left at home; and that home itself was but another bead in 
the long rosary of his regrets.



Chapter 62


The prisoner, left to himself, sat down upon his bedstead: and 
resting his elbows on his knees, and his chin upon his hands, 
remained in that attitude for hours.  It would be hard to say, of 
what nature his reflections were.  They had no distinctness, and, 
saving for some flashes now and then, no reference to his condition 
or the train of circumstances by which it had been brought about.  
The cracks in the pavement of his cell, the chinks in the wall 
where stone was joined to stone, the bars in the window, the iron 
ring upon the floor,--such things as these, subsiding strangely 
into one another, and awakening an indescribable kind of interest 
and amusement, engrossed his whole mind; and although at the bottom 
of his every thought there was an uneasy sense of guilt, and dread 
of death, he felt no more than that vague consciousness of it, 
which a sleeper has of pain.  It pursues him through his dreams, 
gnaws at the heart of all his fancied pleasures, robs the banquet 
of its taste, music of its sweetness, makes happiness itself 
unhappy, and yet is no bodily sensation, but a phantom without 
shape, or form, or visible presence; pervading everything, but 
having no existence; recognisable everywhere, but nowhere seen, or 
touched, or met with face to face, until the sleep is past, and 
waking agony returns.

After a long time the door of his cell opened.  He looked up; saw 
the blind man enter; and relapsed into his former position.

Guided by his breathing, the visitor advanced to where he sat; and 
stopping beside him, and stretching out his hand to assure himself 
that he was right, remained, for a good space, silent.

'This is bad, Rudge.  This is bad,' he said at length.

The prisoner shuffled with his feet upon the ground in turning his 
body from him, but made no other answer.

'How were you taken?' he asked.  'And where?  You never told me 
more than half your secret.  No matter; I know it now.  How was it, 
and where, eh?' he asked again, coming still nearer to him.

'At Chigwell,' said the other.

'At Chigwell!  How came you there?'

'Because I went there to avoid the man I stumbled on,' he answered.  
'Because I was chased and driven there, by him and Fate.  Because I 
was urged to go there, by something stronger than my own will.  
When I found him watching in the house she used to live in, night 
after night, I knew I never could escape him--never! and when I 
heard the Bell--'

He shivered; muttered that it was very cold; paced quickly up and 
down the narrow cell; and sitting down again, fell into his old 
posture.

'You were saying,' said the blind man, after another pause, 'that 
when you heard the Bell--'

'Let it be, will you?' he retorted in a hurried voice.  'It hangs 
there yet.'

The blind man turned a wistful and inquisitive face towards him, 
but he continued to speak, without noticing him.

'I went to Chigwell, in search of the mob.  I have been so hunted 
and beset by this man, that I knew my only hope of safety lay in 
joining them.  They had gone on before; I followed them when it 
left off.'

'When what left off?'

'The Bell.  They had quitted the place.  I hoped that some of them 
might be still lingering among the ruins, and was searching for 
them when I heard--' he drew a long breath, and wiped his forehead 
with his sleeve--'his voice.'

'Saying what?'

'No matter what.  I don't know.  I was then at the foot of the 
turret, where I did the--'

'Ay,' said the blind man, nodding his head with perfect composure, 
'I understand.'

'I climbed the stair, or so much of it as was left; meaning to hide 
till he had gone.  But he heard me; and followed almost as soon as 
I set foot upon the ashes.'

'You might have hidden in the wall, and thrown him down, or stabbed 
him,' said the blind man.

'Might I?  Between that man and me, was one who led him on--I saw 
it, though he did not--and raised above his head a bloody hand.  It 
was in the room above that HE and I stood glaring at each other on 
the night of the murder, and before he fell he raised his hand like 
that, and fixed his eyes on me.  I knew the chase would end there.'

'You have a strong fancy,' said the blind man, with a smile.

'Strengthen yours with blood, and see what it will come to.'

He groaned, and rocked himself, and looking up for the first time, 
said, in a low, hollow voice:

'Eight-and-twenty years!  Eight-and-twenty years!  He has never 
changed in all that time, never grown older, nor altered in the 
least degree.  He has been before me in the dark night, and the 
broad sunny day; in the twilight, the moonlight, the sunlight, the 
light of fire, and lamp, and candle; and in the deepest gloom.  
Always the same!  In company, in solitude, on land, on shipboard; 
sometimes leaving me alone for months, and sometimes always with 
me.  I have seen him, at sea, come gliding in the dead of night 
along the bright reflection of the moon in the calm water; and I 
have seen him, on quays and market-places, with his hand uplifted, 
towering, the centre of a busy crowd, unconscious of the terrible 
form that had its silent stand among them.  Fancy!  Are you real?  
Am I?  Are these iron fetters, riveted on me by the smith's hammer, 
or are they fancies I can shatter at a blow?'

The blind man listened in silence.

'Fancy!  Do I fancy that I killed him?  Do I fancy that as I left 
the chamber where he lay, I saw the face of a man peeping from a 
dark door, who plainly showed me by his fearful looks that he 
suspected what I had done?  Do I remember that I spoke fairly to 
him--that I drew nearer--nearer yet--with the hot knife in my 
sleeve?  Do I fancy how HE died?  Did he stagger back into the 
angle of the wall into which I had hemmed him, and, bleeding 
inwardly, stand, not fail, a corpse before me?  Did I see him, for 
an instant, as I see you now, erect and on his feet--but dead!'

The blind man, who knew that he had risen, motioned him to sit down 
again upon his bedstead; but he took no notice of the gesture.

'It was then I thought, for the first time, of fastening the murder 
upon him.  It was then I dressed him in my clothes, and dragged him 
down the back-stairs to the piece of water.  Do I remember 
listening to the bubbles that came rising up when I had rolled him 
in?  Do I remember wiping the water from my face, and because the 
body splashed it there, in its descent, feeling as if it MUST be 
blood?

'Did I go home when I had done?  And oh, my God! how long it took 
to do!  Did I stand before my wife, and tell her?  Did I see her 
fall upon the ground; and, when I stooped to raise her, did she 
thrust me back with a force that cast me off as if I had been a 
child, staining the hand with which she clasped my wrist?  Is THAT 
fancy?

'Did she go down upon her knees, and call on Heaven to witness that 
she and her unborn child renounced me from that hour; and did she, 
in words so solemn that they turned me cold--me, fresh from the 
horrors my own hands had made--warn me to fly while there was time; 
for though she would be silent, being my wretched wife, she would 
not shelter me?  Did I go forth that night, abjured of God and man, 
and anchored deep in hell, to wander at my cable's length about the 
earth, and surely be drawn down at last?'

'Why did you return?  said the blind man.

'Why is blood red?  I could no more help it, than I could live 
without breath.  I struggled against the impulse, but I was drawn 
back, through every difficult and adverse circumstance, as by a 
mighty engine.  Nothing could stop me.  The day and hour were none 
of my choice.  Sleeping and waking, I had been among the old haunts 
for years--had visited my own grave.  Why did I come back?  Because 
this jail was gaping for me, and he stood beckoning at the door.'

'You were not known?' said the blind man.

'I was a man who had been twenty-two years dead.  No.  I was not 
known.'

'You should have kept your secret better.'

'MY secret?  MINE?  It was a secret, any breath of air could 
whisper at its will.  The stars had it in their twinkling, the 
water in its flowing, the leaves in their rustling, the seasons in 
their return.  It lurked in strangers' faces, and their voices.  
Everything had lips on which it always trembled.--MY secret!'

'It was revealed by your own act at any rate,' said the blind man.

'The act was not mine.  I did it, but it was not mine.  I was 
forced at times to wander round, and round, and round that spot.  
If you had chained me up when the fit was on me, I should have 
broken away, and gone there.  As truly as the loadstone draws iron 
towards it, so he, lying at the bottom of his grave, could draw me 
near him when he would.  Was that fancy?  Did I like to go there, 
or did I strive and wrestle with the power that forced me?'

The blind man shrugged his shoulders, and smiled incredulously.  
The prisoner again resumed his old attitude, and for a long time 
both were mute.

'I suppose then,' said his visitor, at length breaking silence, 
'that you are penitent and resigned; that you desire to make peace 
with everybody (in particular, with your wife who has brought you 
to this); and that you ask no greater favour than to be carried to 
Tyburn as soon as possible?  That being the case, I had better take 
my leave.  I am not good enough to be company for you.'

'Have I not told you,' said the other fiercely, 'that I have 
striven and wrestled with the power that brought me here?  Has my 
whole life, for eight-and-twenty years, been one perpetual 
struggle and resistance, and do you think I want to lie down and 
die?  Do all men shrink from death--I most of all!'

'That's better said.  That's better spoken, Rudge--but I'll not 
call you that again--than anything you have said yet,' returned the 
blind man, speaking more familiarly, and laying his hands upon his 
arm.  'Lookye,--I never killed a man myself, for I have never been 
placed in a position that made it worth my while.  Farther, I am 
not an advocate for killing men, and I don't think I should 
recommend it or like it--for it's very hazardous--under any 
circumstances.  But as you had the misfortune to get into this 
trouble before I made your acquaintance, and as you have been my 
companion, and have been of use to me for a long time now, I 
overlook that part of the matter, and am only anxious that you 
shouldn't die unnecessarily.  Now, I do not consider that, at 
present, it is at all necessary.'

'What else is left me?' returned the prisoner.  'To eat my way 
through these walls with my teeth?'

'Something easier than that,' returned his friend.  'Promise me 
that you will talk no more of these fancies of yours--idle, foolish 
things, quite beneath a man--and I'll tell you what I mean.'

'Tell me,' said the other.

'Your worthy lady with the tender conscience; your scrupulous, 
virtuous, punctilious, but not blindly affectionate wife--'

'What of her?'

'Is now in London.'

'A curse upon her, be she where she may!'

'That's natural enough.  If she had taken her annuity as usual, you 
would not have been here, and we should have been better off.  But 
that's apart from the business.  She's in London.  Scared, as I 
suppose, and have no doubt, by my representation when I waited upon 
her, that you were close at hand (which I, of course, urged only as 
an inducement to compliance, knowing that she was not pining to see 
you), she left that place, and travelled up to London.'

'How do you know?'

'From my friend the noble captain--the illustrious general--the 
bladder, Mr Tappertit.  I learnt from him the last time I saw him, 
which was yesterday, that your son who is called Barnaby--not after 
his father, I suppose--'

'Death! does that matter now!'

'--You are impatient,' said the blind man, calmly; 'it's a good 
sign, and looks like life--that your son Barnaby had been lured 
away from her by one of his companions who knew him of old, at 
Chigwell; and that he is now among the rioters.'

'And what is that to me?  If father and son be hanged together, 
what comfort shall I find in that?'

'Stay--stay, my friend,' returned the blind man, with a cunning 
look, 'you travel fast to journeys' ends.  Suppose I track my lady 
out, and say thus much: "You want your son, ma'am--good.  I, 
knowing those who tempt him to remain among them, can restore him 
to you, ma'am--good.  You must pay a price, ma'am, for his 
restoration--good again.  The price is small, and easy to be paid--
dear ma'am, that's best of all."'

'What mockery is this?'

'Very likely, she may reply in those words.  "No mockery at all," I 
answer: "Madam, a person said to be your husband (identity is 
difficult of proof after the lapse of many years) is in prison, his 
life in peril--the charge against him, murder.  Now, ma'am, your 
husband has been dead a long, long time.  The gentleman never can 
be confounded with him, if you will have the goodness to say a few 
words, on oath, as to when he died, and how; and that this person 
(who I am told resembles him in some degree) is no more he than I 
am.  Such testimony will set the question quite at rest.  Pledge 
yourself to me to give it, ma' am, and I will undertake to keep 
your son (a fine lad) out of harm's way until you have done this 
trifling service, when he shall he delivered up to you, safe and 
sound.  On the other hand, if you decline to do so, I fear he will 
be betrayed, and handed over to the law, which will assuredly 
sentence him to suffer death.  It is, in fact, a choice between his 
life and death.  If you refuse, he swings.  If you comply, the 
timber is not grown, nor the hemp sown, that shall do him any 
harm."'

'There is a gleam of hope in this!' cried the prisoner.

'A gleam!' returned his friend, 'a noon-blaze; a full and glorious 
daylight.  Hush! I hear the tread of distant feet.  Rely on me.'

'When shall I hear more?'

'As soon as I do.  I should hope, to-morrow.  They are coming to 
say that our time for talk is over.  I hear the jingling of the 
keys.  Not another word of this just now, or they may overhear us.'

As he said these words, the lock was turned, and one of the prison 
turnkeys appearing at the door, announced that it was time for 
visitors to leave the jail.

'So soon!' said Stagg, meekly.  'But it can't be helped.  Cheer up, 
friend.  This mistake will soon be set at rest, and then you are a 
man again!  If this charitable gentleman will lead a blind man (who 
has nothing in return but prayers) to the prison-porch, and set him 
with his face towards the west, he will do a worthy deed.  Thank 
you, good sir.  I thank you very kindly.'

So saying, and pausing for an instant at the door to turn his 
grinning face towards his friend, he departed.

When the officer had seen him to the porch, he returned, and again 
unlocking and unbarring the door of the cell, set it wide open, 
informing its inmate that he was at liberty to walk in the adjacent 
yard, if he thought proper, for an hour.

The prisoner answered with a sullen nod; and being left alone 
again, sat brooding over what he had heard, and pondering upon the 
hopes the recent conversation had awakened; gazing abstractedly, 
the while he did so, on the light without, and watching the shadows 
thrown by one wall on another, and on the stone-paved ground.

It was a dull, square yard, made cold and gloomy by high walls, and 
seeming to chill the very sunlight.  The stone, so bare, and 
rough, and obdurate, filled even him with longing thoughts of 
meadow-land and trees; and with a burning wish to be at liberty.  
As he looked, he rose, and leaning against the door-post, gazed up 
at the bright blue sky, smiling even on that dreary home of crime.  
He seemed, for a moment, to remember lying on his back in some 
sweet-scented place, and gazing at it through moving branches, long 
ago.

His attention was suddenly attracted by a clanking sound--he knew 
what it was, for he had startled himself by making the same noise 
in walking to the door.  Presently a voice began to sing, and he 
saw the shadow of a figure on the pavement.  It stopped--was 
silent all at once, as though the person for a moment had forgotten 
where he was, but soon remembered--and so, with the same clanking 
noise, the shadow disappeared.

He walked out into the court and paced it to and fro; startling the 
echoes, as he went, with the harsh jangling of his fetters.  There 
was a door near his, which, like his, stood ajar.

He had not taken half-a-dozen turns up and down the yard, when, 
standing still to observe this door, he heard the clanking sound 
again.  A face looked out of the grated window--he saw it very 
dimly, for the cell was dark and the bars were heavy--and directly 
afterwards, a man appeared, and came towards him.

For the sense of loneliness he had, he might have been in jail a 
year.  Made eager by the hope of companionship, he quickened his 
pace, and hastened to meet the man half way--

What was this!  His son!

They stood face to face, staring at each other.  He shrinking and 
cowed, despite himself; Barnahy struggling with his imperfect 
memory, and wondering where he had seen that face before.  He was 
not uncertain long, for suddenly he laid hands upon him, and 
striving to bear him to the ground, cried:

'Ah! I know!  You are the robber!'

He said nothing in reply at first, but held down his head, and 
struggled with him silently.  Finding the younger man too strong 
for him, he raised his face, looked close into his eyes, and said,

'I am your father.'

God knows what magic the name had for his ears; but Barnaby 
released his hold, fell back, and looked at him aghast.  Suddenly 
he sprung towards him, put his arms about his neck, and pressed his 
head against his cheek.

Yes, yes, he was; he was sure he was.  But where had he been so 
long, and why had he left his mother by herself, or worse than by 
herself, with her poor foolish boy?  And had she really been as 
happy as they said?  And where was she?  Was she near there?  She 
was not happy now, and he in jail?  Ah, no.

Not a word was said in answer; but Grip croaked loudly, and hopped 
about them, round and round, as if enclosing them in a magic 
circle, and invoking all the powers of mischief.



Chapter 63


During the whole of this day, every regiment in or near the 
metropolis was on duty in one or other part of the town; and the 
regulars and militia, in obedience to the orders which were sent to 
every barrack and station within twenty-four hours' journey, began 
to pour in by all the roads.  But the disturbance had attained to 
such a formidable height, and the rioters had grown, with impunity, 
to be so audacious, that the sight of this great force, continually 
augmented by new arrivals, instead of operating as a check, 
stimulated them to outrages of greater hardihood than any they had 
yet committed; and helped to kindle a flame in London, the like of 
which had never been beheld, even in its ancient and rebellious 
times.

All yesterday, and on this day likewise, the commander-in-chief 
endeavoured to arouse the magistrates to a sense of their duty, and 
in particular the Lord Mayor, who was the faintest-hearted and most 
timid of them all.  With this object, large bodies of the soldiery 
were several times despatched to the Mansion House to await his 
orders: but as he could, by no threats or persuasions, be induced 
to give any, and as the men remained in the open street, 
fruitlessly for any good purpose, and thrivingly for a very bad 
one; these laudable attempts did harm rather than good.  For the 
crowd, becoming speedily acquainted with the Lord Mayor's temper, 
did not fail to take advantage of it by boasting that even the 
civil authorities were opposed to the Papists, and could not find 
it in their hearts to molest those who were guilty of no other 
offence.  These vaunts they took care to make within the hearing of 
the soldiers; and they, being naturally loth to quarrel with the 
people, received their advances kindly enough: answering, when 
they were asked if they desired to fire upon their countrymen, 'No, 
they would be damned if they did;' and showing much honest 
simplicity and good nature.  The feeling that the military were No-
Popery men, and were ripe for disobeying orders and joining the 
mob, soon became very prevalent in consequence.  Rumours of their 
disaffection, and of their leaning towards the popular cause, 
spread from mouth to mouth with astonishing rapidity; and whenever 
they were drawn up idly in the streets or squares, there was sure 
to be a crowd about them, cheering and shaking hands, and treating 
them with a great show of confidence and affection.

By this time, the crowd was everywhere; all concealment and 
disguise were laid aside, and they pervaded the whole town.  If 
any man among them wanted money, he had but to knock at the door of 
a dwelling-house, or walk into a shop, and demand it in the rioters 
name; and his demand was instantly complied with.  The peaceable 
citizens being afraid to lay hands upon them, singly and alone, it 
may be easily supposed that when gathered together in bodies, they 
were perfectly secure from interruption.  They assembled in the 
streets, traversed them at their will and pleasure, and publicly 
concerted their plans.  Business was quite suspended; the greater 
part of the shops were closed; most of the houses displayed a blue 
flag in token of their adherence to the popular side; and even the 
Jews in Houndsditch, Whitechapel, and those quarters, wrote upon 
their doors or window-shutters, 'This House is a True Protestant.'  
The crowd was the law, and never was the law held in greater dread, 
or more implicitly obeyed.

It was about six o'clock in the evening, when a vast mob poured 
into Lincoln's Inn Fields by every avenue, and divided--evidently 
in pursuance of a previous design--into several parties.  It must 
not be understood that this arrangement was known to the whole 
crowd, but that it was the work of a few leaders; who, mingling 
with the men as they came upon the ground, and calling to them to 
fall into this or that parry, effected it as rapidly as if it had 
been determined on by a council of the whole number, and every man 
had known his place.

It was perfectly notorious to the assemblage that the largest 
body, which comprehended about two-thirds of the whole, was 
designed for the attack on Newgate.  It comprehended all the 
rioters who had been conspicuous in any of their former 
proceedings; all those whom they recommended as daring hands and 
fit for the work; all those whose companions had been taken in the 
riots; and a great number of people who were relatives or friends 
of felons in the jail.  This last class included, not only the most 
desperate and utterly abandoned villains in London, but some who 
were comparatively innocent.  There was more than one woman there, 
disguised in man's attire, and bent upon the rescue of a child or 
brother.  There were the two sons of a man who lay under sentence 
of death, and who was to be executed along with three others, on 
the next day but one.  There was a great parry of boys whose 
fellow-pickpockets were in the prison; and at the skirts of all, 
a score of miserable women, outcasts from the world, seeking to 
release some other fallen creature as miserable as themselves, or 
moved by a general sympathy perhaps--God knows--with all who were 
without hope, and wretched.

Old swords, and pistols without ball or powder; sledge-hammers, 
knives, axes, saws, and weapons pillaged from the butchers' shops; 
a forest of iron bars and wooden clubs; long ladders for scaling 
the walls, each carried on the shoulders of a dozen men; lighted 
torches; tow smeared with pitch, and tar, and brimstone; staves 
roughly plucked from fence and paling; and even crutches taken from 
crippled beggars in the streets; composed their arms.  When all was 
ready, Hugh and Dennis, with Simon Tappertit between them, led the 
way.  Roaring and chafing like an angry sea, the crowd pressed 
after them.

Instead of going straight down Holborn to the jail, as all 
expected, their leaders took the way to Clerkenwell, and pouring 
down a quiet street, halted before a locksmith's house--the Golden 
Key.

'Beat at the door,' cried Hugh to the men about him.  'We want one 
of his craft to-night.  Beat it in, if no one answers.'

The shop was shut.  Both door and shutters were of a strong and 
sturdy kind, and they knocked without effect.  But the impatient 
crowd raising a cry of 'Set fire to the house!' and torches being 
passed to the front, an upper window was thrown open, and the stout 
old locksmith stood before them.

'What now, you villains!' he demanded.  'Where is my daughter?'

'Ask no questions of us, old man,' retorted Hugh, waving his 
comrades to be silent, 'but come down, and bring the tools of your 
trade.  We want you.'

'Want me!' cried the locksmith, glancing at the regimental dress he 
wore: 'Ay, and if some that I could name possessed the hearts of 
mice, ye should have had me long ago.  Mark me, my lad--and you 
about him do the same.  There are a score among ye whom I see now 
and know, who are dead men from this hour.  Begone! and rob an 
undertaker's while you can!  You'll want some coffins before long.'

'Will you come down?' cried Hugh.

'Will you give me my daughter, ruffian?' cried the locksmith.

'I know nothing of her,' Hugh rejoined.  'Burn the door!'

'Stop!' cried the locksmith, in a voice that made them falter--
presenting, as he spoke, a gun.  'Let an old man do that.  You can 
spare him better.'

The young fellow who held the light, and who was stooping down 
before the door, rose hastily at these words, and fell back.  The 
locksmith ran his eye along the upturned faces, and kept the weapon 
levelled at the threshold of his house.  It had no other rest than 
his shoulder, but was as steady as the house itself.

'Let the man who does it, take heed to his prayers,' he said 
firmly; 'I warn him.'

Snatching a torch from one who stood near him, Hugh was stepping 
forward with an oath, when he was arrested by a shrill and piercing 
shriek, and, looking upward, saw a fluttering garment on the house-
top.

There was another shriek, and another, and then a shrill voice 
cried, 'Is Simmun below!' At the same moment a lean neck was 
stretched over the parapet, and Miss Miggs, indistinctly seen in 
the gathering gloom of evening, screeched in a frenzied manner, 
'Oh! dear gentlemen, let me hear Simmuns's answer from his own 
lips.  Speak to me, Simmun.  Speak to me!'

Mr Tappertit, who was not at all flattered by this compliment, 
looked up, and bidding her hold her peace, ordered her to come down 
and open the door, for they wanted her master, and would take no 
denial.

'Oh good gentlemen!' cried Miss Miggs.  'Oh my own precious, 
precious Simmun--'

'Hold your nonsense, will you!' retorted Mr Tappertit; 'and come 
down and open the door.--G. Varden, drop that gun, or it will be 
worse for you.'

'Don't mind his gun,' screamed Miggs.  'Simmun and gentlemen, I 
poured a mug of table-beer right down the barrel.'

The crowd gave a loud shout, which was followed by a roar of 
laughter.

'It wouldn't go off, not if you was to load it up to the muzzle,' 
screamed Miggs.  'Simmun and gentlemen, I'm locked up in the front 
attic, through the little door on the right hand when you think 
you've got to the very top of the stairs--and up the flight of 
corner steps, being careful not to knock your heads against the 
rafters, and not to tread on one side in case you should fall into 
the two-pair bedroom through the lath and plasture, which do not 
bear, but the contrairy.  Simmun and gentlemen, I've been locked up 
here for safety, but my endeavours has always been, and always will 
be, to be on the right side--the blessed side and to prenounce the 
Pope of Babylon, and all her inward and her outward workings, which 
is Pagin.  My sentiments is of little consequences, I know,' cried 
Miggs, with additional shrillness, 'for my positions is but a 
servant, and as sich, of humilities, still I gives expressions to 
my feelings, and places my reliances on them which entertains my 
own opinions!'

Without taking much notice of these outpourings of Miss Miggs after 
she had made her first announcement in relation to the gun, the 
crowd raised a ladder against the window where the locksmith stood, 
and notwithstanding that he closed, and fastened, and defended it 
manfully, soon forced an entrance by shivering the glass and 
breaking in the frames.  After dealing a few stout blows about him, 
he found himself defenceless, in the midst of a furious crowd, 
which overflowed the room and softened off in a confused heap of 
faces at the door and window.

They were very wrathful with him (for he had wounded two men), and 
even called out to those in front, to bring him forth and hang him 
on a lamp-post.  But Gabriel was quite undaunted, and looked from 
Hugh and Dennis, who held him by either arm, to Simon Tappertit, 
who confronted him.

'You have robbed me of my daughter,' said the locksmith, 'who is 
far dearer to me than my life; and you may take my life, if you 
will.  I bless God that I have been enabled to keep my wife free of 
this scene; and that He has made me a man who will not ask mercy at 
such hands as yours.'

'And a wery game old gentleman you are,' said Mr Dennis, 
approvingly; 'and you express yourself like a man.  What's the 
odds, brother, whether it's a lamp-post to-night, or a feather-
bed ten year to come, eh?'

The locksmith glanced at him disdainfully, but returned no other 
answer.

'For my part,' said the hangman, who particularly favoured the 
lamp-post suggestion, 'I honour your principles.  They're mine 
exactly.  In such sentiments as them,' and here he emphasised his 
discourse with an oath, 'I'm ready to meet you or any man halfway.--
Have you got a bit of cord anywheres handy?  Don't put yourself 
out of the way, if you haven't.  A handkecher will do.'

'Don't be a fool, master,' whispered Hugh, seizing Varden roughly 
by the shoulder; 'but do as you're bid.  You'll soon hear what 
you're wanted for.  Do it!'

'I'll do nothing at your request, or that of any scoundrel here,' 
returned the locksmith.  'If you want any service from me, you may 
spare yourselves the pains of telling me what it is.  I tell you, 
beforehand, I'll do nothing for you.'

Mr Dennis was so affected by this constancy on the part of the 
staunch old man, that he protested--almost with tears in his eyes--
that to baulk his inclinations would be an act of cruelty and hard 
dealing to which he, for one, never could reconcile his conscience.  
The gentleman, he said, had avowed in so many words that he was 
ready for working off; such being the case, he considered it their 
duty, as a civilised and enlightened crowd, to work him off.  It 
was not often, he observed, that they had it in their power to 
accommodate themselves to the wishes of those from whom they had 
the misfortune to differ.  Having now found an individual who 
expressed a desire which they could reasonably indulge (and for 
himself he was free to confess that in his opinion that desire did 
honour to his feelings), he hoped they would decide to accede to 
his proposition before going any further.  It was an experiment 
which, skilfully and dexterously performed, would be over in five 
minutes, with great comfort and satisfaction to all parties; and 
though it did not become him (Mr Dennis) to speak well of himself 
he trusted he might be allowed to say that he had practical 
knowledge of the subject, and, being naturally of an obliging and 
friendly disposition, would work the gentleman off with a deal of 
pleasure.

These remarks, which were addressed in the midst of a frightful din 
and turmoil to those immediately about him, were received with 
great favour; not so much, perhaps, because of the hangman's 
eloquence, as on account of the locksmith's obstinacy.  Gabriel was 
in imminent peril, and he knew it; but he preserved a steady 
silence; and would have done so, if they had been debating whether 
they should roast him at a slow fire.

As the hangman spoke, there was some stir and confusion on the 
ladder; and directly he was silent--so immediately upon his holding 
his peace, that the crowd below had no time to learn what he had 
been saying, or to shout in response--some one at the window cried:

'He has a grey head.  He is an old man: Don't hurt him!'

The locksmith turned, with a start, towards the place from which 
the words had come, and looked hurriedly at the people who were 
hanging on the ladder and clinging to each other.

'Pay no respect to my grey hair, young man,' he said, answering the 
voice and not any one he saw.  'I don't ask it.  My heart is green 
enough to scorn and despise every man among you, band of robbers 
that you are!'

This incautious speech by no means tended to appease the ferocity 
of the crowd.  They cried again to have him brought out; and it 
would have gone hard with the honest locksmith, but that Hugh 
reminded them, in answer, that they wanted his services, and must 
have them.

'So, tell him what we want,' he said to Simon Tappertit, 'and 
quickly.  And open your ears, master, if you would ever use them 
after to-night.'

Gabriel folded his arms, which were now at liberty, and eyed his 
old 'prentice in silence.

'Lookye, Varden,' said Sim, 'we're bound for Newgate.'

'I know you are,' returned the locksmith.  'You never said a truer 
word than that.'

'To burn it down, I mean,' said Simon, 'and force the gates, and 
set the prisoners at liberty.  You helped to make the lock of the 
great door.'

'I did,' said the locksmith.  'You owe me no thanks for that--as 
you'll find before long.'

'Maybe,' returned his journeyman, 'but you must show us how to 
force it.'

'Must I!'

'Yes; for you know, and I don't.  You must come along with us, and 
pick it with your own hands.'

'When I do,' said the locksmith quietly, 'my hands shall drop off 
at the wrists, and you shall wear them, Simon Tappertit, on your 
shoulders for epaulettes.'

'We'll see that,' cried Hugh, interposing, as the indignation of 
the crowd again burst forth.  'You fill a basket with the tools 
he'll want, while I bring him downstairs.  Open the doors below, 
some of you.  And light the great captain, others!  Is there no 
business afoot, my lads, that you can do nothing but stand and 
grumble?'

They looked at one another, and quickly dispersing, swarmed over 
the house, plundering and breaking, according to their custom, and 
carrying off such articles of value as happened to please their 
fancy.  They had no great length of time for these proceedings, for 
the basket of tools was soon prepared and slung over a man's 
shoulders.  The preparations being now completed, and everything 
ready for the attack, those who were pillaging and destroying in 
the other rooms were called down to the workshop.  They were about 
to issue forth, when the man who had been last upstairs, stepped 
forward, and asked if the young woman in the garret (who was making 
a terrible noise, he said, and kept on screaming without the least 
cessation) was to be released?

For his own part, Simon Tappertit would certainly have replied in 
the negative, but the mass of his companions, mindful of the good 
service she had done in the matter of the gun, being of a different 
opinion, he had nothing for it but to answer, Yes.  The man, 
accordingly, went back again to the rescue, and presently returned 
with Miss Miggs, limp and doubled up, and very damp from much 
weeping.

As the young lady had given no tokens of consciousness on their way 
downstairs, the bearer reported her either dead or dying; and being 
at some loss what to do with her, was looking round for a 
convenient bench or heap of ashes on which to place her senseless 
form, when she suddenly came upon her feet by some mysterious 
means, thrust back her hair, stared wildly at Mr Tappertit, cried, 
'My Simmuns's life is not a wictim!' and dropped into his arms with 
such promptitude that he staggered and reeled some paces back, 
beneath his lovely burden.

'Oh bother!' said Mr Tappertit.  'Here.  Catch hold of her, 
somebody.  Lock her up again; she never ought to have been let out.'

'My Simmun!' cried Miss Miggs, in tears, and faintly.  'My for 
ever, ever blessed Simmun!'

'Hold up, will you,' said Mr Tappertit, in a very unresponsive 
tone, 'I'll let you fall if you don't.  What are you sliding your 
feet off the ground for?'

'My angel Simmuns!' murmured Miggs--'he promised--'

'Promised!  Well, and I'll keep my promise,' answered Simon, 
testily.  'I mean to provide for you, don't I?  Stand up!'

'Where am I to go?  What is to become of me after my actions of 
this night!' cried Miggs.  'What resting-places now remains but in 
the silent tombses!'

'I wish you was in the silent tombses, I do,' cried Mr Tappertit, 
'and boxed up tight, in a good strong one.  Here,' he cried to one 
of the bystanders, in whose ear he whispered for a moment: 'Take 
her off, will you.  You understand where?'

The fellow nodded; and taking her in his arms, notwithstanding her 
broken protestations, and her struggles (which latter species of 
opposition, involving scratches, was much more difficult of 
resistance), carried her away.  They who were in the house poured 
out into the street; the locksmith was taken to the head of the 
crowd, and required to walk between his two conductors; the whole 
body was put in rapid motion; and without any shouts or noise they 
bore down straight on Newgate, and halted in a dense mass before 
the prison-gate.



Chapter 64


Breaking the silence they had hitherto preserved, they raised a 
great cry as soon as they were ranged before the jail, and demanded 
to speak to the governor.  This visit was not wholly unexpected, 
for his house, which fronted the street, was strongly barricaded, 
the wicket-gate of the prison was closed up, and at no loophole or 
grating was any person to be seen.  Before they had repeated their 
summons many times, a man appeared upon the roof of the governor's 
house, and asked what it was they wanted.

Some said one thing, some another, and some only groaned and 
hissed.  It being now nearly dark, and the house high, many persons 
in the throng were not aware that any one had come to answer them, 
and continued their clamour until the intelligence was gradually 
diffused through the whole concourse.  Ten minutes or more elapsed 
before any one voice could be heard with tolerable distinctness; 
during which interval the figure remained perched alone, against 
the summer-evening sky, looking down into the troubled street.

'Are you,' said Hugh at length, 'Mr Akerman, the head jailer here?'

'Of course he is, brother,' whispered Dennis.  But Hugh, without 
minding him, took his answer from the man himself.

'Yes,' he said.  'I am.'

'You have got some friends of ours in your custody, master.'

'I have a good many people in my custody.'  He glanced downward, as 
he spoke, into the jail: and the feeling that he could see into 
the different yards, and that he overlooked everything which was 
hidden from their view by the rugged walls, so lashed and goaded 
the mob, that they howled like wolves.

'Deliver up our friends,' said Hugh, 'and you may keep the rest.'

'It's my duty to keep them all.  I shall do my duty.'

'If you don't throw the doors open, we shall break 'em down,' said 
Hugh; 'for we will have the rioters out.'

'All I can do, good people,' Akerman replied, 'is to exhort you to 
disperse; and to remind you that the consequences of any 
disturbance in this place, will be very severe, and bitterly 
repented by most of you, when it is too late.'

He made as though he would retire when he said these words, but he 
was checked by the voice of the locksmith.

'Mr Akerman,' cried Gabriel, 'Mr Akerman.'

'I will hear no more from any of you,' replied the governor, 
turning towards the speaker, and waving his hand.

'But I am not one of them,' said Gabriel.  'I am an honest man, 
Mr Akerman; a respectable tradesman--Gabriel Varden, the locksmith.  
You know me?' 

'You among the crowd!' cried the governor in an altered voice.

'Brought here by force--brought here to pick the lock of the great 
door for them,' rejoined the locksmith.  'Bear witness for me, Mr 
Akerman, that I refuse to do it; and that I will not do it, come 
what may of my refusal.  If any violence is done to me, please to 
remember this.'

'Is there no way (if helping you?' said the governor.

'None, Mr Akerman.  You'll do your duty, and I'll do mine.  Once 
again, you robbers and cut-throats,' said the locksmith, turning 
round upon them, 'I refuse.  Ah!  Howl till you're hoarse.  I 
refuse.'

'Stay--stay!' said the jailer, hastily.  'Mr Varden, I know you for 
a worthy man, and one who would do no unlawful act except upon 
compulsion--'

'Upon compulsion, sir,' interposed the locksmith, who felt that the 
tone in which this was said, conveyed the speaker's impression that 
he had ample excuse for yielding to the furious multitude who beset 
and hemmed him in, on every side, and among whom he stood, an old 
man, quite alone; 'upon compulsion, sir, I'll do nothing.'

'Where is that man,' said the keeper, anxiously, 'who spoke to me 
just now?'

'Here!' Hugh replied.

'Do you know what the guilt of murder is, and that by keeping that 
honest tradesman at your side you endanger his life!'

'We know it very well,' he answered, 'for what else did we bring 
him here?  Let's have our friends, master, and you shall have your 
friend.  Is that fair, lads?'

The mob replied to him with a loud Hurrah!

'You see how it is, sir?' cried Varden.  'Keep 'em out, in King 
George's name.  Remember what I have said.  Good night!'

There was no more parley.  A shower of stones and other missiles 
compelled the keeper of the jail to retire; and the mob, pressing 
on, and swarming round the walls, forced Gabriel Varden close up to 
the door.

In vain the basket of tools was laid upon the ground before him, 
and he was urged in turn by promises, by blows, by offers of 
reward, and threats of instant death, to do the office for which 
they had brought him there.  'No,' cried the sturdy locksmith, 'I 
will not!'

He had never loved his life so well as then, but nothing could move 
him.  The savage faces that glared upon him, look where he would; 
the cries of those who thirsted, like wild animals, for his blood; 
the sight of men pressing forward, and trampling down their 
fellows, as they strove to reach him, and struck at him above the 
heads of other men, with axes and with iron bars; all failed to 
daunt him.  He looked from man to man, and face to face, and still, 
with quickened breath and lessening colour, cried firmly, 'I will 
not!'

Dennis dealt him a blow upon the face which felled him to the 
ground.  He sprung up again like a man in the prime of life, and 
with blood upon his forehead, caught him by the throat.

'You cowardly dog!' he said: 'Give me my daughter.  Give me my 
daughter.'

They struggled together.  Some cried 'Kill him,' and some (but they 
were not near enough) strove to trample him to death.  Tug as he 
would at the old man's wrists, the hangman could not force him to 
unclench his hands.

'Is this all the return you make me, you ungrateful monster?' he 
articulated with great difficulty, and with many oaths.

'Give me my daughter!' cried the locksmith, who was now as fierce 
as those who gathered round him: 'Give me my daughter!'

He was down again, and up, and down once more, and buffeting with a 
score of them, who bandied him from hand to hand, when one tall 
fellow, fresh from a slaughter-house, whose dress and great thigh-
boots smoked hot with grease and blood, raised a pole-axe, and 
swearing a horrible oath, aimed it at the old man's uncovered head.  
At that instant, and in the very act, he fell himself, as if struck 
by lightning, and over his body a one-armed man came darting to the 
locksmith's side.  Another man was with him, and both caught the 
locksmith roughly in their grasp.

'Leave him to us!' they cried to Hugh--struggling, as they spoke, 
to force a passage backward through the crowd.  'Leave him to us.  
Why do you waste your whole strength on such as he, when a couple 
of men can finish him in as many minutes!  You lose time.  Remember 
the prisoners! remember Barnaby!'

The cry ran through the mob.  Hammers began to rattle on the walls; 
and every man strove to reach the prison, and be among the foremost 
rank.  Fighting their way through the press and struggle, as 
desperately as if they were in the midst of enemies rather than 
their own friends, the two men retreated with the locksmith between 
them, and dragged him through the very heart of the concourse.

And now the strokes began to fall like hail upon the gate, and on 
the strong building; for those who could not reach the door, spent 
their fierce rage on anything--even on the great blocks of stone, 
which shivered their weapons into fragments, and made their hands 
and arms to tingle as if the walls were active in their stout 
resistance, and dealt them back their blows.  The clash of iron 
ringing upon iron, mingled with the deafening tumult and sounded 
high above it, as the great sledge-hammers rattled on the nailed 
and plated door: the sparks flew off in showers; men worked in 
gangs, and at short intervals relieved each other, that all their 
strength might be devoted to the work; but there stood the portal 
still, as grim and dark and strong as ever, and, saving for the 
dints upon its battered surface, quite unchanged.

While some brought all their energies to bear upon this toilsome 
task; and some, rearing ladders against the prison, tried to 
clamber to the summit of the walls they were too short to scale; 
and some again engaged a body of police a hundred strong, and beat 
them back and trod them under foot by force of numbers; others 
besieged the house on which the jailer had appeared, and driving in 
the door, brought out his furniture, and piled it up against the 
prison-gate, to make a bonfire which should burn it down.  As soon 
as this device was understood, all those who had laboured hitherto, 
cast down their tools and helped to swell the heap; which reached 
half-way across the street, and was so high, that those who threw 
more fuel on the top, got up by ladders.  When all the keeper's 
goods were flung upon this costly pile, to the last fragment, they 
smeared it with the pitch, and tar, and rosin they had brought, and 
sprinkled it with turpentine.  To all the woodwork round the 
prison-doors they did the like, leaving not a joist or beam 
untouched.  This infernal christening performed, they fired the 
pile with lighted matches and with blazing tow, and then stood by, 
awaiting the result.

The furniture being very dry, and rendered more combustible by wax 
and oil, besides the arts they had used, took fire at once.  The 
flames roared high and fiercely, blackening the prison-wall, and 
twining up its loftly front like burning serpents.  At first they 
crowded round the blaze, and vented their exultation only in their 
looks: but when it grew hotter and fiercer--when it crackled, 
leaped, and roared, like a great furnace--when it shone upon the 
opposite houses, and lighted up not only the pale and wondering 
faces at the windows, but the inmost corners of each habitation--
when through the deep red heat and glow, the fire was seen sporting 
and toying with the door, now clinging to its obdurate surface, now 
gliding off with fierce inconstancy and soaring high into the sky, 
anon returning to fold it in its burning grasp and lure it to its 
ruin--when it shone and gleamed so brightly that the church clock 
of St Sepulchre's so often pointing to the hour of death, was 
legible as in broad day, and the vane upon its steeple-top 
glittered in the unwonted light like something richly jewelled--
when blackened stone and sombre brick grew ruddy in the deep 
reflection, and windows shone like burnished gold, dotting the 
longest distance in the fiery vista with their specks of 
brightness--when wall and tower, and roof and chimney-stack, seemed 
drunk, and in the flickering glare appeared to reel and stagger--
when scores of objects, never seen before, burst out upon the view, 
and things the most familiar put on some new aspect--then the mob 
began to join the whirl, and with loud yells, and shouts, and 
clamour, such as happily is seldom heard, bestirred themselves to 
feed the fire, and keep it at its height.

Although the heat was so intense that the paint on the houses over 
against the prison, parched and crackled up, and swelling into 
boils, as it were from excess of torture, broke and crumbled away; 
although the glass fell from the window-sashes, and the lead and 
iron on the roofs blistered the incautious hand that touched them, 
and the sparrows in the eaves took wing, and rendered giddy by the 
smoke, fell fluttering down upon the blazing pile; still the fire 
was tended unceasingly by busy hands, and round it, men were going 
always.  They never slackened in their zeal, or kept aloof, but 
pressed upon the flames so hard, that those in front had much ado 
to save themselves from being thrust in; if one man swooned or 
dropped, a dozen struggled for his place, and that although they 
knew the pain, and thirst, and pressure to be unendurable.  Those 
who fell down in fainting-fits, and were not crushed or burnt, 
were carried to an inn-yard close at hand, and dashed with water 
from a pump; of which buckets full were passed from man to man 
among the crowd; but such was the strong desire of all to drink, 
and such the fighting to be first, that, for the most part, the 
whole contents were spilled upon the ground, without the lips of 
one man being moistened.

Meanwhile, and in the midst of all the roar and outcry, those who 
were nearest to the pile, heaped up again the burning fragments 
that came toppling down, and raked the fire about the door, which, 
although a sheet of flame, was still a door fast locked and barred, 
and kept them out.  Great pieces of blazing wood were passed, 
besides, above the people's heads to such as stood about the 
ladders, and some of these, climbing up to the topmost stave, and 
holding on with one hand by the prison wall, exerted all their 
skill and force to cast these fire-brands on the roof, or down into 
the yards within.  In many instances their efforts were successful; 
which occasioned a new and appalling addition to the horrors of the 
scene: for the prisoners within, seeing from between their bars 
that the fire caught in many places and thrived fiercely, and being 
all locked up in strong cells for the night, began to know that 
they were in danger of being burnt alive.  This terrible fear, 
spreading from cell to cell and from yard to yard, vented itself in 
such dismal cries and wailings, and in such dreadful shrieks for 
help, that the whole jail resounded with the noise; which was 
loudly heard even above the shouting of the mob and roaring of the 
flames, and was so full of agony and despair, that it made the 
boldest tremble.

It was remarkable that these cries began in that quarter of the 
jail which fronted Newgate Street, where, it was well known, the 
men who were to suffer death on Thursday were confined.  And not 
only were these four who had so short a time to live, the first to 
whom the dread of being burnt occurred, but they were, throughout, 
the most importunate of all: for they could be plainly heard, 
notwithstanding the great thickness of the walls, crying that the 
wind set that way, and that the flames would shortly reach them; 
and calling to the officers of the jail to come and quench the 
fire from a cistern which was in their yard, and full of water.  
Judging from what the crowd outside the walls could hear from time 
to time, these four doomed wretches never ceased to call for help; 
and that with as much distraction, and in as great a frenzy of 
attachment to existence, as though each had an honoured, happy 
life before him, instead of eight-and-forty hours of miserable 
imprisonment, and then a violent and shameful death.

But the anguish and suffering of the two sons of one of these men, 
when they heard, or fancied that they heard, their father's voice, 
is past description.  After wringing their hands and rushing to and 
fro as if they were stark mad, one mounted on the shoulders of his 
brother, and tried to clamber up the face of the high wall, guarded 
at the top with spikes and points of iron.  And when he fell among 
the crowd, he was not deterred by his bruises, but mounted up 
again, and fell again, and, when he found the feat impossible, 
began to beat the stones and tear them with his hands, as if he 
could that way make a breach in the strong building, and force a 
passage in.  At last, they cleft their way among the mob about the 
door, though many men, a dozen times their match, had tried in vain 
to do so, and were seen, in--yes, in--the fire, striving to prize 
it down, with crowbars.

Nor were they alone affected by the outcry from within the prison.  
The women who were looking on, shrieked loudly, beat their hands 
together, stopped their ears; and many fainted: the men who were 
not near the walls and active in the siege, rather than do nothing, 
tore up the pavement of the street, and did so with a haste and 
fury they could not have surpassed if that had been the jail, and 
they were near their object.  Not one living creature in the throng 
was for an instant still.  The whole great mass were mad.

A shout!  Another!  Another yet, though few knew why, or what it 
meant.  But those around the gate had seen it slowly yield, and 
drop from its topmost hinge.  It hung on that side by but one, but 
it was upright still, because of the bar, and its having sunk, of 
its own weight, into the heap of ashes at its foot.  There was now 
a gap at the top of the doorway, through which could be descried a 
gloomy passage, cavernous and dark.  Pile up the fire!

It burnt fiercely.  The door was red-hot, and the gap wider.  They 
vainly tried to shield their faces with their hands, and standing 
as if in readiness for a spring, watched the place.  Dark figures, 
some crawling on their hands and knees, some carried in the arms of 
others, were seen to pass along the roof.  It was plain the jail 
could hold out no longer.  The keeper, and his officers, and their 
wives and children, were escaping.  Pile up the fire!

The door sank down again: it settled deeper in the cinders--
tottered--yielded--was down!

As they shouted again, they fell back, for a moment, and left a 
clear space about the fire that lay between them and the jail 
entry.  Hugh leapt upon the blazing heap, and scattering a train of 
sparks into the air, and making the dark lobby glitter with those 
that hung upon his dress, dashed into the jail.

The hangman followed.  And then so many rushed upon their track, 
that the fire got trodden down and thinly strewn about the street; 
but there was no need of it now, for, inside and out, the prison 
was in flames.



Chapter 65


During the whole course of the terrible scene which was now at its 
height, one man in the jail suffered a degree of fear and mental 
torment which had no parallel in the endurance, even of those who 
lay under sentence of death.

When the rioters first assembled before the building, the murderer 
was roused from sleep--if such slumbers as his may have that 
blessed name--by the roar of voices, and the struggling of a great 
crowd.  He started up as these sounds met his ear, and, sitting on 
his bedstead, listened.

After a short interval of silence the noise burst out again.  Still 
listening attentively, he made out, in course of time, that the 
jail was besieged by a furious multitude.  His guilty conscience 
instantly arrayed these men against himself, and brought the fear 
upon him that he would be singled out, and torn to pieces.

Once impressed with the terror of this conceit, everything tended 
to confirm and strengthen it.  His double crime, the circumstances 
under which it had been committed, the length of time that had 
elapsed, and its discovery in spite of all, made him, as it were, 
the visible object of the Almighty's wrath.  In all the crime and 
vice and moral gloom of the great pest-house of the capital, he 
stood alone, marked and singled out by his great guilt, a Lucifer 
among the devils.  The other prisoners were a host, hiding and 
sheltering each other--a crowd like that without the walls.  He was 
one man against the whole united concourse; a single, solitary, 
lonely man, from whom the very captives in the jail fell off and 
shrunk appalled.

It might be that the intelligence of his capture having been 
bruited abroad, they had come there purposely to drag him out and 
kill him in the street; or it might be that they were the rioters, 
and, in pursuance of an old design, had come to sack the prison.  
But in either case he had no belief or hope that they would spare 
him.  Every shout they raised, and every sound they made, was a 
blow upon his heart.  As the attack went on, he grew more wild and 
frantic in his terror: tried to pull away the bars that guarded the 
chimney and prevented him from climbing up: called loudly on the 
turnkeys to cluster round the cell and save him from the fury of 
the rabble; or put him in some dungeon underground, no matter of 
what depth, how dark it was, or loathsome, or beset with rats and 
creeping things, so that it hid him and was hard to find.

But no one came, or answered him.  Fearful, even while he cried to 
them, of attracting attention, he was silent.  By and bye, he saw, 
as he looked from his grated window, a strange glimmering on the 
stone walls and pavement of the yard.  It was feeble at first, and 
came and went, as though some officers with torches were passing to 
and fro upon the roof of the prison.  Soon it reddened, and lighted 
brands came whirling down, spattering the ground with fire, and 
burning sullenly in corners.  One rolled beneath a wooden bench, 
and set it in a blaze; another caught a water-spout, and so went 
climbing up the wall, leaving a long straight track of fire behind 
it.  After a time, a slow thick shower of burning fragments, from 
some upper portion of the prison which was blazing nigh, began to 
fall before his door.  Remembering that it opened outwards, he knew 
that every spark which fell upon the heap, and in the act lost its 
bright life, and died an ugly speck of dust and rubbish, helped to 
entomb him in a living grave.  Still, though the jail resounded 
with shrieks and cries for help,--though the fire bounded up as if 
each separate flame had had a tiger's life, and roared as though, 
in every one, there were a hungry voice--though the heat began to 
grow intense, and the air suffocating, and the clamour without 
increased, and the danger of his situation even from one merciless 
element was every moment more extreme,--still he was afraid to 
raise his voice again, lest the crowd should break in, and should, 
of their own ears or from the information given them by the other 
prisoners, get the clue to his place of confinement.  Thus fearful 
alike, of those within the prison and of those without; of noise 
and silence; light and darkness; of being released, and being left 
there to die; he was so tortured and tormented, that nothing man 
has ever done to man in the horrible caprice of power and cruelty, 
exceeds his self-inflicted punishment.

Now, now, the door was down.  Now they came rushing through the 
jail, calling to each other in the vaulted passages; clashing the 
iron gates dividing yard from yard; beating at the doors of cells 
and wards; wrenching off bolts and locks and bars; tearing down the 
door-posts to get men out; endeavouring to drag them by main force 
through gaps and windows where a child could scarcely pass; 
whooping and yelling without a moment's rest; and running through 
the heat and flames as if they were cased in metal.  By their legs, 
their arms, the hair upon their heads, they dragged the prisoners 
out.  Some threw themselves upon the captives as they got towards 
the door, and tried to file away their irons; some danced about 
them with a frenzied joy, and rent their clothes, and were ready, 
as it seemed, to tear them limb from limb.  Now a party of a dozen 
men came darting through the yard into which the murderer cast 
fearful glances from his darkened window; dragging a prisoner along 
the ground whose dress they had nearly torn from his body in their 
mad eagerness to set him free, and who was bleeding and senseless 
in their hands.  Now a score of prisoners ran to and fro, who had 
lost themselves in the intricacies of the prison, and were so 
bewildered with the noise and glare that they knew not where to 
turn or what to do, and still cried out for help, as loudly as 
before.  Anon some famished wretch whose theft had been a loaf of 
bread, or scrap of butcher's meat, came skulking past, barefooted--
going slowly away because that jail, his house, was burning; not 
because he had any other, or had friends to meet, or old haunts to 
revisit, or any liberty to gain, but liberty to starve and die.  
And then a knot of highwaymen went trooping by, conducted by the 
friends they had among the crowd, who muffled their fetters as they 
went along, with handkerchiefs and bands of hay, and wrapped them 
in coats and cloaks, and gave them drink from bottles, and held it 
to their lips, because of their handcuffs which there was no time 
to remove.  All this, and Heaven knows how much more, was done 
amidst a noise, a hurry, and distraction, like nothing that we know 
of, even in our dreams; which seemed for ever on the rise, and 
never to decrease for the space of a single instant.

He was still looking down from his window upon these things, when a 
band of men with torches, ladders, axes, and many kinds of weapons, 
poured into the yard, and hammering at his door, inquired if there 
were any prisoner within.  He left the window when he saw them 
coming, and drew back into the remotest corner of the cell; but 
although he returned them no answer, they had a fancy that some one 
was inside, for they presently set ladders against it, and began to 
tear away the bars at the casement; not only that, indeed, but with 
pickaxes to hew down the very stones in the wall.

As soon as they had made a breach at the window, large enough for 
the admission of a man's head, one of them thrust in a torch and 
looked all round the room.  He followed this man's gaze until it 
rested on himself, and heard him demand why he had not answered, 
but made him no reply.

In the general surprise and wonder, they were used to this; without 
saying anything more, they enlarged the breach until it was large 
enough to admit the body of a man, and then came dropping down upon 
the floor, one after another, until the cell was full.  They caught 
him up among them, handed him to the window, and those who stood 
upon the ladders passed him down upon the pavement of the yard.  
Then the rest came out, one after another, and, bidding him fly, 
and lose no time, or the way would be choked up, hurried away to 
rescue others.

It seemed not a minute's work from first to last.  He staggered to 
his feet, incredulous of what had happened, when the yard was 
filled again, and a crowd rushed on, hurrying Barnaby among them.  
In another minute--not so much: another minute! the same instant, 
with no lapse or interval between!--he and his son were being 
passed from hand to hand, through the dense crowd in the street, 
and were glancing backward at a burning pile which some one said 
was Newgate.

From the moment of their first entrance into the prison, the crowd 
dispersed themselves about it, and swarmed into every chink and 
crevice, as if they had a perfect acquaintance with its innermost 
parts, and bore in their minds an exact plan of the whole.  For 
this immediate knowledge of the place, they were, no doubt, in a 
great degree, indebted to the hangman, who stood in the lobby, 
directing some to go this way, some that, and some the other; and 
who materially assisted in bringing about the wonderful rapidity 
with which the release of the prisoners was effected.

But this functionary of the law reserved one important piece of 
intelligence, and kept it snugly to himself.  When he had issued 
his instructions relative to every other part of the building, and 
the mob were dispersed from end to end, and busy at their work, he 
took a bundle of keys from a kind of cupboard in the wall, and 
going by a kind of passage near the chapel (it joined the governors 
house, and was then on fire), betook himself to the condemned 
cells, which were a series of small, strong, dismal rooms, opening 
on a low gallery, guarded, at the end at which he entered, by a 
strong iron wicket, and at its opposite extremity by two doors and 
a thick grate.  Having double locked the wicket, and assured 
himself that the other entrances were well secured, he sat down on 
a bench in the gallery, and sucked the head of his stick with the 
utmost complacency, tranquillity, and contentment.

It would have been strange enough, a man's enjoying himself in this 
quiet manner, while the prison was burning, and such a tumult was 
cleaving the air, though he had been outside the walls.  But here, 
in the very heart of the building, and moreover with the prayers 
and cries of the four men under sentence sounding in his ears, and 
their hands, stretched our through the gratings in their cell-
doors, clasped in frantic entreaty before his very eyes, it was 
particularly remarkable.  Indeed, Mr Dennis appeared to think it an 
uncommon circumstance, and to banter himself upon it; for he thrust 
his hat on one side as some men do when they are in a waggish 
humour, sucked the head of his stick with a higher relish, and 
smiled as though he would say, 'Dennis, you're a rum dog; you're a 
queer fellow; you're capital company, Dennis, and quite a 
character!'

He sat in this way for some minutes, while the four men in the 
cells, who were certain that somebody had entered the gallery, but 
could not see who, gave vent to such piteous entreaties as wretches 
in their miserable condition may be supposed to have been inspired 
with: urging, whoever it was, to set them at liberty, for the love 
of Heaven; and protesting, with great fervour, and truly enough, 
perhaps, for the time, that if they escaped, they would amend their 
ways, and would never, never, never again do wrong before God or 
man, but would lead penitent and sober lives, and sorrowfully 
repent the crimes they had committed.  The terrible energy with 
which they spoke, would have moved any person, no matter how good 
or just (if any good or just person could have strayed into that 
sad place that night), to have set them at liberty: and, while he 
would have left any other punishment to its free course, to have 
saved them from this last dreadful and repulsive penalty; which 
never turned a man inclined to evil, and has hardened thousands who 
were half inclined to good.

Mr Dennis, who had been bred and nurtured in the good old school, 
and had administered the good old laws on the good old plan, always 
once and sometimes twice every six weeks, for a long time, bore 
these appeals with a deal of philosophy.  Being at last, however, 
rather disturbed in his pleasant reflection by their repetition, he 
rapped at one of the doors with his stick, and cried:

'Hold your noise there, will you?'

At this they all cried together that they were to be hanged on the 
next day but one; and again implored his aid.

'Aid! For what!' said Mr Dennis, playfully rapping the knuckles of 
the hand nearest him.

'To save us!' they cried.

'Oh, certainly,' said Mr Dennis, winking at the wall in the absence 
of any friend with whom he could humour the joke.  'And so you're 
to be worked off, are you, brothers?'

'Unless we are released to-night,' one of them cried, 'we are dead 
men!'

'I tell you what it is,' said the hangman, gravely; 'I'm afraid, my 
friend, that you're not in that 'ere state of mind that's suitable 
to your condition, then; you're not a-going to be released: don't 
think it--Will you leave off that 'ere indecent row?  I wonder you 
an't ashamed of yourselves, I do.'

He followed up this reproof by rapping every set of knuckles one 
after the other, and having done so, resumed his seat again with a 
cheerful countenance.

'You've had law,' he said, crossing his legs and elevating his 
eyebrows: 'laws have been made a' purpose for you; a wery handsome 
prison's been made a' purpose for you; a parson's kept a purpose 
for you; a constitootional officer's appointed a' purpose for you; 
carts is maintained a' purpose for you--and yet you're not 
contented!--WILL you hold that noise, you sir in the furthest?'

A groan was the only answer.

'So well as I can make out,' said Mr Dennis, in a tone of mingled 
badinage and remonstrance, 'there's not a man among you.  I begin 
to think I'm on the opposite side, and among the ladies; though for 
the matter of that, I've seen a many ladies face it out, in a 
manner that did honour to the sex.--You in number two, don't grind 
them teeth of yours.  Worse manners,' said the hangman, rapping at 
the door with his stick, 'I never see in this place afore.  I'm 
ashamed of you.  You're a disgrace to the Bailey.'

After pausing for a moment to hear if anything could be pleaded in 
justification, Mr Dennis resumed in a sort of coaxing tone:

'Now look'ee here, you four.  I'm come here to take care of you, 
and see that you an't burnt, instead of the other thing.  It's no 
use your making any noise, for you won't be found out by them as 
has broken in, and you'll only be hoarse when you come to the 
speeches,--which is a pity.  What I say in respect to the speeches 
always is, "Give it mouth."  That's my maxim.  Give it mouth.  I've 
heerd,' said the hangman, pulling off his hat to take his 
handkerchief from the crown and wipe his face, and then putting it 
on again a little more on one side than before, 'I've heerd a 
eloquence on them boards--you know what boards I mean--and have 
heerd a degree of mouth given to them speeches, that they was as 
clear as a bell, and as good as a play.  There's a pattern!  And 
always, when a thing of this natur's to come off, what I stand up 
for, is, a proper frame of mind.  Let's have a proper frame of 
mind, and we can go through with it, creditable--pleasant--
sociable.  Whatever you do (and I address myself in particular, to 
you in the furthest), never snivel.  I'd sooner by half, though I 
lose by it, see a man tear his clothes a' purpose to spile 'em 
before they come to me, than find him snivelling.  It's ten to one 
a better frame of mind, every way!'

While the hangman addressed them to this effect, in the tone and 
with the air of a pastor in familiar conversation with his flock, 
the noise had been in some degree subdued; for the rioters were 
busy in conveying the prisoners to the Sessions House, which was 
beyond the main walls of the prison, though connected with it, and 
the crowd were busy too, in passing them from thence along the 
street.  But when he had got thus far in his discourse, the sound 
of voices in the yard showed plainly that the mob had returned and 
were coming that way; and directly afterwards a violent crashing at 
the grate below, gave note of their attack upon the cells (as they 
were called) at last.

It was in vain the hangman ran from door to door, and covered the 
grates, one after another, with his hat, in futile efforts to 
stifle the cries of the four men within; it was in vain he dogged 
their outstretched hands, and beat them with his stick, or menaced 
them with new and lingering pains in the execution of his office; 
the place resounded with their cries.  These, together with the 
feeling that they were now the last men in the jail, so worked upon 
and stimulated the besiegers, that in an incredibly short space of 
time they forced the strong grate down below, which was formed of 
iron rods two inches square, drove in the two other doors, as if 
they had been but deal partitions, and stood at the end of the 
gallery with only a bar or two between them and the cells.

'Halloa!' cried Hugh, who was the first to look into the dusky 
passage: 'Dennis before us!  Well done, old boy.  Be quick, and 
open here, for we shall be suffocated in the smoke, going out.'

'Go out at once, then,' said Dennis.  'What do you want here?'

'Want!' echoed Hugh.  'The four men.'

'Four devils!' cried the hangman.  'Don't you know they're left for 
death on Thursday?  Don't you respect the law--the constitootion--
nothing?  Let the four men be.'

'Is this a time for joking?' cried Hugh.  'Do you hear 'em?  Pull 
away these bars that have got fixed between the door and the 
ground; and let us in.'

'Brother,' said the hangman, in a low voice, as he stooped under 
pretence of doing what Hugh desired, but only looked up in his 
face, 'can't you leave these here four men to me, if I've the whim!  
You do what you like, and have what you like of everything for your 
share,--give me my share.  I want these four men left alone, I tell 
you!'

'Pull the bars down, or stand out of the way,' was Hugh's reply.

'You can turn the crowd if you like, you know that well enough, 
brother,' said the hangman, slowly.  'What!  You WILL come in, will 
you?'

'Yes.'

'You won't let these men alone, and leave 'em to me?  You've no 
respect for nothing--haven't you?' said the hangman, retreating to 
the door by which he had entered, and regarding his companion with 
a scowl.  'You WILL come in, will you, brother!'

'I tell you, yes.  What the devil ails you?  Where are you going?'

'No matter where I'm going,' rejoined the hangman, looking in again 
at the iron wicket, which he had nearly shut upon himself, and 
held ajar.  'Remember where you're coming.  That's all!'

With that, he shook his likeness at Hugh, and giving him a grin, 
compared with which his usual smile was amiable, disappeared, and 
shut the door.

Hugh paused no longer, but goaded alike by the cries of the 
convicts, and by the impatience of the crowd, warned the man 
immediately behind him--the way was only wide enough for one 
abreast--to stand back, and wielded a sledge-hammer with such 
strength, that after a few blows the iron bent and broke, and gave 
them free admittance.

It the two sons of one of these men, of whom mention has been made, 
were furious in their zeal before, they had now the wrath and 
vigour of lions.  Calling to the man within each cell, to keep as 
far back as he could, lest the axes crashing through the door 
should wound him, a party went to work upon each one, to beat it in 
by sheer strength, and force the bolts and staples from their hold.  
But although these two lads had the weakest party, and the worst 
armed, and did not begin until after the others, having stopped to 
whisper to him through the grate, that door was the first open, and 
that man was the first out.  As they dragged him into the gallery 
to knock off his irons, he fell down among them, a mere heap of 
chains, and was carried out in that state on men's shoulders, with 
no sign of life.

The release of these four wretched creatures, and conveying them, 
astounded and bewildered, into the streets so full of life--a 
spectacle they had never thought to see again, until they emerged 
from solitude and silence upon that last journey, when the air 
should be heavy with the pent-up breath of thousands, and the 
streets and houses should be built and roofed with human faces, not 
with bricks and tiles and stones--was the crowning horror of the 
scene.  Their pale and haggard looks and hollow eyes; their 
staggering feet, and hands stretched out as if to save themselves 
from falling; their wandering and uncertain air; the way they 
heaved and gasped for breath, as though in water, when they were 
first plunged into the crowd; all marked them for the men.  No need 
to say 'this one was doomed to die;' for there were the words 
broadly stamped and branded on his face.  The crowd fell off, as if 
they had been laid out for burial, and had risen in their shrouds; 
and many were seen to shudder, as though they had been actually 
dead men, when they chanced to touch or brush against their 
garments.

At the bidding of the mob, the houses were all illuminated that 
night--lighted up from top to bottom as at a time of public gaiety 
and joy.  Many years afterwards, old people who lived in their 
youth near this part of the city, remembered being in a great glare 
of light, within doors and without, and as they looked, timid and 
frightened children, from the windows, seeing a FACE go by.  Though 
the whole great crowd and all its other terrors had faded from 
their recollection, this one object remained; alone, distinct, and 
well remembered.  Even in the unpractised minds of infants, one of 
these doomed men darting past, and but an instant seen, was an 
image of force enough to dim the whole concourse; to find itself an 
all-absorbing place, and hold it ever after.

When this last task had been achieved, the shouts and cries grew 
fainter; the clank of fetters, which had resounded on all sides as 
the prisoners escaped, was heard no more; all the noises of the 
crowd subsided into a hoarse and sullen murmur as it passed into 
the distance; and when the human tide had rolled away, a melancholy 
heap of smoking ruins marked the spot where it had lately chafed 
and roared.



Chapter 66


Although he had had no rest upon the previous night, and had 
watched with little intermission for some weeks past, sleeping only 
in the day by starts and snatches, Mr Haredale, from the dawn of 
morning until sunset, sought his niece in every place where he 
deemed it possible she could have taken refuge.  All day long, 
nothing, save a draught of water, passed his lips; though he 
prosecuted his inquiries far and wide, and never so much as sat 
down, once.

In every quarter he could think of; at Chigwell and in London; at 
the houses of the tradespeople with whom he dealt, and of the 
friends he knew; he pursued his search.  A prey to the most 
harrowing anxieties and apprehensions, he went from magistrate to 
magistrate, and finally to the Secretary of State.  The only 
comfort he received was from this minister, who assured him that 
the Government, being now driven to the exercise of the extreme 
prerogatives of the Crown, were determined to exert them; that a 
proclamation would probably be out upon the morrow, giving to the 
military, discretionary and unlimited power in the suppression of 
the riots; that the sympathies of the King, the Administration, and 
both Houses of Parliament, and indeed of all good men of every 
religious persuasion, were strongly with the injured Catholics; and 
that justice should be done them at any cost or hazard.  He told 
him, moreover, that other persons whose houses had been burnt, had 
for a time lost sight of their children or their relatives, but 
had, in every case, within his knowledge, succeeded in discovering 
them; that his complaint should be remembered, and fully stated in 
the instructions given to the officers in command, and to all the 
inferior myrmidons of justice; and that everything that could be 
done to help him, should be done, with a goodwill and in good 
faith.

Grateful for this consolation, feeble as it was in its reference to 
the past, and little hope as it afforded him in connection with the 
subject of distress which lay nearest to his heart; and really 
thankful for the interest the minister expressed, and seemed to 
feel, in his condition; Mr Haredale withdrew.  He found himself, 
with the night coming on, alone in the streets; and destitute of 
any place in which to lay his head.

He entered an hotel near Charing Cross, and ordered some 
refreshment and a bed.  He saw that his faint and worn appearance 
attracted the attention of the landlord and his waiters; and 
thinking that they might suppose him to be penniless, took out his 
purse, and laid it on the table.  It was not that, the landlord 
said, in a faltering voice.  If he were one of those who had 
suffered by the rioters, he durst not give him entertainment.  He 
had a family of children, and had been twice warned to be careful 
in receiving guests.  He heartily prayed his forgiveness, but what 
could he do?

Nothing.  No man felt that more sincerely than Mr Haredale.  He 
told the man as much, and left the house.

Feeling that he might have anticipated this occurrence, after what 
he had seen at Chigwell in the morning, where no man dared to touch 
a spade, though he offered a large reward to all who would come and 
dig among the ruins of his house, he walked along the Strand; too 
proud to expose himself to another refusal, and of too generous a 
spirit to involve in distress or ruin any honest tradesman who 
might be weak enough to give him shelter.  He wandered into one of 
the streets by the side of the river, and was pacing in a 
thoughtful manner up and down, thinking of things that had happened 
long ago, when he heard a servant-man at an upper window call to 
another on the opposite side of the street, that the mob were 
setting fire to Newgate.

To Newgate! where that man was!  His failing strength returned, 
his energies came back with tenfold vigour, on the instant.  If it 
were possible--if they should set the murderer free--was he, after 
all he had undergone, to die with the suspicion of having slain his 
own brother, dimly gathering about him--

He had no consciousness of going to the jail; but there he stood, 
before it.  There was the crowd wedged and pressed together in a 
dense, dark, moving mass; and there were the flames soaring up into 
the air.  His head turned round and round, lights flashed before 
his eyes, and he struggled hard with two men.

'Nay, nay,' said one.  'Be more yourself, my good sir.  We attract 
attention here.  Come away.  What can you do among so many men?'

'The gentleman's always for doing something,' said the other, 
forcing him along as he spoke.  'I like him for that.  I do like 
him for that.'

They had by this time got him into a court, hard by the prison.  He 
looked from one to the other, and as he tried to release himself, 
felt that he tottered on his feet.  He who had spoken first, was 
the old gentleman whom he had seen at the Lord Mayor's.  The other 
was John Grueby, who had stood by him so manfully at Westminster.

'What does this mean?' he asked them faintly.  'How came we 
together?'

'On the skirts of the crowd,' returned the distiller; 'but come 
with us.  Pray come with us.  You seem to know my friend here?'

'Surely,' said Mr Haredale, looking in a kind of stupor at John.

'He'll tell you then,' returned the old gentleman, 'that I am a man 
to be trusted.  He's my servant.  He was lately (as you know, I 
have no doubt) in Lord George Gordon's service; but he left it, and 
brought, in pure goodwill to me and others, who are marked by the 
rioters, such intelligence as he had picked up, of their designs.'

--'On one condition, please, sir,' said John, touching his hat.  No 
evidence against my lord--a misled man--a kind-hearted man, sir.  
My lord never intended this.'

'The condition will be observed, of course,' rejoined the old 
distiller.  'It's a point of honour.  But come with us, sir; pray 
come with us.'

John Grueby added no entreaties, but he adopted a different kind of 
persuasion, by putting his arm through one of Mr Haredale's, while 
his master took the other, and leading him away with all speed.

Sensible, from a strange lightness in his head, and a difficulty in 
fixing his thoughts on anything, even to the extent of bearing his 
companions in his mind for a minute together without looking at 
them, that his brain was affected by the agitation and suffering 
through which he had passed, and to which he was still a prey, Mr 
Haredale let them lead him where they would.  As they went along, 
he was conscious of having no command over what he said or thought, 
and that he had a fear of going mad.

The distiller lived, as he had told him when they first met, on 
Holborn Hill, where he had great storehouses and drove a large 
trade.  They approached his house by a back entrance, lest they 
should attract the notice of the crowd, and went into an upper 
room which faced towards the street; the windows, however, in 
common with those of every other room in the house, were boarded up 
inside, in order that, out of doors, all might appear quite dark.

They laid him on a sofa in this chamber, perfectly insensible; but 
John immediately fetching a surgeon, who took from him a large 
quantity of blood, he gradually came to himself.  As he was, for 
the time, too weak to walk, they had no difficulty in persuading 
him to remain there all night, and got him to bed without loss of a 
minute.  That done, they gave him cordial and some toast, and 
presently a pretty strong composing-draught, under the influence 
of which he soon fell into a lethargy, and, for a time, forgot his 
troubles.

The vintner, who was a very hearty old fellow and a worthy man, had 
no thoughts of going to bed himself, for he had received several 
threatening warnings from the rioters, and had indeed gone out that 
evening to try and gather from the conversation of the mob whether 
his house was to be the next attacked.  He sat all night in an 
easy-chair in the same room--dozing a little now and then--and 
received from time to time the reports of John Grueby and two or 
three other trustworthy persons in his employ, who went out into 
the streets as scouts; and for whose entertainment an ample 
allowance of good cheer (which the old vintner, despite his 
anxiety, now and then attacked himself) was set forth in an 
adjoining chamber.

These accounts were of a sufficiently alarming nature from the 
first; but as the night wore on, they grew so much worse, and 
involved such a fearful amount of riot and destruction, that in 
comparison with these new tidings all the previous disturbances 
sunk to nothing.

The first intelligence that came, was of the taking of Newgate, and 
the escape of all the prisoners, whose track, as they made up 
Holborn and into the adjacent streets, was proclaimed to those 
citizens who were shut up in their houses, by the rattling of 
their chains, which formed a dismal concert, and was heard in every 
direction, as though so many forges were at work.  The flames too, 
shone so brightly through the vintner's skylights, that the rooms 
and staircases below were nearly as light as in broad day; while 
the distant shouting of the mob seemed to shake the very walls and 
ceilings.

At length they were heard approaching the house, and some minutes 
of terrible anxiety ensued.  They came close up, and stopped before 
it; but after giving three loud yells, went on.  And although they 
returned several times that night, creating new alarms each time, 
they did nothing there; having their hands full.  Shortly after 
they had gone away for the first time, one of the scouts came 
running in with the news that they had stopped before Lord 
Mansfield's house in Bloomsbury Square.

Soon afterwards there came another, and another, and then the first 
returned again, and so, by little and little, their tale was this:--
That the mob gathering round Lord Mansfield's house, had called on 
those within to open the door, and receiving no reply (for Lord and 
Lady Mansfield were at that moment escaping by the backway), forced 
an entrance according to their usual custom.  That they then began 
to demolish the house with great fury, and setting fire to it in 
several parts, involved in a common ruin the whole of the costly 
furniture, the plate and jewels, a beautiful gallery of pictures, 
the rarest collection of manuscripts ever possessed by any one 
private person in the world, and worse than all, because nothing 
could replace this loss, the great Law Library, on almost every 
page of which were notes in the Judge's own hand, of inestimable 
value,--being the results of the study and experience of his whole 
life.  That while they were howling and exulting round the fire, a 
troop of soldiers, with a magistrate among them, came up, and being 
too late (for the mischief was by that time done), began to 
disperse the crowd.  That the Riot Act being read, and the crowd 
still resisting, the soldiers received orders to fire, and 
levelling their muskets shot dead at the first discharge six men 
and a woman, and wounded many persons; and loading again directly, 
fired another volley, but over the people's heads it was supposed, 
as none were seen to fall.  That thereupon, and daunted by the 
shrieks and tumult, the crowd began to disperse, and the soldiers 
went away, leaving the killed and wounded on the ground: which they 
had no sooner done than the rioters came back again, and taking up 
the dead bodies, and the wounded people, formed into a rude 
procession, having the bodies in the front.  That in this order 
they paraded off with a horrible merriment; fixing weapons in the 
dead men's hands to make them look as if alive; and preceded by a 
fellow ringing Lord Mansfield's dinner-bell with all his might.

The scouts reported further, that this party meeting with some 
others who had been at similar work elsewhere, they all united into 
one, and drafting off a few men with the killed and wounded, 
marched away to Lord Mansfield's country seat at Caen Wood, between 
Hampstead and Highgate; bent upon destroying that house likewise, 
and lighting up a great fire there, which from that height should 
be seen all over London.  But in this, they were disappointed, for 
a party of horse having arrived before them, they retreated faster 
than they went, and came straight back to town.

There being now a great many parties in the streets, each went to 
work according to its humour, and a dozen houses were quickly 
blazing, including those of Sir John Fielding and two other 
justices, and four in Holborn--one of the greatest thoroughfares in 
London--which were all burning at the same time, and burned until 
they went out of themselves, for the people cut the engine hose, 
and would not suffer the firemen to play upon the flames.  At one 
house near Moorfields, they found in one of the rooms some canary 
birds in cages, and these they cast into the fire alive.  The poor 
little creatures screamed, it was said, like infants, when they 
were flung upon the blaze; and one man was so touched that he tried 
in vain to save them, which roused the indignation of the crowd, 
and nearly cost him his life.

At this same house, one of the fellows who went through the rooms, 
breaking the furniture and helping to destroy the building, found a 
child's doll--a poor toy--which he exhibited at the window to the 
mob below, as the image of some unholy saint which the late 
occupants had worshipped.  While he was doing this, another man 
with an equally tender conscience (they had both been foremost in 
throwing down the canary birds for roasting alive), took his seat 
on the parapet of the house, and harangued the crowd from a 
pamphlet circulated by the Association, relative to the true 
principles of Christianity!  Meanwhile the Lord Mayor, with his 
hands in his pockets, looked on as an idle man might look at any 
other show, and seemed mightily satisfied to have got a good place.

Such were the accounts brought to the old vintner by his servants 
as he sat at the side of Mr Haredale's bed, having been unable even 
to doze, after the first part of the night; too much disturbed by 
his own fears; by the cries of the mob, the light of the fires, and 
the firing of the soldiers.  Such, with the addition of the release 
of all the prisoners in the New Jail at Clerkenwell, and as many 
robberies of passengers in the streets, as the crowd had leisure to 
indulge in, were the scenes of which Mr Haredale was happily 
unconscious, and which were all enacted before midnight.



Chapter 67


When darkness broke away and morning began to dawn, the town wore a 
strange aspect indeed.

Sleep had hardly been thought of all night.  The general alarm was 
so apparent in the faces of the inhabitants, and its expression was 
so aggravated by want of rest (few persons, with any property to 
lose, having dared go to bed since Monday), that a stranger coming 
into the streets would have supposed some mortal pest or plague to 
have been raging.  In place of the usual cheerfulness and animation 
of morning, everything was dead and silent.  The shops remained 
closed, offices and warehouses were shut, the coach and chair 
stands were deserted, no carts or waggons rumbled through the 
slowly waking streets, the early cries were all hushed; a universal 
gloom prevailed.  Great numbers of people were out, even at 
daybreak, but they flitted to and fro as though they shrank from 
the sound of their own footsteps; the public ways were haunted 
rather than frequented; and round the smoking ruins people stood 
apart from one another and in silence, not venturing to condemn 
the rioters, or to be supposed to do so, even in whispers.

At the Lord President's in Piccadilly, at Lambeth Palace, at the 
Lord Chancellor's in Great Ormond Street, in the Royal Exchange, 
the Bank, the Guildhall, the Inns of Court, the Courts of Law, and 
every chamber fronting the streets near Westminster Hall and the 
Houses of Parliament, parties of soldiers were posted before 
daylight.  A body of Horse Guards paraded Palace Yard; an 
encampment was formed in the Park, where fifteen hundred men and 
five battalions of Militia were under arms; the Tower was 
fortified, the drawbridges were raised, the cannon loaded and 
pointed, and two regiments of artillery busied in strengthening the 
fortress and preparing it for defence.  A numerous detachment of 
soldiers were stationed to keep guard at the New River Head, which 
the people had threatened to attack, and where, it was said, they 
meant to cut off the main-pipes, so that there might be no water 
for the extinction of the flames.  In the Poultry, and on Cornhill, 
and at several other leading points, iron chains were drawn across 
the street; parties of soldiers were distributed in some of the old 
city churches while it was yet dark; and in several private houses 
(among them, Lord Rockingham's in Grosvenor Square); which were 
blockaded as though to sustain a siege, and had guns pointed from 
the windows.  When the sun rose, it shone into handsome apartments 
filled with armed men; the furniture hastily heaped away in 
corners, and made of little or no account, in the terror of the 
time--on arms glittering in city chambers, among desks and stools, 
and dusty books--into little smoky churchyards in odd lanes and by-
ways, with soldiers lying down among the tombs, or lounging under 
the shade of the one old tree, and their pile of muskets sparkling 
in the light--on solitary sentries pacing up and down in 
courtyards, silent now, but yesterday resounding with the din and 
hum of business--everywhere on guard-rooms, garrisons, and 
threatening preparations.

As the day crept on, still more unusual sights were witnessed in 
the streets.  The gates of the King's Bench and Fleet Prisons 
being opened at the usual hour, were found to have notices affixed 
to them, announcing that the rioters would come that night to burn 
them down.  The wardens, too well knowing the likelihood there was 
of this promise being fulfilled, were fain to set their prisoners 
at liberty, and give them leave to move their goods; so, all day, 
such of them as had any furniture were occupied in conveying it, 
some to this place, some to that, and not a few to the brokers' 
shops, where they gladly sold it, for any wretched price those 
gentry chose to give.  There were some broken men among these 
debtors who had been in jail so long, and were so miserable and 
destitute of friends, so dead to the world, and utterly forgotten 
and uncared for, that they implored their jailers not to set them 
free, and to send them, if need were, to some other place of 
custody.  But they, refusing to comply, lest they should incur the 
anger of the mob, turned them into the streets, where they wandered 
up and down hardly remembering the ways untrodden by their feet so 
long, and crying--such abject things those rotten-hearted jails had 
made them--as they slunk off in their rags, and dragged their 
slipshod feet along the pavement.

Even of the three hundred prisoners who had escaped from Newgate, 
there were some--a few, but there were some--who sought their 
jailers out and delivered themselves up: preferring imprisonment 
and punishment to the horrors of such another night as the last.  
Many of the convicts, drawn back to their old place of captivity by 
some indescribable attraction, or by a desire to exult over it in 
its downfall and glut their revenge by seeing it in ashes, actually 
went back in broad noon, and loitered about the cells.  Fifty were 
retaken at one time on this next day, within the prison walls; but 
their fate did not deter others, for there they went in spite of 
everything, and there they were taken in twos and threes, twice or 
thrice a day, all through the week.  Of the fifty just mentioned, 
some were occupied in endeavouring to rekindle the fire; but in 
general they seemed to have no object in view but to prowl and 
lounge about the old place: being often found asleep in the ruins, 
or sitting talking there, or even eating and drinking, as in a 
choice retreat.

Besides the notices on the gates of the Fleet and the King's Bench, 
many similar announcements were left, before one o'clock at noon, 
at the houses of private individuals; and further, the mob 
proclaimed their intention of seizing on the Bank, the Mint, the 
Arsenal at Woolwich, and the Royal Palaces.  The notices were 
seldom delivered by more than one man, who, if it were at a shop, 
went in, and laid it, with a bloody threat perhaps, upon the 
counter; or if it were at a private house, knocked at the door, and 
thrust it in the servant's hand.  Notwithstanding the presence of 
the military in every quarter of the town, and the great force in 
the Park, these messengers did their errands with impunity all 
through the day.  So did two boys who went down Holborn alone, 
armed with bars taken from the railings of Lord Mansfield's house, 
and demanded money for the rioters.  So did a tall man on horseback 
who made a collection for the same purpose in Fleet Street, and 
refused to take anything but gold.

A rumour had now got into circulation, too, which diffused a 
greater dread all through London, even than these publicly 
announced intentions of the rioters, though all men knew that if 
they were successfully effected, there must ensue a national 
bankruptcy and general ruin.  It was said that they meant to throw 
the gates of Bedlam open, and let all the madmen loose.  This 
suggested such dreadful images to the people's minds, and was 
indeed an act so fraught with new and unimaginable horrors in the 
contemplation, that it beset them more than any loss or cruelty of 
which they could foresee the worst, and drove many sane men nearly 
mad themselves.

So the day passed on: the prisoners moving their goods; people 
running to and fro in the streets, carrying away their property; 
groups standing in silence round the ruins; all business suspended; 
and the soldiers disposed as has been already mentioned, remaining 
quite inactive.  So the day passed on, and dreaded night drew near 
again.

At last, at seven o'clock in the evening, the Privy Council issued 
a solemn proclamation that it was now necessary to employ the 
military, and that the officers had most direct and effectual 
orders, by an immediate exertion of their utmost force, to repress 
the disturbances; and warning all good subjects of the King to keep 
themselves, their servants, and apprentices, within doors that 
night.  There was then delivered out to every soldier on duty, 
thirty-six rounds of powder and ball; the drums beat; and the whole 
force was under arms at sunset.

The City authorities, stimulated by these vigorous measures, held a 
Common Council; passed a vote thanking the military associations 
who had tendered their aid to the civil authorities; accepted it; 
and placed them under the direction of the two sheriffs.  At the 
Queen's palace, a double guard, the yeomen on duty, the groom-
porters, and all other attendants, were stationed in the passages 
and on the staircases at seven o'clock, with strict instructions to 
be watchful on their posts all night; and all the doors were 
locked.  The gentlemen of the Temple, and the other Inns, mounted 
guard within their gates, and strengthened them with the great 
stones of the pavement, which they took up for the purpose.  In 
Lincoln's Inn, they gave up the hall and commons to the 
Northumberland Militia, under the command of Lord Algernon Percy; 
in some few of the city wards, the burgesses turned out, and 
without making a very fierce show, looked brave enough.  Some 
hundreds of stout gentlemen threw themselves, armed to the teeth, 
into the halls of the different companies, double-locked and bolted 
all the gates, and dared the rioters (among themselves) to come on 
at their peril.  These arrangements being all made simultaneously, 
or nearly so, were completed by the time it got dark; and then the 
streets were comparatively clear, and were guarded at all the great 
corners and chief avenues by the troops: while parties of the 
officers rode up and down in all directions, ordering chance 
stragglers home, and admonishing the residents to keep within their 
houses, and, if any firing ensued, not to approach the windows.  
More chains were drawn across such of the thoroughfares as were of 
a nature to favour the approach of a great crowd, and at each of 
these points a considerable force was stationed.  All these 
precautions having been taken, and it being now quite dark, those 
in command awaited the result in some anxiety: and not without a 
hope that such vigilant demonstrations might of themselves 
dishearten the populace, and prevent any new outrages.

But in this reckoning they were cruelly mistaken, for in half an 
hour, or less, as though the setting in of night had been their 
preconcerted signal, the rioters having previously, in small 
parties, prevented the lighting of the street lamps, rose like a 
great sea; and that in so many places at once, and with such 
inconceivable fury, that those who had the direction of the troops 
knew not, at first, where to turn or what to do.  One after 
another, new fires blazed up in every quarter of the town, as 
though it were the intention of the insurgents to wrap the city in 
a circle of flames, which, contracting by degrees, should burn the 
whole to ashes; the crowd swarmed and roared in every street; and 
none but rioters and soldiers being out of doors, it seemed to the 
latter as if all London were arrayed against them, and they stood 
alone against the town.

In two hours, six-and-thirty fires were raging--six-and-thirty 
great conflagrations: among them the Borough Clink in Tooley 
Street, the King's Bench, the Fleet, and the New Bridewell.  In 
almost every street, there was a battle; and in every quarter the 
muskets of the troops were heard above the shouts and tumult of the 
mob.  The firing began in the Poultry, where the chain was drawn 
across the road, where nearly a score of people were killed on the 
first discharge.  Their bodies having been hastily carried into St 
Mildred's Church by the soldiers, the latter fired again, and 
following fast upon the crowd, who began to give way when they saw 
the execution that was done, formed across Cheapside, and charged 
them at the point of the bayonet.

The streets were now a dreadful spectacle.  The shouts of the 
rabble, the shrieks of women, the cries of the wounded, and the 
constant firing, formed a deafening and an awful accompaniment to 
the sights which every corner presented.  Wherever the road was 
obstructed by the chains, there the fighting and the loss of life 
were greatest; but there was hot work and bloodshed in almost every 
leading thoroughfare.

At Holborn Bridge, and on Holborn Hill, the confusion was greater 
than in any other part; for the crowd that poured out of the city 
in two great streams, one by Ludgate Hill, and one by Newgate 
Street, united at that spot, and formed a mass so dense, that at 
every volley the people seemed to fall in heaps.  At this place a 
large detachment of soldiery were posted, who fired, now up Fleet 
Market, now up Holborn, now up Snow Hill--constantly raking the 
streets in each direction.  At this place too, several large fires 
were burning, so that all the terrors of that terrible night seemed 
to be concentrated in one spot.

Full twenty times, the rioters, headed by one man who wielded an 
axe in his right hand, and bestrode a brewer's horse of great size 
and strength, caparisoned with fetters taken out of Newgate, which 
clanked and jingled as he went, made an attempt to force a passage 
at this point, and fire the vintner's house.  Full twenty times 
they were repulsed with loss of life, and still came back again; 
and though the fellow at their head was marked and singled out by 
all, and was a conspicuous object as the only rioter on horseback, 
not a man could hit him.  So surely as the smoke cleared away, so 
surely there was he; calling hoarsely to his companions, 
brandishing his axe above his head, and dashing on as though he 
bore a charmed life, and was proof against ball and powder.

This man was Hugh; and in every part of the riot, he was seen.  He 
headed two attacks upon the Bank, helped to break open the Toll-
houses on Blackfriars Bridge, and cast the money into the street: 
fired two of the prisons with his own hand: was here, and there, 
and everywhere--always foremost--always active--striking at the 
soldiers, cheering on the crowd, making his horse's iron music 
heard through all the yell and uproar: but never hurt or stopped.  
Turn him at one place, and he made a new struggle in anotlter; 
force him to retreat at this point, and he advanced on that, 
directly.  Driven from Holborn for the twentieth time, he rode at 
the head of a great crowd straight upon Saint Paul's, attacked a 
guard of soldiers who kept watch over a body of prisoners within 
the iron railings, forced them to retreat, rescued the men they had 
in custody, and with this accession to his party, came back again, 
mad with liquor and excitement, and hallooing them on like a 
demon.

It would have been no easy task for the most careful rider to sit a 
horse in the midst of such a throng and tumult; but though this 
madman rolled upon his back (he had no saddle) like a boat upon the 
sea, he never for an instant lost his seat, or failed to guide him 
where he would.  Through the very thickest of the press, over dead 
bodies and burning fragments, now on the pavement, now in the road, 
now riding up a flight of steps to make himself the more 
conspicuous to his party, and now forcing a passage through a mass 
of human beings, so closely squeezed together that it seemed as if 
the edge of a knife would scarcely part them,--on he went, as 
though he could surmount all obstacles by the mere exercise of his 
will.  And perhaps his not being shot was in some degree 
attributable to this very circumstance; for his extreme audacity, 
and the conviction that he must be one of those to whom the 
proclamation referred, inspired the soldiers with a desire to take 
him alive, and diverted many an aim which otherwise might have been 
more near the mark.

The vintner and Mr Haredale, unable to sit quietly listening to the 
noise without seeing what went on, had climbed to the roof of the 
house, and hiding behind a stack of chimneys, were looking 
cautiously down into the street, almost hoping that after so many 
repulses the rioters would be foiled, when a great shout proclaimed 
that a parry were coming round the other way; and the dismal 
jingling of those accursed fetters warned them next moment that 
they too were led by Hugh.  The soldiers had advanced into Fleet 
Market and were dispersing the people there; so that they came on 
with hardly any check, and were soon before the house.

'All's over now,' said the vintner.  'Fifty thousand pounds will be 
scattered in a minute.  We must save ourselves.  We can do no 
more, and shall have reason to be thankful if we do as much.'

Their first impulse was, to clamber along the roofs of the houses, 
and, knocking at some garret window for admission, pass down that 
way into the street, and so escape.  But another fierce cry from 
below, and a general upturning of the faces of the crowd, apprised 
them that they were discovered, and even that Mr Haredale was 
recognised; for Hugh, seeing him plainly in the bright glare of 
the fire, which in that part made it as light as day, called to him 
by his name, and swore to have his life.

'Leave me here,' said Mr Haredale, 'and in Heaven's name, my good 
friend, save yourself!  Come on!' he muttered, as he turned towards 
Hugh and faced him without any further effort at concealment: 'This 
roof is high, and if we close, we will die together!'

'Madness,' said the honest vintner, pulling him back, 'sheer 
madness.  Hear reason, sir.  My good sir, hear reason.  I could 
never make myself heard by knocking at a window now; and even if I 
could, no one would be bold enough to connive at my escape.  
Through the cellars, there's a kind of passage into the back street 
by which we roll casks in and out.  We shall have time to get down 
there before they can force an entry.  Do not delay an instant, but 
come with me--for both our sakes--for mine--my dear good sir!'

As he spoke, and drew Mr Haredale back, they had both a glimpse of 
the street.  It was but a glimpse, but it showed them the crowd, 
gathering and clustering round the house: some of the armed men 
pressing to the front to break down the doors and windows, some 
bringing brands from the nearest fire, some with lifted faces 
following their course upon the roof and pointing them out to their 
companions: all raging and roaring like the flames they lighted up.  
They saw some men thirsting for the treasures of strong liquor 
which they knew were stored within; they saw others, who had been 
wounded, sinking down into the opposite doorways and dying, 
solitary wretches, in the midst of all the vast assemblage; here a 
frightened woman trying to escape; and there a lost child; and 
there a drunken ruffian, unconscious of the death-wound on his 
head, raving and fighting to the last.  All these things, and even 
such trivial incidents as a man with his hat off, or turning round, 
or stooping down, or shaking hands with another, they marked 
distinctly; yet in a glance so brief, that, in the act of stepping 
back, they lost the whole, and saw but the pale faces of each 
other, and the red sky above them.

Mr Haredale yielded to the entreaties of his companion--more 
because he was resolved to defend him, than for any thought he had 
of his own life, or any care he entertained for his own safety--and 
quickly re-entering the house, they descended the stairs together.  
Loud blows were thundering on the shutters, crowbars were already 
thrust beneath the door, the glass fell from the sashes, a deep 
light shone through every crevice, and they heard the voices of the 
foremost in the crowd so close to every chink and keyhole, that 
they seemed to be hoarsely whispering their threats into their very 
ears.  They had but a moment reached the bottom of the cellar-steps 
and shut the door behind them, when the mob broke in.

The vaults were profoundly dark, and having no torch or candle--for 
they had been afraid to carry one, lest it should betray their 
place of refuge--they were obliged to grope with their hands.  But 
they were not long without light, for they had not gone far when 
they heard the crowd forcing the door; and, looking back among the 
low-arched passages, could see them in the distance, hurrying to 
and fro with flashing links, broaching the casks, staving the great 
vats, turning off upon the right hand and the left, into the 
different cellars, and lying down to drink at the channels of 
strong spirits which were already flowing on the ground.

They hurried on, not the less quickly for this; and had reached the 
only vault which lay between them and the passage out, when 
suddenly, from the direction in which they were going, a strong 
light gleamed upon their faces; and before they could slip aside, 
or turn back, or hide themselves, two men (one bearing a torch) 
came upon them, and cried in an astonished whisper, 'Here they 
are!'

At the same instant they pulled off what they wore upon their 
heads.  Mr Haredale saw before him Edward Chester, and then saw, 
when the vintner gasped his name, Joe Willet.

Ay, the same Joe, though with an arm the less, who used to make the 
quarterly journey on the grey mare to pay the bill to the purple-
faced vintner; and that very same purple-faced vintner, formerly 
of Thames Street, now looked him in the face, and challenged him by 
name.

'Give me your hand,' said Joe softly, taking it whether the 
astonished vintner would or no.  'Don't fear to shake it; it's a 
friendly one and a hearty one, though it has no fellow.  Why, how 
well you look and how bluff you are!  And you--God bless you, sir.  
Take heart, take heart.  We'll find them.  Be of good cheer; we 
have not been idle.'

There was something so honest and frank in Joe's speech, that Mr 
Haredale put his hand in his involuntarily, though their meeting 
was suspicious enough.  But his glance at Edward Chester, and that 
gentleman's keeping aloof, were not lost upon Joe, who said 
bluntly, glancing at Edward while he spoke:

'Times are changed, Mr Haredale, and times have come when we ought 
to know friends from enemies, and make no confusion of names.  Let 
me tell you that but for this gentleman, you would most likely 
have been dead by this time, or badly wounded at the best.'

'What do you say?' cried Mr Haredale.

'I say,' said Joe, 'first, that it was a bold thing to be in the 
crowd at all disguised as one of them; though I won't say much 
about that, on second thoughts, for that's my case too.  Secondly, 
that it was a brave and glorious action--that's what I call it--to 
strike that fellow off his horse before their eyes!'

'What fellow!  Whose eyes!'

'What fellow, sir!' cried Joe: 'a fellow who has no goodwill to 
you, and who has the daring and devilry in him of twenty fellows.  
I know him of old.  Once in the house, HE would have found you, 
here or anywhere.  The rest owe you no particular grudge, and, 
unless they see you, will only think of drinking themselves dead.  
But we lose time.  Are you ready?'

'Quite,' said Edward.  'Put out the torch, Joe, and go on.  And be 
silent, there's a good fellow.'

'Silent or not silent,' murmured Joe, as he dropped the flaring 
link upon the ground, crushed it with his foot, and gave his hand 
to Mr Haredale, 'it was a brave and glorious action;--no man can 
alter that.'

Both Mr Haredale and the worthy vintner were too amazed and too 
much hurried to ask any further questions, so followed their 
conductors in silence.  It seemed, from a short whispering which 
presently ensued between them and the vintner relative to the best 
way of escape, that they had entered by the back-door, with the 
connivance of John Grueby, who watched outside with the key in his 
pocket, and whom they had taken into their confidence.  A party of 
the crowd coming up that way, just as they entered, John had 
double-locked the door again, and made off for the soldiers, so 
that means of retreat was cut off from under them.

However, as the front-door had been forced, and this minor crowd, 
being anxious to get at the liquor, had no fancy for losing time in 
breaking down another, but had gone round and got in from Holborn 
with the rest, the narrow lane in the rear was quite free of 
people.  So, when they had crawled through the passage indicated by 
the vintner (which was a mere shelving-trap for the admission of 
casks), and had managed with some difficulty to unchain and raise 
the door at the upper end, they emerged into the street without 
being observed or interrupted.  Joe still holding Mr Haredale 
tight, and Edward taking the same care of the vintner, they hurried 
through the streets at a rapid pace; occasionally standing aside to 
let some fugitives go by, or to keep out of the way of the soldiers 
who followed them, and whose questions, when they halted to put 
any, were speedily stopped by one whispered word from Joe.



Chapter 68


While Newgate was burning on the previous night, Barnaby and his 
father, having been passed among the crowd from hand to hand, stood 
in Smithfield, on the outskirts of the mob, gazing at the flames 
like men who had been suddenly roused from sleep.  Some moments 
elapsed before they could distinctly remember where they were, or 
how they got there; or recollected that while they were standing 
idle and listless spectators of the fire, they had tools in their 
hands which had been hurriedly given them that they might free 
themselves from their fetters.

Barnaby, heavily ironed as he was, if he had obeyed his first 
impulse, or if he had been alone, would have made his way back to 
the side of Hugh, who to his clouded intellect now shone forth with 
the new lustre of being his preserver and truest friend.  But his 
father's terror of remaining in the streets, communicated itself to 
him when he comprehended the full extent of his fears, and 
impressed him with the same eagerness to fly to a place of safety.

In a corner of the market among the pens for cattle, Barnaby knelt 
down, and pausing every now and then to pass his hand over his 
father's face, or look up to him with a smile, knocked off his 
irons.  When he had seen him spring, a free man, to his feet, and 
had given vent to the transport of delight which the sight 
awakened, he went to work upon his own, which soon fell rattling 
down upon the ground, and left his limbs unfettered.

Gliding away together when this task was accomplished, and passing 
several groups of men, each gathered round a stooping figure to 
hide him from those who passed, but unable to repress the clanking 
sound of hammers, which told that they too were busy at the same 
work,--the two fugitives made towards Clerkenwell, and passing 
thence to Islington, as the nearest point of egress, were quickly 
in the fields.  After wandering about for a long time, they found 
in a pasture near Finchley a poor shed, with walls of mud, and roof 
of grass and brambles, built for some cowherd, but now deserted.  
Here, they lay down for the rest of the night.

They wandered to and fro when it was day, and once Barnaby went off 
alone to a cluster of little cottages two or three miles away, to 
purchase some bread and milk.  But finding no better shelter, they 
returned to the same place, and lay down again to wait for night.

Heaven alone can tell, with what vague hopes of duty, and 
affection; with what strange promptings of nature, intelligible to 
him as to a man of radiant mind and most enlarged capacity; with 
what dim memories of children he had played with when a child 
himself, who had prattled of their fathers, and of loving them, and 
being loved; with how many half-remembered, dreamy associations of 
his mother's grief and tears and widowhood; he watched and tended 
this man.  But that a vague and shadowy crowd of such ideas came 
slowly on him; that they taught him to be sorry when he looked upon 
his haggard face, that they overflowed his eyes when he stooped to 
kiss him, that they kept him waking in a tearful gladness, shading 
him from the sun, fanning him with leaves, soothing him when he 
started in his sleep--ah! what a troubled sleep it was--and 
wondering when SHE would come to join them and be happy, is the 
truth.  He sat beside him all that day; listening for her footsteps 
in every breath of air, looking for her shadow on the gently-waving 
grass, twining the hedge flowers for her pleasure when she came, 
and his when he awoke; and stooping down from time to time to 
listen to his mutterings, and wonder why he was so restless in that 
quiet place.  The sun went down, and night came on, and he was 
still quite tranquil; busied with these thoughts, as if there were 
no other people in the world, and the dull cloud of smoke hanging 
on the immense city in the distance, hid no vices, no crimes, no 
life or death, or cause of disquiet--nothing but clear air.

But the hour had now come when he must go alone to find out the 
blind man (a task that filled him with delight) and bring him to 
that place; taking especial care that he was not watched or 
followed on his way back.  He listened to the directions he must 
observe, repeated them again and again, and after twice or thrice 
returning to surprise his father with a light-hearted laugh, went 
forth, at last, upon his errand: leaving Grip, whom he had carried 
from the jail in his arms, to his care.

Fleet of foot, and anxious to return, he sped swiftly on towards 
the city, but could not reach it before the fires began, and made 
the night angry with their dismal lustre.  When he entered the 
town--it might be that he was changed by going there without his 
late companions, and on no violent errand; or by the beautiful 
solitude in which he had passed the day, or by the thoughts that 
had come upon him,--but it seemed peopled by a legion of devils.  
This flight and pursuit, this cruel burning and destroying, these 
dreadful cries and stunning noises, were THEY the good lord's noble 
cause!

Though almost stupefied by the bewildering scene, still be found 
the blind man's house.  It was shut up and tenantless.

He waited for a long while, but no one came.  At last he withdrew; 
and as he knew by this time that the soldiers were firing, and many 
people must have been killed, he went down into Holborn, where he 
heard the great crowd was, to try if he could find Hugh, and 
persuade him to avoid the danger, and return with him.

If he had been stunned and shocked before, his horror was 
increased a thousandfold when he got into this vortex of the riot, 
and not being an actor in the terrible spectacle, had it all before 
his eyes.  But there, in the midst, towering above them all, close 
before the house they were attacking now, was Hugh on horseback, 
calling to the rest!

Sickened by the sights surrounding him on every side, and by the 
heat and roar, and crash, he forced his way among the crowd (where 
many recognised him, and with shouts pressed back to let him pass), 
and in time was nearly up with Hugh, who was savagely threatening 
some one, but whom or what he said, he could not, in the great 
confusion, understand.  At that moment the crowd forced their way 
into the house, and Hugh--it was impossible to see by what means, 
in such a concourse--fell headlong down.

Barnaby was beside him when he staggered to his feet.  It was well 
he made him hear his voice, or Hugh, with his uplifted axe, would 
have cleft his skull in twain.

'Barnaby--you!  Whose hand was that, that struck me down?'

'Not mine.'

'Whose!--I say, whose!' he cried, reeling back, and looking wildly 
round.  'What are you doing?  Where is he?  Show me!'

'You are hurt,' said Barnaby--as indeed he was, in the head, both 
by the blow he had received, and by his horse's hoof.  'Come away 
with me.'

As he spoke, he took the horse's bridle in his hand, turned him, 
and dragged Hugh several paces.  This brought them out of the 
crowd, which was pouring from the street into the vintner's 
cellars.

'Where's--where's Dennis?' said Hugh, coming to a stop, and 
checking Barnaby with his strong arm.  'Where has he been all day?  
What did he mean by leaving me as he did, in the jail, last night?  
Tell me, you--d'ye hear!'

With a flourish of his dangerous weapon, he fell down upon the 
ground like a log.  After a minute, though already frantic with 
drinking and with the wound in his head, he crawled to a stream of 
burning spirit which was pouring down the kennel, and began to 
drink at it as if it were a brook of water.

Barnaby drew him away, and forced him to rise.  Though he could 
neither stand nor walk, he involuntarily staggered to his horse, 
climbed upon his back, and clung there.  After vainly attempting to 
divest the animal of his clanking trappings, Barnaby sprung up 
behind him, snatched the bridle, turned into Leather Lane, which 
was close at hand, and urged the frightened horse into a heavy 
trot.

He looked back, once, before he left the street; and looked upon a 
sight not easily to be erased, even from his remembrance, so long 
as he had life.

The vintner's house with a half-a-dozen others near at hand, was 
one great, glowing blaze.  All night, no one had essayed to quench 
the flames, or stop their progress; but now a body of soldiers 
were actively engaged in pulling down two old wooden houses, which 
were every moment in danger of taking fire, and which could 
scarcely fail, if they were left to burn, to extend the 
conflagration immensely.  The tumbling down of nodding walls and 
heavy blocks of wood, the hooting and the execrations of the crowd, 
the distant firing of other military detachments, the distracted 
looks and cries of those whose habitations were in danger, the 
hurrying to and fro of frightened people with their goods; the 
reflections in every quarter of the sky, of deep, red, soaring 
flames, as though the last day had come and the whole universe were 
burning; the dust, and smoke, and drift of fiery particles, 
scorching and kindling all it fell upon; the hot unwholesome 
vapour, the blight on everything; the stars, and moon, and very 
sky, obliterated;--made up such a sum of dreariness and ruin, that 
it seemed as if the face of Heaven were blotted out, and night, in 
its rest and quiet, and softened light, never could look upon the 
earth again.

But there was a worse spectacle than this--worse by far than fire 
and smoke, or even the rabble's unappeasable and maniac rage.  The 
gutters of the street, and every crack and fissure in the stones, 
ran with scorching spirit, which being dammed up by busy hands, 
overflowed the road and pavement, and formed a great pool, into 
which the people dropped down dead by dozens.  They lay in heaps 
all round this fearful pond, husbands and wives, fathers and sons, 
mothers and daughters, women with children in their arms and babies 
at their breasts, and drank until they died.  While some stooped 
with their lips to the brink and never raised their heads again, 
others sprang up from their fiery draught, and danced, half in a 
mad triumph, and half in the agony of suffocation, until they fell, 
and steeped their corpses in the liquor that had killed them.  Nor 
was even this the worst or most appalling kind of death that 
happened on this fatal night.  From the burning cellars, where they 
drank out of hats, pails, buckets, tubs, and shoes, some men were 
drawn, alive, but all alight from head to foot; who, in their 
unendurable anguish and suffering, making for anything that had the 
look of water, rolled, hissing, in this hideous lake, and splashed 
up liquid fire which lapped in all it met with as it ran along the 
surface, and neither spared the living nor the dead.  On this last 
night of the great riots--for the last night it was--the wretched 
victims of a senseless outcry, became themselves the dust and ashes 
of the flames they had kindled, and strewed the public streets of 
London.

With all he saw in this last glance fixed indelibly upon his mind, 
Barnaby hurried from the city which enclosed such horrors; and 
holding down his head that he might not even see the glare of the 
fires upon the quiet landscape, was soon in the still country 
roads.

He stopped at about half-a-mile from the shed where his father 
lay, and with some difficulty making Hugh sensible that he must 
dismount, sunk the horse's furniture in a pool of stagnant water, 
and turned the animal loose.  That done, he supported his companion 
as well as he could, and led him slowly forward.



Chapter 69


It was the dead of night, and very dark, when Barnaby, with his 
stumbling comrade, approached the place where he had left his 
father; but he could see him stealing away into the gloom, 
distrustful even of him, and rapidly retreating.  After calling to 
him twice or thrice that there was nothing to fear, but without 
effect, he suffered Hugh to sink upon the ground, and followed to 
bring him back.

He continued to creep away, until Barnaby was close upon him; then 
turned, and said in a terrible, though suppressed voice:

'Let me go.  Do not lay hands upon me.  You have told her; and you 
and she together have betrayed me!'

Barnaby looked at him, in silence.

'You have seen your mother!'

'No,' cried Barnaby, eagerly.  'Not for a long time--longer than I 
can tell.  A whole year, I think.  Is she here?'

His father looked upon him steadfastly for a few moments, and then 
said--drawing nearer to him as he spoke, for, seeing his face, and 
hearing his words, it was impossible to doubt his truth:

'What man is that?'

'Hugh--Hugh.  Only Hugh.  You know him.  HE will not harm you.  
Why, you're afraid of Hugh!  Ha ha ha!  Afraid of gruff, old, noisy 
Hugh!'

'What man is he, I ask you,' he rejoined so fiercely, that Barnaby 
stopped in his laugh, and shrinking back, surveyed him with a look 
of terrified amazement.

'Why, how stern you are!  You make me fear you, though you are my 
father.  Why do you speak to me so?'

--'I want,' he answered, putting away the hand which his son, with 
a timid desire to propitiate him, laid upon his sleeve,--'I want an 
answer, and you give me only jeers and questions.  Who have you 
brought with you to this hiding-place, poor fool; and where is the 
blind man?'

'I don't know where.  His house was close shut.  I waited, but no 
person came; that was no fault of mine.  This is Hugh--brave Hugh, 
who broke into that ugly jail, and set us free.  Aha!  You like him 
now, do you?  You like him now!'

'Why does he lie upon the ground?'

'He has had a fall, and has been drinking.  The fields and trees go 
round, and round, and round with him, and the ground heaves under 
his feet.  You know him?  You remember?  See!'

They had by this time returned to where he lay, and both stooped 
over him to look into his face.

'I recollect the man,' his father murmured.  'Why did you bring him 
here?'

'Because he would have been killed if I had left him over yonder.  
They were firing guns and shedding blood.  Does the sight of blood 
turn you sick, father?  I see it does, by your face.  That's like 
me--What are you looking at?'

'At nothing!' said the murderer softly, as he started back a pace 
or two, and gazed with sunken jaw and staring eyes above his son's 
head.  'At nothing!'

He remained in the same attitude and with the same expression on 
his face for a minute or more; then glanced slowly round as if he 
had lost something; and went shivering back, towards the shed.

'Shall I bring him in, father?' asked Barnaby, who had looked on, 
wondering.

He only answered with a suppressed groan, and lying down upon the 
ground, wrapped his cloak about his head, and shrunk into the 
darkest corner.

Finding that nothing would rouse Hugh now, or make him sensible for 
a moment, Barnaby dragged him along the grass, and laid him on a 
little heap of refuse hay and straw which had been his own bed; 
first having brought some water from a running stream hard by, and 
washed his wound, and laved his hands and face.  Then he lay down 
himself, between the two, to pass the night; and looking at the 
stars, fell fast asleep.

Awakened early in the morning, by the sunshine and the songs of 
birds, and hum of insects, he left them sleeping in the hut, and 
walked into the sweet and pleasant air.  But he felt that on his 
jaded senses, oppressed and burdened with the dreadful scenes of 
last night, and many nights before, all the beauties of opening 
day, which he had so often tasted, and in which he had had such 
deep delight, fell heavily.  He thought of the blithe mornings when 
he and the dogs went bounding on together through the woods and 
fields; and the recollection filled his eyes with tears.  He had no 
consciousness, God help him, of having done wrong, nor had he any 
new perception of the merits of the cause in which he had been 
engaged, or those of the men who advocated it; but he was full of 
cares now, and regrets, and dismal recollections, and wishes (quite 
unknown to him before) that this or that event had never happened, 
and that the sorrow and suffering of so many people had been 
spared.  And now he began to think how happy they would be--his 
father, mother, he, and Hugh--if they rambled away together, and 
lived in some lonely place, where there were none of these 
troubles; and that perhaps the blind man, who had talked so wisely 
about gold, and told him of the great secrets he knew, could teach 
them how to live without being pinched by want.  As this occurred 
to him, he was the more sorry that he had not seen him last night; 
and he was still brooding over this regret, when his father came, 
and touched him on the shoulder.

'Ah!' cried Barnaby, starting from his fit of thoughtfulness.  'Is 
it only you?'

'Who should it be?'

'I almost thought,' he answered, 'it was the blind man.  I must 
have some talk with him, father.'

'And so must I, for without seeing him, I don't know where to fly 
or what to do, and lingering here, is death.  You must go to him 
again, and bring him here.'

'Must I!' cried Barnaby, delighted; 'that's brave, father.  That's 
what I want to do.'

'But you must bring only him, and none other.  And though you wait 
at his door a whole day and night, still you must wait, and not 
come back without him.'

'Don't you fear that,' he cried gaily.  'He shall come, he shall 
come.'

'Trim off these gewgaws,' said his father, plucking the scraps of 
ribbon and the feathers from his hat, 'and over your own dress wear 
my cloak.  Take heed how you go, and they will be too busy in the 
streets to notice you.  Of your coming back you need take no 
account, for he'll manage that, safely.'

'To be sure!' said Barnaby.  'To be sure he will!  A wise man, 
father, and one who can teach us to be rich.  Oh! I know him, I 
know him.'

He was speedily dressed, and as well disguised as he could be.  
With a lighter heart he then set off upon his second journey, 
leaving Hugh, who was still in a drunken stupor, stretched upon the 
ground within the shed, and his father walking to and fro before it.

The murderer, full of anxious thoughts, looked after him, and paced 
up and down, disquieted by every breath of air that whispered among 
the boughs, and by every light shadow thrown by the passing clouds 
upon the daisied ground.  He was anxious for his safe return, and 
yet, though his own life and safety hung upon it, felt a relief 
while he was gone.  In the intense selfishness which the constant 
presence before him of his great crimes, and their consequences 
here and hereafter, engendered, every thought of Barnaby, as his 
son, was swallowed up and lost.  Still, his presence was a torture 
and reproach; in his wild eyes, there were terrible images of that 
guilty night; with his unearthly aspect, and his half-formed mind, 
he seemed to the murderer a creature who had sprung into existence 
from his victim's blood.  He could not bear his look, his voice, 
his touch; and yet he was forced, by his own desperate condition 
and his only hope of cheating the gibbet, to have him by his side, 
and to know that he was inseparable from his single chance of escape.

He walked to and fro, with little rest, all day, revolving these 
things in his mind; and still Hugh lay, unconscious, in the shed.  
At length, when the sun was setting, Barnaby returned, leading the 
blind man, and talking earnestly to him as they came along together.

The murderer advanced to meet them, and bidding his son go on and 
speak to Hugh, who had just then staggered to his feet, took his 
place at the blind man's elbow, and slowly followed, towards the 
shed.

'Why did you send HIM?' said Stagg.  'Don't you know it was the way 
to have him lost, as soon as found?'

'Would you have had me come myself?' returned the other.

'Humph!  Perhaps not.  I was before the jail on Tuesday night, but 
missed you in the crowd.  I was out last night, too.  There was 
good work last night--gay work--profitable work'--he added, 
rattling the money in his pockets.

'Have you--'

--'Seen your good lady?  Yes.'

'Do you mean to tell me more, or not?'

'I'll tell you all,' returned the blind man, with a laugh.  'Excuse 
me--but I love to see you so impatient.  There's energy in it.'

'Does she consent to say the word that may save me?'

'No,' returned the blind man emphatically, as he turned his face 
towards him.  'No.  Thus it is.  She has been at death's door since 
she lost her darling--has been insensible, and I know not what.  I 
tracked her to a hospital, and presented myself (with your leave) 
at her bedside.  Our talk was not a long one, for she was weak, and 
there being people near I was not quite easy.  But I told her all 
that you and I agreed upon, and pointed out the young gentleman's 
position, in strong terms.  She tried to soften me, but that, of 
course (as I told her), was lost time.  She cried and moaned, you 
may be sure; all women do.  Then, of a sudden, she found her voice 
and strength, and said that Heaven would help her and her innocent 
son; and that to Heaven she appealed against us--which she did; in 
really very pretty language, I assure you.  I advised her, as a 
friend, not to count too much on assistance from any such distant 
quarter--recommended her to think of it--told her where I lived--
said I knew she would send to me before noon, next day--and left 
her, either in a faint or shamming.'

When he had concluded this narration, during which he had made 
several pauses, for the convenience of cracking and eating nuts, of 
which he seemed to have a pocketful, the blind man pulled a flask 
from his pocket, took a draught himself, and offered it to his 
companion.

'You won't, won't you?' he said, feeling that he pushed it from 
him.  'Well!  Then the gallant gentleman who's lodging with you, 
will.  Hallo, bully!'

'Death!' said the other, holding him back.  'Will you tell me what 
I am to do!'

'Do!  Nothing easier.  Make a moonlight flitting in two hours' time 
with the young gentleman (he's quite ready to go; I have been 
giving him good advice as we came along), and get as far from 
London as you can.  Let me know where you are, and leave the rest 
to me.  She MUST come round; she can't hold out long; and as to the 
chances of your being retaken in the meanwhile, why it wasn't one 
man who got out of Newgate, but three hundred.  Think of that, for 
your comfort.'

'We must support life.  How?'

'How!' repeated the blind man.  'By eating and drinking.  And how 
get meat and drink, but by paying for it!  Money!' he cried, 
slapping his pocket.  'Is money the word?  Why, the streets have 
been running money.  Devil send that the sport's not over yet, for 
these are jolly times; golden, rare, roaring, scrambling times.  
Hallo, bully!  Hallo!  Hallo!  Drink, bully, drink.  Where are ye 
there!  Hallo!'

With such vociferations, and with a boisterous manner which bespoke 
his perfect abandonment to the general licence and disorder, he 
groped his way towards the shed, where Hugh and Barnaby were 
sitting on the ground.

'Put it about!' he cried, handing his flask to Hugh.  'The kennels 
run with wine and gold.  Guineas and strong water flow from the 
very pumps.  About with it, don't spare it!'

Exhausted, unwashed, unshorn, begrimed with smoke and dust, his 
hair clotted with blood, his voice quite gone, so that he spoke in 
whispers; his skin parched up by fever, his whole body bruised and 
cut, and beaten about, Hugh still took the flask, and raised it to 
his lips.  He was in the act of drinking, when the front of the 
shed was suddenly darkened, and Dennis stood before them.

'No offence, no offence,' said that personage in a conciliatory 
tone, as Hugh stopped in his draught, and eyed him, with no 
pleasant look, from head to foot.  'No offence, brother.  Barnaby 
here too, eh?  How are you, Barnaby?  And two other gentlemen!  
Your humble servant, gentlemen.  No offence to YOU either, I hope.  
Eh, brothers?'

Notwithstanding that he spoke in this very friendly and confident 
manner, he seemed to have considerable hesitation about entering, 
and remained outside the roof.  He was rather better dressed than 
usual: wearing the same suit of threadbare black, it is true, but 
having round his neck an unwholesome-looking cravat of a yellowish 
white; and, on his hands, great leather gloves, such as a gardener 
might wear in following his trade.  His shoes were newly greased, 
and ornamented with a pair of rusty iron buckles; the packthread at 
his knees had been renewed; and where he wanted buttons, he wore 
pins.  Altogether, he had something the look of a tipstaff, or a 
bailiff's follower, desperately faded, but who had a notion of 
keeping up the appearance of a professional character, and making 
the best of the worst means.

'You're very snug here,' said Mr Dennis, pulling out a mouldy 
pocket-handkerchief, which looked like a decomposed halter, and 
wiping his forehead in a nervous manner.

'Not snug enough to prevent your finding us, it seems,' Hugh 
answered, sulkily.

'Why I'll tell you what, brother,' said Dennis, with a friendly 
smile, 'when you don't want me to know which way you're riding, you 
must wear another sort of bells on your horse.  Ah! I know the 
sound of them you wore last night, and have got quick ears for 'em; 
that's the truth.  Well, but how are you, brother?'

He had by this time approached, and now ventured to sit down by him.

'How am I?' answered Hugh.  'Where were you yesterday?  Where did 
you go when you left me in the jail?  Why did you leave me?  And 
what did you mean by rolling your eyes and shaking your fist at me, 
eh?'

'I shake my fist!--at you, brother!' said Dennis, gently checking 
Hugh's uplifted hand, which looked threatening.

'Your stick, then; it's all one.'

'Lord love you, brother, I meant nothing.  You don't understand me 
by half.  I shouldn't wonder now,' he added, in the tone of a 
desponding and an injured man, 'but you thought, because I wanted 
them chaps left in the prison, that I was a going to desert the 
banners?'

Hugh told him, with an oath, that he had thought so.

'Well!' said Mr Dennis, mournfully, 'if you an't enough to make a 
man mistrust his feller-creeturs, I don't know what is.  Desert the 
banners!  Me!  Ned Dennis, as was so christened by his own 
father!--Is this axe your'n, brother?'

Yes, it's mine,' said Hugh, in the same sullen manner as before; 
'it might have hurt you, if you had come in its way once or twice 
last night.  Put it down.'

'Might have hurt me!' said Mr Dennis, still keeping it in his hand, 
and feeling the edge with an air of abstraction.  'Might have hurt 
me! and me exerting myself all the time to the wery best advantage.  
Here's a world!  And you're not a-going to ask me to take a sup out 
of that 'ere bottle, eh?'

Hugh passed it towards him.  As he raised it to his lips, Barnaby 
jumped up, and motioning them to be silent, looked eagerly out.

'What's the matter, Barnaby?' said Dennis, glancing at Hugh and 
dropping the flask, but still holding the axe in his hand.

'Hush!' he answered softly.  'What do I see glittering behind the 
hedge?'

'What!' cried the hangman, raising his voice to its highest pitch, 
and laying hold of him and Hugh.  'Not SOLDIERS, surely!'

That moment, the shed was filled with armed men; and a body of 
horse, galloping into the field, drew up before it.

'There!' said Dennis, who remained untouched among them when they 
had seized their prisoners; 'it's them two young ones, gentlemen, 
that the proclamation puts a price on.  This other's an escaped 
felon.--I'm sorry for it, brother,' he added, in a tone of 
resignation, addressing himself to Hugh; 'but you've brought it on 
yourself; you forced me to do it; you wouldn't respect the 
soundest constitootional principles, you know; you went and 
wiolated the wery framework of society.  I had sooner have given 
away a trifle in charity than done this, I would upon my soul.--If 
you'll keep fast hold on 'em, gentlemen, I think I can make a shift 
to tie 'em better than you can.'

But this operation was postponed for a few moments by a new 
occurrence.  The blind man, whose ears were quicker than most 
people's sight, had been alarmed, before Barnaby, by a rustling in 
the bushes, under cover of which the soldiers had advanced.  He 
retreated instantly--had hidden somewhere for a minute--and 
probably in his confusion mistaking the point at which he had 
emerged, was now seen running across the open meadow.

An officer cried directly that he had helped to plunder a house 
last night.  He was loudly called on, to surrender.  He ran the 
harder, and in a few seconds would have been out of gunshot.  The 
word was given, and the men fired.

There was a breathless pause and a profound silence, during which 
all eyes were fixed upon him.  He had been seen to start at the 
discharge, as if the report had frightened him.  But he neither 
stopped nor slackened his pace in the least, and ran on full forty 
yards further.  Then, without one reel or stagger, or sign of 
faintness, or quivering of any limb, he dropped.

Some of them hurried up to where he lay;--the hangman with them.  
Everything had passed so quickly, that the smoke had not yet 
scattered, but curled slowly off in a little cloud, which seemed 
like the dead man's spirit moving solemnly away.  There were a few 
drops of blood upon the grass--more, when they turned him over--
that was all.

'Look here! Look here!' said the hangman, stooping one knee beside 
the body, and gazing up with a disconsolate face at the officer and 
men.  'Here's a pretty sight!'

'Stand out of the way,' replied the officer.  'Serjeant! see what 
he had about him.'

The man turned his pockets out upon the grass, and counted, besides 
some foreign coins and two rings, five-and-forty guineas in gold.  
These were bundled up in a handkerchief and carried away; the body 
remained there for the present, but six men and the serjeant were 
left to take it to the nearest public-house.

'Now then, if you're going,' said the serjeant, clapping Dennis on 
the back, and pointing after the officer who was walking towards 
the shed.

To which Mr Dennis only replied, 'Don't talk to me!' and then 
repeated what he had said before, namely, 'Here's a pretty sight!'

'It's not one that you care for much, I should think,' observed the 
serjeant coolly.

'Why, who,' said Mr Dennis rising, 'should care for it, if I 
don't?'

'Oh! I didn't know you was so tender-hearted,' said the serjeant.  
'That's all!'

'Tender-hearted!' echoed Dennis.  'Tender-hearted!  Look at this 
man.  Do you call THIS constitootional?  Do you see him shot 
through and through instead of being worked off like a Briton?  
Damme, if I know which party to side with.  You're as bad as the 
other.  What's to become of the country if the military power's to 
go a superseding the ciwilians in this way?  Where's this poor 
feller-creetur's rights as a citizen, that he didn't have ME in 
his last moments!  I was here.  I was willing.  I was ready.  These 
are nice times, brother, to have the dead crying out against us in 
this way, and sleep comfortably in our beds arterwards; wery 
nice!'

Whether he derived any material consolation from binding the 
prisoners, is uncertain; most probably he did.  At all events his 
being summoned to that work, diverted him, for the time, from these 
painful reflections, and gave his thoughts a more congenial 
occupation.

They were not all three carried off together, but in two parties; 
Barnaby and his father, going by one road in the centre of a body 
of foot; and Hugh, fast bound upon a horse, and strongly guarded by 
a troop of cavalry, being taken by another.

They had no opportunity for the least communication, in the short 
interval which preceded their departure; being kept strictly apart.  
Hugh only observed that Barnaby walked with a drooping head among 
his guard, and, without raising his eyes, that he tried to wave 
his fettered hand when he passed.  For himself, he buoyed up his 
courage as he rode along, with the assurance that the mob would 
force his jail wherever it might be, and set him at liberty.  But 
when they got into London, and more especially into Fleet Market, 
lately the stronghold of the rioters, where the military were 
rooting out the last remnant of the crowd, he saw that this hope 
was gone, and felt that he was riding to his death.



Chapter 70


Mr Dennis having despatched this piece of business without any 
personal hurt or inconvenience, and having now retired into the 
tranquil respectability of private life, resolved to solace himself 
with half an hour or so of female society.  With this amiable 
purpose in his mind, he bent his steps towards the house where 
Dolly and Miss Haredale were still confined, and whither Miss Miggs 
had also been removed by order of Mr Simon Tappertit.

As he walked along the streets with his leather gloves clasped 
behind him, and his face indicative of cheerful thought and 
pleasant calculation, Mr Dennis might have been likened unto a 
farmer ruminating among his crops, and enjoying by anticipation the 
bountiful gifts of Providence.  Look where he would, some heap of 
ruins afforded him rich promise of a working off; the whole town 
appeared to have been ploughed and sown, and nurtured by most 
genial weather; and a goodly harvest was at hand.

Having taken up arms and resorted to deeds of violence, with the 
great main object of preserving the Old Bailey in all its purity, 
and the gallows in all its pristine usefulness and moral grandeur, 
it would perhaps be going too far to assert that Mr Dennis had ever 
distinctly contemplated and foreseen this happy state of things.  
He rather looked upon it as one of those beautiful dispensations 
which are inscrutably brought about for the behoof and advantage of 
good men.  He felt, as it were, personally referred to, in this 
prosperous ripening for the gibbet; and had never considered 
himself so much the pet and favourite child of Destiny, or loved 
that lady so well or with such a calm and virtuous reliance, in 
all his life.

As to being taken up, himself, for a rioter, and punished with the 
rest, Mr Dennis dismissed that possibility from his thoughts as an 
idle chimera; arguing that the line of conduct he had adopted at 
Newgate, and the service he had rendered that day, would be more 
than a set-off against any evidence which might identify him as a 
member of the crowd.  That any charge of companionship which might 
be made against him by those who were themselves in danger, would 
certainly go for nought.  And that if any trivial indiscretion on 
his part should unluckily come out, the uncommon usefulness of his 
office, at present, and the great demand for the exercise of its 
functions, would certainly cause it to be winked at, and passed 
over.  In a word, he had played his cards throughout, with great 
care; had changed sides at the very nick of time; had delivered up 
two of the most notorious rioters, and a distinguished felon to 
boot; and was quite at his ease.

Saving--for there is a reservation; and even Mr Dennis was not 
perfectly happy--saving for one circumstance; to wit, the forcible 
detention of Dolly and Miss Haredale, in a house almost adjoining 
his own.  This was a stumbling-block; for if they were discovered 
and released, they could, by the testimony they had it in their 
power to give, place him in a situation of great jeopardy; and to 
set them at liberty, first extorting from them an oath of secrecy 
and silence, was a thing not to be thought of.  It was more, 
perhaps, with an eye to the danger which lurked in this quarter, 
than from his abstract love of conversation with the sex, that the 
hangman, quickening his steps, now hastened into their society, 
cursing the amorous natures of Hugh and Mr Tappertit with great 
heartiness, at every step he took.

When be entered the miserable room in which they were confined, 
Dolly and Miss Haredale withdrew in silence to the remotest corner.  
But Miss Miggs, who was particularly tender of her reputation, 
immediately fell upon her knees and began to scream very loud, 
crying, 'What will become of me!'--'Where is my Simmuns!'--'Have 
mercy, good gentlemen, on my sex's weaknesses!'--with other doleful 
lamentations of that nature, which she delivered with great 
propriety and decorum.

'Miss, miss,' whispered Dennis, beckoning to her with his 
forefinger, 'come here--I won't hurt you.  Come here, my lamb, will 
you?'

On hearing this tender epithet, Miss Miggs, who had left off 
screaming when he opened his lips, and had listened to him 
attentively, began again, crying: 'Oh I'm his lamb!  He says I'm 
his lamb!  Oh gracious, why wasn't I born old and ugly!  Why was I 
ever made to be the youngest of six, and all of 'em dead and in 
their blessed graves, excepting one married sister, which is 
settled in Golden Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, second bell-
handle on the--!'

'Don't I say I an't a-going to hurt you?' said Dennis, pointing to 
a chair.  'Why miss, what's the matter?'

'I don't know what mayn't be the matter!' cried Miss Miggs, 
clasping her hands distractedly.  'Anything may be the matter!'

'But nothing is, I tell you,' said the hangman.  'First stop that 
noise and come and sit down here, will you, chuckey?'

The coaxing tone in which he said these latter words might have 
failed in its object, if he had not accompanied them with sundry 
sharp jerks of his thumb over one shoulder, and with divers winks 
and thrustings of his tongue into his cheek, from which signals the 
damsel gathered that he sought to speak to her apart, concerning 
Miss Haredale and Dolly.  Her curiosity being very powerful, and 
her jealousy by no means inactive, she arose, and with a great deal 
of shivering and starting back, and much muscular action among all 
the small bones in her throat, gradually approached him.

'Sit down,' said the hangman.

Suiting the action to the word, he thrust her rather suddenly and 
prematurely into a chair, and designing to reassure her by a little 
harmless jocularity, such as is adapted to please and fascinate 
the sex, converted his right forefinger into an ideal bradawl or 
gimlet, and made as though he would screw the same into her side--
whereat Miss Miggs shrieked again, and evinced symptoms of 
faintness.

'Lovey, my dear,' whispered Dennis, drawing his chair close to 
hers.  'When was your young man here last, eh?'

'MY young man, good gentleman!' answered Miggs in a tone of 
exquisite distress.

'Ah!  Simmuns, you know--him?' said Dennis.

'Mine indeed!' cried Miggs, with a burst of bitterness--and as she 
said it, she glanced towards Dolly.  'MINE, good gentleman!'

This was just what Mr Dennis wanted, and expected.

'Ah!' he said, looking so soothingly, not to say amorously on 
Miggs, that she sat, as she afterwards remarked, on pins and 
needles of the sharpest Whitechapel kind, not knowing what 
intentions might be suggesting that expression to his features: 
'I was afraid of that.  I saw as much myself.  It's her fault.  She 
WILL entice 'em.'

'I wouldn't,' cried Miggs, folding her hands and looking upwards 
with a kind of devout blankness, 'I wouldn't lay myself out as she 
does; I wouldn't be as bold as her; I wouldn't seem to say to all 
male creeturs "Come and kiss me"'--and here a shudder quite 
convulsed her frame--'for any earthly crowns as might be offered.  
Worlds,' Miggs added solemnly, 'should not reduce me.  No.  Not if 
I was Wenis.'

'Well, but you ARE Wenus, you know,' said Mr Dennis, 
confidentially.

'No, I am not, good gentleman,' answered Miggs, shaking her head 
with an air of self-denial which seemed to imply that she might be 
if she chose, but she hoped she knew better.  'No, I am not, good 
gentleman.  Don't charge me with it.'

Up to this time she had turned round, every now and then, to where 
Dolly and Miss Haredale had retired and uttered a scream, or groan, 
or laid her hand upon her heart and trembled excessively, with a 
view of keeping up appearances, and giving them to understand that 
she conversed with the visitor, under protest and on compulsion, 
and at a great personal sacrifice, for their common good.  But at 
this point, Mr Dennis looked so very full of meaning, and gave such 
a singularly expressive twitch to his face as a request to her to 
come still nearer to him, that she abandoned these little arts, and 
gave him her whole and undivided attention.

'When was Simmuns here, I say?' quoth Dennis, in her ear.

'Not since yesterday morning; and then only for a few minutes.  Not 
all day, the day before.'

'You know he meant all along to carry off that one!' said Dennis, 
indicating Dolly by the slightest possible jerk of his head:--'And 
to hand you over to somebody else.'

Miss Miggs, who had fallen into a terrible state of grief when the 
first part of this sentence was spoken, recovered a little at the 
second, and seemed by the sudden check she put upon her tears, to 
intimate that possibly this arrangement might meet her views; and 
that it might, perhaps, remain an open question.

'--But unfort'nately,' pursued Dennis, who observed this: 'somebody 
else was fond of her too, you see; and even if he wasn't, somebody 
else is took for a rioter, and it's all over with him.'

Miss Miggs relapsed.

'Now I want,' said Dennis, 'to clear this house, and to see you 
righted.  What if I was to get her off, out of the way, eh?'

Miss Miggs, brightening again, rejoined, with many breaks and 
pauses from excess of feeling, that temptations had been Simmuns's 
bane.  That it was not his faults, but hers (meaning Dolly's).  
That men did not see through these dreadful arts as women did, and 
therefore was caged and trapped, as Simmun had been.  That she had 
no personal motives to serve--far from it--on the contrary, her 
intentions was good towards all parties.  But forasmuch as she 
knowed that Simmun, if united to any designing and artful minxes 
(she would name no names, for that was not her dispositions)--to 
ANY designing and artful minxes--must be made miserable and unhappy 
for life, she DID incline towards prewentions.  Such, she added, 
was her free confessions.  But as this was private feelings, and 
might perhaps be looked upon as wengeance, she begged the gentleman 
would say no more.  Whatever he said, wishing to do her duty by all 
mankind, even by them as had ever been her bitterest enemies, she 
would not listen to him.  With that she stopped her ears, and shook 
her head from side to side, to intimate to Mr Dennis that though he 
talked until he had no breath left, she was as deaf as any adder.

'Lookee here, my sugar-stick,' said Mr Dennis, 'if your view's the 
same as mine, and you'll only be quiet and slip away at the right 
time, I can have the house clear to-morrow, and be out of this 
trouble.--Stop though! there's the other.'

'Which other, sir?' asked Miggs--still with her fingers in her ears 
and her head shaking obstinately.

'Why, the tallest one, yonder,' said Dennis, as he stroked his 
chin, and added, in an undertone to himself, something about not 
crossing Muster Gashford.

Miss Miggs replied (still being profoundly deaf) that if Miss 
Haredale stood in the way at all, he might make himself quite easy 
on that score; as she had gathered, from what passed between Hugh 
and Mr Tappertit when they were last there, that she was to be 
removed alone (not by them, but by somebody else), to-morrow night.

Mr Dennis opened his eyes very wide at this piece of information, 
whistled once, considered once, and finally slapped his head once 
and nodded once, as if he had got the clue to this mysterious 
removal, and so dismissed it.  Then he imparted his design 
concerning Dolly to Miss Miggs, who was taken more deaf than 
before, when he began; and so remained, all through.

The notable scheme was this.  Mr Dennis was immediately to seek out 
from among the rioters, some daring young fellow (and he had one in 
his eye, he said), who, terrified by the threats he could hold out 
to him, and alarmed by the capture of so many who were no better 
and no worse than he, would gladly avail himself of any help to get 
abroad, and out of harm's way, with his plunder, even though his 
journey were incumbered by an unwilling companion; indeed, the 
unwilling companion being a beautiful girl, would probably be an 
additional inducement and temptation.  Such a person found, he 
proposed to bring him there on the ensuing night, when the tall one 
was taken off, and Miss Miggs had purposely retired; and then that 
Dolly should be gagged, muffled in a cloak, and carried in any 
handy conveyance down to the river's side; where there were 
abundant means of getting her smuggled snugly off in any small 
craft of doubtful character, and no questions asked.  With regard 
to the expense of this removal, he would say, at a rough 
calculation, that two or three silver tea or coffee-pots, with 
something additional for drink (such as a muffineer, or toast-
rack), would more than cover it.  Articles of plate of every kind 
having been buried by the rioters in several lonely parts of 
London, and particularly, as he knew, in St James's Square, which, 
though easy of access, was little frequented after dark, and had a 
convenient piece of water in the midst, the needful funds were 
close at hand, and could be had upon the shortest notice.  With 
regard to Dolly, the gentleman would exercise his own discretion.  
He would be bound to do nothing but to take her away, and keep her 
away.  All other arrangements and dispositions would rest entirely 
with himself.

If Miss Miggs had had her hearing, no doubt she would have been 
greatly shocked by the indelicacy of a young female's going away 
with a stranger by night (for her moral feelings, as we have said, 
were of the tenderest kind); but directly Mr Dennis ceased to 
speak, she reminded him that he had only wasted breath.  She then 
went on to say (still with her fingers in her ears) that nothing 
less than a severe practical lesson would save the locksmith's 
daughter from utter ruin; and that she felt it, as it were, a moral 
obligation and a sacred duty to the family, to wish that some one 
would devise one for her reformation.  Miss Miggs remarked, and 
very justly, as an abstract sentiment which happened to occur to 
her at the moment, that she dared to say the locksmith and his wife 
would murmur, and repine, if they were ever, by forcible abduction, 
or otherwise, to lose their child; but that we seldom knew, in this 
world, what was best for us: such being our sinful and imperfect 
natures, that very few arrived at that clear understanding.

Having brought their conversation to this satisfactory end, they 
parted: Dennis, to pursue his design, and take another walk about 
his farm; Miss Miggs, to launch, when he left her, into such a 
burst of mental anguish (which she gave them to understand was 
occasioned by certain tender things he had had the presumption and 
audacity to say), that little Dolly's heart was quite melted.  
Indeed, she said and did so much to soothe the outraged feelings of 
Miss Miggs, and looked so beautiful while doing so, that if that 
young maid had not had ample vent for her surpassing spite, in a 
knowledge of the mischief that was brewing, she must have scratched 
her features, on the spot.



Chapter 71


All next day, Emma Haredale, Dolly, and Miggs, remained cooped up 
together in what had now been their prison for so many days, 
without seeing any person, or hearing any sound but the murmured 
conversation, in an outer room, of the men who kept watch over 
them.  There appeared to be more of these fellows than there had 
been hitherto; and they could no longer hear the voices of women, 
which they had before plainly distinguished.  Some new excitement, 
too, seemed to prevail among them; for there was much stealthy 
going in and out, and a constant questioning of those who were 
newly arrived.  They had previously been quite reckless in their 
behaviour; often making a great uproar; quarrelling among 
themselves, fighting, dancing, and singing.  They were now very 
subdued and silent, conversing almost in whispers, and stealing in 
and out with a soft and stealthy tread, very different from the 
boisterous trampling in which their arrivals and departures had 
hitherto been announced to the trembling captives.

Whether this change was occasioned by the presence among them of 
some person of authority in their ranks, or by any other cause, 
they were unable to decide.  Sometimes they thought it was in part 
attributable to there being a sick man in the chamber, for last 
night there had been a shuffling of feet, as though a burden were 
brought in, and afterwards a moaning noise.  But they had no means 
of ascertaining the truth: for any question or entreaty on their 
parts only provoked a storm of execrations, or something worse; and 
they were too happy to be left alone, unassailed by threats or 
admiration, to risk even that comfort, by any voluntary 
communication with those who held them in durance.

It was sufficiently evident, both to Emma and to the locksmith's 
poor little daughter herself, that she, Dolly, was the great 
object of attraction; and that so soon as they should have leisure 
to indulge in the softer passion, Hugh and Mr Tappertit would 
certainly fall to blows for her sake; in which latter case, it was 
not very difficult to see whose prize she would become.  With all 
her old horror of that man revived, and deepened into a degree of 
aversion and abhorrence which no language can describe; with a 
thousand old recollections and regrets, and causes of distress, 
anxiety, and fear, besetting her on all sides; poor Dolly Varden--
sweet, blooming, buxom Dolly--began to hang her head, and fade, and 
droop, like a beautiful flower.  The colour fled from her cheeks, 
her courage forsook her, her gentle heart failed.  Unmindful of all 
her provoking caprices, forgetful of all her conquests and 
inconstancy, with all her winning little vanities quite gone, she 
nestled all the livelong day in Emma Haredale's bosom; and, 
sometimes calling on her dear old grey-haired father, sometimes on 
her mother, and sometimes even on her old home, pined slowly away, 
like a poor bird in its cage.

Light hearts, light hearts, that float so gaily on a smooth stream, 
that are so sparkling and buoyant in the sunshine--down upon fruit, 
bloom upon flowers, blush in summer air, life of the winged insect, 
whose whole existence is a day--how soon ye sink in troubled water!  
Poor Dolly's heart--a little, gentle, idle, fickle thing; giddy, 
restless, fluttering; constant to nothing but bright looks, and 
smiles and laughter--Dolly's heart was breaking.

Emma had known grief, and could bear it better.  She had little 
comfort to impart, but she could soothe and tend her, and she did 
so; and Dolly clung to her like a child to its nurse.  In 
endeavouring to inspire her with some fortitude, she increased her 
own; and though the nights were long, and the days dismal, and she 
felt the wasting influence of watching and fatigue, and had 
perhaps a more defined and clear perception of their destitute 
condition and its worst dangers, she uttered no complaint.  Before 
the ruffians, in whose power they were, she bore herself so 
calmly, and with such an appearance, in the midst of all her 
terror, of a secret conviction that they dared not harm her, that 
there was not a man among them but held her in some degree of 
dread; and more than one believed she had a weapon hidden in her 
dress, and was prepared to use it.

Such was their condition when they were joined by Miss Miggs, who 
gave them to understand that she too had been taken prisoner 
because of her charms, and detailed such feats of resistance she 
had performed (her virtue having given her supernatural strength), 
that they felt it quite a happiness to have her for a champion.  
Nor was this the only comfort they derived at first from Miggs's 
presence and society: for that young lady displayed such 
resignation and long-suffering, and so much meek endurance, under 
her trials, and breathed in all her chaste discourse a spirit of 
such holy confidence and resignation, and devout belief that all 
would happen for the best, that Emma felt her courage strengthened 
by the bright example; never doubting but that everything she said 
was true, and that she, like them, was torn from all she loved, and 
agonised by doubt and apprehension.  As to poor Dolly, she was 
roused, at first, by seeing one who came from home; but when she 
heard under what circumstances she had left it, and into whose 
hands her father had fallen, she wept more bitterly than ever, and 
refused all comfort.

Miss Miggs was at some trouble to reprove her for this state of 
mind, and to entreat her to take example by herself, who, she 
said, was now receiving back, with interest, tenfold the amount of 
her subscriptions to the red-brick dwelling-house, in the articles 
of peace of mind and a quiet conscience.  And, while on serious 
topics, Miss Miggs considered it her duty to try her hand at the 
conversion of Miss Haredale; for whose improvement she launched 
into a polemical address of some length, in the course whereof, 
she likened herself unto a chosen missionary, and that young lady 
to a cannibal in darkness.  Indeed, she returned so often to these 
sublects, and so frequently called upon them to take a lesson from 
her,--at the same time vaunting and, as it were, rioting in, her 
huge unworthiness, and abundant excess of sin,--that, in the course 
of a short time, she became, in that small chamber, rather a 
nuisance than a comfort, and rendered them, if possible, even more 
unhappy than they had been before.

The night had now come; and for the first time (for their jailers 
had been regular in bringing food and candles), they were left in 
darkness.  Any change in their condition in such a place inspired 
new fears; and when some hours had passed, and the gloom was still 
unbroken, Emma could no longer repress her alarm.

They listened attentively.  There was the same murmuring in the 
outer room, and now and then a moan which seemed to be wrung from a 
person in great pain, who made an effort to subdue it, but could 
not.  Even these men seemed to be in darkness too; for no light 
shone through the chinks in the door, nor were they moving, as 
their custom was, but quite still: the silence being unbroken by 
so much as the creaking of a board.

At first, Miss Miggs wondered greatly in her own mind who this sick 
person might be; but arriving, on second thoughts, at the 
conclusion that he was a part of the schemes on foot, and an artful 
device soon to be employed with great success, she opined, for Miss 
Haredale's comfort, that it must be some misguided Papist who had 
been wounded: and this happy supposition encouraged her to say, 
under her breath, 'Ally Looyer!' several times.

'Is it possible,' said Emma, with some indignation, 'that you who 
have seen these men committing the outrages you have told us of, 
and who have fallen into their hands, like us, can exult in their 
cruelties!'

'Personal considerations, miss,' rejoined Miggs, 'sinks into 
nothing, afore a noble cause.  Ally Looyer!  Ally Looyer!  Ally 
Looyer, good gentlemen!'

It seemed from the shrill pertinacity with which Miss Miggs 
repeated this form of acclamation, that she was calling the same 
through the keyhole of the door; but in the profound darkness she 
could not be seen.

'If the time has come--Heaven knows it may come at any moment--when 
they are bent on prosecuting the designs, whatever they may be, 
with which they have brought us here, can you still encourage, and 
take part with them?' demanded Emma.

'I thank my goodness-gracious-blessed-stars I can, miss,' returned 
Miggs, with increased energy.--'Ally Looyer, good gentlemen!'

Even Dolly, cast down and disappointed as she was, revived at this, 
and bade Miggs hold her tongue directly.

'WHICH, was you pleased to observe, Miss Varden?' said Miggs, with 
a strong emphasis on the irrelative pronoun.

Dolly repeated her request.

'Ho, gracious me!' cried Miggs, with hysterical derision.  'Ho, 
gracious me!  Yes, to be sure I will.  Ho yes!  I am a abject 
slave, and a toiling, moiling, constant-working, always-being-
found-fault-with, never-giving-satisfactions, nor-having-no-
time-to-clean-oneself, potter's wessel--an't I, miss!  Ho yes!  My 
situations is lowly, and my capacities is limited, and my duties is 
to humble myself afore the base degenerating daughters of their 
blessed mothers as is--fit to keep companies with holy saints but 
is born to persecutions from wicked relations--and to demean myself 
before them as is no better than Infidels--an't it, miss!  Ho yes!  
My only becoming occupations is to help young flaunting pagins to 
brush and comb and titiwate theirselves into whitening and 
suppulchres, and leave the young men to think that there an't a bit 
of padding in it nor no pinching ins nor fillings out nor pomatums 
nor deceits nor earthly wanities--an't it, miss!  Yes, to be sure 
it is--ho yes!'

Having delivered these ironical passages with a most wonderful 
volubility, and with a shrillness perfectly deafening (especially 
when she jerked out the interjections), Miss Miggs, from mere 
habit, and not because weeping was at all appropriate to the 
occasion, which was one of triumph, concluded by bursting into a 
flood of tears, and calling in an impassioned manner on the name of 
Simmuns.

What Emma Haredale and Dolly would have done, or how long Miss 
Miggs, now that she had hoisted her true colours, would have gone 
on waving them before their astonished senses, it is impossible to 
tell.  Nor is it necessary to speculate on these matters, for a 
startling interruption occurred at that moment, which took their 
whole attention by storm.

This was a violent knocking at the door of the house, and then its 
sudden bursting open; which was immediately succeeded by a scuffle 
in the room without, and the clash of weapons.  Transported with 
the hope that rescue had at length arrived, Emma and Dolly shrieked 
aloud for help; nor were their shrieks unanswered; for after a 
hurried interval, a man, bearing in one hand a drawn sword, and in 
the other a taper, rushed into the chamber where they were confined.

It was some check upon their transport to find in this person an 
entire stranger, but they appealed to him, nevertheless, and 
besought him, in impassioned language, to restore them to their 
friends.

'For what other purpose am I here?' he answered, closing the door, 
and standing with his back against it.  'With what object have I 
made my way to this place, through difficulty and danger, but to 
preserve you?'

With a joy for which it was impossible to find adequate expression, 
they embraced each other, and thanked Heaven for this most timely 
aid.  Their deliverer stepped forward for a moment to put the light 
upon the table, and immediately returning to his former position 
against the door, bared his head, and looked on smilingly.

'You have news of my uncle, sir?' said Emma, turning hastily 
towards him.

'And of my father and mother?' added Dolly.

'Yes,' he said.  'Good news.'

'They are alive and unhurt?' they both cried at once.

'Yes, and unhurt,' he rejoined.

'And close at hand?'

'I did not say close at hand,' he answered smoothly; 'they are at 
no great distance.  YOUR friends, sweet one,' he added, addressing 
Dolly, 'are within a few hours' journey.  You will be restored to 
them, I hope, to-night.'

'My uncle, sir--' faltered Emma.

'Your uncle, dear Miss Haredale, happily--I say happily, because he 
has succeeded where many of our creed have failed, and is safe--has 
crossed the sea, and is out of Britain.'

'I thank God for it,' said Emma, faintly.

'You say well.  You have reason to be thankful: greater reason 
than it is possible for you, who have seen but one night of these 
cruel outrages, to imagine.'

'Does he desire,' said Emma, 'that I should follow him?'

'Do you ask if he desires it?' cried the stranger in surprise.  'IF 
he desires it!  But you do not know the danger of remaining in 
England, the difficulty of escape, or the price hundreds would pay 
to secure the means, when you make that inquiry.  Pardon me.  I had 
forgotten that you could not, being prisoner here.'

'I gather, sir,' said Emma, after a moment's pause, 'from what you 
hint at, but fear to tell me, that I have witnessed but the 
beginning, and the least, of the violence to which we are exposed, 
and that it has not yet slackened in its fury?'

He shrugged his shoulders, shook his head, lifted up his hands; and 
with the same smooth smile, which was not a pleasant one to see, 
cast his eyes upon the ground, and remained silent.

'You may venture, sir, to speak plain,' said Emma, 'and to tell me 
the worst.  We have undergone some preparation for it.'

But here Dolly interposed, and entreated her not to hear the worst, 
but the best; and besought the gentleman to tell them the best, and 
to keep the remainder of his news until they were safe among their 
friends again.

'It is told in three words,' he said, glancing at the locksmith's 
daughter with a look of some displeasure.  'The people have risen, 
to a man, against us; the streets are filled with soldiers, who 
support them and do their bidding.  We have no protection but from 
above, and no safety but in flight; and that is a poor resource; 
for we are watched on every hand, and detained here, both by force 
and fraud.  Miss Haredale, I cannot bear--believe me, that I cannot 
bear--by speaking of myself, or what I have done, or am prepared 
to do, to seem to vaunt my services before you.  But, having 
powerful Protestant connections, and having my whole wealth 
embarked with theirs in shipping and commerce, I happily possessed 
the means of saving your uncle.  I have the means of saving you; 
and in redemption of my sacred promise, made to him, I am here; 
pledged not to leave you until I have placed you in his arms.  The 
treachery or penitence of one of the men about you, led to the 
discovery of your place of confinement; and that I have forced my 
way here, sword in hand, you see.'

'You bring,' said Emma, faltering, 'some note or token from my 
uncle?'

'No, he doesn't,' cried Dolly, pointing at him earnestly; 'now I am 
sure he doesn't.  Don't go with him for the world!'

'Hush, pretty fool--be silent,' he replied, frowning angrily upon 
her.  'No, Miss Haredale, I have no letter, nor any token of any 
kind; for while I sympathise with you, and such as you, on whom 
misfortune so heavy and so undeserved has fallen, I value my life.  
I carry, therefore, no writing which, found upon me, would lead to 
its certain loss.  I never thought of bringing any other token, nor 
did Mr Haredale think of entrusting me with one--possibly because 
he had good experience of my faith and honesty, and owed his life 
to me.'

There was a reproof conveyed in these words, which to a nature like 
Emma Haredale's, was well addressed.  But Dolly, who was 
differently constituted, was by no means touched by it, and still 
conjured her, in all the terms of affection and attachment she 
could think of, not to be lured away.

'Time presses,' said their visitor, who, although he sought to 
express the deepest interest, had something cold and even in his 
speech, that grated on the ear; 'and danger surrounds us.  If I 
have exposed myself to it, in vain, let it be so; but if you and he 
should ever meet again, do me justice.  If you decide to remain (as 
I think you do), remember, Miss Haredale, that I left you with a 
solemn caution, and acquitting myself of all the consequences to 
which you expose yourself.'

'Stay, sir!' cried Emma--one moment, I beg you.  Cannot we--and she 
drew Dolly closer to her--'cannot we go together?'

'The task of conveying one female in safety through such scenes as 
we must encounter, to say nothing of attracting the attention of 
those who crowd the streets,' he answered, 'is enough.  I have said 
that she will be restored to her friends to-night.  If you accept 
the service I tender, Miss Haredale, she shall be instantly placed 
in safe conduct, and that promise redeemed.  Do you decide to 
remain?  People of all ranks and creeds are flying from the town, 
which is sacked from end to end.  Let me be of use in some 
quarter.  Do you stay, or go?'

'Dolly,' said Emma, in a hurried manner, 'my dear girl, this is our 
last hope.  If we part now, it is only that we may meet again in 
happiness and honour.  I will trust to this gentleman.'

'No no-no!' cried Dolly, clinging to her.  'Pray, pray, do not!'

'You hear,' said Emma, 'that to-night--only to-night--within a few 
hours--think of that!--you will be among those who would die of 
grief to lose you, and who are now plunged in the deepest misery 
for your sake.  Pray for me, dear girl, as I will for you; and 
never forget the many quiet hours we have passed together.  Say 
one "God bless you!"  Say that at parting!'

But Dolly could say nothing; no, not when Emma kissed her cheek a 
hundred times, and covered it with tears, could she do more than 
hang upon her neck, and sob, and clasp, and hold her tight.

'We have time for no more of this,' cried the man, unclenching her 
hands, and pushing her roughly off, as he drew Emma Haredale 
towards the door: 'Now!  Quick, outside there! are you ready?'

'Ay!' cried a loud voice, which made him start.  'Quite ready!  
Stand back here, for your lives!'

And in an instant he was felled like an ox in the butcher's 
shambles--struck down as though a block of marble had fallen from 
the roof and crushed him--and cheerful light, and beaming faces 
came pouring in--and Emma was clasped in her uncle's embrace, and 
Dolly, with a shriek that pierced the air, fell into the arms of 
her father and mother.

What fainting there was, what laughing, what crying, what sobbing, 
what smiling, how much questioning, no answering, all talking 
together, all beside themselves with joy; what kissing, 
congratulating, embracing, shaking of hands, and falling into all 
these raptures, over and over and over again; no language can 
describe.

At length, and after a long time, the old locksmith went up and 
fairly hugged two strangers, who had stood apart and left them to 
themselves; and then they saw--whom?  Yes, Edward Chester and 
Joseph Willet.

'See here!' cried the locksmith.  'See here! where would any of us 
have been without these two?  Oh, Mr Edward, Mr Edward--oh, Joe, 
Joe, how light, and yet how full, you have made my old heart to-
night!'

'It was Mr Edward that knocked him down, sir,' said Joe: 'I longed 
to do it, but I gave it up to him.  Come, you brave and honest 
gentleman!  Get your senses together, for you haven't long to lie 
here.'

He had his foot upon the breast of their sham deliverer, in the 
absence of a spare arm; and gave him a gentle roll as he spoke.  
Gashford, for it was no other, crouching yet malignant, raised his 
scowling face, like sin subdued, and pleaded to be gently used.

'I have access to all my lord's papers, Mr Haredale,' he said, in a 
submissive voice: Mr Haredale keeping his back towards him, and not 
once looking round: 'there are very important documents among them.  
There are a great many in secret drawers, and distributed in 
various places, known only to my lord and me.  I can give some very 
valuable information, and render important assistance to any 
inquiry.  You will have to answer it, if I receive ill usage.

'Pah!' cried Joe, in deep disgust.  'Get up, man; you're waited 
for, outside.  Get up, do you hear?'

Gashford slowly rose; and picking up his hat, and looking with a 
baffled malevolence, yet with an air of despicable humility, all 
round the room, crawled out.

'And now, gentlemen,' said Joe, who seemed to be the spokesman of 
the party, for all the rest were silent; 'the sooner we get back 
to the Black Lion, the better, perhaps.'

Mr Haredale nodded assent, and drawing his niece's arm through his, 
and taking one of her hands between his own, passed out 
straightway; followed by the locksmith, Mrs Varden, and Dolly--who 
would scarcely have presented a sufficient surface for all the hugs 
and caresses they bestowed upon her though she had been a dozen 
Dollys.  Edward Chester and Joe followed.

And did Dolly never once look behind--not once?  Was there not one 
little fleeting glimpse of the dark eyelash, almost resting on her 
flushed cheek, and of the downcast sparkling eye it shaded?  Joe 
thought there was--and he is not likely to have been mistaken; for 
there were not many eyes like Dolly's, that's the truth.

The outer room through which they had to pass, was full of men; 
among them, Mr Dennis in safe keeping; and there, had been since 
yesterday, lying in hiding behind a wooden screen which was now 
thrown down, Simon Tappertit, the recreant 'prentice, burnt and 
bruised, and with a gun-shot wound in his body; and his legs--his 
perfect legs, the pride and glory of his life, the comfort of his 
existence--crushed into shapeless ugliness.  Wondering no longer at 
the moans they had heard, Dolly kept closer to her father, and 
shuddered at the sight; but neither bruises, burns, nor gun-shot 
wound, nor all the torture of his shattered limbs, sent half so 
keen a pang to Simon's breast, as Dolly passing out, with Joe for 
her preserver.

A coach was ready at the door, and Dolly found herself safe and 
whole inside, between her father and mother, with Emma Haredale and 
her uncle, quite real, sitting opposite.  But there was no Joe, no 
Edward; and they had said nothing.  They had only bowed once, and 
kept at a distance.  Dear heart! what a long way it was to the 
Black Lion!



Chapter 72


The Black Lion was so far off, and occupied such a length of time 
in the getting at, that notwithstanding the strong presumptive 
evidence she had about her of the late events being real and of 
actual occurrence, Dolly could not divest herself of the belief 
that she must be in a dream which was lasting all night.  Nor was 
she quite certain that she saw and heard with her own proper 
senses, even when the coach, in the fulness of time, stopped at the 
Black Lion, and the host of that tavern approached in a gush of 
cheerful light to help them to dismount, and give them hearty 
welcome.

There too, at the coach door, one on one side, one upon the other, 
were already Edward Chester and Joe Willet, who must have followed 
in another coach: and this was such a strange and unaccountable 
proceeding, that Dolly was the more inclined to favour the idea of 
her being fast asleep.  But when Mr Willet appeared--old John 
himself--so heavy-headed and obstinate, and with such a double 
chin as the liveliest imagination could never in its boldest 
flights have conjured up in all its vast proportions--then she 
stood corrected, and unwillingly admitted to herself that she was 
broad awake.

And Joe had lost an arm--he--that well-made, handsome, gallant 
fellow!  As Dolly glanced towards him, and thought of the pain he 
must have suffered, and the far-off places in which he had been 
wandering, and wondered who had been his nurse, and hoped that 
whoever it was, she had been as kind and gentle and considerate as 
she would have been, the tears came rising to her bright eyes, one 
by one, little by little, until she could keep them back no longer, 
and so before them all, wept bitterly.

'We are all safe now, Dolly,' said her father, kindly.  'We shall 
not be separated any more.  Cheer up, my love, cheer up!'

The locksmith's wife knew better perhaps, than he, what ailed her 
daughter.  But Mrs Varden being quite an altered woman--for the 
riots had done that good--added her word to his, and comforted her 
with similar representations.

'Mayhap,' said Mr Willet, senior, looking round upon the company, 
'she's hungry.  That's what it is, depend upon it--I am, myself.'

The Black Lion, who, like old John, had been waiting supper past 
all reasonable and conscionable hours, hailed this as a 
philosophical discovery of the profoundest and most penetrating 
kind; and the table being already spread, they sat down to supper 
straightway.

The conversation was not of the liveliest nature, nor were the 
appetites of some among them very keen.  But, in both these 
respects, old John more than atoned for any deficiency on the part 
of the rest, and very much distinguished himself.

It was not in point of actual conversation that Mr Willet shone so 
brilliantly, for he had none of his old cronies to 'tackle,' and 
was rather timorous of venturing on Joe; having certain vague 
misgivings within him, that he was ready on the shortest notice, 
and on receipt of the slightest offence, to fell the Black Lion to 
the floor of his own parlour, and immediately to withdraw to China 
or some other remote and unknown region, there to dwell for 
evermore, or at least until he had got rid of his remaining arm and 
both legs, and perhaps an eye or so, into the bargain.  It was with 
a peculiar kind of pantomime that Mr Willet filled up every pause; 
and in this he was considered by the Black Lion, who had been his 
familiar for some years, quite to surpass and go beyond himself, 
and outrun the expectations of his most admiring friends.

The subject that worked in Mr Willet's mind, and occasioned these 
demonstrations, was no other than his son's bodily disfigurement, 
which he had never yet got himself thoroughly to believe, or 
comprehend.  Shortly after their first meeting, he had been 
observed to wander, in a state of great perplexity, to the kitchen, 
and to direct his gaze towards the fire, as if in search of his 
usual adviser in all matters of doubt and difficulty.  But there 
being no boiler at the Black Lion, and the rioters having so beaten 
and battered his own that it was quite unfit for further service, 
he wandered out again, in a perfect bog of uncertainty and mental 
confusion, and in that state took the strangest means of resolving 
his doubts: such as feeling the sleeve of his son's greatcoat as 
deeming it possible that his arm might be there; looking at his own 
arms and those of everybody else, as if to assure himself that two 
and not one was the usual allowance; sitting by the hour together 
in a brown study, as if he were endeavouring to recall Joe's image 
in his younger days, and to remember whether he really had in those 
times one arm or a pair; and employing himself in many other 
speculations of the same kind.

Finding himself at this supper, surrounded by faces with which he 
had been so well acquainted in old times, Mr Willet recurred to the 
subject with uncommon vigour; apparently resolved to understand it 
now or never.  Sometimes, after every two or three mouthfuls, he 
laid down his knife and fork, and stared at his son with all his 
might--particularly at his maimed side; then, he looked slowly 
round the table until he caught some person's eye, when he shook 
his head with great solemnity, patted his shoulder, winked, or as 
one may say--for winking was a very slow process with him--went to 
sleep with one eye for a minute or two; and so, with another solemn 
shaking of his head, took up his knife and fork again, and went on 
eating.  Sometimes, he put his food into his mouth abstractedly, 
and, with all his faculties concentrated on Joe, gazed at him in a 
fit of stupefaction as he cut his meat with one hand, until he was 
recalled to himself by symptoms of choking on his own part, and was 
by that means restored to consciousness.  At other times he 
resorted to such small devices as asking him for the salt, the 
pepper, the vinegar, the mustard--anything that was on his maimed 
side--and watching him as he handed it.  By dint of these 
experiments, he did at last so satisfy and convince himself, that, 
after a longer silence than he had yet maintained, he laid down his 
knife and fork on either side his plate, drank a long draught from 
a tankard beside him (still keeping his eyes on Joe), and leaning 
backward in his chair and fetching a long breath, said, as he 
looked all round the board:

'It's been took off!'

'By George!' said the Black Lion, striking the table with his hand, 
'he's got it!'

'Yes, sir,' said Mr Willet, with the look of a man who felt that he 
had earned a compliment, and deserved it.  'That's where it is.  
It's been took off.'

'Tell him where it was done,' said the Black Lion to Joe.

'At the defence of the Savannah, father.'

'At the defence of the Salwanners,' repeated Mr Willet, softly; 
again looking round the table.

'In America, where the war is,' said Joe.

'In America, where the war is,' repeated Mr Willet.  'It was took 
off in the defence of the Salwanners in America where the war is.'  
Continuing to repeat these words to himself in a low tone of voice 
(the same information had been conveyed to him in the same terms, 
at least fifty times before), Mr Willet arose from table, walked 
round to Joe, felt his empty sleeve all the way up, from the cuff, 
to where the stump of his arm remained; shook his hand; lighted his 
pipe at the fire, took a long whiff, walked to the door, turned 
round once when he had reached it, wiped his left eye with the back 
of his forefinger, and said, in a faltering voice: 'My son's arm--
was took off--at the defence of the--Salwanners--in America--where 
the war is'--with which words he withdrew, and returned no more 
that night.

Indeed, on various pretences, they all withdrew one after another, 
save Dolly, who was left sitting there alone.  It was a great 
relief to be alone, and she was crying to her heart's content, when 
she heard Joe's voice at the end of the passage, bidding somebody 
good night.

Good night!  Then he was going elsewhere--to some distance, 
perhaps.  To what kind of home COULD he be going, now that it was 
so late!

She heard him walk along the passage, and pass the door.  But there 
was a hesitation in his footsteps.  He turned back--Dolly's heart 
beat high--he looked in.

'Good night!'--he didn't say Dolly, but there was comfort in his 
not saying Miss Varden.

'Good night!' sobbed Dolly.

'I am sorry you take on so much, for what is past and gone,' said 
Joe kindly.  'Don't.  I can't bear to see you do it.  Think of it 
no longer.  You are safe and happy now.'

Dolly cried the more.

'You must have suffered very much within these few days--and yet 
you're not changed, unless it's for the better.  They said you 
were, but I don't see it.  You were--you were always very 
beautiful,' said Joe, 'but you are more beautiful than ever, now.  
You are indeed.  There can be no harm in my saying so, for you must 
know it.  You are told so very often, I am sure.'

As a general principle, Dolly DID know it, and WAS told so, very 
often.  But the coachmaker had turned out, years ago, to be a 
special donkey; and whether she had been afraid of making similar 
discoveries in others, or had grown by dint of long custom to be 
careless of compliments generally, certain it is that although she 
cried so much, she was better pleased to be told so now, than ever 
she had been in all her life.

'I shall bless your name,' sobbed the locksmith's little daughter, 
'as long as I live.  I shall never hear it spoken without feeling 
as if my heart would burst.  I shall remember it in my prayers, 
every night and morning till I die!'

'Will you?' said Joe, eagerly.  'Will you indeed?  It makes me--
well, it makes me very glad and proud to hear you say so.'

Dolly still sobbed, and held her handkerchief to her eyes.  Joe 
still stood, looking at her.

'Your voice,' said Joe, 'brings up old times so pleasantly, that, 
for the moment, I feel as if that night--there can be no harm in 
talking of that night now--had come back, and nothing had happened 
in the mean time.  I feel as if I hadn't suffered any hardships, 
but had knocked down poor Tom Cobb only yesterday, and had come to 
see you with my bundle on my shoulder before running away.--You 
remember?'

Remember!  But she said nothing.  She raised her eyes for an 
instant.  It was but a glance; a little, tearful, timid glance.  It 
kept Joe silent though, for a long time.

'Well!' he said stoutly, 'it was to be otherwise, and was.  I have 
been abroad, fighting all the summer and frozen up all the winter, 
ever since.  I have come back as poor in purse as I went, and 
crippled for life besides.  But, Dolly, I would rather have lost 
this other arm--ay, I would rather have lost my head--than have 
come back to find you dead, or anything but what I always pictured 
you to myself, and what I always hoped and wished to find you.  
Thank God for all!'

Oh how much, and how keenly, the little coquette of five years ago, 
felt now!  She had found her heart at last.  Never having known its 
worth till now, she had never known the worth of his.  How 
priceless it appeared!

'I did hope once,' said Joe, in his homely way, 'that I might come 
back a rich man, and marry you.  But I was a boy then, and have 
long known better than that.  I am a poor, maimed, discharged 
soldier, and must be content to rub through life as I can.  I can't 
say, even now, that I shall be glad to see you married, Dolly; but 
I AM glad--yes, I am, and glad to think I can say so--to know that 
you are admired and courted, and can pick and choose for a happy 
life.  It's a comfort to me to know that you'll talk to your 
husband about me; and I hope the time will come when I may be able 
to like him, and to shake hands with him, and to come and see you 
as a poor friend who knew you when you were a girl.  God bless 
you!'

His hand DID tremble; but for all that, he took it away again, and 
left her.



Chapter 73


By this Friday night--for it was on Friday in the riot week, that 
Emma and Dolly were rescued, by the timely aid of Joe and Edward 
Chester--the disturbances were entirely quelled, and peace and 
order were restored to the affrighted city.  True, after what had 
happened, it was impossible for any man to say how long this better 
state of things might last, or how suddenly new outrages, exceeding 
even those so lately witnessed, might burst forth and fill its 
streets with ruin and bloodshed; for this reason, those who had 
fled from the recent tumults still kept at a distance, and many 
families, hitherto unable to procure the means of flight, now 
availed themselves of the calm, and withdrew into the country.  The 
shops, too, from Tyburn to Whitechapel, were still shut; and very 
little business was transacted in any of the places of great 
commercial resort.  But, notwithstanding, and in spite of the 
melancholy forebodings of that numerous class of society who see 
with the greatest clearness into the darkest perspectives, the town 
remained profoundly quiet.  The strong military force disposed in 
every advantageous quarter, and stationed at every commanding 
point, held the scattered fragments of the mob in check; the search 
after rioters was prosecuted with unrelenting vigour; and if there 
were any among them so desperate and reckless as to be inclined, 
after the terrible scenes they had beheld, to venture forth again, 
they were so daunted by these resolute measures, that they quickly 
shrunk into their hiding-places, and had no thought but for their 
safety.

In a word, the crowd was utterly routed.  Upwards of two hundred 
had been shot dead in the streets.  Two hundred and fifty more were 
lying, badly wounded, in the hospitals; of whom seventy or eighty 
died within a short time afterwards.  A hundred were already in 
custody, and more were taken every hour.  How many perished in the 
conflagrations, or by their own excesses, is unknown; but that 
numbers found a terrible grave in the hot ashes of the flames they 
had kindled, or crept into vaults and cellars to drink in secret or 
to nurse their sores, and never saw the light again, is certain.  
When the embers of the fires had been black and cold for many 
weeks, the labourers' spades proved this, beyond a doubt.

Seventy-two private houses and four strong jails were destroyed in 
the four great days of these riots.  The total loss of property, as 
estimated by the sufferers, was one hundred and fifty-five thousand 
pounds; at the lowest and least partial estimate of disinterested 
persons, it exceeded one hundred and twenty-five thousand pounds.  
For this immense loss, compensation was soon afterwards made out of 
the public purse, in pursuance of a vote of the House of Commons; 
the sum being levied on the various wards in the city, on the 
county, and the borough of Southwark.  Both Lord Mansfield and Lord 
Saville, however, who had been great sufferers, refused to accept 
of any compensation whatever.

The House of Commons, sitting on Tuesday with locked and guarded 
doors, had passed a resolution to the effect that, as soon as the 
tumults subsided, it would immediately proceed to consider the 
petitions presented from many of his Majesty's Protestant subjects, 
and would take the same into its serious consideration.  While this 
question was under debate, Mr Herbert, one of the members present, 
indignantly rose and called upon the House to observe that Lord 
George Gordon was then sitting under the gallery with the blue 
cockade, the signal of rebellion, in his hat.  He was not only 
obliged, by those who sat near, to take it out; but offering to go 
into the street to pacify the mob with the somewhat indefinite 
assurance that the House was prepared to give them 'the 
satisfaction they sought,' was actually held down in his seat by 
the combined force of several members.  In short, the disorder and 
violence which reigned triumphant out of doors, penetrated into the 
senate, and there, as elsewhere, terror and alarm prevailed, and 
ordinary forms were for the time forgotten.

On the Thursday, both Houses had adjourned until the following 
Monday se'nnight, declaring it impossible to pursue their 
deliberations with the necessary gravity and freedom, while they 
were surrounded by armed troops.  And now that the rioters were 
dispersed, the citizens were beset with a new fear; for, finding 
the public thoroughfares and all their usual places of resort 
filled with soldiers entrusted with the free use of fire and sword, 
they began to lend a greedy ear to the rumours which were afloat of 
martial law being declared, and to dismal stories of prisoners 
having been seen hanging on lamp-posts in Cheapside and Fleet 
Street.  These terrors being promptly dispelled by a Proclamation 
declaring that all the rioters in custody would be tried by a 
special commission in due course of law, a fresh alarm was 
engendered by its being whispered abroad that French money had been 
found on some of the rioters, and that the disturbances had been 
fomented by foreign powers who sought to compass the overthrow and 
ruin of England.  This report, which was strengthened by the 
diffusion of anonymous handbills, but which, if it had any 
foundation at all, probably owed its origin to the circumstance of 
some few coins which were not English money having been swept into 
the pockets of the insurgents with other miscellaneous booty, and 
afterwards discovered on the prisoners or the dead bodies,--caused 
a great sensation; and men's minds being in that excited state 
when they are most apt to catch at any shadow of apprehension, was 
bruited about with much industry.

All remaining quiet, however, during the whole of this Friday, and 
on this Friday night, and no new discoveries being made, confidence 
began to be restored, and the most timid and desponding breathed 
again.  In Southwark, no fewer than three thousand of the 
inhabitants formed themselves into a watch, and patrolled the 
streets every hour.  Nor were the citizens slow to follow so good 
an example: and it being the manner of peaceful men to be very bold 
when the danger is over, they were abundantly fierce and daring; 
not scrupling to question the stoutest passenger with great 
severity, and carrying it with a very high hand over all errand-
boys, servant-girls, and 'prentices.

As day deepened into evening, and darkness crept into the nooks and 
corners of the town as if it were mustering in secret and gathering 
strength to venture into the open ways, Barnaby sat in his dungeon, 
wondering at the silence, and listening in vain for the noise and 
outcry which had ushered in the night of late.  Beside him, with 
his hand in hers, sat one in whose companionship he felt at peace.  
She was worn, and altered, full of grief, and heavy-hearted; but 
the same to him.

'Mother,' he said, after a long silence: 'how long,--how many days 
and nights,--shall I be kept here?'

'Not many, dear.  I hope not many.'

'You hope!  Ay, but your hoping will not undo these chains.  I 
hope, but they don't mind that.  Grip hopes, but who cares for 
Grip?'

The raven gave a short, dull, melancholy croak.  It said 'Nobody,' 
as plainly as a croak could speak.

'Who cares for Grip, except you and me?' said Barnaby, smoothing 
the bird's rumpled feathers with his hand.  'He never speaks in 
this place; he never says a word in jail; he sits and mopes all day 
in his dark corner, dozing sometimes, and sometimes looking at the 
light that creeps in through the bars, and shines in his bright eye 
as if a spark from those great fires had fallen into the room and 
was burning yet.  But who cares for Grip?'

The raven croaked again--Nobody.

'And by the way,' said Barnaby, withdrawing his hand from the bird, 
and laying it upon his mother's arm, as he looked eagerly in her 
face; 'if they kill me--they may: I heard it said they would--what 
will become of Grip when I am dead?'

The sound of the word, or the current of his own thoughts, 
suggested to Grip his old phrase 'Never say die!'  But he stopped 
short in the middle of it, drew a dismal cork, and subsided into a 
faint croak, as if he lacked the heart to get through the shortest 
sentence.

'Will they take HIS life as well as mine?' said Barnaby.  'I wish 
they would.  If you and I and he could die together, there would be 
none to feel sorry, or to grieve for us.  But do what they will, I 
don't fear them, mother!'

'They will not harm you,' she said, her tears choking her 
utterance.  'They never will harm you, when they know all.  I am 
sure they never will.'

'Oh!  Don't be too sure of that,' cried Barnaby, with a strange 
pleasure in the belief that she was self-deceived, and in his own 
sagacity.  'They have marked me from the first.  I heard them say 
so to each other when they brought me to this place last night; and 
I believe them.  Don't you cry for me.  They said that I was bold, 
and so I am, and so I will be.  You may think that I am silly, but 
I can die as well as another.--I have done no harm, have I?' he 
added quickly.

'None before Heaven,' she answered.

'Why then,' said Barnaby, 'let them do their worst.  You told me 
once--you--when I asked you what death meant, that it was nothing 
to be feared, if we did no harm--Aha! mother, you thought I had 
forgotten that!'

His merry laugh and playful manner smote her to the heart.  She 
drew him closer to her, and besought him to talk to her in whispers 
and to be very quiet, for it was getting dark, and their time was 
short, and she would soon have to leave him for the night.

'You will come to-morrow?' said Barnaby.

Yes.  And every day.  And they would never part again.

He joyfully replied that this was well, and what he wished, and 
what he had felt quite certain she would tell him; and then he 
asked her where she had been so long, and why she had not come to 
see him when he had been a great soldier, and ran through the wild 
schemes he had had for their being rich and living prosperously, 
and with some faint notion in his mind that she was sad and he had 
made her so, tried to console and comfort her, and talked of their 
former life and his old sports and freedom: little dreaming that 
every word he uttered only increased her sorrow, and that her tears 
fell faster at the freshened recollection of their lost 
tranquillity.

'Mother,' said Barnaby, as they heard the man approaching to close 
the cells for the night,' when I spoke to you just now about my 
father you cried "Hush!" and turned away your head.  Why did you do 
so?  Tell me why, in a word.  You thought HE was dead.  You are not 
sorry that he is alive and has come back to us.  Where is he?  
Here?'

'Do not ask any one where he is, or speak about him,' she made 
answer.

'Why not?' said Barnaby.  'Because he is a stern man, and talks 
roughly?  Well!  I don't like him, or want to be with him by 
myself; but why not speak about him?'

'Because I am sorry that he is alive; sorry that he has come back; 
and sorry that he and you have ever met.  Because, dear Barnaby, 
the endeavour of my life has been to keep you two asunder.'

'Father and son asunder!  Why?'

'He has,' she whispered in his ear, 'he has shed blood.  The time 
has come when you must know it.  He has shed the blood of one who 
loved him well, and trusted him, and never did him wrong in word or 
deed.'

Barnaby recoiled in horror, and glancing at his stained wrist for 
an instant, wrapped it, shuddering, in his dress.

'But,' she added hastily as the key turned in the lock, 'although 
we shun him, he is your father, dearest, and I am his wretched 
wife.  They seek his life, and he will lose it.  It must not be by 
our means; nay, if we could win him back to penitence, we should be 
bound to love him yet.  Do not seem to know him, except as one who 
fled with you from the jail, and if they question you about him, do 
not answer them.  God be with you through the night, dear boy!  God 
be with you!'

She tore herself away, and in a few seconds Barnaby was alone.  He 
stood for a long time rooted to the spot, with his face hidden in 
his hands; then flung himself, sobbing, on his miserable bed.

But the moon came slowly up in all her gentle glory, and the stars 
looked out, and through the small compass of the grated window, as 
through the narrow crevice of one good deed in a murky life of 
guilt, the face of Heaven shone bright and merciful.  He raised his 
head; gazed upward at the quiet sky, which seemed to smile upon the 
earth in sadness, as if the night, more thoughtful than the day, 
looked down in sorrow on the sufferings and evil deeds of men; and 
felt its peace sink deep into his heart.  He, a poor idiot, caged 
in his narrow cell, was as much lifted up to God, while gazing on 
the mild light, as the freest and most favoured man in all the 
spacious city; and in his ill-remembered prayer, and in the 
fragment of the childish hymn, with which he sung and crooned 
himself asleep, there breathed as true a spirit as ever studied 
homily expressed, or old cathedral arches echoed.

As his mother crossed a yard on her way out, she saw, through a 
grated door which separated it from another court, her husband, 
walking round and round, with his hands folded on his breast, and 
his head hung down.  She asked the man who conducted her, if she 
might speak a word with this prisoner.  Yes, but she must be quick 
for he was locking up for the night, and there was but a minute or 
so to spare.  Saying this, he unlocked the door, and bade her go 
in.

It grated harshly as it turned upon its hinges, but he was deaf to 
the noise, and still walked round and round the little court, 
without raising his head or changing his attitude in the least.  
She spoke to him, but her voice was weak, and failed her.  At 
length she put herself in his track, and when he came near, 
stretched out her hand and touched him.

He started backward, trembling from head to foot; but seeing who it 
was, demanded why she came there.  Before she could reply, he spoke 
again.

'Am I to live or die?  Do you murder too, or spare?'

'My son--our son,' she answered, 'is in this prison.'

'What is that to me?' he cried, stamping impatiently on the stone 
pavement.  'I know it.  He can no more aid me than I can aid him.  
If you are come to talk of him, begone!'

As he spoke he resumed his walk, and hurried round the court as 
before.  When he came again to where she stood, he stopped, and 
said,

'Am I to live or die?  Do you repent?'

'Oh!--do YOU?' she answered.  'Will you, while time remains?  Do 
not believe that I could save you, if I dared.'

'Say if you would,' he answered with an oath, as he tried to 
disengage himself and pass on.  'Say if you would.'

'Listen to me for one moment,' she returned; 'for but a moment.  I 
am but newly risen from a sick-bed, from which I never hoped to 
rise again.  The best among us think, at such a time, of good 
intentions half-performed and duties left undone.  If I have ever, 
since that fatal night, omitted to pray for your repentance before 
death--if I omitted, even then, anything which might tend to urge 
it on you when the horror of your crime was fresh--if, in our later 
meeting, I yielded to the dread that was upon me, and forgot to 
fall upon my knees and solemnly adjure you, in the name of him you 
sent to his account with Heaven, to prepare for the retribution 
which must come, and which is stealing on you now--I humbly before 
you, and in the agony of supplication in which you see me, beseech 
that you will let me make atonement.'

'What is the meaning of your canting words?' he answered roughly.  
'Speak so that I may understand you.'

'I will,' she answered, 'I desire to.  Bear with me for a moment 
more.  The hand of Him who set His curse on murder, is heavy on us 
now.  You cannot doubt it.  Our son, our innocent boy, on whom His 
anger fell before his birth, is in this place in peril of his life--
brought here by your guilt; yes, by that alone, as Heaven sees and 
knows, for he has been led astray in the darkness of his intellect, 
and that is the terrible consequence of your crime.'

'If you come, woman-like, to load me with reproaches--' he 
muttered, again endeavouring to break away.

'I do not.  I have a different purpose.  You must hear it.  If not 
to-night, to-morrow; if not to-morrow, at another time.  You MUST 
hear it.  Husband, escape is hopeless--impossible.'

'You tell me so, do you?' he said, raising his manacled hand, and 
shaking it.  'You!'

'Yes,' she said, with indescribable earnestness.  'But why?'

'To make me easy in this jail.  To make the time 'twixt this and 
death, pass pleasantly.  For my good--yes, for my good, of 
course,' he said, grinding his teeth, and smiling at her with a 
livid face.

'Not to load you with reproaches,' she replied; 'not to aggravate 
the tortures and miseries of your condition, not to give you one 
hard word, but to restore you to peace and hope.  Husband, dear 
husband, if you will but confess this dreadful crime; if you will 
but implore forgiveness of Heaven and of those whom you have 
wronged on earth; if you will dismiss these vain uneasy thoughts, 
which never can be realised, and will rely on Penitence and on the 
Truth, I promise you, in the great name of the Creator, whose image 
you have defaced, that He will comfort and console you.  And for 
myself,' she cried, clasping her hands, and looking upward, 'I 
swear before Him, as He knows my heart and reads it now, that from 
that hour I will love and cherish you as I did of old, and watch 
you night and day in the short interval that will remain to us, and 
soothe you with my truest love and duty, and pray with you, that 
one threatening judgment may be arrested, and that our boy may be 
spared to bless God, in his poor way, in the free air and light!'

He fell back and gazed at her while she poured out these words, as 
though he were for a moment awed by her manner, and knew not what 
to do.  But anger and fear soon got the mastery of him, and he 
spurned her from him.

'Begone!' he cried.  'Leave me!  You plot, do you!  You plot to 
get speech with me, and let them know I am the man they say I am.  
A curse on you and on your boy.'

'On him the curse has already fallen,' she replied, wringing her 
hands.

'Let it fall heavier.  Let it fall on one and all.  I hate you 
both.  The worst has come to me.  The only comfort that I seek or I 
can have, will be the knowledge that it comes to you.  Now go!'

She would have urged him gently, even then, but he menaced her with 
his chain.

'I say go--I say it for the last time.  The gallows has me in its 
grasp, and it is a black phantom that may urge me on to something 
more.  Begone!  I curse the hour that I was born, the man I slew, 
and all the living world!'

In a paroxysm of wrath, and terror, and the fear of death, he broke 
from her, and rushed into the darkness of his cell, where he cast 
himself jangling down upon the stone floor, and smote it with his 
ironed hands.  The man returned to lock the dungeon door, and 
having done so, carried her away.

On that warm, balmy night in June, there were glad faces and light 
hearts in all quarters of the town, and sleep, banished by the late 
horrors, was doubly welcomed.  On that night, families made merry 
in their houses, and greeted each other on the common danger they 
had escaped; and those who had been denounced, ventured into the 
streets; and they who had been plundered, got good shelter.  Even 
the timorous Lord Mayor, who was summoned that night before the 
Privy Council to answer for his conduct, came back contented; 
observing to all his friends that he had got off very well with a 
reprimand, and repeating with huge satisfaction his memorable 
defence before the Council, 'that such was his temerity, he thought 
death would have been his portion.'

On that night, too, more of the scattered remnants of the mob were 
traced to their lurking-places, and taken; and in the hospitals, 
and deep among the ruins they had made, and in the ditches, and 
fields, many unshrouded wretches lay dead: envied by those who had 
been active in the disturbances, and who pillowed their doomed 
heads in the temporary jails.

And in the Tower, in a dreary room whose thick stone walls shut out 
the hum of life, and made a stillness which the records left by 
former prisoners with those silent witnesses seemed to deepen and 
intensify; remorseful for every act that had been done by every man 
among the cruel crowd; feeling for the time their guilt his own, 
and their lives put in peril by himself; and finding, amidst such 
reflections, little comfort in fanaticism, or in his fancied call; 
sat the unhappy author of all--Lord George Gordon.

He had been made prisoner that evening.  'If you are sure it's me 
you want,' he said to the officers, who waited outside with the 
warrant for his arrest on a charge of High Treason, 'I am ready to 
accompany you--' which he did without resistance.  He was conducted 
first before the Privy Council, and afterwards to the Horse 
Guards, and then was taken by way of Westminster Bridge, and back 
over London Bridge (for the purpose of avoiding the main streets), 
to the Tower, under the strongest guard ever known to enter its 
gates with a single prisoner.

Of all his forty thousand men, not one remained to bear him 
company.  Friends, dependents, followers,--none were there.  His 
fawning secretary had played the traitor; and he whose weakness had 
been goaded and urged on by so many for their own purposes, was 
desolate and alone.



Chapter 74


Me Dennis, having been made prisoner late in the evening, was 
removed to a neighbouring round-house for that night, and carried 
before a justice for examination on the next day, Saturday.  The 
charges against him being numerous and weighty, and it being in 
particular proved, by the testimony of Gabriel Varden, that he had 
shown a special desire to take his life, he was committed for 
trial.  Moreover he was honoured with the distinction of being 
considered a chief among the insurgents, and received from the 
magistrate's lips the complimentary assurance that he was in a 
position of imminent danger, and would do well to prepare himself 
for the worst.

To say that Mr Dennis's modesty was not somewhat startled by these 
honours, or that he was altogether prepared for so flattering a 
reception, would be to claim for him a greater amount of stoical 
philosophy than even he possessed.  Indeed this gentleman's 
stoicism was of that not uncommon kind, which enables a man to bear 
with exemplary fortitude the afflictions of his friends, but 
renders him, by way of counterpoise, rather selfish and sensitive 
in respect of any that happen to befall himself.  It is therefore 
no disparagement to the great officer in question to state, without 
disguise or concealment, that he was at first very much alarmed, 
and that he betrayed divers emotions of fear, until his reasoning 
powers came to his relief, and set before him a more hopeful 
prospect.

In proportion as Mr Dennis exercised these intellectual qualities 
with which he was gifted, in reviewing his best chances of coming 
off handsomely and with small personal inconvenience, his spirits 
rose, and his confidence increased.  When he remembered the great 
estimation in which his office was held, and the constant demand 
for his services; when he bethought himself, how the Statute Book 
regarded him as a kind of Universal Medicine applicable to men, 
women, and children, of every age and variety of criminal 
constitution; and how high he stood, in his official capacity, in 
the favour of the Crown, and both Houses of Parliament, the Mint, 
the Bank of England, and the Judges of the land; when he 
recollected that whatever Ministry was in or out, he remained their 
peculiar pet and panacea, and that for his sake England stood 
single and conspicuous among the civilised nations of the earth: 
when he called these things to mind and dwelt upon them, he felt 
certain that the national gratitude MUST relieve him from the 
consequences of his late proceedings, and would certainly restore 
him to his old place in the happy social system.

With these crumbs, or as one may say, with these whole loaves of 
comfort to regale upon, Mr Dennis took his place among the escort 
that awaited him, and repaired to jail with a manly indifference.  
Arriving at Newgate, where some of the ruined cells had been 
hastily fitted up for the safe keeping of rioters, he was warmly 
received by the turnkeys, as an unusual and interesting case, which 
agreeably relieved their monotonous duties.  In this spirit, he was 
fettered with great care, and conveyed into the interior of the 
prison.

'Brother,' cried the hangman, as, following an officer, he 
traversed under these novel circumstances the remains of passages 
with which he was well acquainted, 'am I going to be along with 
anybody?'

'If you'd have left more walls standing, you'd have been alone,' 
was the reply.  'As it is, we're cramped for room, and you'll have 
company.'

'Well,' returned Dennis, 'I don't object to company, brother.  I 
rather like company.  I was formed for society, I was.'

'That's rather a pity, an't it?' said the man.

'No,' answered Dennis, 'I'm not aware that it is.  Why should it be 
a pity, brother?'

'Oh! I don't know,' said the man carelessly.  'I thought that was 
what you meant.  Being formed for society, and being cut off in 
your flower, you know--'

'I say,' interposed the other quickly, 'what are you talking of?  
Don't.  Who's a-going to be cut off in their flowers?'

'Oh, nobody particular.  I thought you was, perhaps,' said the man.

Mr Dennis wiped his face, which had suddenly grown very hot, and 
remarking in a tremulous voice to his conductor that he had always 
been fond of his joke, followed him in silence until he stopped at 
a door.

'This is my quarters, is it?' he asked facetiously.

'This is the shop, sir,' replied his friend.

He was walking in, but not with the best possible grace, when he 
suddenly stopped, and started back.

'Halloa!' said the officer.  'You're nervous.'

'Nervous!' whispered Dennis in great alarm.  'Well I may be.  Shut 
the door.'

'I will, when you're in,' returned the man.

'But I can't go in there,' whispered Dennis.  'I can't be shut up 
with that man.  Do you want me to be throttled, brother?'

The officer seemed to entertain no particular desire on the subject 
one way or other, but briefly remarking that he had his orders, and 
intended to obey them, pushed him in, turned the key, and retired.

Dennis stood trembling with his back against the door, and 
involuntarily raising his arm to defend himself, stared at a man, 
the only other tenant of the cell, who lay, stretched at his fall 
length, upon a stone bench, and who paused in his deep breathing as 
if he were about to wake.  But he rolled over on one side, let his 
arm fall negligently down, drew a long sigh, and murmuring 
indistinctly, fell fast asleep again.

Relieved in some degree by this, the hangman took his eyes for an 
instant from the slumbering figure, and glanced round the cell in 
search of some 'vantage-ground or weapon of defence.  There was 
nothing moveable within it, but a clumsy table which could not be 
displaced without noise, and a heavy chair.  Stealing on tiptoe 
towards this latter piece of furniture, he retired with it into the 
remotest corner, and intrenching himself behind it, watched the 
enemy with the utmost vigilance and caution.

The sleeping man was Hugh; and perhaps it was not unnatural for 
Dennis to feel in a state of very uncomfortable suspense, and to 
wish with his whole soul that he might never wake again.  Tired of 
standing, he crouched down in his corner after some time, and 
rested on the cold pavement; but although Hugh's breathing still 
proclaimed that he was sleeping soundly, he could not trust him out 
of his sight for an instant.  He was so afraid of him, and of some 
sudden onslaught, that he was not content to see his closed eyes 
through the chair-back, but every now and then, rose stealthily to 
his feet, and peered at him with outstretched neck, to assure 
himself that he really was still asleep, and was not about to 
spring upon him when he was off his guard.

He slept so long and so soundly, that Mr Dennis began to think he 
might sleep on until the turnkey visited them.  He was 
congratulating himself upon these promising appearances, and 
blessing his stars with much fervour, when one or two unpleasant 
symptoms manifested themselves: such as another motion of the arm, 
another sigh, a restless tossing of the head.  Then, just as it 
seemed that he was about to fall heavily to the ground from his 
narrow bed, Hugh's eyes opened.

It happened that his face was turned directly towards his 
unexpected visitor.  He looked lazily at him for some half-dozen 
seconds without any aspect of surprise or recognition; then 
suddenly jumped up, and with a great oath pronounced his name.

'Keep off, brother, keep off!' cried Dennis, dodging behind the 
chair.  'Don't do me a mischief.  I'm a prisoner like you.  I 
haven't the free use of my limbs.  I'm quite an old man.  Don't 
hurt me!'

He whined out the last three words in such piteous accents, that 
Hugh, who had dragged away the chair, and aimed a blow at him with 
it, checked himself, and bade him get up.

'I'll get up certainly, brother,' cried Dennis, anxious to 
propitiate him by any means in his power.  'I'll comply with any 
request of yours, I'm sure.  There--I'm up now.  What can I do for 
you?  Only say the word, and I'll do it.'

'What can you do for me!' cried Hugh, clutching him by the collar 
with both hands, and shaking him as though he were bent on stopping 
his breath by that means.  'What have you done for me?'

'The best.  The best that could be done,' returned the hangman.

Hugh made him no answer, but shaking him in his strong grip until 
his teeth chattered in his head, cast him down upon the floor, and 
flung himself on the bench again.

'If it wasn't for the comfort it is to me, to see you here,' he 
muttered, 'I'd have crushed your head against it; I would.'

It was some time before Dennis had breath enough to speak, but as 
soon as he could resume his propitiatory strain, he did so.

'I did the best that could be done, brother,' he whined; 'I did 
indeed.  I was forced with two bayonets and I don't know how many 
bullets on each side of me, to point you out.  If you hadn't been 
taken, you'd have been shot; and what a sight that would have been--
a fine young man like you!'

'Will it be a better sight now?' asked Hugh, raising his head, with 
such a fierce expression, that the other durst not answer him just 
then.

'A deal better,' said Dennis meekly, after a pause.  'First, 
there's all the chances of the law, and they're five hundred 
strong.  We may get off scot-free.  Unlikelier things than that 
have come to pass.  Even if we shouldn't, and the chances fail, we 
can but be worked off once: and when it's well done, it's so neat, 
so skilful, so captiwating, if that don't seem too strong a word, 
that you'd hardly believe it could be brought to sich perfection.  
Kill one's fellow-creeturs off, with muskets!--Pah!' and his 
nature so revolted at the bare idea, that he spat upon the dungeon 
pavement.

His warming on this topic, which to one unacquainted with his 
pursuits and tastes appeared like courage; together with his artful 
suppression of his own secret hopes, and mention of himself as 
being in the same condition with Hugh; did more to soothe that 
ruffian than the most elaborate arguments could have done, or the 
most abject submission.  He rested his arms upon his knees, and 
stooping forward, looked from beneath his shaggy hair at Dennis, 
with something of a smile upon his face.

'The fact is, brother,' said the hangman, in a tone of greater 
confidence, 'that you got into bad company.  The man that was with 
you was looked after more than you, and it was him I wanted.  As to 
me, what have I got by it?  Here we are, in one and the same plight.'

'Lookee, rascal,' said Hugh, contracting his brows, 'I'm not 
altogether such a shallow blade but I know you expected to get 
something by it, or you wouldn't have done it.  But it's done, and 
you're here, and it will soon be all over with you and me; and I'd 
as soon die as live, or live as die.  Why should I trouble myself 
to have revenge on you?  To eat, and drink, and go to sleep, as 
long as I stay here, is all I care for.  If there was but a little 
more sun to bask in, than can find its way into this cursed place, 
I'd lie in it all day, and not trouble myself to sit or stand up 
once.  That's all the care I have for myself.  Why should I care 
for YOU?'

Finishing this speech with a growl like the yawn of a wild beast, 
he stretched himself upon the bench again, and closed his eyes once 
more.

After looking at him in silence for some moments, Dennis, who was 
greatly relieved to find him in this mood, drew the chair towards 
his rough couch and sat down near him--taking the precaution, 
however, to keep out of the range of his brawny arm.

'Well said, brother; nothing could be better said,' he ventured to 
observe.  'We'll eat and drink of the best, and sleep our best, and 
make the best of it every way.  Anything can be got for money.  
Let's spend it merrily.'

'Ay,' said Hugh, coiling himself into a new position.--'Where is it?'

'Why, they took mine from me at the lodge,' said Mr Dennis; 'but 
mine's a peculiar case.'

'Is it?  They took mine too.'

'Why then, I tell you what, brother,' Dennis began.  'You must look 
up your friends--'

'My friends!' cried Hugh, starting up and resting on his hands.  
'Where are my friends?'

'Your relations then,' said Dennis.

'Ha ha ha!' laughed Hugh, waving one arm above his head.  'He talks 
of friends to me--talks of relations to a man whose mother died the 
death in store for her son, and left him, a hungry brat, without a 
face he knew in all the world!  He talks of this to me!'

'Brother,' cried the hangman, whose features underwent a sudden 
change, 'you don't mean to say--'

'I mean to say,' Hugh interposed, 'that they hung her up at Tyburn.  
What was good enough for her, is good enough for me.  Let them do 
the like by me as soon as they please--the sooner the better.  Say 
no more to me.  I'm going to sleep.'

'But I want to speak to you; I want to hear more about that,' said 
Dennis, changing colour.

'If you're a wise man,' growled Hugh, raising his head to look at 
him with a frown, 'you'll hold your tongue.  I tell you I'm going 
to sleep.'

Dennis venturing to say something more in spite of this caution, 
the desperate fellow struck at him with all his force, and missing 
him, lay down again with many muttered oaths and imprecations, and 
turned his face towards the wall.  After two or three ineffectual 
twitches at his dress, which he was hardy enough to venture upon, 
notwithstanding his dangerous humour, Mr Dennis, who burnt, for 
reasons of his own, to pursue the conversation, had no alternative 
but to sit as patiently as he could: waiting his further pleasure.



Chapter 75


A month has elapsed,--and we stand in the bedchamber of Sir John 
Chester.  Through the half-opened window, the Temple Garden looks 
green and pleasant; the placid river, gay with boat and barge, and 
dimpled with the plash of many an oar, sparkles in the distance; 
the sky is blue and clear; and the summer air steals gently in, 
filling the room with perfume.  The very town, the smoky town, is 
radiant.  High roofs and steeple-tops, wont to look black and 
sullen, smile a cheerful grey; every old gilded vane, and ball, and 
cross, glitters anew in the bright morning sun; and, high among 
them all, St Paul's towers up, showing its lofty crest in burnished 
gold.

Sir John was breakfasting in bed.  His chocolate and toast stood 
upon a little table at his elbow; books and newspapers lay ready to 
his hand, upon the coverlet; and, sometimes pausing to glance with 
an air of tranquil satisfaction round the well-ordered room, and 
sometimes to gaze indolently at the summer sky, he ate, and drank, 
and read the news luxuriously.

The cheerful influence of the morning seemed to have some effect, 
even upon his equable temper.  His manner was unusually gay; his 
smile more placid and agreeable than usual; his voice more clear 
and pleasant.  He laid down the newspaper he had been reading; 
leaned back upon his pillow with the air of one who resigned 
himself to a train of charming recollections; and after a pause, 
soliloquised as follows:

'And my friend the centaur, goes the way of his mamma!  I am not 
surprised.  And his mysterious friend Mr Dennis, likewise!  I am 
not surprised.  And my old postman, the exceedingly free-and-easy 
young madman of Chigwell!  I am quite rejoiced.  It's the very best 
thing that could possibly happen to him.'

After delivering himself of these remarks, he fell again into his 
smiling train of reflection; from which he roused himself at length 
to finish his chocolate, which was getting cold, and ring the bell 
for more.

The new supply arriving, he took the cup from his servant's hand; 
and saying, with a charming affability, 'I am obliged to you, 
Peak,' dismissed him.

'It is a remarkable circumstance,' he mused, dallying lazily with 
the teaspoon, 'that my friend the madman should have been within an 
ace of escaping, on his trial; and it was a good stroke of chance 
(or, as the world would say, a providential occurrence) that the 
brother of my Lord Mayor should have been in court, with other 
country justices, into whose very dense heads curiosity had 
penetrated.  For though the brother of my Lord Mayor was decidedly 
wrong; and established his near relationship to that amusing person 
beyond all doubt, in stating that my friend was sane, and had, to 
his knowledge, wandered about the country with a vagabond parent, 
avowing revolutionary and rebellious sentiments; I am not the less 
obliged to him for volunteering that evidence.  These insane 
creatures make such very odd and embarrassing remarks, that they 
really ought to be hanged for the comfort of society.'

The country justice had indeed turned the wavering scale against 
poor Barnaby, and solved the doubt that trembled in his favour.  
Grip little thought how much he had to answer for.

'They will be a singular party,' said Sir John, leaning his head 
upon his hand, and sipping his chocolate; 'a very curious party.  
The hangman himself; the centaur; and the madman.  The centaur 
would make a very handsome preparation in Surgeons' Hall, and 
would benefit science extremely.  I hope they have taken care to 
bespeak him.--Peak, I am not at home, of course, to anybody but the 
hairdresser.'

This reminder to his servant was called forth by a knock at the 
door, which the man hastened to open.  After a prolonged murmur of 
question and answer, he returned; and as he cautiously closed the 
room-door behind him, a man was heard to cough in the passage.

'Now, it is of no use, Peak,' said Sir John, raising his hand in 
deprecation of his delivering any message; 'I am not at home.  I 
cannot possibly hear you.  I told you I was not at home, and my 
word is sacred.  Will you never do as you are desired?'

Having nothing to oppose to this reproof, the man was about to 
withdraw, when the visitor who had given occasion to it, probably 
rendered impatient by delay, knocked with his knuckles at the 
chamber-door, and called out that he had urgent business with Sir 
John Chester, which admitted of no delay.

'Let him in,' said Sir John.  'My good fellow,' he added, when the 
door was opened, 'how come you to intrude yourself in this 
extraordinary manner upon the privacy of a gentleman?  How can you 
be so wholly destitute of self-respect as to be guilty of such 
remarkable ill-breeding?'

'My business, Sir John, is not of a common kind, I do assure you,' 
returned the person he addressed.  'If I have taken any uncommon 
course to get admission to you, I hope I shall be pardoned on that 
account.'

'Well! we shall see; we shall see,' returned Sir John, whose face 
cleared up when he saw who it was, and whose prepossessing smile 
was now restored.  'I am sure we have met before,' he added in his 
winning tone, 'but really I forget your name?'

'My name is Gabriel Varden, sir.'

'Varden, of course, Varden,' returned Sir John, tapping his 
forehead.  'Dear me, how very defective my memory becomes!  Varden 
to be sure--Mr Varden the locksmith.  You have a charming wife, Mr 
Varden, and a most beautiful daughter.  They are well?'

Gabriel thanked him, and said they were.

'I rejoice to hear it,' said Sir John.  'Commend me to them when 
you return, and say that I wished I were fortunate enough to 
convey, myself, the salute which I entrust you to deliver.  And 
what,' he asked very sweetly, after a moment's pause, 'can I do for 
you?  You may command me freely.'

'I thank you, Sir John,' said Gabriel, with some pride in his 
manner, 'but I have come to ask no favour of you, though I come on 
business.--Private,' he added, with a glance at the man who stood 
looking on, 'and very pressing business.'

'I cannot say you are the more welcome for being independent, and 
having nothing to ask of me,' returned Sir John, graciously, 'for I 
should have been happy to render you a service; still, you are 
welcome on any terms.  Oblige me with some more chocolate, Peak, 
and don't wait.'

The man retired, and left them alone.

'Sir John,' said Gabriel, 'I am a working-man, and have been so, 
all my life.  If I don't prepare you enough for what I have to 
tell; if I come to the point too abruptly; and give you a shock, 
which a gentleman could have spared you, or at all events lessened 
very much; I hope you will give me credit for meaning well.  I wish 
to be careful and considerate, and I trust that in a straightforward 
person like me, you'll take the will for the deed.'

'Mr Varden,' returned the other, perfectly composed under this 
exordium; 'I beg you'll take a chair.  Chocolate, perhaps, you 
don't relish?  Well! it IS an acquired taste, no doubt.'

'Sir John,' said Gabriel, who had acknowledged with a bow the 
invitation to be seated, but had not availed himself of it.  'Sir 
John'--he dropped his voice and drew nearer to the bed--'I am just 
now come from Newgate--'

'Good Gad!' cried Sir John, hastily sitting up in bed; 'from 
Newgate, Mr Varden!  How could you be so very imprudent as to come 
from Newgate!  Newgate, where there are jail-fevers, and ragged 
people, and bare-footed men and women, and a thousand horrors!  
Peak, bring the camphor, quick!  Heaven and earth, Mr Varden, my 
dear, good soul, how COULD you come from Newgate?'

Gabriel returned no answer, but looked on in silence while Peak 
(who had entered with the hot chocolate) ran to a drawer, and 
returning with a bottle, sprinkled his master's dressing-gown and 
the bedding; and besides moistening the locksmith himself, 
plentifully, described a circle round about him on the carpet.  
When he had done this, he again retired; and Sir John, reclining in 
an easy attitude upon his pillow, once more turned a smiling face 
towards his visitor.

'You will forgive me, Mr Varden, I am sure, for being at first a 
little sensitive both on your account and my own.  I confess I was 
startled, notwithstanding your delicate exordium.  Might I ask you 
to do me the favour not to approach any nearer?--You have really 
come from Newgate!'

The locksmith inclined his head.

'In-deed!  And now, Mr Varden, all exaggeration and embellishment 
apart,' said Sir John Chester, confidentially, as he sipped his 
chocolate, 'what kind of place IS Newgate?'

'A strange place, Sir John,' returned the locksmith, 'of a sad and 
doleful kind.  A strange place, where many strange things are heard 
and seen; but few more strange than that I come to tell you of.  
The case is urgent.  I am sent here.'

'Not--no, no--not from the jail?'

'Yes, Sir John; from the jail.'

'And my good, credulous, open-hearted friend,' said Sir John, 
setting down his cup, and laughing,--'by whom?'

'By a man called Dennis--for many years the hangman, and to-morrow 
morning the hanged,' returned the locksmith.

Sir John had expected--had been quite certain from the first--that 
he would say he had come from Hugh, and was prepared to meet him on 
that point.  But this answer occasioned him a degree of 
astonishment, which, for the moment, he could not, with all his 
command of feature, prevent his face from expressing.  He quickly 
subdued it, however, and said in the same light tone:

'And what does the gentleman require of me?  My memory may be at 
fault again, but I don't recollect that I ever had the pleasure of 
an introduction to him, or that I ever numbered him among my 
personal friends, I do assure you, Mr Varden.'

'Sir John,' returned the locksmith, gravely, 'I will tell you, as 
nearly as I can, in the words he used to me, what he desires that 
you should know, and what you ought to know without a moment's loss 
of time.'

Sir John Chester settled himself in a position of greater repose, 
and looked at his visitor with an expression of face which seemed 
to say, 'This is an amusing fellow!  I'll hear him out.'

'You may have seen in the newspapers, sir,' said Gabriel, pointing 
to the one which lay by his side, 'that I was a witness against 
this man upon his trial some days since; and that it was not his 
fault I was alive, and able to speak to what I knew.'

'MAY have seen!' cried Sir John.  'My dear Mr Varden, you are quite 
a public character, and live in all men's thoughts most deservedly.  
Nothing can exceed the interest with which I read your testimony, 
and remembered that I had the pleasure of a slight acquaintance 
with you.---I hope we shall have your portrait published?'

'This morning, sir,' said the locksmith, taking no notice of these 
compliments, 'early this morning, a message was brought to me from 
Newgate, at this man's request, desiring that I would go and see 
him, for he had something particular to communicate.  I needn't 
tell you that he is no friend of mine, and that I had never seen 
him, until the rioters beset my house.'

Sir John fanned himself gently with the newspaper, and nodded.

'I knew, however, from the general report,' resumed Gabriel, 'that 
the order for his execution to-morrow, went down to the prison 
last night; and looking upon him as a dying man, I complied with 
his request.'

'You are quite a Christian, Mr Varden,' said Sir John; 'and in that 
amiable capacity, you increase my desire that you should take a 
chair.'

'He said,' continued Gabriel, looking steadily at the knight, 'that 
he had sent to me, because he had no friend or companion in the 
whole world (being the common hangman), and because he believed, 
from the way in which I had given my evidence, that I was an honest 
man, and would act truly by him.  He said that, being shunned by 
every one who knew his calling, even by people of the lowest and 
most wretched grade, and finding, when he joined the rioters, that 
the men he acted with had no suspicion of it (which I believe is 
true enough, for a poor fool of an old 'prentice of mine was one of 
them), he had kept his own counsel, up to the time of his being 
taken and put in jail.'

'Very discreet of Mr Dennis,' observed Sir John with a slight yawn, 
though still with the utmost affability, 'but--except for your 
admirable and lucid manner of telling it, which is perfect--not 
very interesting to me.'

'When,' pursued the locksmith, quite unabashed and wholly 
regardless of these interruptions, 'when he was taken to the jail, 
he found that his fellow-prisoner, in the same room, was a young 
man, Hugh by name, a leader in the riots, who had been betrayed and 
given up by himself.  From something which fell from this unhappy 
creature in the course of the angry words they had at meeting, he 
discovered that his mother had suffered the death to which they 
both are now condemned.--The time is very short, Sir John.'

The knight laid down his paper fan, replaced his cup upon the table 
at his side, and, saving for the smile that lurked about his mouth, 
looked at the locksmith with as much steadiness as the locksmith 
looked at him.

'They have been in prison now, a month.  One conversation led to 
many more; and the hangman soon found, from a comparison of time, 
and place, and dates, that he had executed the sentence of the law 
upon this woman, himself.  She had been tempted by want--as so many 
people are--into the easy crime of passing forged notes.  She was 
young and handsome; and the traders who employ men, women, and 
children in this traffic, looked upon her as one who was well 
adapted for their business, and who would probably go on without 
suspicion for a long time.  But they were mistaken; for she was 
stopped in the commission of her very first offence, and died for 
it.  She was of gipsy blood, Sir John--'

It might have been the effect of a passing cloud which obscured the 
sun, and cast a shadow on his face; but the knight turned deadly 
pale.  Still he met the locksmith's eye, as before.

'She was of gipsy blood, Sir John,' repeated Gabriel, 'and had a 
high, free spirit.  This, and her good looks, and her lofty manner, 
interested some gentlemen who were easily moved by dark eyes; and 
efforts were made to save her.  They might have been successful, if 
she would have given them any clue to her history.  But she never 
would, or did.  There was reason to suspect that she would make an 
attempt upon her life.  A watch was set upon her night and day; and 
from that time she never spoke again--'

Sir John stretched out his hand towards his cup.  The locksmith 
going on, arrested it half-way.

--'Until she had but a minute to live.  Then she broke silence, and 
said, in a low firm voice which no one heard but this executioner, 
for all other living creatures had retired and left her to her 
fate, "If I had a dagger within these fingers and he was within my 
reach, I would strike him dead before me, even now!"  The man asked 
"Who?"  She said, "The father of her boy."'

Sir John drew back his outstretched hand, and seeing that the 
locksmith paused, signed to him with easy politeness and without 
any new appearance of emotion, to proceed.

'It was the first word she had ever spoken, from which it could be 
understood that she had any relative on earth.  "Was the child 
alive?" he asked.  "Yes."  He asked her where it was, its name, and 
whether she had any wish respecting it.  She had but one, she said.  
It was that the boy might live and grow, in utter ignorance of his 
father, so that no arts might teach him to be gentle and 
forgiving.  When he became a man, she trusted to the God of their 
tribe to bring the father and the son together, and revenge her 
through her child.  He asked her other questions, but she spoke no 
more.  Indeed, he says, she scarcely said this much, to him, but 
stood with her face turned upwards to the sky, and never looked 
towards him once.'

Sir John took a pinch of snuff; glanced approvingly at an elegant 
little sketch, entitled 'Nature,' on the wall; and raising his eyes 
to the locksmith's face again, said, with an air of courtesy and 
patronage, 'You were observing, Mr Varden--'

'That she never,' returned the locksmith, who was not to be 
diverted by any artifice from his firm manner, and his steady gaze, 
'that she never looked towards him once, Sir John; and so she died, 
and he forgot her.  But, some years afterwards, a man was 
sentenced to die the same death, who was a gipsy too; a sunburnt, 
swarthy fellow, almost a wild man; and while he lay in prison, 
under sentence, he, who had seen the hangman more than once while 
he was free, cut an image of him on his stick, by way of braving 
death, and showing those who attended on him, how little he cared 
or thought about it.  He gave this stick into his hands at Tyburn, 
and told him then, that the woman I have spoken of had left her own 
people to join a fine gentleman, and that, being deserted by him, 
and cast off by her old friends, she had sworn within her own proud 
breast, that whatever her misery might be, she would ask no help of 
any human being.  He told him that she had kept her word to the 
last; and that, meeting even him in the streets--he had been fond 
of her once, it seems--she had slipped from him by a trick, and he 
never saw her again, until, being in one of the frequent crowds at 
Tyburn, with some of his rough companions, he had been driven 
almost mad by seeing, in the criminal under another name, whose 
death he had come to witness, herself.  Standing in the same place 
in which she had stood, he told the hangman this, and told him, 
too, her real name, which only her own people and the gentleman for 
whose sake she had left them, knew.  That name he will tell again, 
Sir John, to none but you.'

'To none but me!' exclaimed the knight, pausing in the act of 
raising his cup to his lips with a perfectly steady hand, and 
curling up his little finger for the better display of a brilliant 
ring with which it was ornamented: 'but me!--My dear Mr Varden, 
how very preposterous, to select me for his confidence!  With you 
at his elbow, too, who are so perfectly trustworthy!'

'Sir John, Sir John,' returned the locksmith, 'at twelve tomorrow, 
these men die.  Hear the few words I have to add, and do not hope 
to deceive me; for though I am a plain man of humble station, and 
you are a gentleman of rank and learning, the truth raises me to 
your level, and I KNOW that you anticipate the disclosure with 
which I am about to end, and that you believe this doomed man, 
Hugh, to be your son.'

'Nay,' said Sir John, bantering him with a gay air; 'the wild 
gentleman, who died so suddenly, scarcely went as far as that, I 
think?'

'He did not,' returned the locksmith, 'for she had bound him by 
some pledge, known only to these people, and which the worst among 
them respect, not to tell your name: but, in a fantastic pattern on 
the stick, he had carved some letters, and when the hangman asked 
it, he bade him, especially if he should ever meet with her son in 
after life, remember that place well.'

'What place?'

'Chester.'

The knight finished his cup of chocolate with an appearance of 
infinite relish, and carefully wiped his lips upon his 
handkerchief.

'Sir John,' said the locksmith, 'this is all that has been told to 
me; but since these two men have been left for death, they have 
conferred together closely.  See them, and hear what they can add.  
See this Dennis, and learn from him what he has not trusted to me.  
If you, who hold the clue to all, want corroboration (which you do 
not), the means are easy.'

'And to what,' said Sir John Chester, rising on his elbow, after 
smoothing the pillow for its reception; 'my dear, good-natured, 
estimable Mr Varden--with whom I cannot be angry if I would--to 
what does all this tend?'

'I take you for a man, Sir John, and I suppose it tends to some 
pleading of natural affection in your breast,' returned the 
locksmith.  'I suppose to the straining of every nerve, and the 
exertion of all the influence you have, or can make, in behalf of 
your miserable son, and the man who has disclosed his existence to 
you.  At the worst, I suppose to your seeing your son, and 
awakening him to a sense of his crime and danger.  He has no such 
sense now.  Think what his life must have been, when he said in my 
hearing, that if I moved you to anything, it would be to hastening 
his death, and ensuring his silence, if you had it in your power!'

'And have you, my good Mr Varden,' said Sir John in a tone of mild 
reproof, 'have you really lived to your present age, and remained 
so very simple and credulous, as to approach a gentleman of 
established character with such credentials as these, from 
desperate men in their last extremity, catching at any straw?  Oh 
dear!  Oh fie, fie!'

The locksmith was going to interpose, but he stopped him:

'On any other subject, Mr Varden, I shall be delighted--I shall be 
charmed--to converse with you, but I owe it to my own character not 
to pursue this topic for another moment.'

'Think better of it, sir, when I am gone,' returned the locksmith; 
'think better of it, sir.  Although you have, thrice within as many 
weeks, turned your lawful son, Mr Edward, from your door, you may 
have time, you may have years to make your peace with HIM, Sir 
John: but that twelve o'clock will soon be here, and soon be past 
for ever.'

'I thank you very much,' returned the knight, kissing his delicate 
hand to the locksmith, 'for your guileless advice; and I only wish, 
my good soul, although your simplicity is quite captivating, that 
you had a little more worldly wisdom.  I never so much regretted 
the arrival of my hairdresser as I do at this moment.  God bless 
you!  Good morning!  You'll not forget my message to the ladies, Mr 
Varden?  Peak, show Mr Varden to the door.'

Gabriel said no more, but gave the knight a parting look, and left 
him.  As he quitted the room, Sir John's face changed; and the 
smile gave place to a haggard and anxious expression, like that of 
a weary actor jaded by the performance of a difficult part.  He 
rose from his bed with a heavy sigh, and wrapped himself in his 
morning-gown.

'So she kept her word,' he said, 'and was constant to her threat!  
I would I had never seen that dark face of hers,--I might have read 
these consequences in it, from the first.  This affair would make a 
noise abroad, if it rested on better evidence; but, as it is, and 
by not joining the scattered links of the chain, I can afford to 
slight it.--Extremely distressing to be the parent of such an 
uncouth creature!  Still, I gave him very good advice.  I told him 
he would certainly be hanged.  I could have done no more if I had 
known of our relationship; and there are a great many fathers who 
have never done as much for THEIR natural children.--The 
hairdresser may come in, Peak!'

The hairdresser came in; and saw in Sir John Chester (whose 
accommodating conscience was soon quieted by the numerous 
precedents that occurred to him in support of his last 
observation), the same imperturbable, fascinating, elegant 
gentleman he had seen yesterday, and many yesterdays before.



Chapter 76


As the locksmith walked slowly away from Sir John Chester's 
chambers, he lingered under the trees which shaded the path, almost 
hoping that he might be summoned to return.  He had turned back 
thrice, and still loitered at the corner, when the clock struck 
twelve.

It was a solemn sound, and not merely for its reference to to-
morrow; for he knew that in that chime the murderer's knell was 
rung.  He had seen him pass along the crowded street, amidst the 
execration of the throng; and marked his quivering lip, and 
trembling limbs; the ashy hue upon his face, his clammy brow, the 
wild distraction of his eye--the fear of death that swallowed up 
all other thoughts, and gnawed without cessation at his heart and 
brain.  He had marked the wandering look, seeking for hope, and 
finding, turn where it would, despair.  He had seen the remorseful, 
pitiful, desolate creature, riding, with his coffin by his side, to 
the gibbet.  He knew that, to the last, he had been an unyielding, 
obdurate man; that in the savage terror of his condition he had 
hardened, rather than relented, to his wife and child; and that the 
last words which had passed his white lips were curses on them as 
his enemies.

Mr Haredale had determined to be there, and see it done.  Nothing 
but the evidence of his own senses could satisfy that gloomy thirst 
for retribution which had been gathering upon him for so many 
years.  The locksmith knew this, and when the chimes had ceased to 
vibrate, hurried away to meet him.

'For these two men,' he said, as he went, 'I can do no more.  
Heaven have mercy on them!--Alas! I say I can do no more for them, 
but whom can I help?  Mary Rudge will have a home, and a firm 
friend when she most wants one; but Barnaby--poor Barnaby--willing 
Barnaby--what aid can I render him?  There are many, many men of 
sense, God forgive me,' cried the honest locksmith, stopping in a 
narrow count to pass his hand across his eyes, 'I could better 
afford to lose than Barnaby.  We have always been good friends, but 
I never knew, till now, how much I loved the lad.'

There were not many in the great city who thought of Barnaby that 
day, otherwise than as an actor in a show which was to take place 
to-morrow.  But if the whole population had had him in their minds, 
and had wished his life to be spared, not one among them could have 
done so with a purer zeal or greater singleness of heart than the 
good locksmith.

Barnaby was to die.  There was no hope.  It is not the least evil 
attendant upon the frequent exhibition of this last dread 
punishment, of Death, that it hardens the minds of those who deal 
it out, and makes them, though they be amiable men in other 
respects, indifferent to, or unconscious of, their great 
responsibility.  The word had gone forth that Barnaby was to die.  
It went forth, every month, for lighter crimes.  It was a thing so 
common, that very few were startled by the awful sentence, or 
cared to question its propriety.  Just then, too, when the law had 
been so flagrantly outraged, its dignity must be asserted.  The 
symbol of its dignity,--stamped upon every page of the criminal 
statute-book,--was the gallows; and Barnaby was to die.

They had tried to save him.  The locksmith had carried petitions 
and memorials to the fountain-head, with his own hands.  But the 
well was not one of mercy, and Barnaby was to die.

From the first his mother had never left him, save at night; and 
with her beside him, he was as usual contented.  On this last day, 
he was more elated and more proud than he had been yet; and when 
she dropped the book she had been reading to him aloud, and fell 
upon his neck, he stopped in his busy task of folding a piece of 
crape about his hat, and wondered at her anguish.  Grip uttered a 
feeble croak, half in encouragement, it seemed, and half in 
remonstrance, but he wanted heart to sustain it, and lapsed 
abruptly into silence.

With them who stood upon the brink of the great gulf which none can 
see beyond, Time, so soon to lose itself in vast Eternity, rolled 
on like a mighty river, swollen and rapid as it nears the sea.  It 
was morning but now; they had sat and talked together in a dream; 
and here was evening.  The dreadful hour of separation, which even 
yesterday had seemed so distant, was at hand.

They walked out into the courtyard, clinging to each other, but not 
speaking.  Barnaby knew that the jail was a dull, sad, miserable 
place, and looked forward to to-morrow, as to a passage from it to 
something bright and beautiful.  He had a vague impression too, 
that he was expected to be brave--that he was a man of great 
consequence, and that the prison people would be glad to make him 
weep.  He trod the ground more firmly as he thought of this, and 
bade her take heart and cry no more, and feel how steady his hand 
was.  'They call me silly, mother.  They shall see to-morrow!'

Dennis and Hugh were in the courtyard.  Hugh came forth from his 
cell as they did, stretching himself as though he had been 
sleeping.  Dennis sat upon a bench in a corner, with his knees and 
chin huddled together, and rocked himself to and fro like a person 
in severe pain.

The mother and son remained on one side of the court, and these two 
men upon the other.  Hugh strode up and down, glancing fiercely 
every now and then at the bright summer sky, and looking round, 
when he had done so, at the walls.

'No reprieve, no reprieve!  Nobody comes near us.  There's only the 
night left now!' moaned Dennis faintly, as he wrung his hands.  'Do 
you think they'll reprieve me in the night, brother?  I've known 
reprieves come in the night, afore now.  I've known 'em come as 
late as five, six, and seven o'clock in the morning.  Don't you 
think there's a good chance yet,--don't you?  Say you do.  Say you 
do, young man,' whined the miserable creature, with an imploring 
gesture towards Barnaby, 'or I shall go mad!'

'Better be mad than sane, here,' said Hugh.  'GO mad.'

'But tell me what you think.  Somebody tell me what he thinks!' 
cried the wretched object,--so mean, and wretched, and despicable, 
that even Pity's self might have turned away, at sight of such a 
being in the likeness of a man--'isn't there a chance for me,--
isn't there a good chance for me?  Isn't it likely they may be 
doing this to frighten me?  Don't you think it is?  Oh!' he almost 
shrieked, as he wrung his hands, 'won't anybody give me comfort!'

'You ought to be the best, instead of the worst,' said Hugh, 
stopping before him.  'Ha, ha, ha!  See the hangman, when it comes 
home to him!'

'You don't know what it is,' cried Dennis, actually writhing as he 
spoke: 'I do.  That I should come to be worked off!  I!  I!  That I 
should come!'

'And why not?' said Hugh, as he thrust back his matted hair to get 
a better view of his late associate.  'How often, before I knew 
your trade, did I hear you talking of this as if it was a treat?'

'I an't unconsistent,' screamed the miserable creature; 'I'd talk 
so again, if I was hangman.  Some other man has got my old 
opinions at this minute.  That makes it worse.  Somebody's longing 
to work me off.  I know by myself that somebody must be!'

'He'll soon have his longing,' said Hugh, resuming his walk.  
'Think of that, and be quiet.'

Although one of these men displayed, in his speech and bearing, the 
most reckless hardihood; and the other, in his every word and 
action, testified such an extreme of abject cowardice that it was 
humiliating to see him; it would be difficult to say which of them 
would most have repelled and shocked an observer.  Hugh's was the 
dogged desperation of a savage at the stake; the hangman was 
reduced to a condition little better, if any, than that of a hound 
with the halter round his neck.  Yet, as Mr Dennis knew and could 
have told them, these were the two commonest states of mind in 
persons brought to their pass.  Such was the wholesome growth of 
the seed sown by the law, that this kind of harvest was usually 
looked for, as a matter of course.

In one respect they all agreed.  The wandering and uncontrollable 
train of thought, suggesting sudden recollections of things distant 
and long forgotten and remote from each other--the vague restless 
craving for something undefined, which nothing could satisfy--the 
swift flight of the minutes, fusing themselves into hours, as if by 
enchantment--the rapid coming of the solemn night--the shadow of 
death always upon them, and yet so dim and faint, that objects the 
meanest and most trivial started from the gloom beyond, and forced 
themselves upon the view--the impossibility of holding the mind, 
even if they had been so disposed, to penitence and preparation, or 
of keeping it to any point while one hideous fascination tempted it 
away--these things were common to them all, and varied only in 
their outward tokens.

'Fetch me the book I left within--upon your bed,' she said to 
Barnaby, as the clock struck.  'Kiss me first.'

He looked in her face, and saw there, that the time was come.  
After a long embrace, he tore himself away, and ran to bring it to 
her; bidding her not stir till he came back.  He soon returned, for 
a shriek recalled him,--but she was gone.

He ran to the yard-gate, and looked through.  They were carrying 
her away.  She had said her heart would break.  It was better so.

'Don't you think,' whimpered Dennis, creeping up to him, as he 
stood with his feet rooted to the ground, gazing at the blank 
walls--'don't you think there's still a chance?  It's a dreadful 
end; it's a terrible end for a man like me.  Don't you think 
there's a chance?  I don't mean for you, I mean for me.  Don't let 
HIM hear us (meaning Hugh); 'he's so desperate.'

Now then,' said the officer, who had been lounging in and out with 
his hands in his pockets, and yawning as if he were in the last 
extremity for some subject of interest: 'it's time to turn in, 
boys.'

'Not yet,' cried Dennis, 'not yet.  Not for an hour yet.'

'I say,--your watch goes different from what it used to,' returned 
the man.  'Once upon a time it was always too fast.  It's got the 
other fault now.'

'My friend,' cried the wretched creature, falling on his knees, 'my 
dear friend--you always were my dear friend--there's some mistake.  
Some letter has been mislaid, or some messenger has been stopped 
upon the way.  He may have fallen dead.  I saw a man once, fall 
down dead in the street, myself, and he had papers in his pocket.  
Send to inquire.  Let somebody go to inquire.  They never will hang 
me.  They never can.--Yes, they will,' he cried, starting to his 
feet with a terrible scream.  'They'll hang me by a trick, and keep 
the pardon back.  It's a plot against me.  I shall lose my life!'  
And uttering another yell, he fell in a fit upon the ground.

'See the hangman when it comes home to him!' cried Hugh again, as 
they bore him away--'Ha ha ha!  Courage, bold Barnaby, what care 
we?  Your hand!  They do well to put us out of the world, for if we 
got loose a second time, we wouldn't let them off so easy, eh?  
Another shake!  A man can die but once.  If you wake in the night, 
sing that out lustily, and fall asleep again.  Ha ha ha!'

Barnaby glanced once more through the grate into the empty yard; 
and then watched Hugh as he strode to the steps leading to his 
sleeping-cell.  He heard him shout, and burst into a roar of 
laughter, and saw him flourish his hat.  Then he turned away 
himself, like one who walked in his sleep; and, without any sense 
of fear or sorrow, lay down on his pallet, listening for the clock 
to strike again.



Chapter 77


The time wore on.  The noises in the streets became less frequent 
by degrees, until silence was scarcely broken save by the bells in 
church towers, marking the progress--softer and more stealthy 
while the city slumbered--of that Great Watcher with the hoary 
head, who never sleeps or rests.  In the brief interval of darkness 
and repose which feverish towns enjoy, all busy sounds were hushed; 
and those who awoke from dreams lay listening in their beds, and 
longed for dawn, and wished the dead of the night were past.

Into the street outside the jail's main wall, workmen came 
straggling at this solemn hour, in groups of two or three, and 
meeting in the centre, cast their tools upon the ground and spoke 
in whispers.  Others soon issued from the jail itself, bearing on 
their shoulders planks and beams: these materials being all brought 
forth, the rest bestirred themselves, and the dull sound of hammers 
began to echo through the stillness.

Here and there among this knot of labourers, one, with a lantern or 
a smoky link, stood by to light his fellows at their work; and by 
its doubtful aid, some might be dimly seen taking up the pavement 
of the road, while others held great upright posts, or fixed them 
in the holes thus made for their reception.  Some dragged slowly 
on, towards the rest, an empty cart, which they brought rumbling 
from the prison-yard; while others erected strong barriers across 
the street.  All were busily engaged.  Their dusky figures moving 
to and fro, at that unusual hour, so active and so silent, might 
have been taken for those of shadowy creatures toiling at midnight 
on some ghostly unsubstantial work, which, like themselves, would 
vanish with the first gleam of day, and leave but morning mist and 
vapour.

While it was yet dark, a few lookers-on collected, who had plainly 
come there for the purpose and intended to remain: even those who 
had to pass the spot on their way to some other place, lingered, 
and lingered yet, as though the attraction of that were 
irresistible.  Meanwhile the noise of saw and mallet went on 
briskly, mingled with the clattering of boards on the stone 
pavement of the road, and sometimes with the workmen's voices as 
they called to one another.  Whenever the chimes of the 
neighbouring church were heard--and that was every quarter of an 
hour--a strange sensation, instantaneous and indescribable, but 
perfectly obvious, seemed to pervade them all.

Gradually, a faint brightness appeared in the east, and the air, 
which had been very warm all through the night, felt cool and 
chilly.  Though there was no daylight yet, the darkness was 
diminished, and the stars looked pale.  The prison, which had been 
a mere black mass with little shape or form, put on its usual 
aspect; and ever and anon a solitary watchman could be seen upon 
its roof, stopping to look down upon the preparations in the 
street.  This man, from forming, as it were, a part of the jail, 
and knowing or being supposed to know all that was passing within, 
became an object of as much interest, and was as eagerly looked 
for, and as awfully pointed out, as if he had been a spirit.

By and by, the feeble light grew stronger, and the houses with 
their signboards and inscriptions, stood plainly out, in the dull 
grey morning.  Heavy stage waggons crawled from the inn-yard 
opposite; and travellers peeped out; and as they rolled sluggishly 
away, cast many a backward look towards the jail.  And now, the 
sun's first beams came glancing into the street; and the night's 
work, which, in its various stages and in the varied fancies of the 
lookers-on had taken a hundred shapes, wore its own proper form--a 
scaffold, and a gibbet.

As the warmth of the cheerful day began to shed itself upon the 
scanty crowd, the murmur of tongues was heard, shutters were thrown 
open, and blinds drawn up, and those who had slept in rooms over 
against the prison, where places to see the execution were let at 
high prices, rose hastily from their beds.  In some of the houses, 
people were busy taking out the window-sashes for the better 
accommodation of spectators; in others, the spectators were already 
seated, and beguiling the time with cards, or drink, or jokes among 
themselves.  Some had purchased seats upon the house-tops, and 
were already crawling to their stations from parapet and garret-
window.  Some were yet bargaining for good places, and stood in 
them in a state of indecision: gazing at the slowly-swelling crowd, 
and at the workmen as they rested listlessly against the scaffold--
affecting to listen with indifference to the proprietor's eulogy of 
the commanding view his house afforded, and the surpassing 
cheapness of his terms.

A fairer morning never shone.  From the roofs and upper stories of 
these buildings, the spires of city churches and the great 
cathedral dome were visible, rising up beyond the prison, into the 
blue sky, and clad in the colour of light summer clouds, and 
showing in the clear atmosphere their every scrap of tracery and 
fretwork, and every niche and loophole.  All was brightness and 
promise, excepting in the street below, into which (for it yet lay 
in shadow) the eye looked down as into a dark trench, where, in the 
midst of so much life, and hope, and renewal of existence, stood 
the terrible instrument of death.  It seemed as if the very sun 
forbore to look upon it.

But it was better, grim and sombre in the shade, than when, the day 
being more advanced, it stood confessed in the full glare and glory 
of the sun, with its black paint blistering, and its nooses 
dangling in the light like loathsome garlands.  It was better in 
the solitude and gloom of midnight with a few forms clustering 
about it, than in the freshness and the stir of morning: the centre 
of an eager crowd.  It was better haunting the street like a 
spectre, when men were in their beds, and influencing perchance the 
city's dreams, than braving the broad day, and thrusting its 
obscene presence upon their waking senses.

Five o'clock had struck--six--seven--and eight.  Along the two main 
streets at either end of the cross-way, a living stream had now 
set in, rolling towards the marts of gain and business.  Carts, 
coaches, waggons, trucks, and barrows, forced a passage through the 
outskirts of the throng, and clattered onward in the same 
direction.  Some of these which were public conveyances and had 
come from a short distance in the country, stopped; and the driver 
pointed to the gibbet with his whip, though he might have spared 
himself the pains, for the heads of all the passengers were turned 
that way without his help, and the coach-windows were stuck full of 
staring eyes.  In some of the carts and waggons, women might be 
seen, glancing fearfully at the same unsightly thing; and even 
little children were held up above the people's heads to see what 
kind of a toy a gallows was, and learn how men were hanged.

Two rioters were to die before the prison, who had been concerned 
in the attack upon it; and one directly afterwards in Bloomsbury 
Square.  At nine o'clock, a strong body of military marched into 
the street, and formed and lined a narrow passage into Holborn, 
which had been indifferently kept all night by constables.  Through 
this, another cart was brought (the one already mentioned had been 
employed in the construction of the scaffold), and wheeled up to 
the prison-gate.  These preparations made, the soldiers stood at 
ease; the officers lounged to and fro, in the alley they had made, 
or talked together at the scaffold's foot; and the concourse, 
which had been rapidly augmenting for some hours, and still 
received additions every minute, waited with an impatience which 
increased with every chime of St Sepulchre's clock, for twelve at 
noon.

Up to this time they had been very quiet, comparatively silent, 
save when the arrival of some new party at a window, hitherto 
unoccupied, gave them something new to look at or to talk of.  But, 
as the hour approached, a buzz and hum arose, which, deepening 
every moment, soon swelled into a roar, and seemed to fill the air.  
No words or even voices could be distinguished in this clamour, nor 
did they speak much to each other; though such as were better 
informed upon the topic than the rest, would tell their neighbours, 
perhaps, that they might know the hangman when he came out, by his 
being the shorter one: and that the man who was to suffer with him 
was named Hugh: and that it was Barnaby Rudge who would be hanged 
in Bloomsbury Square.

The hum grew, as the time drew near, so loud, that those who were 
at the windows could not hear the church-clock strike, though it 
was close at hand.  Nor had they any need to hear it, either, for 
they could see it in the people's faces.  So surely as another 
quarter chimed, there was a movement in the crowd--as if something 
had passed over it--as if the light upon them had been changed--in 
which the fact was readable as on a brazen dial, figured by a 
giant's hand.

Three quarters past eleven!  The murmur now was deafening, yet 
every man seemed mute.  Look where you would among the crowd, you 
saw strained eyes and lips compressed; it would have been difficult 
for the most vigilant observer to point this way or that, and say 
that yonder man had cried out.  It were as easy to detect the 
motion of lips in a sea-shell.

Three quarters past eleven!  Many spectators who had retired from 
the windows, came back refreshed, as though their watch had just 
begun.  Those who had fallen asleep, roused themselves; and every 
person in the crowd made one last effort to better his position--
which caused a press against the sturdy barriers that made them 
bend and yield like twigs.  The officers, who until now had kept 
together, fell into their several positions, and gave the words of 
command.  Swords were drawn, muskets shouldered, and the bright 
steel winding its way among the crowd, gleamed and glittered in the 
sun like a river.  Along this shining path, two men came hurrying 
on, leading a horse, which was speedily harnessed to the cart at 
the prison-door.  Then, a profound silence replaced the tumult that 
had so long been gathering, and a breathless pause ensued.  Every 
window was now choked up with heads; the house-tops teemed with 
people--clinging to chimneys, peering over gable-ends, and holding 
on where the sudden loosening of any brick or stone would dash them 
down into the street.  The church tower, the church roof, the 
church yard, the prison leads, the very water-spouts and 
lampposts--every inch of room--swarmed with human life.

At the first stroke of twelve the prison-bell began to toll.  Then 
the roar--mingled now with cries of 'Hats off!' and 'Poor fellows!' 
and, from some specks in the great concourse, with a shriek or 
groan--burst forth again.  It was terrible to see--if any one in 
that distraction of excitement could have seen--the world of eager 
eyes, all strained upon the scaffold and the beam.

The hollow murmuring was heard within the jail as plainly as 
without.  The three were brought forth into the yard, together, as 
it resounded through the air.  They knew its import well.

'D'ye hear?' cried Hugh, undaunted by the sound.  'They expect us!  
I heard them gathering when I woke in the night, and turned over on 
t'other side and fell asleep again.  We shall see how they welcome 
the hangman, now that it comes home to him.  Ha, ha, ha!'

The Ordinary coming up at this moment, reproved him for his 
indecent mirth, and advised him to alter his demeanour.

'And why, master?' said Hugh.  'Can I do better than bear it 
easily?  YOU bear it easily enough.  Oh! never tell me,' he cried, 
as the other would have spoken, 'for all your sad look and your 
solemn air, you think little enough of it!  They say you're the 
best maker of lobster salads in London.  Ha, ha!  I've heard that, 
you see, before now.  Is it a good one, this morning--is your hand 
in?  How does the breakfast look?  I hope there's enough, and to 
spare, for all this hungry company that'll sit down to it, when the 
sight's over.'

'I fear,' observed the clergyman, shaking his head, 'that you are 
incorrigible.'

'You're right.  I am,' rejoined Hugh sternly.  'Be no hypocrite, 
master!  You make a merry-making of this, every month; let me be 
merry, too.  If you want a frightened fellow there's one that'll 
suit you.  Try your hand upon him.'

He pointed, as he spoke, to Dennis, who, with his legs trailing on 
the ground, was held between two men; and who trembled so, that all 
his joints and limbs seemed racked by spasms.  Turning from this 
wretched spectacle, he called to Barnaby, who stood apart.

'What cheer, Barnaby?  Don't be downcast, lad.  Leave that to HIM.'

'Bless you,' cried Barnaby, stepping lightly towards him, 'I'm not 
frightened, Hugh.  I'm quite happy.  I wouldn't desire to live now, 
if they'd let me.  Look at me!  Am I afraid to die?  Will they see 
ME tremble?'

Hugh gazed for a moment at his face, on which there was a strange, 
unearthly smile; and at his eye, which sparkled brightly; and 
interposing between him and the Ordinary, gruffly whispered to the 
latter:

'I wouldn't say much to him, master, if I was you.  He may spoil 
your appetite for breakfast, though you ARE used to it.'

He was the only one of the three who had washed or trimmed himself 
that morning.  Neither of the others had done so, since their doom 
was pronounced.  He still wore the broken peacock's feathers in his 
hat; and all his usual scraps of finery were carefully disposed 
about his person.  His kindling eye, his firm step, his proud and 
resolute bearing, might have graced some lofty act of heroism; some 
voluntary sacrifice, born of a noble cause and pure enthusiasm; 
rather than that felon's death.

But all these things increased his guilt.  They were mere 
assumptions.  The law had declared it so, and so it must be.  The 
good minister had been greatly shocked, not a quarter of an hour 
before, at his parting with Grip.  For one in his condition, to 
fondle a bird!--The yard was filled with people; bluff civic 
functionaries, officers of justice, soldiers, the curious in such 
matters, and guests who had been bidden as to a wedding.  Hugh 
looked about him, nodded gloomily to some person in authority, who 
indicated with his hand in what direction he was to proceed; and 
clapping Barnaby on the shoulder, passed out with the gait of a 
lion.

They entered a large room, so near to the scaffold that the voices 
of those who stood about it, could be plainly heard: some 
beseeching the javelin-men to take them out of the crowd: others 
crying to those behind, to stand back, for they were pressed to 
death, and suffocating for want of air.

In the middle of this chamber, two smiths, with hammers, stood 
beside an anvil.  Hugh walked straight up to them, and set his foot 
upon it with a sound as though it had been struck by a heavy 
weapon.  Then, with folded arms, he stood to have his irons knocked 
off: scowling haughtily round, as those who were present eyed him 
narrowly and whispered to each other.

It took so much time to drag Dennis in, that this ceremony was over 
with Hugh, and nearly over with Barnaby, before he appeared.  He no 
sooner came into the place he knew so well, however, and among 
faces with which he was so familiar, than he recovered strength and 
sense enough to clasp his hands and make a last appeal.

'Gentlemen, good gentlemen,' cried the abject creature, grovelling 
down upon his knees, and actually prostrating himself upon the 
stone floor: 'Governor, dear governor--honourable sheriffs--worthy 
gentlemen--have mercy upon a wretched man that has served His 
Majesty, and the Law, and Parliament, for so many years, and don't--
don't let me die--because of a mistake.'

'Dennis,' said the governor of the jail, 'you know what the course 
is, and that the order came with the rest.  You know that we could 
do nothing, even if we would.'

'All I ask, sir,--all I want and beg, is time, to make it sure,' 
cried the trembling wretch, looking wildly round for sympathy.  
'The King and Government can't know it's me; I'm sure they can't 
know it's me; or they never would bring me to this dreadful 
slaughterhouse.  They know my name, but they don't know it's the 
same man.  Stop my execution--for charity's sake stop my execution, 
gentlemen--till they can be told that I've been hangman here, nigh 
thirty year.  Will no one go and tell them?' he implored, clenching 
his hands and glaring round, and round, and round again--'will no 
charitable person go and tell them!'

'Mr Akerman,' said a gentleman who stood by, after a moment's 
pause, 'since it may possibly produce in this unhappy man a better 
frame of mind, even at this last minute, let me assure him that he 
was well known to have been the hangman, when his sentence was 
considered.'

'--But perhaps they think on that account that the punishment's not 
so great,' cried the criminal, shuffling towards this speaker on 
his knees, and holding up his folded hands; 'whereas it's worse, 
it's worse a hundred times, to me than any man.  Let them know 
that, sir.  Let them know that.  They've made it worse to me by 
giving me so much to do.  Stop my execution till they know that!'

The governor beckoned with his hand, and the two men, who had 
supported him before, approached.  He uttered a piercing cry:

'Wait!  Wait.  Only a moment--only one moment more!  Give me a last 
chance of reprieve.  One of us three is to go to Bloomsbury Square.  
Let me be the one.  It may come in that time; it's sure to come.  
In the Lord's name let me be sent to Bloomsbury Square.  Don't hang 
me here.  It's murder.'

They took him to the anvil: but even then he could he heard above 
the clinking of the smiths' hammers, and the hoarse raging of the 
crowd, crying that he knew of Hugh's birth--that his father was 
living, and was a gentleman of influence and rank--that he had 
family secrets in his possession--that he could tell nothing unless 
they gave him time, but must die with them on his mind; and he 
continued to rave in this sort until his voice failed him, and he 
sank down a mere heap of clothes between the two attendants.

It was at this moment that the clock struck the first stroke of 
twelve, and the bell began to toll.  The various officers, with the 
two sheriffs at their head, moved towards the door.  All was ready 
when the last chime came upon the ear.

They told Hugh this, and asked if he had anything to say.

'To say!' he cried.  'Not I.  I'm ready.--Yes,' he added, as his 
eye fell upon Barnaby, 'I have a word to say, too.  Come hither, 
lad.'

There was, for the moment, something kind, and even tender, 
struggling in his fierce aspect, as he wrung his poor companion by 
the hand.

'I'll say this,' he cried, looking firmly round, 'that if I had ten 
lives to lose, and the loss of each would give me ten times the 
agony of the hardest death, I'd lay them all down--ay, I would, 
though you gentlemen may not believe it--to save this one.  This 
one,' he added, wringing his hand again, 'that will be lost through 
me.'

'Not through you,' said the idiot, mildly.  'Don't say that.  You 
were not to blame.  You have always been very good to me.--Hugh, we 
shall know what makes the stars shine, NOW!'

'I took him from her in a reckless mood, and didn't think what harm 
would come of it,' said Hugh, laying his hand upon his head, and 
speaking in a lower voice.  'I ask her pardon; and his.--Look 
here,' he added roughly, in his former tone.  'You see this lad?'

They murmured 'Yes,' and seemed to wonder why he asked.

'That gentleman yonder--' pointing to the clergyman--'has often in 
the last few days spoken to me of faith, and strong belief.  You 
see what I am--more brute than man, as I have been often told--but 
I had faith enough to believe, and did believe as strongly as any 
of you gentlemen can believe anything, that this one life would be 
spared.  See what he is!--Look at him!'

Barnaby had moved towards the door, and stood beckoning him to 
follow.

'If this was not faith, and strong belief!' cried Hugh, raising 
his right arm aloft, and looking upward like a savage prophet whom 
the near approach of Death had filled with inspiration, 'where are 
they!  What else should teach me--me, born as I was born, and 
reared as I have been reared--to hope for any mercy in this 
hardened, cruel, unrelenting place!  Upon these human shambles, I, 
who never raised this hand in prayer till now, call down the wrath 
of God!  On that black tree, of which I am the ripened fruit, I do 
invoke the curse of all its victims, past, and present, and to 
come.  On the head of that man, who, in his conscience, owns me for 
his son, I leave the wish that he may never sicken on his bed of 
down, but die a violent death as I do now, and have the night-wind 
for his only mourner.  To this I say, Amen, amen!'

His arm fell downward by his side; he turned; and moved towards 
them with a steady step, the man he had been before.

'There is nothing more?' said the governor.

Hugh motioned Barnaby not to come near him (though without looking 
in the direction where he stood) and answered, 'There is nothing 
more.'

'Move forward!'

'--Unless,' said Hugh, glancing hurriedly back,--'unless any 
person here has a fancy for a dog; and not then, unless he means to 
use him well.  There's one, belongs to me, at the house I came 
from, and it wouldn't be easy to find a better.  He'll whine at 
first, but he'll soon get over that.--You wonder that I think about 
a dog just now, he added, with a kind of laugh.  'If any man 
deserved it of me half as well, I'd think of HIM.'

He spoke no more, but moved onward in his place, with a careless 
air, though listening at the same time to the Service for the Dead, 
with something between sullen attention, and quickened curiosity.  
As soon as he had passed the door, his miserable associate was 
carried out; and the crowd beheld the rest.

Barnaby would have mounted the steps at the same time--indeed he 
would have gone before them, but in both attempts he was 
restrained, as he was to undergo the sentence elsewhere.  In a few 
minutes the sheriffs reappeared, the same procession was again 
formed, and they passed through various rooms and passages to 
another door--that at which the cart was waiting.  He held down his 
head to avoid seeing what he knew his eyes must otherwise 
encounter, and took his seat sorrowfully,--and yet with something 
of a childish pride and pleasure,--in the vehicle.  The officers 
fell into their places at the sides, in front and in the rear; the 
sheriffs' carriages rolled on; a guard of soldiers surrounded the 
whole; and they moved slowly forward through the throng and 
pressure toward Lord Mansfield's ruined house.

It was a sad sight--all the show, and strength, and glitter, 
assembled round one helpless creature--and sadder yet to note, as 
he rode along, how his wandering thoughts found strange 
encouragement in the crowded windows and the concourse in the 
streets; and how, even then, he felt the influence of the bright 
sky, and looked up, smiling, into its deep unfathomable blue.  But 
there had been many such sights since the riots were over--some so 
moving in their nature, and so repulsive too, that they were far 
more calculated to awaken pity for the sufferers, than respect for 
that law whose strong arm seemed in more than one case to be as 
wantonly stretched forth now that all was safe, as it had been 
basely paralysed in time of danger.

Two cripples--both mere boys--one with a leg of wood, one who 
dragged his twisted limbs along by the help of a crutch, were 
hanged in this same Bloomsbury Square.  As the cart was about to 
glide from under them, it was observed that they stood with their 
faces from, not to, the house they had assisted to despoil; and 
their misery was protracted that this omission might be remedied.  
Another boy was hanged in Bow Street; other young lads in various 
quarters of the town.  Four wretched women, too, were put to 
death.  In a word, those who suffered as rioters were, for the most 
part, the weakest, meanest, and most miserable among them.  It was 
a most exquisite satire upon the false religious cry which had led 
to so much misery, that some of these people owned themselves to be 
Catholics, and begged to be attended by their own priests.

One young man was hanged in Bishopsgate Street, whose aged grey-
headed father waited for him at the gallows, kissed him at its foot 
when he arrived, and sat there, on the ground, till they took him 
down.  They would have given him the body of his child; but he had 
no hearse, no coffin, nothing to remove it in, being too poor--and 
walked meekly away beside the cart that took it back to prison, 
trying, as he went, to touch its lifeless hand.

But the crowd had forgotten these matters, or cared little about 
them if they lived in their memory: and while one great multitude 
fought and hustled to get near the gibbet before Newgate, for a 
parting look, another followed in the train of poor lost Barnaby, 
to swell the throng that waited for him on the spot.



Chapter 78


On this same day, and about this very hour, Mr Willet the elder sat 
smoking his pipe in a chamber at the Black Lion.  Although it was 
hot summer weather, Mr Willet sat close to the fire.  He was in a 
state of profound cogitation, with his own thoughts, and it was his 
custom at such times to stew himself slowly, under the impression 
that that process of cookery was favourable to the melting out of 
his ideas, which, when he began to simmer, sometimes oozed forth so 
copiously as to astonish even himself.

Mr Willet had been several thousand times comforted by his friends 
and acquaintance, with the assurance that for the loss he had 
sustained in the damage done to the Maypole, he could 'come upon 
the county.'  But as this phrase happened to bear an unfortunate 
resemblance to the popular expression of 'coming on the parish,' it 
suggested to Mr Willet's mind no more consolatory visions than 
pauperism on an extensive scale, and ruin in a capacious aspect.  
Consequently, he had never failed to receive the intelligence with 
a rueful shake of the head, or a dreary stare, and had been always 
observed to appear much more melancholy after a visit of condolence 
than at any other time in the whole four-and-twenty hours.

It chanced, however, that sitting over the fire on this particular 
occasion--perhaps because he was, as it were, done to a turn; 
perhaps because he was in an unusually bright state of mind; 
perhaps because he had considered the subject so long; perhaps 
because of all these favouring circumstances, taken together--it 
chanced that, sitting over the fire on this particular occasion, Mr 
Willet did, afar off and in the remotest depths of his intellect, 
perceive a kind of lurking hint or faint suggestion, that out of 
the public purse there might issue funds for the restoration of the 
Maypole to its former high place among the taverns of the earth.  
And this dim ray of light did so diffuse itself within him, and did 
so kindle up and shine, that at last he had it as plainly and 
visibly before him as the blaze by which he sat; and, fully 
persuaded that he was the first to make the discovery, and that he 
had started, hunted down, fallen upon, and knocked on the head, a 
perfectly original idea which had never presented itself to any 
other man, alive or dead, he laid down his pipe, rubbed his hands, 
and chuckled audibly.

'Why, father!' cried Joe, entering at the moment, 'you're in 
spirits to-day!'

'It's nothing partickler,' said Mr Willet, chuckling again.  'It's 
nothing at all partickler, Joseph.  Tell me something about the 
Salwanners.'  Having preferred this request, Mr Willet chuckled a 
third time, and after these unusual demonstrations of levity, he 
put his pipe in his mouth again.

'What shall I tell you, father?' asked Joe, laying his hand upon 
his sire's shoulder, and looking down into his face.  'That I have 
come back, poorer than a church mouse?  You know that.  That I have 
come back, maimed and crippled?  You know that.'

'It was took off,' muttered Mr Willet,with his eyes upon the fire, 
'at the defence of the Salwanners, in America, where the war is.'

'Quite right,' returned Joe, smiling, and leaning with his 
remaining elbow on the back of his father's chair; 'the very 
subject I came to speak to you about.  A man with one arm, father, 
is not of much use in the busy world.'

This was one of those vast propositions which Mr Willet had never 
considered for an instant, and required time to 'tackle.'  
Wherefore he made no answer.

'At all events,' said Joe, 'he can't pick and choose his means of 
earning a livelihood, as another man may.  He can't say "I will 
turn my hand to this," or "I won't turn my hand to that," but must 
take what he can do, and be thankful it's no worse.--What did you 
say?'

Mr Willet had been softly repeating to himself, in a musing tone, 
the words 'defence of the Salwanners:' but he seemed embarrassed at 
having been overheard, and answered 'Nothing.'

'Now look here, father.--Mr Edward has come to England from the 
West Indies.  When he was lost sight of (I ran away on the same 
day, father), he made a voyage to one of the islands, where a 
school-friend of his had settled; and, finding him, wasn't too 
proud to be employed on his estate, and--and in short, got on well, 
and is prospering, and has come over here on business of his own, 
and is going back again speedily.  Our returning nearly at the 
same time, and meeting in the course of the late troubles, has been 
a good thing every way; for it has not only enabled us to do old 
friends some service, but has opened a path in life for me which I 
may tread without being a burden upon you.  To be plain, father, he 
can employ me; I have satisfied myself that I can be of real use to 
him; and I am going to carry my one arm away with him, and to make 
the most of it.

In the mind's eye of Mr Willet, the West Indies, and indeed all 
foreign countries, were inhabited by savage nations, who were 
perpetually burying pipes of peace, flourishing tomahawks, and 
puncturing strange patterns in their bodies.  He no sooner heard 
this announcement, therefore, than he leaned back in his chair, 
took his pipe from his lips, and stared at his son with as much 
dismay as if he already beheld him tied to a stake, and tortured 
for the entertainment of a lively population.  In what form of 
expression his feelings would have found a vent, it is impossible 
to say.  Nor is it necessary: for, before a syllable occurred to 
him, Dolly Varden came running into the room, in tears, threw 
herself on Joe's breast without a word of explanation, and clasped 
her white arms round his neck.

'Dolly!' cried Joe.  'Dolly!'

'Ay, call me that; call me that always,' exclaimed the locksmith's 
little daughter; 'never speak coldly to me, never be distant, never 
again reprove me for the follies I have long repented, or I shall 
die, Joe.'

'I reprove you!' said Joe.

'Yes--for every kind and honest word you uttered, went to my heart.  
For you, who have borne so much from me--for you, who owe your 
sufferings and pain to my caprice--for you to be so kind--so noble 
to me, Joe--'

He could say nothing to her.  Not a syllable.  There was an odd 
sort of eloquence in his one arm, which had crept round her waist: 
but his lips were mute.

'If you had reminded me by a word--only by one short word,' sobbed 
Dolly, clinging yet closer to him, 'how little I deserved that you 
should treat me with so much forbearance; if you had exulted only 
for one moment in your triumph, I could have borne it better.'

'Triumph!' repeated Joe, with a smile which seemed to say, 'I am a 
pretty figure for that.'

'Yes, triumph,' she cried, with her whole heart and soul in her 
earnest voice, and gushing tears; 'for it is one.  I am glad to 
think and know it is.  I wouldn't be less humbled, dear--I wouldn't 
be without the recollection of that last time we spoke together in 
this place--no, not if I could recall the past, and make our 
parting, yesterday.'

Did ever lover look as Joe looked now!

'Dear Joe,' said Dolly, 'I always loved you--in my own heart I 
always did, although I was so vain and giddy.  I hoped you would 
come back that night.  I made quite sure you would.  I prayed for 
it on my knees.  Through all these long, long years, I have never 
once forgotten you, or left off hoping that this happy time might 
come.'

The eloquence of Joe's arm surpassed the most impassioned language; 
and so did that of his lips--yet he said nothing, either.

'And now, at last,' cried Dolly, trembling with the fervour of her 
speech, 'if you were sick, and shattered in your every limb; if you 
were ailing, weak, and sorrowful; if, instead of being what you 
are, you were in everybody's eyes but mine the wreck and ruin of a 
man; I would be your wife, dear love, with greater pride and joy, 
than if you were the stateliest lord in England!'

'What have I done,' cried Joe, 'what have I done to meet with this 
reward?'

'You have taught me,' said Dolly, raising her pretty face to his, 
'to know myself, and your worth; to be something better than I 
was; to be more deserving of your true and manly nature.  In years 
to come, dear Joe, you shall find that you have done so; for I will 
be, not only now, when we are young and full of hope, but when we 
have grown old and weary, your patient, gentle, never-tiring 
wife.  I will never know a wish or care beyond our home and you, 
and I will always study how to please you with my best affection 
and my most devoted love.  I will: indeed I will!'

Joe could only repeat his former eloquence--but it was very much to 
the purpose.

'They know of this, at home,' said Dolly.  'For your sake, I would 
leave even them; but they know it, and are glad of it, and are as 
proud of you as I am, and as full of gratitude.--You'll not come 
and see me as a poor friend who knew me when I was a girl, will 
you, dear Joe?'

Well, well!  It don't matter what Joe said in answer, but he said a 
great deal; and Dolly said a great deal too: and he folded Dolly in 
his one arm pretty tight, considering that it was but one; and 
Dolly made no resistance: and if ever two people were happy in this 
world--which is not an utterly miserable one, with all its faults--
we may, with some appearance of certainty, conclude that they 
were.

To say that during these proceedings Mr Willet the elder underwent 
the greatest emotions of astonishment of which our common nature is 
susceptible--to say that he was in a perfect paralysis of surprise, 
and that he wandered into the most stupendous and theretofore 
unattainable heights of complicated amazement--would be to shadow 
forth his state of mind in the feeblest and lamest terms.  If a 
roc, an eagle, a griffin, a flying elephant, a winged sea-horse, 
had suddenly appeared, and, taking him on its back, carried him 
bodily into the heart of the 'Salwanners,' it would have been to 
him as an everyday occurrence, in comparison with what he now 
beheld.  To be sitting quietly by, seeing and hearing these things; 
to be completely overlooked, unnoticed, and disregarded, while his 
son and a young lady were talking to each other in the most 
impassioned manner, kissing each other, and making themselves in 
all respects perfectly at home; was a position so tremendous, so 
inexplicable, so utterly beyond the widest range of his capacity of 
comprehension, that he fell into a lethargy of wonder, and could no 
more rouse himself than an enchanted sleeper in the first year of 
his fairy lease, a century long.

'Father,' said Joe, presenting Dolly.  'You know who this is?'

Mr Willet looked first at her, then at his son, then back again at 
Dolly, and then made an ineffectual effort to extract a whiff from 
his pipe, which had gone out long ago.

'Say a word, father, if it's only "how d'ye do,"' urged Joe.

'Certainly, Joseph,' answered Mr Willet.  'Oh yes!  Why not?'

'To be sure,' said Joe.  'Why not?'

'Ah!' replied his father.  'Why not?' and with this remark, which 
he uttered in a low voice as though he were discussing some grave 
question with himself, he used the little finger--if any of his 
fingers can be said to have come under that denomination--of his 
right hand as a tobacco-stopper, and was silent again.

And so he sat for half an hour at least, although Dolly, in the 
most endearing of manners, hoped, a dozen times, that he was not 
angry with her.  So he sat for half an hour, quite motionless, and 
looking all the while like nothing so much as a great Dutch Pin or 
Skittle.  At the expiration of that period, he suddenly, and 
without the least notice, burst (to the great consternation of the 
young people) into a very loud and very short laugh; and 
repeating, 'Certainly, Joseph.  Oh yes!  Why not?' went out for a 
walk.



Chapter 79


Old John did not walk near the Golden Key, for between the Golden 
Key and the Black Lion there lay a wilderness of streets--as 
everybody knows who is acquainted with the relative bearings of 
Clerkenwell and Whitechapel--and he was by no means famous for 
pedestrian exercises.  But the Golden Key lies in our way, though 
it was out of his; so to the Golden Key this chapter goes.

The Golden Key itself, fair emblem of the locksmith's trade, had 
been pulled down by the rioters, and roughly trampled under foot.  
But, now, it was hoisted up again in all the glory of a new coat of 
paint, and shewed more bravely even than in days of yore.  Indeed 
the whole house-front was spruce and trim, and so freshened up 
throughout, that if there yet remained at large any of the rioters 
who had been concerned in the attack upon it, the sight of the old, 
goodly, prosperous dwelling, so revived, must have been to them as 
gall and wormwood.

The shutters of the shop were closed, however, and the window-
blinds above were all pulled down, and in place of its usual 
cheerful appearance, the house had a look of sadness and an air of 
mourning; which the neighbours, who in old days had often seen poor 
Barnaby go in and out, were at no loss to understand.  The door 
stood partly open; but the locksmith's hammer was unheard; the cat 
sat moping on the ashy forge; all was deserted, dark, and silent.

On the threshold of this door, Mr Haredale and Edward Chester met.  
The younger man gave place; and both passing in with a familiar 
air, which seemed to denote that they were tarrying there, or were 
well-accustomed to go to and fro unquestioned, shut it behind them.

Entering the old back-parlour, and ascending the flight of stairs, 
abrupt and steep, and quaintly fashioned as of old, they turned 
into the best room; the pride of Mrs Varden's heart, and erst the 
scene of Miggs's household labours.

'Varden brought the mother here last evening, he told me?' said Mr 
Haredale.

'She is above-stairs now--in the room over here,' Edward rejoined.  
'Her grief, they say, is past all telling.  I needn't add--for that 
you know beforehand, sir--that the care, humanity, and sympathy of 
these good people have no bounds.'

'I am sure of that.  Heaven repay them for it, and for much more!  
Varden is out?'

'He returned with your messenger, who arrived almost at the moment 
of his coming home himself.  He was out the whole night--but that 
of course you know.  He was with you the greater part of it?'

'He was.  Without him, I should have lacked my right hand.  He is 
an older man than I; but nothing can conquer him.'

'The cheeriest, stoutest-hearted fellow in the world.'

'He has a right to be.  He has a right to he.  A better creature 
never lived.  He reaps what he has sown--no more.'

'It is not all men,' said Edward, after a moment's hesitation, 'who 
have the happiness to do that.'

'More than you imagine,' returned Mr Haredale.  'We note the 
harvest more than the seed-time.  You do so in me.'

In truth his pale and haggard face, and gloomy bearing, had so far 
influenced the remark, that Edward was, for the moment, at a loss 
to answer him.

'Tut, tut,' said Mr Haredale, ''twas not very difficult to read a 
thought so natural.  But you are mistaken nevertheless.  I have 
had my share of sorrows--more than the common lot, perhaps, but I 
have borne them ill.  I have broken where I should have bent; and 
have mused and brooded, when my spirit should have mixed with all 
God's great creation.  The men who learn endurance, are they who 
call the whole world, brother.  I have turned FROM the world, and I 
pay the penalty.'

Edward would have interposed, but he went on without giving him 
time.

'It is too late to evade it now.  I sometimes think, that if I had 
to live my life once more, I might amend this fault--not so much, I 
discover when I search my mind, for the love of what is right, as 
for my own sake.  But even when I make these better resolutions, I 
instinctively recoil from the idea of suffering again what I have 
undergone; and in this circumstance I find the unwelcome assurance 
that I should still be the same man, though I could cancel the 
past, and begin anew, with its experience to guide me.'

'Nay, you make too sure of that,' said Edward.

'You think so,' Mr Haredale answered, 'and I am glad you do.  I 
know myself better, and therefore distrust myself more.  Let us 
leave this subject for another--not so far removed from it as it 
might, at first sight, seem to be.  Sir, you still love my niece, 
and she is still attached to you.'

'I have that assurance from her own lips,' said Edward, 'and you 
know--I am sure you know--that I would not exchange it for any 
blessing life could yield me.'

'You are frank, honourable, and disinterested,' said Mr Haredale; 
'you have forced the conviction that you are so, even on my once-
jaundiced mind, and I believe you.  Wait here till I come back.'

He left the room as he spoke; but soon returned with his niece.  
'On that first and only time,' he said, looking from the one to the 
other, 'when we three stood together under her father's roof, I 
told you to quit it, and charged you never to return.'

'It is the only circumstance arising out of our love,' observed 
Edward, 'that I have forgotten.'

'You own a name,' said Mr Haredale, 'I had deep reason to remember.  
I was moved and goaded by recollections of personal wrong and 
injury, I know, but, even now I cannot charge myself with having, 
then, or ever, lost sight of a heartfelt desire for her true 
happiness; or with having acted--however much I was mistaken--with 
any other impulse than the one pure, single, earnest wish to be to 
her, as far as in my inferior nature lay, the father she had lost.'

'Dear uncle,' cried Emma, 'I have known no parent but you.  I have 
loved the memory of others, but I have loved you all my life.  
Never was father kinder to his child than you have been to me, 
without the interval of one harsh hour, since I can first 
remember.'

'You speak too fondly,' he answered, 'and yet I cannot wish you 
were less partial; for I have a pleasure in hearing those words, 
and shall have in calling them to mind when we are far asunder, 
which nothing else could give me.  Bear with me for a moment 
longer, Edward, for she and I have been together many years; and 
although I believe that in resigning her to you I put the seal upon 
her future happiness, I find it needs an effort.'

He pressed her tenderly to his bosom, and after a minute's pause, 
resumed:

'I have done you wrong, sir, and I ask your forgiveness--in no 
common phrase, or show of sorrow; but with earnestness and 
sincerity.  In the same spirit, I acknowledge to you both that the 
time has been when I connived at treachery and falsehood--which if 
I did not perpetrate myself, I still permitted--to rend you two 
asunder.'

'You judge yourself too harshly,' said Edward.  'Let these things 
rest.'

'They rise in judgment against me when I look back, and not now for 
the first time,' he answered.  'I cannot part from you without your 
full forgiveness; for busy life and I have little left in common 
now, and I have regrets enough to carry into solitude, without 
addition to the stock.'

'You bear a blessing from us both,' said Emma.  'Never mingle 
thoughts of me--of me who owe you so much love and duty--with 
anything but undying affection and gratitude for the past, and 
bright hopes for the future.'

'The future,' returned her uncle, with a melancholy smile, 'is a 
bright word for you, and its image should be wreathed with 
cheerful hopes.  Mine is of another kind, but it will be one of 
peace, and free, I trust, from care or passion.  When you quit 
England I shall leave it too.  There are cloisters abroad; and now 
that the two great objects of my life are set at rest, I know no 
better home.  You droop at that, forgetting that I am growing old, 
and that my course is nearly run.  Well, we will speak of it again--
not once or twice, but many times; and you shall give me cheerful 
counsel, Emma.'

'And you will take it?' asked his niece.

'I'll listen to it,' he answered, with a kiss, 'and it will have 
its weight, be certain.  What have I left to say?  You have, of 
late, been much together.  It is better and more fitting that the 
circumstances attendant on the past, which wrought your separation, 
and sowed between you suspicion and distrust, should not be entered 
on by me.'

'Much, much better,' whispered Emma.

'I avow my share in them,' said Mr Haredale, 'though I held it, at 
the time, in detestation.  Let no man turn aside, ever so slightly, 
from the broad path of honour, on the plausible pretence that he is 
justified by the goodness of his end.  All good ends can he worked 
out by good means.  Those that cannot, are bad; and may be counted 
so at once, and left alone.'

He looked from her to Edward, and said in a gentler tone:

'In goods and fortune you are now nearly equal.  I have been her 
faithful steward, and to that remnant of a richer property which my 
brother left her, I desire to add, in token of my love, a poor 
pittance, scarcely worth the mention, for which I have no longer 
any need.  I am glad you go abroad.  Let our ill-fated house 
remain the ruin it is.  When you return, after a few thriving 
years, you will command a better, and a more fortunate one.  We are 
friends?'

Edward took his extended hand, and grasped it heartily.

'You are neither slow nor cold in your response,' said Mr Haredale, 
doing the like by him, 'and when I look upon you now, and know you, 
I feel that I would choose you for her husband.  Her father had a 
generous nature, and you would have pleased him well.  I give her 
to you in his name, and with his blessing.  If the world and I part 
in this act, we part on happier terms than we have lived for many a 
day.'

He placed her in his arms, and would have left the room, but that 
he was stopped in his passage to the door by a great noise at a 
distance, which made them start and pause.

It was a loud shouting, mingled with boisterous acclamations, that 
rent the very air.  It drew nearer and nearer every moment, and 
approached so rapidly, that, even while they listened, it burst 
into a deafening confusion of sounds at the street corner.

'This must be stopped--quieted,' said Mr Haredale, hastily.  'We 
should have foreseen this, and provided against it.  I will go out 
to them at once.'

But, before he could reach the door, and before Edward could catch 
up his hat and follow him, they were again arrested by a loud 
shriek from above-stairs: and the locksmith's wife, bursting in, 
and fairly running into Mr Haredale's arms, cried out:

'She knows it all, dear sir!--she knows it all!  We broke it out to 
her by degrees, and she is quite prepared.'  Having made this 
communication, and furthermore thanked Heaven with great fervour 
and heartiness, the good lady, according to the custom of matrons, 
on all occasions of excitement, fainted away directly.

They ran to the window, drew up the sash, and looked into the 
crowded street.  Among a dense mob of persons, of whom not one was 
for an instant still, the locksmith's ruddy face and burly form 
could be descried, beating about as though he was struggling with a 
rough sea.  Now, he was carried back a score of yards, now onward 
nearly to the door, now back again, now forced against the opposite 
houses, now against those adjoining his own: now carried up a 
flight of steps, and greeted by the outstretched hands of half a 
hundred men, while the whole tumultuous concourse stretched their 
throats, and cheered with all their might.  Though he was really in 
a fair way to be torn to pieces in the general enthusiasm, the 
locksmith, nothing discomposed, echoed their shouts till he was as 
hoarse as they, and in a glow of joy and right good-humour, waved 
his hat until the daylight shone between its brim and crown.

But in all the bandyings from hand to hand, and strivings to and 
fro, and sweepings here and there, which--saving that he looked 
more jolly and more radiant after every struggle--troubled his 
peace of mind no more than if he had been a straw upon the water's 
surface, he never once released his firm grasp of an arm, drawn 
tight through his.  He sometimes turned to clap this friend upon 
the back, or whisper in his ear a word of staunch encouragement, or 
cheer him with a smile; but his great care was to shield him from 
the pressure, and force a passage for him to the Golden Key.  
Passive and timid, scared, pale, and wondering, and gazing at the 
throng as if he were newly risen from the dead, and felt himself a 
ghost among the living, Barnaby--not Barnaby in the spirit, but in 
flesh and blood, with pulses, sinews, nerves, and beating heart, 
and strong affections--clung to his stout old friend, and followed 
where he led.

And thus, in course of time, they reached the door, held ready for 
their entrance by no unwilling hands.  Then slipping in, and 
shutting out the crowd by main force, Gabriel stood between Mr 
Haredale and Edward Chester, and Barnaby, rushing up the stairs, 
fell upon his knees beside his mother's bed.

'Such is the blessed end, sir,' cried the panting locksmith, to Mr 
Haredale, 'of the best day's work we ever did.  The rogues! it's 
been hard fighting to get away from 'em.  I almost thought, once or 
twice, they'd have been too much for us with their kindness!'

They had striven, all the previous day, to rescue Barnaby from his 
impending fate.  Failing in their attempts, in the first quarter 
to which they addressed themselves, they renewed them in another.  
Failing there, likewise, they began afresh at midnight; and made 
their way, not only to the judge and jury who had tried him, but to 
men of influence at court, to the young Prince of Wales, and even 
to the ante-chamber of the King himself.  Successful, at last, in 
awakening an interest in his favour, and an inclination to inquire 
more dispassionately into his case, they had had an interview with 
the minister, in his bed, so late as eight o'clock that morning.  
The result of a searching inquiry (in which they, who had known the 
poor fellow from his childhood, did other good service, besides 
bringing it about) was, that between eleven and twelve o'clock, a 
free pardon to Barnaby Rudge was made out and signed, and entrusted 
to a horse-soldier for instant conveyance to the place of 
execution.  This courier reached the spot just as the cart appeared 
in sight; and Barnaby being carried back to jail, Mr Haredale, 
assured that all was safe, had gone straight from Bloomsbury Square 
to the Golden Key, leaving to Gabriel the grateful task of bringing 
him home in triumph.

'I needn't say,' observed the locksmith, when he had shaken hands 
with all the males in the house, and hugged all the females, five-
and-forty times, at least, 'that, except among ourselves, I didn't 
want to make a triumph of it.  But, directly we got into the street 
we were known, and this hubbub began.  Of the two,' he added, as he 
wiped his crimson face, 'and after experience of both, I think I'd 
rather be taken out of my house by a crowd of enemies, than 
escorted home by a mob of friends!'

It was plain enough, however, that this was mere talk on Gabriel's 
part, and that the whole proceeding afforded him the keenest 
delight; for the people continuing to make a great noise without, 
and to cheer as if their voices were in the freshest order, and 
good for a fortnight, he sent upstairs for Grip (who had come home 
at his master's back, and had acknowledged the favours of the 
multitude by drawing blood from every finger that came within his 
reach), and with the bird upon his arm presented himself at the 
first-floor window, and waved his hat again until it dangled by a 
shred, between his finger and thumb.  This demonstration having 
been received with appropriate shouts, and silence being in some 
degree restored, he thanked them for their sympathy; and taking the 
liberty to inform them that there was a sick person in the house, 
proposed that they should give three cheers for King George, three 
more for Old England, and three more for nothing particular, as a 
closing ceremony.  The crowd assenting, substituted Gabriel Varden 
for the nothing particular; and giving him one over, for good 
measure, dispersed in high good-humour.

What congratulations were exchanged among the inmates at the Golden 
Key, when they were left alone; what an overflowing of joy and 
happiness there was among them; how incapable it was of expression 
in Barnaby's own person; and how he went wildly from one to 
another, until he became so far tranquillised, as to stretch 
himself on the ground beside his mother's couch and fall into a 
deep sleep; are matters that need not be told.  And it is well they 
happened to be of this class, for they would be very hard to tell, 
were their narration ever so indispensable.

Before leaving this bright picture, it may be well to glance at a 
dark and very different one which was presented to only a few eyes, 
that same night.

The scene was a churchyard; the time, midnight; the persons, Edward 
Chester, a clergyman, a grave-digger, and the four bearers of a 
homely coffin.  They stood about a grave which had been newly dug, 
and one of the bearers held up a dim lantern,--the only light 
there--which shed its feeble ray upon the book of prayer.  He 
placed it for a moment on the coffin, when he and his companions 
were about to lower it down.  There was no inscription on the lid.

The mould fell solemnly upon the last house of this nameless man; 
and the rattling dust left a dismal echo even in the accustomed 
ears of those who had borne it to its resting-place.  The grave was 
filled in to the top, and trodden down.  They all left the spot 
together.

'You never saw him, living?' asked the clergyman, of Edward.

'Often, years ago; not knowing him for my brother.'

'Never since?'

'Never.  Yesterday, he steadily refused to see me.  It was urged 
upon him, many times, at my desire.'

'Still he refused?  That was hardened and unnatural.'

'Do you think so?'

'I infer that you do not?'

'You are right.  We hear the world wonder, every day, at monsters 
of ingratitude.  Did it never occur to you that it often looks for 
monsters of affection, as though they were things of course?'

They had reached the gate by this time, and bidding each other good 
night, departed on their separate ways.



Chapter 80


That afternoon, when he had slept off his fatigue; had shaved, and 
washed, and dressed, and freshened himself from top to toe; when he 
had dined, comforted himself with a pipe, an extra Toby, a nap in 
the great arm-chair, and a quiet chat with Mrs Varden on everything 
that had happened, was happening, or about to happen, within the 
sphere of their domestic concern; the locksmith sat himself down at 
the tea-table in the little back-parlour: the rosiest, cosiest, 
merriest, heartiest, best-contented old buck, in Great Britain or 
out of it.

There he sat, with his beaming eye on Mrs V., and his shining face 
suffused with gladness, and his capacious waistcoat smiling in 
every wrinkle, and his jovial humour peeping from under the table 
in the very plumpness of his legs; a sight to turn the vinegar of 
misanthropy into purest milk of human kindness.  There he sat, 
watching his wife as she decorated the room with flowers for the 
greater honour of Dolly and Joseph Willet, who had gone out 
walking, and for whom the tea-kettle had been singing gaily on the 
hob full twenty minutes, chirping as never kettle chirped before; 
for whom the best service of real undoubted china, patterned with 
divers round-faced mandarins holding up broad umbrellas, was now 
displayed in all its glory; to tempt whose appetites a clear, 
transparent, juicy ham, garnished with cool green lettuce-leaves 
and fragrant cucumber, reposed upon a shady table, covered with a 
snow-white cloth; for whose delight, preserves and jams, crisp 
cakes and other pastry, short to eat, with cunning twists, and 
cottage loaves, and rolls of bread both white and brown, were all 
set forth in rich profusion; in whose youth Mrs V.  herself had 
grown quite young, and stood there in a gown of red and white: 
symmetrical in figure, buxom in bodice, ruddy in cheek and lip, 
faultless in ankle, laughing in face and mood, in all respects 
delicious to behold--there sat the locksmith among all and every 
these delights, the sun that shone upon them all: the centre of the 
system: the source of light, heat, life, and frank enjoyment in the 
bright household world.

And when had Dolly ever been the Dolly of that afternoon?  To see 
how she came in, arm-in-arm with Joe; and how she made an effort 
not to blush or seem at all confused; and how she made believe she 
didn't care to sit on his side of the table; and how she coaxed the 
locksmith in a whisper not to joke; and how her colour came and 
went in a little restless flutter of happiness, which made her do 
everything wrong, and yet so charmingly wrong that it was better 
than right!--why, the locksmith could have looked on at this (as he 
mentioned to Mrs Varden when they retired for the night) for four-
and-twenty hours at a stretch, and never wished it done.

The recollections, too, with which they made merry over that long 
protracted tea!  The glee with which the locksmith asked Joe if he 
remembered that stormy night at the Maypole when he first asked 
after Dolly--the laugh they all had, about that night when she was 
going out to the party in the sedan-chair--the unmerciful manner in 
which they rallied Mrs Varden about putting those flowers outside 
that very window--the difficulty Mrs Varden found in joining the 
laugh against herself, at first, and the extraordinary perception 
she had of the joke when she overcame it--the confidential 
statements of Joe concerning the precise day and hour when he was 
first conscious of being fond of Dolly, and Dolly's blushing 
admissions, half volunteered and half extorted, as to the time from 
which she dated the discovery that she 'didn't mind' Joe--here was 
an exhaustless fund of mirth and conversation.

Then, there was a great deal to be said regarding Mrs Varden's 
doubts, and motherly alarms, and shrewd suspicions; and it appeared 
that from Mrs Varden's penetration and extreme sagacity nothing had 
ever been hidden.  She had known it all along.  She had seen it 
from the first.  She had always predicted it.  She had been aware 
of it before the principals.  She had said within herself (for she 
remembered the exact words) 'that young Willet is certainly 
looking after our Dolly, and I must look after HIM.'  Accordingly, 
she had looked after him, and had observed many little 
circumstances (all of which she named) so exceedingly minute that 
nobody else could make anything out of them even now; and had, it 
seemed from first to last, displayed the most unbounded tact and 
most consummate generalship.

Of course the night when Joe WOULD ride homeward by the side of the 
chaise, and when Mrs Varden WOULD insist upon his going back again, 
was not forgotten--nor the night when Dolly fainted on his name 
being mentioned--nor the times upon times when Mrs Varden, ever 
watchful and prudent, had found her pining in her own chamber.  In 
short, nothing was forgotten; and everything by some means or other 
brought them back to the conclusion, that that was the happiest 
hour in all their lives; consequently, that everything must have 
occurred for the best, and nothing could be suggested which would 
have made it better.

While they were in the full glow of such discourse as this, there 
came a startling knock at the door, opening from the street into 
the workshop, which had been kept closed all day that the house 
might be more quiet.  Joe, as in duty bound, would hear of nobody 
but himself going to open it; and accordingly left the room for 
that purpose.

It would have been odd enough, certainly, if Joe had forgotten the 
way to this door; and even if he had, as it was a pretty large one 
and stood straight before him, he could not easily have missed it.  
But Dolly, perhaps because she was in the flutter of spirits before 
mentioned, or perhaps because she thought he would not be able to 
open it with his one arm--she could have had no other reason--
hurried out after him; and they stopped so long in the passage--no 
doubt owing to Joe's entreaties that she would not expose herself 
to the draught of July air which must infallibly come rushing in on 
this same door being opened--that the knock was repeated, in a yet 
more startling manner than before.

'Is anybody going to open that door?' cried the locksmith.  'Or 
shall I come?'

Upon that, Dolly went running back into the parlour, all dimples 
and blushes; and Joe opened it with a mighty noise, and other 
superfluous demonstrations of being in a violent hurry.

'Well,' said the locksmith, when he reappeared: 'what is it?  eh 
Joe? what are you laughing at?'

'Nothing, sir.  It's coming in.'

'Who's coming in? what's coming in?'  Mrs Varden, as much at a loss 
as her husband, could only shake her head in answer to his 
inquiring look: so, the locksmith wheeled his chair round to 
command a better view of the room-door, and stared at it with his 
eyes wide open, and a mingled expression of curiosity and wonder 
shining in his jolly face.

Instead of some person or persons straightway appearing, divers 
remarkable sounds were heard, first in the workshop and afterwards 
in the little dark passage between it and the parlour, as though 
some unwieldy chest or heavy piece of furniture were being brought 
in, by an amount of human strength inadequate to the task.  At 
length after much struggling and humping, and bruising of the wall 
on both sides, the door was forced open as by a battering-ram; and 
the locksmith, steadily regarding what appeared beyond, smote his 
thigh, elevated his eyebrows, opened his mouth, and cried in a loud 
voice expressive of the utmost consternation:

'Damme, if it an't Miggs come back!'

The young damsel whom he named no sooner heard these words, than 
deserting a small boy and a very large box by which she was 
accompanied, and advancing with such precipitation that her bonnet 
flew off her head, burst into the room, clasped her hands (in which 
she held a pair of pattens, one in each), raised her eyes devotedly 
to the ceiling, and shed a flood of tears.

'The old story!' cried the locksmith, looking at her in 
inexpressible desperation.  'She was born to be a damper, this 
young woman! nothing can prevent it!'

'Ho master, ho mim!' cried Miggs, 'can I constrain my feelings in 
these here once agin united moments!  Ho Mr Warsen, here's 
blessedness among relations, sir!  Here's forgivenesses of 
injuries, here's amicablenesses!'

The locksmith looked from his wife to Dolly, and from Dolly to Joe, 
and from Joe to Miggs, with his eyebrows still elevated and his 
mouth still open.  When his eyes got back to Miggs, they rested on 
her; fascinated.

'To think,' cried Miggs with hysterical joy, 'that Mr Joe, and dear 
Miss Dolly, has raly come together after all as has been said and 
done contrairy!  To see them two a-settin' along with him and her, 
so pleasant and in all respects so affable and mild; and me not 
knowing of it, and not being in the ways to make no preparations 
for their teas.  Ho what a cutting thing it is, and yet what sweet 
sensations is awoke within me!'

Either in clasping her hands again, or in an ecstasy of pious joy, 
Miss Miggs clinked her pattens after the manner of a pair of 
cymbals, at this juncture; and then resumed, in the softest 
accents:

'And did my missis think--ho goodness, did she think--as her own 
Miggs, which supported her under so many trials, and understood her 
natur' when them as intended well but acted rough, went so deep 
into her feelings--did she think as her own Miggs would ever leave 
her?  Did she think as Miggs, though she was but a servant, and 
knowed that servitudes was no inheritances, would forgit that she 
was the humble instruments as always made it comfortable between 
them two when they fell out, and always told master of the meekness 
and forgiveness of her blessed dispositions!  Did she think as 
Miggs had no attachments!  Did she think that wages was her only 
object!'

To none of these interrogatories, whereof every one was more 
pathetically delivered than the last, did Mrs Varden answer one 
word: but Miggs, not at all abashed by this circumstance, turned to 
the small boy in attendance--her eldest nephew--son of her own 
married sister--born in Golden Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, 
and bred in the very shadow of the second bell-handle on the right-
hand door-post--and with a plentiful use of her pocket-
handkerchief, addressed herself to him: requesting that on his 
return home he would console his parents for the loss of her, his 
aunt, by delivering to them a faithful statement of his having left 
her in the bosom of that family, with which, as his aforesaid 
parents well knew, her best affections were incorporated; that he 
would remind them that nothing less than her imperious sense of 
duty, and devoted attachment to her old master and missis, likewise 
Miss Dolly and young Mr Joe, should ever have induced her to 
decline that pressing invitation which they, his parents, had, as 
he could testify, given her, to lodge and board with them, free of 
all cost and charge, for evermore; lastly, that he would help her 
with her box upstairs, and then repair straight home, bearing her 
blessing and her strong injunctions to mingle in his prayers a 
supplication that he might in course of time grow up a locksmith, 
or a Mr Joe, and have Mrs Vardens and Miss Dollys for his relations 
and friends.

Having brought this admonition to an end--upon which, to say the 
truth, the young gentleman for whose benefit it was designed, 
bestowed little or no heed, having to all appearance his faculties 
absorbed in the contemplation of the sweetmeats,--Miss Miggs 
signified to the company in general that they were not to be 
uneasy, for she would soon return; and, with her nephew's aid, 
prepared to bear her wardrobe up the staircase.

'My dear,' said the locksmith to his wife.  'Do you desire this?'

'I desire it!' she answered.  'I am astonished--I am amazed--at her 
audacity.  Let her leave the house this moment.'

Miggs, hearing this, let her end of the box fall heavily to the 
floor, gave a very loud sniff, crossed her arms, screwed down the 
corners of her mouth, and cried, in an ascending scale, 'Ho, good 
gracious!' three distinct times.

'You hear what your mistress says, my love,' remarked the 
locksmith.  'You had better go, I think.  Stay; take this with you, 
for the sake of old service.'

Miss Miggs clutched the bank-note he took from his pocket-book and 
held out to her; deposited it in a small, red leather purse; put 
the purse in her pocket (displaying, as she did so, a considerable 
portion of some under-garment, made of flannel, and more black 
cotton stocking than is commonly seen in public); and, tossing her 
head, as she looked at Mrs Varden, repeated--

'Ho, good gracious!'

'I think you said that once before, my dear,' observed the 
locksmith.

'Times is changed, is they, mim!' cried Miggs, bridling; 'you can 
spare me now, can you?  You can keep 'em down without me?  You're 
not in wants of any one to scold, or throw the blame upon, no 
longer, an't you, mim?  I'm glad to find you've grown so 
independent.  I wish you joy, I'm sure!'

With that she dropped a curtsey, and keeping her head erect, her 
ear towards Mrs Varden, and her eye on the rest of the company, as 
she alluded to them in her remarks, proceeded:

'I'm quite delighted, I'm sure, to find sich independency, feeling 
sorry though, at the same time, mim, that you should have been 
forced into submissions when you couldn't help yourself--he he he!  
It must be great vexations, 'specially considering how ill you 
always spoke of Mr Joe--to have him for a son-in-law at last; and 
I wonder Miss Dolly can put up with him, either, after being off 
and on for so many years with a coachmaker.  But I HAVE heerd say, 
that the coachmaker thought twice about it--he he he!--and that he 
told a young man as was a frind of his, that he hoped he knowed 
better than to be drawed into that; though she and all the family 
DID pull uncommon strong!'

Here she paused for a reply, and receiving none, went on as before.

'I HAVE heerd say, mim, that the illnesses of some ladies was all 
pretensions, and that they could faint away, stone dead, whenever 
they had the inclinations so to do.  Of course I never see sich 
cases with my own eyes--ho no!  He he he!  Nor master neither--ho 
no!  He he he!  I HAVE heerd the neighbours make remark as some one 
as they was acquainted with, was a poor good-natur'd mean-spirited 
creetur, as went out fishing for a wife one day, and caught a 
Tartar.  Of course I never to my knowledge see the poor person 
himself.  Nor did you neither, mim--ho no.  I wonder who it can 
be--don't you, mim?  No doubt you do, mim.  Ho yes.  He he he!'

Again Miggs paused for a reply; and none being offered, was so 
oppressed with teeming spite and spleen, that she seemed like to 
burst.

'I'm glad Miss Dolly can laugh,' cried Miggs with a feeble titter.  
'I like to see folks a-laughing--so do you, mim, don't you?  You 
was always glad to see people in spirits, wasn't you, mim?  And you 
always did your best to keep 'em cheerful, didn't you, mim?  
Though there an't such a great deal to laugh at now either; is 
there, mim?  It an't so much of a catch, after looking out so sharp 
ever since she was a little chit, and costing such a deal in dress 
and show, to get a poor, common soldier, with one arm, is it, mim?  
He he!  I wouldn't have a husband with one arm, anyways.  I would 
have two arms.  I would have two arms, if it was me, though instead 
of hands they'd only got hooks at the end, like our dustman!'

Miss Miggs was about to add, and had, indeed, begun to add, that, 
taking them in the abstract, dustmen were far more eligible matches 
than soldiers, though, to be sure, when people were past choosing 
they must take the best they could get, and think themselves well 
off too; but her vexation and chagrin being of that internally 
bitter sort which finds no relief in words, and is aggravated to 
madness by want of contradiction, she could hold out no longer, and 
burst into a storm of sobs and tears.

In this extremity she fell on the unlucky nephew, tooth and nail, 
and plucking a handful of hair from his head, demanded to know how 
long she was to stand there to be insulted, and whether or no he 
meant to help her to carry out the box again, and if he took a 
pleasure in hearing his family reviled: with other inquiries of 
that nature; at which disgrace and provocation, the small boy, who 
had been all this time gradually lashed into rebellion by the sight 
of unattainable pastry, walked off indignant, leaving his aunt and 
the box to follow at their leisure.  Somehow or other, by dint of 
pushing and pulling, they did attain the street at last; where Miss 
Miggs, all blowzed with the exertion of getting there, and with her 
sobs and tears, sat down upon her property to rest and grieve, 
until she could ensnare some other youth to help her home.

'It's a thing to laugh at, Martha, not to care for,' whispered the 
locksmith, as he followed his wife to the window, and good-
humouredly dried her eyes.  'What does it matter?  You had seen 
your fault before.  Come!  Bring up Toby again, my dear; Dolly 
shall sing us a song; and we'll be all the merrier for this 
interruption!'



Chapter 81


Another month had passed, and the end of August had nearly come, 
when Mr Haredale stood alone in the mail-coach office at Bristol.  
Although but a few weeks had intervened since his conversation with 
Edward Chester and his niece, in the locksmith's house, and he had 
made no change, in the mean time, in his accustomed style of dress, 
his appearance was greatly altered.  He looked much older, and more 
care-worn.  Agitation and anxiety of mind scatter wrinkles and grey 
hairs with no unsparing hand; but deeper traces follow on the 
silent uprooting of old habits, and severing of dear, familiar 
ties.  The affections may not be so easily wounded as the passions, 
but their hurts are deeper, and more lasting.  He was now a 
solitary man, and the heart within him was dreary and lonesome.

He was not the less alone for having spent so many years in 
seclusion and retirement.  This was no better preparation than a 
round of social cheerfulness: perhaps it even increased the 
keenness of his sensibility.  He had been so dependent upon her for 
companionship and love; she had come to be so much a part and 
parcel of his existence; they had had so many cares and thoughts in 
common, which no one else had shared; that losing her was beginning 
life anew, and being required to summon up the hope and elasticity 
of youth, amid the doubts, distrusts, and weakened energies of 
age.

The effort he had made to part from her with seeming cheerfulness 
and hope--and they had parted only yesterday--left him the more 
depressed.  With these feelings, he was about to revisit London for 
the last time, and look once more upon the walls of their old home, 
before turning his back upon it, for ever.

The journey was a very different one, in those days, from what the 
present generation find it; but it came to an end, as the longest 
journey will, and he stood again in the streets of the metropolis.  
He lay at the inn where the coach stopped, and resolved, before he 
went to bed, that he would make his arrival known to no one; would 
spend but another night in London; and would spare himself the pang 
of parting, even with the honest locksmith.

Such conditions of the mind as that to which he was a prey when he 
lay down to rest, are favourable to the growth of disordered 
fancies, and uneasy visions.  He knew this, even in the horror with 
which he started from his first sleep, and threw up the window to 
dispel it by the presence of some object, beyond the room, which 
had not been, as it were, the witness of his dream.  But it was not 
a new terror of the night; it had been present to him before, in 
many shapes; it had haunted him in bygone times, and visited his 
pillow again and again.  If it had been but an ugly object, a 
childish spectre, haunting his sleep, its return, in its old form, 
might have awakened a momentary sensation of fear, which, almost in 
the act of waking, would have passed away.  This disquiet, 
however, lingered about him, and would yield to nothing.  When he 
closed his eyes again, he felt it hovering near; as he slowly sunk 
into a slumber, he was conscious of its gathering strength and 
purpose, and gradually assuming its recent shape; when he sprang up 
from his bed, the same phantom vanished from his heated brain, and 
left him filled with a dread against which reason and waking 
thought were powerless.

The sun was up, before he could shake it off.  He rose late, but 
not refreshed, and remained within doors all that day.  He had a 
fancy for paying his last visit to the old spot in the evening, for 
he had been accustomed to walk there at that season, and desired to 
see it under the aspect that was most familiar to him.  At such an 
hour as would afford him time to reach it a little before sunset, 
he left the inn, and turned into the busy street.

He had not gone far, and was thoughtfully making his way among the 
noisy crowd, when he felt a hand upon his shoulder, and, turning, 
recognised one of the waiters from the inn, who begged his pardon, 
but he had left his sword behind him.

'Why have you brought it to me?' he asked, stretching out his hand, 
and yet not taking it from the man, but looking at him in a 
disturbed and agitated manner.

The man was sorry to have disobliged him, and would carry it back 
again.  The gentleman had said that he was going a little way into 
the country, and that he might not return until late.  The roads 
were not very safe for single travellers after dark; and, since the 
riots, gentlemen had been more careful than ever, not to trust 
themselves unarmed in lonely places.  'We thought you were a 
stranger, sir,' he added, 'and that you might believe our roads to 
be better than they are; but perhaps you know them well, and carry 
fire-arms--'

He took the sword, and putting it up at his side, thanked the man, 
and resumed his walk.

It was long remembered that he did this in a manner so strange, and 
with such a trembling hand, that the messenger stood looking after 
his retreating figure, doubtful whether he ought not to follow, and 
watch him.  It was long remembered that he had been heard pacing 
his bedroom in the dead of the night; that the attendants had 
mentioned to each other in the morning, how fevered and how pale he 
looked; and that when this man went back to the inn, he told a 
fellow-servant that what he had observed in this short interview 
lay very heavy on his mind, and that he feared the gentleman 
intended to destroy himself, and would never come back alive.

With a half-consciousness that his manner had attracted the man's 
attention (remembering the expression of his face when they 
parted), Mr Haredale quickened his steps; and arriving at a stand 
of coaches, bargained with the driver of the best to carry him so 
far on his road as the point where the footway struck across the 
fields, and to await his return at a house of entertainment which 
was within a stone's-throw of that place.  Arriving there in due 
course, he alighted and pursued his way on foot.

He passed so near the Maypole, that he could see its smoke rising 
from among the trees, while a flock of pigeons--some of its old 
inhabitants, doubtless--sailed gaily home to roost, between him and 
the unclouded sky.  'The old house will brighten up now,' he said, 
as he looked towards it, 'and there will be a merry fireside 
beneath its ivied roof.  It is some comfort to know that everything 
will not be blighted hereabouts.  I shall be glad to have one 
picture of life and cheerfulness to turn to, in my mind!'

He resumed his walk, and bent his steps towards the Warren.  It was 
a clear, calm, silent evening, with hardly a breath of wind to stir 
the leaves, or any sound to break the stillness of the time, but 
drowsy sheep-bells tinkling in the distance, and, at intervals, 
the far-off lowing of cattle, or bark of village dogs.  The sky 
was radiant with the softened glory of sunset; and on the earth, 
and in the air, a deep repose prevailed.  At such an hour, he 
arrived at the deserted mansion which had been his home so long, 
and looked for the last time upon its blackened walls.

The ashes of the commonest fire are melancholy things, for in them 
there is an image of death and ruin,--of something that has been 
bright, and is but dull, cold, dreary dust,--with which our nature 
forces us to sympathise.  How much more sad the crumbled embers of 
a home: the casting down of that great altar, where the worst among 
us sometimes perform the worship of the heart; and where the best 
have offered up such sacrifices, and done such deeds of heroism, 
as, chronicled, would put the proudest temples of old Time, with 
all their vaunting annals, to the blush!

He roused himself from a long train of meditation, and walked 
slowly round the house.  It was by this time almost dark.

He had nearly made the circuit of the building, when he uttered a 
half-suppressed exclamation, started, and stood still.  Reclining, 
in an easy attitude, with his back against a tree, and 
contemplating the ruin with an expression of pleasure,--a pleasure 
so keen that it overcame his habitual indolence and command of 
feature, and displayed itself utterly free from all restraint or 
reserve,--before him, on his own ground, and triumphing then, as he 
had triumphed in every misfortune and disappointment of his life, 
stood the man whose presence, of all mankind, in any place, and 
least of all in that, he could the least endure.

Although his blood so rose against this man, and his wrath so 
stirred within him, that he could have struck him dead, he put such 
fierce constraint upon himself that he passed him without a word or 
look.  Yes, and he would have gone on, and not turned, though to 
resist the Devil who poured such hot temptation in his brain, 
required an effort scarcely to be achieved, if this man had not 
himself summoned him to stop: and that, with an assumed compassion 
in his voice which drove him well-nigh mad, and in an instant 
routed all the self-command it had been anguish--acute, poignant 
anguish--to sustain.

All consideration, reflection, mercy, forbearance; everything by 
which a goaded man can curb his rage and passion; fled from him as 
he turned back.  And yet he said, slowly and quite calmly--far more 
calmly than he had ever spoken to him before:

'Why have you called to me?'

'To remark,' said Sir John Chester with his wonted composure, 'what 
an odd chance it is, that we should meet here!'

'It IS a strange chance.'

'Strange?  The most remarkable and singular thing in the world.  I 
never ride in the evening; I have not done so for years.  The whim 
seized me, quite unaccountably, in the middle of last night.--How 
very picturesque this is!'--He pointed, as he spoke, to the 
dismantled house, and raised his glass to his eye.

'You praise your own work very freely.'

Sir John let fall his glass; inclined his face towards him with an 
air of the most courteous inquiry; and slightly shook his head as 
though he were remarking to himself, 'I fear this animal is going 
mad!'

'I say you praise your own work very freely,' repeated Mr 
Haredale.

'Work!' echoed Sir John, looking smilingly round.  'Mine!--I beg 
your pardon, I really beg your pardon--'

'Why, you see,' said Mr Haredale, 'those walls.  You see those 
tottering gables.  You see on every side where fire and smoke have 
raged.  You see the destruction that has been wanton here.  Do you 
not?'

'My good friend,' returned the knight, gently checking his 
impatience with his hand, 'of course I do.  I see everything you 
speak of, when you stand aside, and do not interpose yourself 
between the view and me.  I am very sorry for you.  If I had not 
had the pleasure to meet you here, I think I should have written to 
tell you so.  But you don't bear it as well as I had expected--
excuse me--no, you don't indeed.'

He pulled out his snuff-box, and addressing him with the superior 
air of a man who, by reason of his higher nature, has a right to 
read a moral lesson to another, continued:

'For you are a philosopher, you know--one of that stern and rigid 
school who are far above the weaknesses of mankind in general.  You 
are removed, a long way, from the frailties of the crowd.  You 
contemplate them from a height, and rail at them with a most 
impressive bitterness.  I have heard you.'

--'And shall again,' said Mr Haredale.

'Thank you,' returned the other.  'Shall we walk as we talk?  The 
damp falls rather heavily.  Well,--as you please.  But I grieve to 
say that I can spare you only a very few moments.'

'I would,' said Mr Haredale, 'you had spared me none.  I would, 
with all my soul, you had been in Paradise (if such a monstrous 
lie could be enacted), rather than here to-night.'

'Nay,' returned the other--'really--you do yourself injustice.  You 
are a rough companion, but I would not go so far to avoid you.'

'Listen to me,' said Mr Haredale.  'Listen to me.'

'While you rail?' inquired Sir John.

'While I deliver your infamy.  You urged and stimulated to do your 
work a fit agent, but one who in his nature--in the very essence of 
his being--is a traitor, and who has been false to you (despite the 
sympathy you two should have together) as he has been to all 
others.  With hints, and looks, and crafty words, which told again 
are nothing, you set on Gashford to this work--this work before us 
now.  With these same hints, and looks, and crafty words, which 
told again are nothing, you urged him on to gratify the deadly 
hate he owes me--I have earned it, I thank Heaven--by the abduction 
and dishonour of my niece.  You did.  I see denial in your looks,' 
he cried, abruptly pointing in his face, and stepping back, 'and 
denial is a lie!'

He had his hand upon his sword; but the knight, with a contemptuous 
smile, replied to him as coldly as before.

'You will take notice, sir--if you can discriminate sufficiently--
that I have taken the trouble to deny nothing.  Your discernment is 
hardly fine enough for the perusal of faces, not of a kind as 
coarse as your speech; nor has it ever been, that I remember; or, 
in one face that I could name, you would have read indifference, 
not to say disgust, somewhat sooner than you did.  I speak of a 
long time ago,--but you understand me.'

'Disguise it as you will, you mean denial.  Denial explicit or 
reserved, expressed or left to be inferred, is still a lie.  You 
say you don't deny.  Do you admit?'

'You yourself,' returned Sir John, suffering the current of his 
speech to flow as smoothly as if it had been stemmed by no one word 
of interruption, 'publicly proclaimed the character of the 
gentleman in question (I think it was in Westminster Hall) in terms 
which relieve me from the necessity of making any further allusion 
to him.  You may have been warranted; you may not have been; I 
can't say.  Assuming the gentleman to be what you described, and 
to have made to you or any other person any statements that may 
have happened to suggest themselves to him, for the sake of his 
own security, or for the sake of money, or for his own amusement, 
or for any other consideration,--I have nothing to say of him, 
except that his extremely degrading situation appears to me to be 
shared with his employers.  You are so very plain yourself, that 
you will excuse a little freedom in me, I am sure.'

'Attend to me again, Sir John but once,' cried Mr Haredale; 'in 
your every look, and word, and gesture, you tell me this was not 
your act.  I tell you that it was, and that you tampered with the 
man I speak of, and with your wretched son (whom God forgive!) to 
do this deed.  You talk of degradation and character.  You told me 
once that you had purchased the absence of the poor idiot and his 
mother, when (as I have discovered since, and then suspected) you 
had gone to tempt them, and had found them flown.  To you I traced 
the insinuation that I alone reaped any harvest from my brother's 
death; and all the foul attacks and whispered calumnies that 
followed in its train.  In every action of my life, from that first 
hope which you converted into grief and desolation, you have stood, 
like an adverse fate, between me and peace.  In all, you have ever 
been the same cold-blooded, hollow, false, unworthy villain.  For 
the second time, and for the last, I cast these charges in your 
teeth, and spurn you from me as I would a faithless dog!'

With that he raised his arm, and struck him on the breast so that 
he staggered.  Sir John, the instant he recovered, drew his sword, 
threw away the scabbard and his hat, and running on his adversary 
made a desperate lunge at his heart, which, but that his guard was 
quick and true, would have stretched him dead upon the grass.

In the act of striking him, the torrent of his opponent's rage had 
reached a stop.  He parried his rapid thrusts, without returning 
them, and called to him, with a frantic kind of terror in his face, 
to keep back.

'Not to-night! not to-night!' he cried.  'In God's name, not 
tonight!'

Seeing that he lowered his weapon, and that he would not thrust in 
turn, Sir John lowered his.

'Not to-night!' his adversary cried.  'Be warned in time!'

'You told me--it must have been in a sort of inspiration--' said 
Sir John, quite deliberately, though now he dropped his mask, and 
showed his hatred in his face, 'that this was the last time.  Be 
assured it is!  Did you believe our last meeting was forgotten?  
Did you believe that your every word and look was not to be 
accounted for, and was not well remembered?  Do you believe that I 
have waited your time, or you mine?  What kind of man is he who 
entered, with all his sickening cant of honesty and truth, into a 
bond with me to prevent a marriage he affected to dislike, and when 
I had redeemed my part to the spirit and the letter, skulked from 
his, and brought the match about in his own time, to rid himself of 
a burden he had grown tired of, and cast a spurious lustre on his 
house?'

'I have acted,' cried Mr Haredale, 'with honour and in good faith.  
I do so now.  Do not force me to renew this duel to-night!'

'You said my "wretched" son, I think?' said Sir John, with a smile.  
'Poor fool!  The dupe of such a shallow knave--trapped into 
marriage by such an uncle and by such a niece--he well deserves 
your pity.  But he is no longer a son of mine: you are welcome to 
the prize your craft has made, sir.'

'Once more,' cried his opponent, wildly stamping on the ground, 
'although you tear me from my better angel, I implore you not to 
come within the reach of my sword to-night.  Oh! why were you here 
at all!  Why have we met!  To-morrow would have cast us far apart 
for ever!'

'That being the case,' returned Sir John, without the least 
emotion, 'it is very fortunate we have met to-night.  Haredale, I 
have always despised you, as you know, but I have given you credit 
for a species of brute courage.  For the honour of my judgment, 
which I had thought a good one, I am sorry to find you a coward.'

Not another word was spoken on either side.  They crossed swords, 
though it was now quite dusk, and attacked each other fiercely.  
They were well matched, and each was thoroughly skilled in the 
management of his weapon.

After a few seconds they grew hotter and more furious, and pressing 
on each other inflicted and received several slight wounds.  It was 
directly after receiving one of these in his arm, that Mr Haredale, 
making a keener thrust as he felt the warm blood spirting out, 
plunged his sword through his opponent's body to the hilt.

Their eyes met, and were on each other as he drew it out.  He put 
his arm about the dying man, who repulsed him, feebly, and dropped 
upon the turf.  Raising himself upon his hands, he gazed at him for 
an instant, with scorn and hatred in his look; but, seeming to 
remember, even then, that this expression would distort his 
features after death, he tried to smile, and, faintly moving his 
right hand, as if to hide his bloody linen in his vest, fell back 
dead--the phantom of last night.



Chapter the Last


A parting glance at such of the actors in this little history as 
it has not, in the course of its events, dismissed, will bring it 
to an end.

Mr Haredale fled that night.  Before pursuit could be begun, indeed 
before Sir John was traced or missed, he had left the kingdom.  
Repairing straight to a religious establishment, known throughout 
Europe for the rigour and severity of its discipline, and for the 
merciless penitence it exacted from those who sought its shelter as 
a refuge from the world, he took the vows which thenceforth shut 
him out from nature and his kind, and after a few remorseful years 
was buried in its gloomy cloisters.

Two days elapsed before the body of Sir John was found.  As soon as 
it was recognised and carried home, the faithful valet, true to his 
master's creed, eloped with all the cash and movables he could lay 
his hands on, and started as a finished gentleman upon his own 
account.  In this career he met with great success, and would 
certainly have married an heiress in the end, but for an unlucky 
check which led to his premature decease.  He sank under a 
contagious disorder, very prevalent at that time, and vulgarly 
termed the jail fever.

Lord George Gordon, remaining in his prison in the Tower until 
Monday the fifth of February in the following year, was on that 
day solemnly tried at Westminster for High Treason.  Of this crime 
he was, after a patient investigation, declared Not Guilty; upon 
the ground that there was no proof of his having called the 
multitude together with any traitorous or unlawful intentions.  Yet 
so many people were there, still, to whom those riots taught no 
lesson of reproof or moderation, that a public subscription was set 
on foot in Scotland to defray the cost of his defence.

For seven years afterwards he remained, at the strong intercession 
of his friends, comparatively quiet; saving that he, every now and 
then, took occasion to display his zeal for the Protestant faith in 
some extravagant proceeding which was the delight of its enemies; 
and saving, besides, that he was formally excommunicated by the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, for refusing to appear as a witness in 
the Ecclesiastical Court when cited for that purpose.  In the year 
1788 he was stimulated by some new insanity to write and publish 
an injurious pamphlet, reflecting on the Queen of France, in very 
violent terms.  Being indicted for the libel, and (after various 
strange demonstrations in court) found guilty, he fled into Holland 
in place of appearing to receive sentence: from whence, as the 
quiet burgomasters of Amsterdam had no relish for his company, 
he was sent home again with all speed.  Arriving in the month of 
July at Harwich, and going thence to Birmingham, he made in the 
latter place, in August, a public profession of the Jewish 
religion; and figured there as a Jew until he was arrested, and 
brought back to London to receive the sentence he had evaded.  By 
virtue of this sentence he was, in the month of December, cast 
into Newgate for five years and ten months, and required besides to 
pay a large fine, and to furnish heavy securities for his future 
good behaviour.

After addressing, in the midsummer of the following year, an appeal 
to the commiseration of the National Assembly of France, which the 
English minister refused to sanction, he composed himself to 
undergo his full term of punishment; and suffering his beard to 
grow nearly to his waist, and conforming in all respects to the 
ceremonies of his new religion, he applied himself to the study of 
history, and occasionally to the art of painting, in which, in his 
younger days, he had shown some skill.  Deserted by his former 
friends, and treated in all respects like the worst criminal in the 
jail, he lingered on, quite cheerful and resigned, until the 1st 
of November 1793, when he died in his cell, being then only three-
and-forty years of age.

Many men with fewer sympathies for the distressed and needy, with 
less abilities and harder hearts, have made a shining figure and 
left a brilliant fame.  He had his mourners.  The prisoners 
bemoaned his loss, and missed him; for though his means were not 
large, his charity was great, and in bestowing alms among them he 
considered the necessities of all alike, and knew no distinction of 
sect or creed.  There are wise men in the highways of the world who 
may learn something, even from this poor crazy lord who died in 
Newgate.

To the last, he was truly served by bluff John Grueby.  John was at 
his side before he had been four-and-twenty hours in the Tower, and 
never left him until he died.  He had one other constant attendant, 
in the person of a beautiful Jewish girl; who attached herself to 
him from feelings half religious, half romantic, but whose virtuous 
and disinterested character appears to have been beyond the censure 
even of the most censorious.

Gashford deserted him, of course.  He subsisted for a time upon his 
traffic in his master's secrets; and, this trade failing when the 
stock was quite exhausted, procured an appointment in the 
honourable corps of spies and eavesdroppers employed by the 
government.  As one of these wretched underlings, he did his 
drudgery, sometimes abroad, sometimes at home, and long endured the 
various miseries of such a station.  Ten or a dozen years ago--not 
more--a meagre, wan old man, diseased and miserably poor, was found 
dead in his bed at an obscure inn in the Borough, where he was 
quite unknown.  He had taken poison.  There was no clue to his 
name; but it was discovered from certain entries in a pocket-book 
he carried, that he had been secretary to Lord George Gordon in the 
time of the famous riots.

Many months after the re-establishment of peace and order, and even 
when it had ceased to be the town-talk, that every military 
officer, kept at free quarters by the City during the late alarms, 
had cost for his board and lodging four pounds four per day, and 
every private soldier two and twopence halfpenny; many months after 
even this engrossing topic was forgotten, and the United Bulldogs 
were to a man all killed, imprisoned, or transported, Mr Simon 
Tappertit, being removed from a hospital to prison, and thence to 
his place of trial, was discharged by proclamation, on two wooden 
legs.  Shorn of his graceful limbs, and brought down from his high 
estate to circumstances of utter destitution, and the deepest 
misery, he made shift to stump back to his old master, and beg for 
some relief.  By the locksmith's advice and aid, he was established 
in business as a shoeblack, and opened shop under an archway near 
the Horse Guards.  This being a central quarter, he quickly made a 
very large connection; and on levee days, was sometimes known to 
have as many as twenty half-pay officers waiting their turn for 
polishing.  Indeed his trade increased to that extent, that in 
course of time he entertained no less than two apprentices, besides 
taking for his wife the widow of an eminent bone and rag collector, 
formerly of MilIbank.  With this lady (who assisted in the 
business) he lived in great domestic happiness, only chequered by 
those little storms which serve to clear the atmosphere of wedlock, 
and brighten its horizon.  In some of these gusts of bad weather, 
Mr Tappertit would, in the assertion of his prerogative, so far 
forget himself, as to correct his lady with a brush, or boot, or 
shoe; while she (but only in extreme cases) would retaliate by 
taking off his legs, and leaving him exposed to the derision of 
those urchins who delight in mischief.

Miss Miggs, baffled in all her schemes, matrimonial and otherwise, 
and cast upon a thankless, undeserving world, turned very sharp and 
sour; and did at length become so acid, and did so pinch and slap 
and tweak the hair and noses of the youth of Golden Lion Court, 
that she was by one consent expelled that sanctuary, and desired to 
bless some other spot of earth, in preference.  It chanced at that 
moment, that the justices of the peace for Middlesex proclaimed by 
public placard that they stood in need of a female turnkey for the 
County Bridewell, and appointed a day and hour for the inspection 
of candidates.  Miss Miggs attending at the time appointed, was 
instantly chosen and selected from one hundred and twenty-four 
competitors, and at once promoted to the office; which she held 
until her decease, more than thirty years afterwards, remaining 
single all that time.  It was observed of this lady that while she 
was inflexible and grim to all her female flock, she was 
particularly so to those who could establish any claim to beauty: 
and it was often remarked as a proof of her indomitable virtue and 
severe chastity, that to such as had been frail she showed no 
mercy; always falling upon them on the slightest occasion, or on no 
occasion at all, with the fullest measure of her wrath.  Among 
other useful inventions which she practised upon this class of 
offenders and bequeathed to posterity, was the art of inflicting an 
exquisitely vicious poke or dig with the wards of a key in the 
small of the back, near the spine.  She likewise originated a mode 
of treading by accident (in pattens) on such as had small feet; 
also very remarkable for its ingenuity, and previously quite 
unknown.

It was not very long, you may be sure, before Joe Willet and Dolly 
Varden were made husband and wife, and with a handsome sum in bank 
(for the locksmith could afford to give his daughter a good dowry), 
reopened the Maypole.  It was not very long, you may be sure, 
before a red-faced little boy was seen staggering about the Maypole 
passage, and kicking up his heels on the green before the door.  It 
was not very long, counting by years, before there was a red-faced 
little girl, another red-faced little boy, and a whole troop of 
girls and boys: so that, go to Chigwell when you would, there would 
surely be seen, either in the village street, or on the green, or 
frolicking in the farm-yard--for it was a farm now, as well as a 
tavern--more small Joes and small Dollys than could be easily 
counted.  It was not a very long time before these appearances 
ensued; but it WAS a VERY long time before Joe looked five years 
older, or Dolly either, or the locksmith either, or his wife 
either: for cheerfulness and content are great beautifiers, and 
are famous preservers of youthful looks, depend upon it.

It was a long time, too, before there was such a country inn as the 
Maypole, in all England: indeed it is a great question whether 
there has ever been such another to this hour, or ever will be.  It 
was a long time too--for Never, as the proverb says, is a long day--
before they forgot to have an interest in wounded soldiers at the 
Maypole, or before Joe omitted to refresh them, for the sake of his 
old campaign; or before the serjeant left off looking in there, now 
and then; or before they fatigued themselves, or each other, by 
talking on these occasions of battles and sieges, and hard weather 
and hard service, and a thousand things belonging to a soldier's 
life.  As to the great silver snuff-box which the King sent Joe 
with his own hand, because of his conduct in the Riots, what guest 
ever went to the Maypole without putting finger and thumb into that 
box, and taking a great pinch, though he had never taken a pinch of 
snuff before, and almost sneezed himself into convulsions even 
then?  As to the purple-faced vintner, where is the man who lived 
in those times and never saw HIM at the Maypole: to all appearance 
as much at home in the best room, as if he lived there?  And as to 
the feastings and christenings, and revellings at Christmas, and 
celebrations of birthdays, wedding-days, and all manner of days, 
both at the Maypole and the Golden Key,--if they are not notorious, 
what facts are?

Mr Willet the elder, having been by some extraordinary means 
possessed with the idea that Joe wanted to be married, and that it 
would be well for him, his father, to retire into private life, and 
enable him to live in comfort, took up his abode in a small cottage 
at Chigwell; where they widened and enlarged the fireplace for him, 
hung up the boiler, and furthermore planted in the little garden 
outside the front-door, a fictitious Maypole; so that he was quite 
at home directly.  To this, his new habitation, Tom Cobb, Phil 
Parkes, and Solomon Daisy went regularly every night: and in the 
chimney-corner, they all four quaffed, and smoked, and prosed, and 
dozed, as they had done of old.  It being accidentally discovered 
after a short time that Mr Willet still appeared to consider 
himself a landlord by profession, Joe provided him with a slate, 
upon which the old man regularly scored up vast accounts for meat, 
drink, and tobacco.  As he grew older this passion increased upon 
him; and it became his delight to chalk against the name of each of 
his cronies a sum of enormous magnitude, and impossible to be paid: 
and such was his secret joy in these entries, that he would be 
perpetually seen going behind the door to look at them, and coming 
forth again, suffused with the liveliest satisfaction.

He never recovered the surprise the Rioters had given him, and 
remained in the same mental condition down to the last moment of 
his life.  It was like to have been brought to a speedy 
termination by the first sight of his first grandchild, which 
appeared to fill him with the belief that some alarming miracle had 
happened to Joe.  Being promptly blooded, however, by a skilful 
surgeon, he rallied; and although the doctors all agreed, on his 
being attacked with symptoms of apoplexy six months afterwards, 
that he ought to die, and took it very ill that he did not, he 
remained alive--possibly on account of his constitutional slowness--
for nearly seven years more, when he was one morning found 
speechless in his bed.  He lay in this state, free from all tokens 
of uneasiness, for a whole week, when he was suddenly restored to 
consciousness by hearing the nurse whisper in his son's ear that he 
was going.  'I'm a-going, Joseph,' said Mr Willet, turning round 
upon the instant, 'to the Salwanners'--and immediately gave up 
the ghost.

He left a large sum of money behind him; even more than he was 
supposed to have been worth, although the neighbours, according to 
the custom of mankind in calculating the wealth that other people 
ought to have saved, had estimated his property in good round 
numbers.  Joe inherited the whole; so that he became a man of great 
consequence in those parts, and was perfectly independent.

Some time elapsed before Barnaby got the better of the shock he had 
sustained, or regained his old health and gaiety.  But he recovered 
by degrees: and although he could never separate his condemnation 
and escape from the idea of a terrific dream, he became, in other 
respects, more rational.  Dating from the time of his recovery, he 
had a better memory and greater steadiness of purpose; but a dark 
cloud overhung his whole previous existence, and never cleared 
away.

He was not the less happy for this, for his love of freedom and 
interest in all that moved or grew, or had its being in the 
elements, remained to him unimpaired.  He lived with his mother on 
the Maypole farm, tending the poultry and the cattle, working in a 
garden of his own, and helping everywhere.  He was known to every 
bird and beast about the place, and had a name for every one.  
Never was there a lighter-hearted husbandman, a creature more 
popular with young and old, a blither or more happy soul than 
Barnaby; and though he was free to ramble where he would, he never 
quitted Her, but was for evermore her stay and comfort.

It was remarkable that although he had that dim sense of the past, 
he sought out Hugh's dog, and took him under his care; and that he 
never could be tempted into London.  When the Riots were many years 
old, and Edward and his wife came back to England with a family 
almost as numerous as Dolly's, and one day appeared at the Maypole 
porch, he knew them instantly, and wept and leaped for joy.  But 
neither to visit them, nor on any other pretence, no matter how 
full of promise and enjoyment, could he be persuaded to set foot in 
the streets: nor did he ever conquer this repugnance or look upon 
the town again.

Grip soon recovered his looks, and became as glossy and sleek as 
ever.  But he was profoundly silent.  Whether he had forgotten the 
art of Polite Conversation in Newgate, or had made a vow in those 
troubled times to forego, for a period, the display of his 
accomplishments, is matter of uncertainty; but certain it is that 
for a whole year he never indulged in any other sound than a grave, 
decorous croak.  At the expiration of that term, the morning being 
very bright and sunny, he was heard to address himself to the 
horses in the stable, upon the subject of the Kettle, so often 
mentioned in these pages; and before the witness who overheard him 
could run into the house with the intelligence, and add to it upon 
his solemn affirmation the statement that he had heard him laugh, 
the bird himself advanced with fantastic steps to the very door of 
the bar, and there cried, 'I'm a devil, I'm a devil, I'm a devil!' 
with extraordinary rapture.

From that period (although he was supposed to be much affected by 
the death of Mr Willet senior), he constantly practised and 
improved himself in the vulgar tongue; and, as he was a mere infant 
for a raven when Barnaby was grey, he has very probably gone on 
talking to the present time.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Barnaby Rudge, by Charles Dickens

