*****The Project Gutenberg Etext of Somebody's Little Girl*****
#1 in our series by Martha Young
A short story


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.



Somebody's Little Girl

by Martha Young

October, 1996  [Etext #702]



*****The Project Gutenberg Etext of Somebody's Little Girl*****
*****This file should be named slgrl10.txt or slgrl10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, slgrl11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, slgrl10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL
by Martha Young






Dedication

To
Two Little Elizabeths:
Elizabeth Young
and
Elizabeth Magruder





SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL



If I were just to tell the things that Bessie Bell remembered I
should tell you some very strange things.  Bessie Bell did not know
whether she remembered them, or just knew them, or whether they just
grew, those strange things in some strange country that never was
wnywhere in the world; for when Bessie Bell tried to tell about
those strange things great grown wise people said: ``No, no, Bessie
Bell, there is nothing in the world like that.''

So Bessie Bell just remembered and wondered.

She remembered how somewhere, sometime, there was a window where you
could look out and see everything green, little and green, and
always changing and moving, away, away--beyond everything little,
and green, and moving all the time.  But great grown wise folks
said: ``No, there is no window in all the world like that.''

And once when some one gave Bessie Bell a little round red apple she
caught her breath very quickly and her little heart jumped and then
thumped very loudly (that is the way it seemed to her) and she
remembered: Little apple trees all just alike, and little apple
trees in rows all just alike on top of those and again on top of
those until they came to a great row of big round red apples on top
of all.

Rut great grown people said: ``No, no, Bessie Bell, there are no
apple trees in all the world like that.''

And one time Bessie Bell was at a pretty house and somebody sat her
on a little low chair and said: `` Keep still, Bessie Bell.''

She kept still so long that at last she began to be afraid to move
at all, and she got afraid even to crook up her little finger for
fear it would pop off loud,--she had kept still so long that all her
round little fingers and her round little legs felt so stiff.

Then one, great grown person said: ``She seems a very quiet child.''
And the other said: ``She is a very quiet child--sometimes.''

But just then Bessie Bell turned her head, and though her round
little neck felt stiff it did not pop!--and she saw--something in
a corner that was blue, green, and brown, and soft, and she forgot
how afraid to move she was, and she forgot how stiff she thought she
was, and she forgot how still she was told to be, and she jumped up
and ran to the corner and cried out: ``Pretty! Pretty! Pretty!''

One grown person took up the Thing that was blue, and green, and
brown, and soft, and waved it to and fro, to and fro in front of
Bessie Bell.

And Bessie Bell clapped her hands, and jumped for joy, and laughed,
and cried: ``Boo! boo! boo!''

And Bessie Bell ran right into the Thing that was blue, and green,
and brown, and soft, and she threw out her round little arms and
clasped them about the Thing that was blue, and green, and brown,
and soft!

And she pulled it over her face, and she laughed and cried for joy--
because she remembered--

But the great grown person who had brought Bessie Bell to the pretty
house said: ``Oh, Bessie Bell! Why, Bessie Bell!  For shame, Bessie
Bell! How could you do so to the beautiful peacock-feather-fly-
brush!''

So Bessie Bell could only cry--and that very softly--and feel
ashamed as she was bid, and forget what it was that she remembered.

Bessie Bell might have remembered one time when a great house was
all desolate, and when nobody or nothing at all breathed in the
whole great big house, but one little tiny girl and one great big
white cat, with just one black spot on its tail.

The nurse that always had played so nicely with the tiny little girl
was lying with her cheek in her hand over yonder.

The Grandmother who had always talked so much to the tiny little
girl was not talking any more.

The tiny little girl was so sick that she only just could breathe
quickly, just so--and just so--.

If Bessie Bell could remember that, it was only that she remembered
the big white cat like a big soft dream.  And she might have
remembered how, now and then, the big cat put out a paw and touched
the little girl's cheek, like a soft white dream-touch.

And that little girl had on a night-gown that was long, and soft,
and white, and on that little white night-gown was worked, oh so
carefully, in linen thread: ``Bessie Bell.''

Then the few people who walked about the world in Fever-time came in
to that big house, and they took up that little tiny girl that
breathed so softly and so quickly--just so!

And they read on her little white night-gown the words written with
the linen thread: ``Bessie Bell.''

And they said: ``Let us take this little girl with us.''

They put a big soft white blanket around the little girl and walked
out of the big house with her, someone carrying her in strong arms.

And the big white cat got down off the big white bed and rubbed
himself against the bedpost, and went round and round the bed-post,
and rubbed himself round and round the bed-post.

And the tiny little girl never saw the big house, or the big soft
white cat any more.

And now when it happened that she remembered something, great grown
people said: ``No, no, Bessie Bell, there is nothing in the world
like that.''

So she just wondered and remembered, and almost forgot what it was
that she did remember.

* * *
* *
*



Sister Mary Felice had all the little tiny girls playing in the
sand: that was the place that was meant for the little girls to play
in.

All the little girls had on blue checked aprons.  All the aprons had
straps and buttons behind.

For just one hour every day all the little tiny girls played in the
sand, and while they played Sister Mary Felice sat on a willow-
wrought bench and watched them play.

Then when that hour was exactly passed Sister Angela always came
with a basket of netted canes, an Indian basket, on her arm.  In the
Indian basket were little cakes--such nice little cakes--always they
had caraway seeds in them.

One day Sister Mary Felice said: ``Sister Angela, did Sister
Ignatius put too many caraway seeds in the cakes this time?''

Sister Angela said: ``I think not, Sister Mary Felice.  Will you try
one?''

Sister Mary Felice said: ``I thank you, Sister Angela.''

Then Sister Mary Felice took one to try.

Then always Sister Angela, with the Indian basket on her arm, took
all the little girls to the long back gallery that was latticed in.

On a low shelf close against the lattice sat a row of white basins.

Then all the little tiny girls washed their little tiny hands in the
white basins.  And while they washed their little tiny hands by twos
and by threes together, two little girls washing their hands in one
basin together, three little girls washing their hands together,
they all oftentimes laughed together and said:

``Wash together!
And be friends forever!
Wash together!
And be friends forever!''

Then Sister Angela held a long pink checked towel in her hands while
the little tiny girls came as their tiny hands were washed and wiped
them on the pink checked towel.

Then if two little girls took hold of the pink checked towel at once
they both laughed and sang:

``Don't wipe together,
Or we'll fight
Before night.''

And the other little girls that were still washing their hands in
the white basins on the low shelf by the back-gallery lattice sang
over and over again:

``Wash together! We'll wash together!
And we'll be happy forever!''

When all the pink clean tiny hands were wiped dry, or as nearly dry
as little girls do wipe tiny pink hands, on the pink checked towel
held for them by Sister Angela, then Sister Angela hung the pink
checked towel on the lowest limb of the arbor-vita tree.  Then the
little girls all ran to sit down in a row on the lowest step of the
back gallery, with their little feet on the gravel below.  Sister
Angela walked the length of the row, and gave to each little girl in
the row a sweet tiny cake, or maybe Sister Angela walked twice down
the row and gave to each little girl two cakes, or sometimes maybe
she walked three times down the row, and then each little girl had
three cakes; but no one little girl ever had more than every other
little girl.

Always Sister Angela sat a little way off from the row of the little
girls.  She always sat on a bench under the great magnoliatree and
watched the tiny girls as they ate their tiny cakes.

And always the pink checked towel waved itself ever so softly to and
fro on the lowest limb of the arbor-vitae-tree, for that was the way
that pink checked towels did to help to dry themselves after helping
to dry so many little pink fingers.  Often, so often, little brown
sparrows came hopping to the gravel to pick up any tiny crumbs of
cake that the little girls dropped, but you may be sure that they
did not drop so very many, many little brown crumbs for little brown
birds to find.

But if they were dropped, even if by rare chance were the crumbs so
large as to be nearly as large as half of a cake--why then, that
crumb had to stay for those little birds.  It was the law! The law
that the little girls had made for themselves, and nobody but
themselves knew about that law--for the good of the birds.  But no
little girl cared to disobey that law of their own that nobody but
themselves knew about, for if one had--how dreadful it would have
been--no little girl would have played with her until--oh, so long,
so long--until she might at last have been forgiven!

So all the little brown crumbs that the tiny little girls did drop,
why the tiny little brown birds did pick up,--and they never said
whether they liked caraway seeds or not!

* * *
* *
*



One day when the tiny little girls were all in a row eating cakes,
Sister Angela, sitting on a bench under the magnolia, said quite
suddenly: ``Good morning!''

She rose up from her seat under the great magnolia.

Then the little brown birds fluttered up from the gravel.

Then all the little girls looked up.

There stood two pretty grown-up people.

And these two grown-up people had no soft white around their faces
like the soft white around the face that Sister Angela wore, and
they had no black veils, soft and long like the black veil that
Sister Angela wore.  And they had no little white crosses like the
small white cross that Sister Angela wore on the breast of her soft
black dress.

One of the pretty-grown up folks looked at one of the little tiny
girls and said: ``And what is her name?''

Sister Angela said: ``Bessie Bell was written on her little white
night-gown, done in linen thread.''

And Sister Angela said: ``Yes, we have always kept the little white
night-gown.''

And one of the pretty grown-up people said: ``Yes, that was right.
Always to keep the little white night-gown.''

And the other grown-up person said: ``And how comes that to be all
that you know?''

Sister Angela said: ``Because of the fever.''

And the pretty one said: ``The dreadful fever!''

Sister Angela said: ``Yes.  The dreadful fever.  It often leaves
none in a house, and even sometimes none in a whole neighborhood to
tell the story.''

If, as Sister Angela and the pretty grown person talked, there came
to Bessie Bell any thought of a great silent house, and a big white
cat, with just one bit of black spot on its tail, why if such a
thought came to Bessie Bell it came only to float away, away like
white thistle seed--drifting away as dreams drift.

When the two pretty grown ones had gone away, then Sister Angela had
nodded her head at the row of little girls, so that they might know
that they might go on eating their cakes, for of course the little
girls knew that they must hold their cakes in their hands and wait,
and not eat, when Sister Angela had shaken her head gently at them
while she talked to the two pretty ones.  The little brown birds
seemed to know, too, that they could come back to the gravel to look
for crumbs again.

Then, as the little girls were again eating their cakes, one little
girl said: ``Sister Angela, were they Sisters?''

Sister Angela said: ``No, they are not Sisters.''

Then another little girl asked: ``Sister Angela, what were they,
then?''

Sister Angela said: ``They are only just ladies.''

Then always after that Bessie Bell and the other little girls were
glad when Only-Just-Ladies came to see them.

The sun shone nearly always, or it seemed to the little girls that
it nearly always shone, out in that large garden where they could
play the hour in the sand, and where they could spend one hour
eating their cakes with their feet on the gravel, and where they
could walk behind Sister Justina on all the shell-bordered walks
around the beds (but they must not step on the beds)--just one hour.
If a rain came it always did surprise them: those little girls were
always surprised when it rained! and they did not know exactly what
to do when it rained, though they knew almost always what to do when
the sun shone.  One day when it rained it happened that the little
girls were all left over the one hour in the long room where all the
rows and rows of the little arm-chairs sat, and where all the little
girls learned to Count, and to say Their Prayers, and to Tell the
Time, and to sing ``Angels Bright,'' and to know the A B C blocks.
Sister Theckla, who always stayed the one hour in that room, had
gone to say to the Sisters that the one hour was over, and that it
was raining, and what must the little girls do now?

While Sister Theckla was gone, all the little girls went to the
windows, and all the tiny girls looked at the rain coming down,
coming down in drops, so many drops; and so fast the drops came that
they seemed to come in long strings of drops straight from the sky.

Then one little girl laughed and began to beat on the window by
which she stood, to beat all over it as far as her little damp pink
fingers could reach, and to say:

``Rain! Rain!
Go to Spain!
Rain! Rain!
Go to Spain!
Rain! Rain!
Go to Spain!''

And all the little girls thought that was so beautiful that they
began to beat all over the windows, too, just as high and just as
far as their little damp pink fingers could reach, and to sing as
loud and as gaily as they could sing:

``Rain! Rain!
Go to Spain!''

Sister Theckla and Sister Angela came to the door of the room,--and
they were so astonished that they could only look at one another and
say to one another: ``What do they mean?  Where did they learn
that?''

And the little girl who had taught the other little girls that much
of the song remembered some more; and so she beat louder than ever
on the window pane and said:

``Rain, rain, rain,
Go away!
And come another day!''

All the little girls laughed more than ever and sang louder than
ever:

``Rain, rain, rain,
Go away!
Come again another day!''

Then Sister Angela looked at Sister Theckla and said: ``Where did
the child learn that, do you suppose?''

And Sister Theckla said: ``She is older than the others.  She must
have learned it at home!''

And Sister Angela and Sister Theckla came into the room and they
said: ``See, now, what you have done to the windows!''

Sure enough, when the little girls looked at the windows the glass
was all dim and blurred with little damp finger-prints!

* * *
* *
*



It was one day as the sun shone as it did shine most days, that the
same little girl who knew how to sing that song when it rained was
running on the shell-bordered walk, holding Bessie Bell's hand and
running, when her little foot tripped up against Bessie Bell's
foot,--and over Bessie Bell rolled on the walk with the shell
border.

Then Bessie Bell cried and cried.

And Sister Mary Felice said: ``Bessie Bell, where are you hurt?''

Bessie Bell did not know where she was hurt: she only knew that she
was so sorry to have been so happy to be running, and then to roll
so suddenly on the walk.

Then the little girl said: ``She isn't hurt at all.  She is just
crying.''

Sister Mary Felice said: ``But you threw her down.  You must tell
her you are sorry.''

Then the little girl said: ``But I didn't mean to throw her down.''

``But,'' Sister Mary Felice said, ``you did trip her up, and you must
beg her pardon.''

Then Sister Theckla came to take all the little girls to the room
where so many chairs sat in so many rows, and she too said: ``Yes,
you must beg her pardon.''

Bessie Bell was listening so that she had almost stopped crying, but
now when Sister Story Felice and Sister Theckla both said to the
little girl, ``Yes, you must beg pardon,'' then the little girl began
to cry, too.

Then Bessie Bell grew so sorry again, she hardly knew why, or for
what, that she began to cry again.

So then both Sisters said again: ``Yes, you should beg pardon.''

But the little girl still cried, and said, ``But I didn't mean to
trip her.''  Then she shook her head at Bessie Bell and said--because
she just had to say it:

``I beg your pardon!
Grant me grace!
I hope the cat will scratch your face! ''

Oh! Sister Mary Felice looked at Sister Theckla, and Sister Theckla
looked at Sister Mary Felice--and they both said: ``Where did she
learn that?''

But Bessie Bell knew that the little girl did not mean to throw her
down, so she said, ``No, you didn't mean to do it.''

She had thought she ought to say that, and she had been getting
ready to say that before the little girl had been made to beg her
pardon, and now that she had gotten ready she said: ``No, you didn't
mean to do it.''

Then the little girl stopped crying, too, and ran and caught Bessie
Bell's hand again and said to her again:

``I beg your pardon!
Grant me grace!
I hope the cat won't scratch your face!''

So they went skipping down the walk together just as they had gone
before.  Then Sister Mary Felice and Sister Theckla both said:
``Well! Well!''

* * *
* *
*



One time it came about that Bessie Bell lay a long time in her
little white crib-bed, and she did not know why, and she did not
care much why.  She did not get up and play in the sand while Sister
Mary Felice looked one hour at the little girls playing in the sand.

She scarcely wondered why she did not leave the crib-bed to sit on
the long gallery-step in a row with all the other little girls, all
with their feet on the gravel, and all eating the tiny cakes that
Sister Ignatius made, while Sister Angela sat on the bench under the
magnolia-tree and looked at the row of little girls.

If sometimes just at waking from fitful sleep in her crib-bed there
came to her just a thought, or a remembrance, of a great big soft
white cat that reached its paw out and softly touched her cheek, it
came to her only like the touch of fancy in a big soft white dream.

Often Only-Just-Ladies came and talked over her little white crib
with Sister Helen Vincula.

Bessie Bell's little fingers were no longer pink and round now; they
lay just white, so white and small, on the white spread.  And Bessie
Bell did not mind how quiet she was told to be, for she was too
tired to want to make any noise at all.

One day it happened that an Only-Just-Lady came and said: ``Sister
Helen Vincula, I want to give you a ticket to carry you away to the
high mountain, and I want you to go to stay a month in my house on
the mountain, and I want you to carry this little sick girl with
you.  And when you are there, Sister Helen Vincula, my bread-man
will bring you bread, and my milk-man will bring you milk, and my
market-man from the cove will bring you apples and eggs, and all the
rest of the good things that come up the mountain from the warm
caves.''

``For,'' the Only-Just-Lady said, ``I want this little sick girl to
grow well again, and I want her little arms and legs and fingers to
get round and pink again.''

Bessie Bell thought that that was a very pretty tale that the Lady
was telling, but she did not know or understand that that tale was
about her.  Then the Only-Just-Lady said, ``Sister Helen Vincula, it
will do you good, too, as well as this little girl to stay in the
high mountains.

Not until all of Bessie Bell's little blue checked aprons, and all
of her little blue dresses, and all of her little white petticoats,
and all of her little white night-gowns, and even the tiny old
night-gown with the linen thread name worked on it, had been put
with all the rest of her small belongings into the old trunk with
brass tacks in the leather, the old, old trunk that had belonged to
Sister Helen Vincula, did Bessie Bell know that it was herself,
little Bessie Bell, who was going away Somewhere.

* * *
* *
*



It was a very strange new world to Bessie Bell, that new world up on
the High Mountain.

She did not think the grand views off the edge of the high mountain
so strange.  But she loved to look out on those views as she stood
by Sister Helen Vincula on the graycliff; Sister Helen Vincula
holding her hand very fast while they both looked down into the
valleys and coves.  As the shadows of evening crept up to the cliff
whereon they stood, and as those shadows folded round and round the
points and coves, those points and caves lying below and beyond fold
over fold, everything grew purple and violet.

Everything grew so purple, and so violet, and so great, and so wide
that it seemed sometimes to the little girl, standing on the cliff
by Sister Helen Vincula, that she was looking right down into the
heart of a violet as great, as wide--as great, as wide--as the whole
world.

But this did not seem so strange to Bessie Bell, for she yet
remembered that window out of which one could see just small, green,
moving things, and of which great grown people had told her, ``No,
Bessie Bell, there is no such window in all the world.''

So in her own way she thought that maybe after awhile that the big,
big violet might drift away, away, and great grown people might say,
``No, Bessie Bell, there never was a violet in all the world like
that.''

It was the people--and all the people--of that new world that seemed
so strange to Bessie Bell.

There were children, and children in all the summer cabins on that
high mountain.

And those children did not walk in rows.

And those children did not do things by one hours.

And those children did not wash their hands in little white basins
sitting in rows on long back gallery benches.

It was strange to Bessie Bell that those children did not sit in
rows to eat tiny cakes with caraway seeds in them while Sister
Angela sat on the bench under the great magnolia-tree and looked at
the row of little girls.

It was so very strange to Bessie Bell that these children wore all
sorts of clothes--all sorts! Not just blue dresses, and blue checked
aprons.

And Bessie Bell knew, too, that those little girls in all sorts of
clothes could not float away into that strange country of No-where
and Never-was, where, too, the things that she remembered seemed to
drift away--and to so nearly get lost, living only in dimming
memory.

These little girls in all sorts of clothes were real, and sure-
enough, and nobody could ever say of them, ``There are no such
little girls in the world,'' because sometimes when Bessie Bell would
get to thinking, and thinking about the strangeness of them, she
would almost wonder if she did not just remember them.  When she
would give one just a little pinch to see if that one was a real
sure-enough little girl, why that little girl would say, ``Don't.''
She would say ``Don't!'' just the same as a little girl in the row of
little girls all with blue checked aprons would say ``Don't,'' if you
pinched one of them ever so little.

There were no Sisters on that high mountain.  Sister Helen Vincula
was the only Sister there.  That seemed very strange to Bessie Bell.

One day the strangest thing of all so far happened.

One little girl called another little girl with whom she was
playing, ``Sister.''

Bessie Bell laughed at that.

``Oh, she is not a Sister!'' said Bessie Bell.

``Yes, she is; she is my sister!'' said the little girl.

``No,'' said Bessie Bell, just as great grown people said to her when
she remembered strange things, ``No, there never was in the world a
Sister like that!''

Then the smaller of the little girls who were playing together ran
to the larger one, and caught hold of her hand, and they stood
together in front of Bessie Bell--they both had long black curls,
but Bessie Bell had short golden curls--and the smaller girl said:
``Yes, she is my sister!''

And the larger girl said: ``Yes, she is, too.  She is my-own-dear-
sister!''

The smaller little girl shook her black curls and said: ``She is my
own-dear-owny-downy-dear-sister!''

In all of her life Bessie Bell had never heard anything like that.

And all the other little girls who were playing joined in and said:
``Bessie Bell doesn't know what she is talking about.  Of course you
are sisters.  Everybody knows you are sisters!''

Bessie Bell was distressed to be told that she did not know what she
was talking about--and she knew so much about Sisters.

So she began to cry, very softly.

Then she stopped crying long enough to say: ``But I never saw
Sisters like that before!''

Then she took up her crying again right where she left off.

Then a little boy--but he seemed a very large boy to Bessie Bell
with his long-striped-stocking-legs--said to Bessie Bell: ``No,
Bessie Bell, they are not Sisters like Sister Helen Vincula and the
Sisters that you know, but they are just what they say they are--
just own dear sisters.''

Then came to Bessie Bell that knowledge that we are often times slow
in getting: she knew all of a sudden--that she did not know
everything.  She did not know all, even about Sisters.

Because, in all that she knew or remembered or wondered about, there
was nothing at all about that strange thing that all the little
children, but herself, knew so well about--''Own-dear-sisters.''

Another strange thing came into her mind, brought into her mind
partly by her ears, but mostly by her eyes: There were not in this
new world on the high mountain--perhaps there were not after all so
many anywhere as she had thought--there were not so many Sisters
like Sister Helen Vincula (for was not Sister Helen Vincula the only
Sister she had seen on the mountain?).  There were not after all so
many Sisters like Sister Angela; and Sister Mary Felice, who watched
the little blue-checked-apron girls playing in the sand; and Sister
Ignatius, who cooked the cakes with the caraway seeds in them; and
Sister Theckla, who taught the little girls to Count and to Sing.

Why, the whole world, surely the up-on-the mountain-world, seemed
full of Only-Just-Ladies.

Not just a Lady here and there, coming to visit with hats on, to
talk a little to the Sisters, to look at the little girls with blue
checked aprons on.  But here they were coming and going all the
time, moving about, and living in the cabins, walking everywhere
with or without hats on, standing on the gray cliffs, and looking
down--maybe into the heart of a worldwide violet there, off the edge
of the cliff, such as Bessie Bell saw or fancied she saw.

So many Ladies.

Bessie Bell leaned against the little fluted post of the gallery to
the cabin that she and Sister Helen Vincula lived in, and decided to
herself that, strange as it was, yet was it true that the whole
world was full of--Ladies.

There were yet stranger things for Bessie Bell to learn.

She had not for long played with those many little girls in all
sorts of clothes, and with larger girls, and with boys,--some with
short-striped-stocking-legs and some with long-striped-stocking-
legs,--before she heard one child say: ``Mama says she will take me
to Sweet Fern Cave to-morrow.''

Or perhaps it was another child who said: ``Mama won't let me wade
in the branch.''

Or another child said: ``Mama says I can have a party for all the
little girls and boys on the mountain next Friday!''

Then another little child said: ``My Mama has made me a beautiful
pink dress, and I will wear that to your party.''

Mama?  My Mama?

Bessie Bell leaned against the little fluted post of the gallery to
the cabin where she and Sister Helen Vincula lived, and thought a
great deal about that.

And Bessie Bell wondered a great deal what that could mean: Mama?
My Mama?

There were strange new things in this world.

Bessie Bell almost forgot to remember now, because every day was so
full of such strange new things to know.

Mama?  My Mama?

Bessie Bell did a great deal of thinking about that.

One day the little children were playing at building rock chimneys.

There was not much sand there for little children to play in, so
that the children often built rock chimneys, and rock tables, and
rock fences.

As they were playing one little girl suddenly left the playground
and ran, calling: ``Mama! Mama! Come here; come this way, and see
the chimney we have built!''

Bessie Bell turned quickly from play and looked after the little
girl who was running across the playground to where three ladies
were standing.

The little girl caught the dress of one of the ladies, and came
pulling at her dress and bringing her across the ground to see the
stone chimney, and the little girl kept saying:

``Look, Mama! See, Mama! Isn't it a grand chimney? Won't it 'most
hold smoke?''

Bessie Bell stood still with her little hands--they were beginning
to be round pink little hands again, now--clasped in front of her
and wondered.

``See, Mama! Look, Mama!'' cried the little girl.

``Why does she say: Mama?'' asked Bessie Bell, because she just
wondered, and wondered--and she did not know.

``Because it is her Mama,'' said a child who had just brought two
more rocks to put on the chimney.

``Oh,'' said Bessie Bell.

That lady who was the little girl's Mama looked much as all the
ladies looked.

``Are all Ladies Mamas?'' asked Bessie Bell.

She hoped the child who had brought the two rocks would not laugh,
for Bessie Bell knew she would cry if she did.

The little girl did not laugh at all.  She was trying so carefully
to put the last rock on top of the stone chimney, she said: ``No,
Bessie Bell: some are Mamas, and some are only just Ladies.''

There.  There it was again: Only-Just-Ladies.

Bessie Bell wondered how to tell which were Mamas, and which were
Ladies--just Ladies.

Very often after that day she watched those who passed the cabin
where she and Sister Helen Vincula lived, and wondered which were
Mamas--

And which were Ladies.

There was no rule of old or young by which Bessie Bell could tell.

Nor was it as one could tell Sisters from Just-Ladies by a way of
dress.  For Sisters, like Sister Helen Vincula, wore a soft white
around the face, and soft long black veils, and a small cross on the
breast of the dress: so that even had any not known the difference
one could easily have guessed.

But for Ladies and Mamas there were none of these differences.

But Bessie Bell looked and looked and wondered, but her eyes brought
to her no way of knowing.

Bessie Bell could at length think of only one way to find out the
difference, and that was to ask--to let her ears help her eyes to
bring to her some way of knowing.

One day, a dear old lady with white curls all around under her
bonnet stopped near the playground and called Bessie Bell to her and
gave her some chocolate candy, every piece of candy folded up in its
own white paper.

Bessie Bell said: ``Thank you, ma'am.''

Then as the lady still stood by the playground Bessie Bell asked
her: ``Are you a Lady, ma'am ?''

``I have been called so,'' said the lady, smiling down at Bessie
Bell.

``Or are you a Mama?'' asked Bessie Bell.

``Ah, said the lady; ``I am a Mama, too, but all my little girls
have grown up and left me.''

Bessie Bell wondered how they could have done that, those little
girls.  But she saw, and was so glad to see, that this lady was very
wise, and that she understood all the things that little girls
wonder about.

But though there was a difference, a very great difference, between
Mamas and Ladies it was very hard to tell--unless you asked.

One day a large fat lady took Bessie Bell on her lap.  That was very
strange to Bessie Bell--to sit on top of anybody.

And the lady made a rabbit, and a pony, and a preacher, all out of a
handkerchief and her nice fat fingers.  And then she made with the
same handkerchief and fingers a Mama holding a Baby.

Then Bessie Bell looked up at her with her wondering eyes and asked:
``Are you a Lady--''

``Bless my soul!'' cried the lady. ``Do you hear this child?  And
now, come to think of it, I don't know whether I am a lady or not--''

And the lady laughed until Bessie Bell felt quite shaken up.

``Or are you a Mama?'' asked Bessie Bell, when it seemed that the
lady was about to stop laughing.

``So that is it?'' asked the lady, and she seemed about to begin
laughing again.

``Yes, I am a Mama, and I have three little girls about as funny as
you are.''

Another time a lady passed by the cabin where Bessie Bell stood
leaning against the little fluted white post of the gallery, and
said:

``Good morning, Bessie Bell.  I am Alice's Mama.''

That made things so simple, thought Bessie Bell.  This lady was a
Mama.  And she was Alice's Mama.

Bessie Bell wished that all would tell in that nice way at once
whether they were Mamas or Just-Ladies.

The next lady who passed by the cabin also stopped to talk to Bessie
Bell.

And Bessie Bell asked: ``Are you a Mama or Only-Just-A-Lady?''

``I am only just a lady,'' the lady said, patting Bessie Bell's
little tiny hand.  And it was easy to see that, in Bessie Bell's
mind, though Only-Just-Ladies were kind and sweet, Mamas were far
greater and more important beings.

One night, when Sister Helen Vincula had put Bessie Bell to bed in
the small bed that was not a crib-bed, though like that she had
slept in before she had come to the high mountain, Bessie Bell still
lay wide awake.

Her blue eyes were wide open and both of her pink little hands were
above her head on the pillow.  She was thinking, and thinking, and
she forgot that she was thinking her thinking aloud, and she said:

``Alice has a mama.  Robbie has a mama.  Katie has a mama.  Where is
Bessie Bell's mama?  Never mind: Bessie Bell will find a mama.''

Then Sister Helen Vincula, who was wide awake, too, said:

``Ah me, ah me.''

Bessie Bell said: ``Sister Helen Vincula, did you call me?''

Sister Helen Vincula said:

``No, child: go to sleep.''

* * *
* *
*



The next day was the day for Sister Helen Vincula and Bessie Bell to
leave the high, cool mountain.  They were to leave the little cabin
where the lady had told them to live until they had gotten well
again.

So when their leaving day came Sister Helen Vincula put a clean
stiff-starched blue-checked apron on Bessie Bell, and they walked
together to the Mall where the band was playing.

Bessie Bell was always so glad when Sister Helen Vincula took her to
the Mall in the afternoon when the band played.

All the little children went every afternoon in their prettiest
dresses to the Mall where the band played.

Because in the afternoon the band played just the sort of music that
little girls liked to hear.

Every afternoon all the nurses came to the Mall and brought all the
babies, and the nurses rolled the babies up and down the sawdust
walks in the pretty baby-carriages, with nice white, and pink, and
blue parasols over the babies' heads.

That afternoon Sister Helen Vincula stayed a long time with Bessie
Bell, on the Mall, sitting by her on the stone bench and listening
to the gay music, and looking at the children in their prettiest
clothes, and at the nurses rolling the babies in the pretty
carriages with the beautiful pink, and white, and blue parasols over
the babies' heads.

Then Sister Helen Vincula said: ``Bessie Bell, I am going across the
long bridge to see some ladies and to tell them Good-bye, because we
are going away tomorrow.

And Sister Helen Vincula said: ``Now, will you stay right here on
this stone bench till I come back for you?''

Bessie Bell said, ``Yes, Sister Helen Vincula.''

So Sister Helen Vincula went away across the long bridge to see the
ladies and to tell them Good-bye.

Bessie Bell did not know much about going away, and she did not
understand about it at all, so she did not care at all about it.

She just sat on the stone bench with her little pink hands folded on
her blue checked apron, and looked at the children in their
prettiest clothes, and at the babies, and at the parasols.

She loved so to look, and she loved so to listen to the pretty gay
music that she did not notice that a lady had come to the stone
bench, and had seated herself just where Sister Helen Vincula had
sat before she went to see the ladies and to tell them Good-bye.

There were many other ladies on the Mall, and many ladies passed in
their walk by the stone bench where Bessie Bell and the lady sat.

Everybody loved to come to the Mall in the afternoon when the band
played. Everybody loved to hear the gay music.  Everybody loved to
see the children in their prettiest clothes, and to see all the
nurses rolling the babies in the carriages with the pretty parasols.

And one of the ladies passing by looked over to the stone bench
where Bessie Bell sat with her hands folded on her blue checked
apron, and where the lady had seated herself just as Sister Helen
Vincula had sat before she went across the long bridge.

And the lady said, as she passed by and looked: ``Striking
likeness.''

Another lady with her said: ``Wonderful!''

And another one with them said: ``Impossible! But strange indeed--''

Bessie Bell did not notice what the ladies said, but because they
looked so attentively to where she sat on the stone bench her
attention was turned the way their eyes turned as they talked in low
tones and looked attentively passing by.

So when they had passed by, Bessie Bell turned and looked to the
other end of the bench where the lady sat.

Bessie Bell was so surprised at the first look that she hardly knew
what to think.

The lady did not look like Sister Helen Vincula, oh, not at all; but
the veil that she wore was soft and black like that that Sister
Helen Vincula wore.  The dress that the lady wore was black also,
but it looked as if it were stiff and very crisp, and not soft like
the dress that Sister Helen Vincula wore.  Bessie Bell did not mean
to be rude, but she reached out one tiny hand and took hold of the
lady's dress, just a tiny pinch of it.

Yes, it was very crisp.

Then the lady turned and looked at Bessie Bell.

Then Bessie Bell was still more surprised, for there was something
white under her veil.  Not white all round the face like that Sister
Helen Vincula wore, but soft crinkly white just over the lady's soft
yellow hair.

Also on the breast of her black dress was a cross, but not white
like the cross that Sister Helen Vincula wore.  No, this cross was
shining very brightly, and it was very golden in the sunlight,--and--
somehow, somehow,--Bessie Bell knew just how that cross felt,--she
knew without feeling it.  She did not have to feel it as she had
felt the dress.

Bessie Bell looked and thought.  She thought this lady looked like a
Sister--and yet there was a difference.  She looked also like Just-
A-Lady, and she also looked grand and important enough for a Mama.

Bessie Bell looked and thought, but she could not tell just exactly
what this lady was.

It was best that she should ask, and then she would surely know.

So she asked: ``Are vou a Lady, ma'am?''

``I hope so, little girl,'' the lady said.

``I thought, maybe, you were a Sister,'' said Bessie Bell.

``No,'' said the lady.

``Like Sister Mary Felice, and Sister Angela, and Sister Helen
Vincula,'' said Bessie Bell.

``No,'' said the lady.

``Are you a Mama, then?'' asked Bessie Bell.

The lady looked as if she were going to cry.

But Bessie Bell could see nothing to cry about.  The band was still
playing ever so gaily, and all the little children looked so
beautiful and so happy, all playing and running hither and thither
on the sawdust walks, that it was good just to look at them.

But on the instant Bessie Bell remembered how sorrowful it was to
cry when you could not understand things, so she quickly reached out
her little pink hand and laid it on the lady's hand--just because
she knew how sorrowful it felt to feel like crying and not to know.

``You see,'' said Bessie Bell gently, as she softly patted the lady's
hand, ``you see, you do look something like a Sister,--but,'' said
Bessie Bell, ``I believe you do look more like a Mama.''

``Little girl,'' said the lady, ``what do you mean?''

And she still looked as if she might cry.

``Yes,'' said Bessie Bell, for she had begun to think very hard,
``Alice has a mama.  Robbie has a mama.  Lucy has a mama.  Everybody
has a mama.  Never mind, Bessie Bell will find a mama--''

``Little girl,'' said the lady, ``why do you say, Bessie Bell--?''

When the lady said that it seemed to Bessie Bell that she heard
something sweet--something away off beyond what the band was
playing, so she just clapped her hands and laughed out loud, and
said over and over as if it were a little song:

``Bessie Bell! Bessie, Bessie, Bessie Bell!''

But the lady at her side looked down at the child as if she were
afraid.  Bessie Bell knew how sorrowful it was to be afraid, so she
stopped patting her hands and laughing,--for she didn't know why she
had begun to do it--and she laid her hand again on the lady's hand,
just because she knew how sorrowful it was to be afraid.

But Bessie Bell could not see anything to be afraid of: the band was
playing just as gaily as ever, and the children, and the nurses, and
the babies, and the parasols were as gay as ever.

``Whereis your mama?'' asked the lady, taking fast hold of the little
hand that patted her hand.

``Everybody has a mama--never mind--''

``But where is your mama?'' asked the lady again.

Bessie Bell had begun to wonder and so had forgotten to answer.

``Child, where is your mama?'' said the lady again, still holding
fast to Bessie Bell's hand.

``But--I don't know,'' said Bessie Bell.

Then the lady looked as if she had begun to wonder, too, and she
seemed to be looking away off; away off, but how closely she held
Bessie Bell's hand--closer than Sister Angela, or Sister Theckla, or
even Sister Helen Vincula, or Sister Justina--

Then Bessie Bell began to wonder still more, and to remember, as the
lady held fast to her little fingers.  She began to talk her
thinking out loud, and she said: ``Yes, there was a window--where
everything was green, and, small, and moving--but Sister Justina
said there was not any window like that in the whole world--''

The lady held Bessie Bell's hand very hard, and she said--softly, as
if she, too, was talking her thinking aloud:

``Yes, there was a window like that in the world, for just outside
the nursery-window there grew a Pride of China Tree, and it filled
all the window with small, green, moving leaves--''

Then Bessie Bell just let the lady draw her up close, and she leaned
up against the lady.

She felt so happy now, for she knew she had found the Wisest Woman
in the world, for this lady knew the things that little girls only
could remember.  If she had thought about it she would have told the
lady about the tiny apple-trees with the very, very small apples on
them, and other rows of apple-trees over those, and other rows on
top of those, and on top of all a row of big round red apples.

Then the lady might have said: Yes, there were apple-trees like that
in the world, for all the nursery walls were papered like that, with
a row of big round red apples at the top.

But Bessie Bell did not think of or remember that then; she just
leaned up against the lady and swung one of her little feet up and
down, back and forth, as she sat on the stone bench: she was so
happy to have met the Wisest Woman in the world.

The people who passed by looked, and turned to look again, at the
little girl in the stiff-starched, faded blue checked apron leaning
up against the lady in the crisp, dull silk.

But Bessie Bell did not look at anybody who passed.

And the lady did not look at anybody who passed.

And the band kept on playing gay music.

It was not very long before Sister Helen Vincula came back from
seeing the ladies across the long bridge, and from telling them
Good-bye.  As soon as she saw Bessie Bell leaning up against the
lady she cried:

``Why, Bessie Bell! ''

Bessie Bell said, ``Sister Helen Vincula,'' and she knew she had done
something wrong, but she could only wonder what.

But the lady said very quickly,- and she held Bessie Bell's hand
even harder than before,--she said:

``Sister Helen Vincula, I must ask you something--''

Sister Helen Vincula and the lady talked a long time.

Bessie Bell did not listen very much to what they said.

She did not lean up against the lady now, but she sat close.  Sister
Helen Vincula did not seem to mind that.

She did not swing her foot to and fro now, but she still felt very
contented and happy to have met the very Wisest Woman.

When she did listen a little she heard the lady say:

``There came news that my husband was ill in Mobile, and I feared
that it was of the Dreadful Fever, and I hurried there so that I
could get to him before the Dreadful Quarantines were put on.  I
felt all safe about the baby, for I left her with my mother and the
faithful nurse who had been my nurse, too.  But when the worst had
come and was over,--and it was the Dreadful Fever,--then I tried to
get back to my home; but I could not for many, many days, because
the Dreadful Quarantines were on.  Then at last I did get there--I
slipped up secretly by water.  All were gone. I could find no one
who could tell me anything.  I could find no one who knew anything.
The house was wide open.  There was no sign of life, but that the
cat came and rubbed up against me, and walked round and round me.
The Dreadful Fever was everywhere, and nobody could tell me
anything; and I searched everywhere, always and always alone--there
was no one to help me: everyone was trying to save from the Dreadful
Fever--''

Bessie Bell did not know what all that was about, but she felt so
sorry for the lady that she squeezed down ever so softly on her hand
that held her own still so tightly.

Sister Helen Vincula wiped her eyes.

The lady kept looking away off, but still held Bessie Bell's hand in
hers.

Then Sister Helen Vincula said: ``We are going away to-morrow.''

But the lady held fast to Bessie Bell's hand and said: ``Not this
little girl.''

``Oh,'' said Sister Helen Vincula, ``but she is in my charge, and so
what can I do!''

And the lady said: ``I cannot let her leave me--not ever.''

But Sister Helen Vincula said: ``Oh, madam, you do not know.  No
matter what we hope, we do not know--''

But the lady held still faster to Bessie Bell's hand.

``Oh,'' said Sister Helen Vincula, ``I have a thought! Come to our
cabin with me.''

So they went.

And Bessie Bell walked between Sister Helen Vincula and the lady.

And they each held one of her little pink hands.

When they were at the cabin Sister Helen Vincula opened the old
trunk with the brass tacks on it, and she went down to the very
bottom of it, unpacking as she went.  For the old trunk was almost
entirely packed for the going away to-morrow.  Then Sister Helen
Vincula took out, from almost the bottom of the trunk, the little
white night-gown that had ``Bessie Bell'' written on it with linen
thread.

And Sister Helen Vincula laid the little white night-gown across the
lady's lap.

Then the lady read the name written with the linen thread.

The lady said: ``I worked this name with my own hands.''

She drew Bessie Bell closer to her, and she said: ``Sister Helen
Vincula, can you doubt?''

Bessie Bell stood contentedly where the lady held her, and she
looked first at the night-gown and then at the lady, then at Sister
Helen Vincula.  She did not know or care what it was all about--she
scarcely wondered.

``Sister Helen Vincula,'' said the lady, ``I know past all doubting
that I worked this name.  You believe that.  Much more past all
doubting do you not know--You must know--''

``Ah,'' said Sister Helen Vincula, ``I hope with you.'' She reached
for the little night-gown, and she smoothed it in her fingers.
``Ah,'' she said, ``the child has grown since she has been with us,
so much, but the little gown--it looks--really smaller to me--

But the lady was not listening to Sister Helen Vincula.  She had her
arms about Bessie Bell's shoulders and was looking into her face.

``I am glad I brought the little gown,'' Sister Helen Vincula was
saying; ``the child was so ill, so fearfully thin, I feared--it was
only a fancy--I feared--''

``No, no, no,'' cried the lady, drawing Bessie Bell closer.

``Now nearly two years she has been with us,'' said Sister Helen
Vincula.

``She was just old enough to be put to the table in a high chair,''
said the lady.  ``Ah, how she did laugh and crow and jump when her
father took the peacock-feather-fly-brush from the maid, and waved
it in front of her!  She would seize the ends of the feathers, and
laugh and crow louder than ever, and hide her laughing little face
deep into the feathers--Ah me--''

But Bessie Bell said nothing, nor remembered anything.  For she did
not know that the lady was talking of something green, and blue, and
soft, and brown.

And it was Sister Justina, and not Sister Helen Vincula, who had
told her to be ashamed when she had cried: Pretty! Pretty! Pretty!
as the something green, and blue, and soft, and brown was waved to
and fro in front of her until she seized it and buried her little
face in it for the joy--of remembering--

So Sister Helen Vincula did not know, and Bessie Bell did not
remember, while the lady talked.

Only long after, when Bessie Bell grew much larger, it happened that
whenever she saw an old-fashioned peacock-feather-fly-brush--at
first, just for a second, she felt very glad; and then, just for a
second, she felt very sorry; and she never knew or could remember
why.  She forgot after awhile how she had been so full of sorrow
when Sister Justina said, Be Ashamed, and she could no longer
remember why she was glad; only a feeling of both was left--and she
could not tell how or why.

But the lady would not let Bessie Bell get far from her, and Bessie
did not care to go far from her.  She stood with her little pink
hands folded, and looked up at the lady who held to her so closely.

Sister Helen Vincula said: ``It was Sister Theckla who spent that
summer with the sick, and it was Sister Theckla who brought the
child to us.  Can you not go home with us?  Or I could write to you
at once--''

``No,'' said the lady. ``I will go.  The child shall not leave me--'

``And we will talk to Sister Theckla, and she will tell us all that
she knows, and then--God willing--we shall know all.''

The lady said: ``Yes, we will all go together.  We will go at once.''

And so it was that when Sister Theckla had told all that she knew,
then the lady knew (as she always had said she had known), past all
doubting, that Bessie Bell had really found what she most wished
for.

But we do not know how long it was before Bessie Bell really
understood that the Wisest Woman in the world, who knew what little
girls had almost forgotten how to remember, was her own Mother.

* * *
* *
*



When all the people on the high, cool mountains heard about all that
the lady knew, and all that Sister Theckla told, and all that Bessie
Bell had found, they were all as glad as they could be.

And when the boy with the long-striped-stocking-legs heard all about
it he said: ``That is fine!  Bessie Bell said that she would find a
Mama--and she has!''





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Somebody's Little Girl

