Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Black Tulip by Alexandre Dumas
#1 in our series by Alexandre Dumas [Pere/Father]


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Black Tulip

by Alexandre Dumas 

June, 1997  [Etext #965]


Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Black Tulip by Alexandre Dumas 
*****This file should be named tbtlp10.txt or tbtlp10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, tbtlp11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, tbtlp10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Black Tulip by Alexandre Dumas 




Chapter 1

A Grateful People 


On the 20th of August, 1672, the city of the Hague, always 
so lively, so neat, and so trim that one might believe every 
day to be Sunday, with its shady park, with its tall trees, 
spreading over its Gothic houses, with its canals like large 
mirrors, in which its steeples and its almost Eastern 
cupolas are reflected, -- the city of the Hague, the capital 
of the Seven United Provinces, was swelling in all its 
arteries with a black and red stream of hurried, panting, 
and restless citizens, who, with their knives in their 
girdles, muskets on their shoulders, or sticks in their 
hands, were pushing on to the Buytenhof, a terrible prison, 
the grated windows of which are still shown, where, on the 
charge of attempted murder preferred against him by the 
surgeon Tyckelaer, Cornelius de Witt, the brother of the 
Grand Pensionary of Holland was confined. 

If the history of that time, and especially that of the year 
in the middle of which our narrative commences, were not 
indissolubly connected with the two names just mentioned, 
the few explanatory pages which we are about to add might 
appear quite supererogatory; but we will, from the very 
first, apprise the reader -- our old friend, to whom we are 
wont on the first page to promise amusement, and with whom 
we always try to keep our word as well as is in our power -- 
that this explanation is as indispensable to the right 
understanding of our story as to that of the great event 
itself on which it is based. 

Cornelius de Witt, Ruart de Pulten, that is to say, warden 
of the dikes, ex-burgomaster of Dort, his native town, and 
member of the Assembly of the States of Holland, was 
forty-nine years of age, when the Dutch people, tired of the 
Republic such as John de Witt, the Grand Pensionary of 
Holland, understood it, at once conceived a most violent 
affection for the Stadtholderate, which had been abolished 
for ever in Holland by the "Perpetual Edict" forced by John 
de Witt upon the United Provinces. 

As it rarely happens that public opinion, in its whimsical 
flights, does not identify a principle with a man, thus the 
people saw the personification of the Republic in the two 
stern figures of the brothers De Witt, those Romans of 
Holland, spurning to pander to the fancies of the mob, and 
wedding themselves with unbending fidelity to liberty 
without licentiousness, and prosperity without the waste of 
superfluity; on the other hand, the Stadtholderate recalled 
to the popular mind the grave and thoughtful image of the 
young Prince William of Orange. 

The brothers De Witt humoured Louis XIV., whose moral 
influence was felt by the whole of Europe, and the pressure 
of whose material power Holland had been made to feel in 
that marvellous campaign on the Rhine, which, in the space 
of three months, had laid the power of the United Provinces 
prostrate. 

Louis XIV. had long been the enemy of the Dutch, who 
insulted or ridiculed him to their hearts' content, although 
it must be said that they generally used French refugees for 
the mouthpiece of their spite. Their national pride held him 
up as the Mithridates of the Republic. The brothers De Witt, 
therefore, had to strive against a double difficulty, -- 
against the force of national antipathy, and, besides, 
against the feeling of weariness which is natural to all 
vanquished people, when they hope that a new chief will be 
able to save them from ruin and shame. 

This new chief, quite ready to appear on the political 
stage, and to measure himself against Louis XIV., however 
gigantic the fortunes of the Grand Monarch loomed in the 
future, was William, Prince of Orange, son of William II., 
and grandson, by his mother Henrietta Stuart, of Charles I. 
of England. We have mentioned him before as the person by 
whom the people expected to see the office of Stadtholder 
restored. 

This young man was, in 1672, twenty-two years of age. John 
de Witt, who was his tutor, had brought him up with the view 
of making him a good citizen. Loving his country better than 
he did his disciple, the master had, by the Perpetual Edict, 
extinguished the hope which the young Prince might have 
entertained of one day becoming Stadtholder. But God laughs 
at the presumption of man, who wants to raise and prostrate 
the powers on earth without consulting the King above; and 
the fickleness and caprice of the Dutch combined with the 
terror inspired by Louis XIV., in repealing the Perpetual 
Edict, and re-establishing the office of Stadtholder in 
favour of William of Orange, for whom the hand of Providence 
had traced out ulterior destinies on the hidden map of the 
future. 

The Grand Pensionary bowed before the will of his fellow 
citizens; Cornelius de Witt, however, was more obstinate, 
and notwithstanding all the threats of death from the 
Orangist rabble, who besieged him in his house at Dort, he 
stoutly refused to sign the act by which the office of 
Stadtholder was restored. Moved by the tears and entreaties 
of his wife, he at last complied, only adding to his 
signature the two letters V. C. (Vi Coactus), notifying 
thereby that he only yielded to force. 

It was a real miracle that on that day he escaped from the 
doom intended for him. 

John de Witt derived no advantage from his ready compliance 
with the wishes of his fellow citizens. Only a few days 
after, an attempt was made to stab him, in which he was 
severely although not mortally wounded. 

This by no means suited the views of the Orange faction. The 
life of the two brothers being a constant obstacle to their 
plans, they changed their tactics, and tried to obtain by 
calumny what they had not been able to effect by the aid of 
the poniard. 

How rarely does it happen that, in the right moment, a great 
man is found to head the execution of vast and noble 
designs; and for that reason, when such a providential 
concurrence of circumstances does occur, history is prompt 
to record the name of the chosen one, and to hold him up to 
the admiration of posterity. But when Satan interposes in 
human affairs to cast a shadow upon some happy existence, or 
to overthrow a kingdom, it seldom happens that he does not 
find at his side some miserable tool, in whose ear he has 
but to whisper a word to set him at once about his task. 

The wretched tool who was at hand to be the agent of this 
dastardly plot was one Tyckelaer whom we have already 
mentioned, a surgeon by profession. 

He lodged an information against Cornelius de Witt, setting 
forth that the warden -- who, as he had shown by the letters 
added to his signature, was fuming at the repeal of the 
Perpetual Edict -- had, from hatred against William of 
Orange, hired an assassin to deliver the new Republic of its 
new Stadtholder; and he, Tyckelaer was the person thus 
chosen; but that, horrified at the bare idea of the act 
which he was asked to perpetrate, he had preferred rather to 
reveal the crime than to commit it. 

This disclosure was, indeed, well calculated to call forth a 
furious outbreak among the Orange faction. The Attorney 
General caused, on the 16th of August, 1672, Cornelius de 
Witt to be arrested; and the noble brother of John de Witt 
had, like the vilest criminal, to undergo, in one of the 
apartments of the town prison, the preparatory degrees of 
torture, by means of which his judges expected to force from 
him the confession of his alleged plot against William of 
Orange. 

But Cornelius was not only possessed of a great mind, but 
also of a great heart. He belonged to that race of martyrs 
who, indissolubly wedded to their political convictions as 
their ancestors were to their faith, are able to smile on 
pain: while being stretched on the rack, he recited with a 
firm voice, and scanning the lines according to measure, the 
first strophe of the "Justum ac tenacem" of Horace, and, 
making no confession, tired not only the strength, but even 
the fanaticism, of his executioners. 

The judges, notwithstanding, acquitted Tyckelaer from every 
charge; at the same time sentencing Cornelius to be deposed 
from all his offices and dignities; to pay all the costs of 
the trial; and to be banished from the soil of the Republic 
for ever. 

This judgment against not only an innocent, but also a great 
man, was indeed some gratification to the passions of the 
people, to whose interests Cornelius de Witt had always 
devoted himself: but, as we shall soon see, it was not 
enough. 

The Athenians, who indeed have left behind them a pretty 
tolerable reputation for ingratitude, have in this respect 
to yield precedence to the Dutch. They, at least in the case 
of Aristides, contented themselves with banishing him. 

John de Witt, at the first intimation of the charge brought 
against his brother, had resigned his office of Grand 
Pensionary. He too received a noble recompense for his 
devotedness to the best interests of his country, taking 
with him into the retirement of private life the hatred of a 
host of enemies, and the fresh scars of wounds inflicted by 
assassins, only too often the sole guerdon obtained by 
honest people, who are guilty of having worked for their 
country, and of having forgotten their own private 
interests. 

In the meanwhile William of Orange urged on the course of 
events by every means in his power, eagerly waiting for the 
time when the people, by whom he was idolised, should have 
made of the bodies of the brothers the two steps over which 
he might ascend to the chair of Stadtholder. 

Thus, then, on the 20th of August, 1672, as we have already 
stated in the beginning of this chapter, the whole town was 
crowding towards the Buytenhof, to witness the departure of 
Cornelius de Witt from prison, as he was going to exile; and 
to see what traces the torture of the rack had left on the 
noble frame of the man who knew his Horace so well. 

Yet all this multitude was not crowding to the Buytenhof 
with the innocent view of merely feasting their eyes with 
the spectacle; there were many who went there to play an 
active part in it, and to take upon themselves an office 
which they conceived had been badly filled, -- that of the 
executioner. 

There were, indeed, others with less hostile intentions. All 
that they cared for was the spectacle, always so attractive 
to the mob, whose instinctive pride is flattered by it, -- 
the sight of greatness hurled down into the dust. 

"Has not," they would say, "this Cornelius de Witt been 
locked up and broken by the rack? Shall we not see him pale, 
streaming with blood, covered with shame?" And was not this 
a sweet triumph for the burghers of the Hague, whose envy 
even beat that of the common rabble; a triumph in which 
every honest citizen and townsman might be expected to 
share? 

"Moreover," hinted the Orange agitators interspersed through 
the crowd, whom they hoped to manage like a sharp-edged and 
at the same time crushing instrument, -- "moreover, will 
there not, from the Buytenhof to the gate of the town, a 
nice little opportunity present itself to throw some 
handfuls of dirt, or a few stones, at this Cornelius de 
Witt, who not only conferred the dignity of Stadtholder on 
the Prince of Orange merely vi coactus, but who also 
intended to have him assassinated?" 

"Besides which," the fierce enemies of France chimed in, "if 
the work were done well and bravely at the Hague, Cornelius 
would certainly not be allowed to go into exile, where he 
will renew his intrigues with France, and live with his big 
scoundrel of a brother, John, on the gold of the Marquis de 
Louvois." 

Being in such a temper, people generally will run rather 
than walk; which was the reason why the inhabitants of the 
Hague were hurrying so fast towards the Buytenhof. 

Honest Tyckelaer, with a heart full of spite and malice, and 
with no particular plan settled in his mind, was one of the 
foremost, being paraded about by the Orange party like a 
hero of probity, national honour, and Christian charity. 

This daring miscreant detailed, with all the embellishments 
and flourishes suggested by his base mind and his ruffianly 
imagination, the attempts which he pretended Cornelius de 
Witt had made to corrupt him; the sums of money which were 
promised, and all the diabolical stratagems planned 
beforehand to smooth for him, Tyckelaer, all the 
difficulties in the path of murder. 

And every phase of his speech, eagerly listened to by the 
populace, called forth enthusiastic cheers for the Prince of 
Orange, and groans and imprecations of blind fury against 
the brothers De Witt. 

The mob even began to vent its rage by inveighing against 
the iniquitous judges, who had allowed such a detestable 
criminal as the villain Cornelius to get off so cheaply. 

Some of the agitators whispered, "He will be off, he will 
escape from us!" 

Others replied, "A vessel is waiting for him at Schevening, 
a French craft. Tyckelaer has seen her." 

"Honest Tyckelaer! Hurrah for Tyckelaer!" the mob cried in 
chorus. 

"And let us not forget," a voice exclaimed from the crowd, 
"that at the same time with Cornelius his brother John, who 
is as rascally a traitor as himself, will likewise make his 
escape." 

"And the two rogues will in France make merry with our 
money, with the money for our vessels, our arsenals, and our 
dockyards, which they have sold to Louis XIV." 

"Well, then, don't let us allow them to depart!" advised one 
of the patriots who had gained the start of the others. 

"Forward to the prison, to the prison!" echoed the crowd. 

Amid these cries, the citizens ran along faster and faster, 
cocking their muskets, brandishing their hatchets, and 
looking death and defiance in all directions. 

No violence, however, had as yet been committed; and the 
file of horsemen who were guarding the approaches of the 
Buytenhof remained cool, unmoved, silent, much more 
threatening in their impassibility than all this crowd of 
burghers, with their cries, their agitation, and their 
threats. The men on their horses, indeed, stood like so many 
statues, under the eye of their chief, Count Tilly, the 
captain of the mounted troops of the Hague, who had his 
sword drawn, but held it with its point downwards, in a line 
with the straps of his stirrup. 

This troop, the only defence of the prison, overawed by its 
firm attitude not only the disorderly riotous mass of the 
populace, but also the detachment of the burgher guard, 
which, being placed opposite the Buytenhof to support the 
soldiers in keeping order, gave to the rioters the example 
of seditious cries, shouting, -- 

"Hurrah for Orange! Down with the traitors!" 

The presence of Tilly and his horsemen, indeed, exercised a 
salutary check on these civic warriors; but by degrees they 
waxed more and more angry by their own shouts, and as they 
were not able to understand how any one could have courage 
without showing it by cries, they attributed the silence of 
the dragoons to pusillanimity, and advanced one step towards 
the prison, with all the turbulent mob following in their 
wake. 

In this moment, Count Tilly rode forth towards them 
single-handed, merely lifting his sword and contracting his 
brow whilst he addressed them: -- 

"Well, gentlemen of the burgher guard, what are you 
advancing for, and what do you wish?" 

The burghers shook their muskets, repeating their cry, -- 

"Hurrah for Orange! Death to the traitors!" 

"'Hurrah for Orange!' all well and good!" replied Tilly, 
"although I certainly am more partial to happy faces than to 
gloomy ones. 'Death to the traitors!' as much of it as you 
like, as long as you show your wishes only by cries. But, as 
to putting them to death in good earnest, I am here to 
prevent that, and I shall prevent it." 

Then, turning round to his men, he gave the word of command, 
-- 

"Soldiers, ready!" 

The troopers obeyed orders with a precision which 
immediately caused the burgher guard and the people to fall 
back, in a degree of confusion which excited the smile of 
the cavalry officer. 

"Holloa!" he exclaimed, with that bantering tone which is 
peculiar to men of his profession; "be easy, gentlemen, my 
soldiers will not fire a shot; but, on the other hand, you 
will not advance by one step towards the prison." 

"And do you know, sir, that we have muskets?" roared the 
commandant of the burghers. 

"I must know it, by Jove, you have made them glitter enough 
before my eyes; but I beg you to observe also that we on our 
side have pistols, that the pistol carries admirably to a 
distance of fifty yards, and that you are only twenty-five 
from us." 

"Death to the traitors!" cried the exasperated burghers. 

"Go along with you," growled the officer, "you always cry 
the same thing over again. It is very tiresome." 

With this, he took his post at the head of his troops, 
whilst the tumult grew fiercer and fiercer about the 
Buytenhof. 

And yet the fuming crowd did not know that, at that very 
moment when they were tracking the scent of one of their 
victims, the other, as if hurrying to meet his fate, passed, 
at a distance of not more than a hundred yards, behind the 
groups of people and the dragoons, to betake himself to the 
Buytenhof. 

John de Witt, indeed, had alighted from his coach with his 
servant, and quietly walked across the courtyard of the 
prison. 

Mentioning his name to the turnkey, who however knew him, he 
said, -- 

"Good morning, Gryphus; I am coming to take away my brother, 
who, as you know, is condemned to exile, and to carry him 
out of the town." 

Whereupon the jailer, a sort of bear, trained to lock and 
unlock the gates of the prison, had greeted him and admitted 
him into the building, the doors of which were immediately 
closed again. 

Ten yards farther on, John de Witt met a lovely young girl, 
of about seventeen or eighteen, dressed in the national 
costume of the Frisian women, who, with pretty demureness, 
dropped a curtesy to him. Chucking her under the chin, he 
said to her, -- 

"Good morning, my good and fair Rosa; how is my brother?" 

"Oh, Mynheer John!" the young girl replied, "I am not afraid 
of the harm which has been done to him. That's all over 
now." 

"But what is it you are afraid of?" 

"I am afraid of the harm which they are going to do to him." 

"Oh, yes," said De Witt, "you mean to speak of the people 
down below, don't you?" 

"Do you hear them?" 

"They are indeed in a state of great excitement; but when 
they see us perhaps they will grow calmer, as we have never 
done them anything but good." 

"That's unfortunately no reason, except for the contrary," 
muttered the girl, as, on an imperative sign from her 
father, she withdrew. 

"Indeed, child, what you say is only too true." 

Then, in pursuing his way, he said to himself, -- 

"Here is a damsel who very likely does not know how to read, 
who consequently has never read anything, and yet with one 
word she has just told the whole history of the world." 

And with the same calm mien, but more melancholy than he had 
been on entering the prison, the Grand Pensionary proceeded 
towards the cell of his brother. 




Chapter 2

The Two Brothers


As the fair Rosa, with foreboding doubt, had foretold, so it 
happened. Whilst John de Witt was climbing the narrow 
winding stairs which led to the prison of his brother 
Cornelius, the burghers did their best to have the troop of 
Tilly, which was in their way, removed. 

Seeing this disposition, King Mob, who fully appreciated the 
laudable intentions of his own beloved militia, shouted most 
lustily, -- 

"Hurrah for the burghers!" 

As to Count Tilly, who was as prudent as he was firm, he 
began to parley with the burghers, under the protection of 
the cocked pistols of his dragoons, explaining to the 
valiant townsmen, that his order from the States commanded 
him to guard the prison and its approaches with three 
companies. 

"Wherefore such an order? Why guard the prison?" cried the 
Orangists. 

"Stop," replied the Count, "there you at once ask me more 
than I can tell you. I was told, 'Guard the prison,' and I 
guard it. You, gentlemen, who are almost military men 
yourselves, you are aware that an order must never be 
gainsaid." 

"But this order has been given to you that the traitors may 
be enabled to leave the town." 

"Very possibly, as the traitors are condemned to exile," 
replied Tilly. 

"But who has given this order?" 

"The States, to be sure!" 

"The States are traitors." 

"I don't know anything about that!" 

"And you are a traitor yourself!" 

"I?" 

"Yes, you." 

"Well, as to that, let us understand each other gentlemen. 
Whom should I betray? The States? Why, I cannot betray them, 
whilst, being in their pay, I faithfully obey their orders." 

As the Count was so indisputably in the right that it was 
impossible to argue against him, the mob answered only by 
redoubled clamour and horrible threats, to which the Count 
opposed the most perfect urbanity. 

"Gentlemen," he said, "uncock your muskets, one of them may 
go off by accident; and if the shot chanced to wound one of 
my men, we should knock over a couple of hundreds of yours, 
for which we should, indeed, be very sorry, but you even 
more so; especially as such a thing is neither contemplated 
by you nor by myself." 

"If you did that," cried the burghers, "we should have a pop 
at you, too." 

"Of course you would; but suppose you killed every man Jack 
of us, those whom we should have killed would not, for all 
that, be less dead." 

"Then leave the place to us, and you will perform the part 
of a good citizen." 

"First of all," said the Count, "I am not a citizen, but an 
officer, which is a very different thing; and secondly, I am 
not a Hollander, but a Frenchman, which is more different 
still. I have to do with no one but the States, by whom I am 
paid; let me see an order from them to leave the place to 
you, and I shall only be too glad to wheel off in an 
instant, as I am confoundedly bored here." 

"Yes, yes!" cried a hundred voices; the din of which was 
immediately swelled by five hundred others; "let us march to 
the Town-hall; let us go and see the deputies! Come along! 
come along!" 

"That's it," Tilly muttered between his teeth, as he saw the 
most violent among the crowd turning away; "go and ask for a 
meanness at the Town-hall, and you will see whether they 
will grant it; go, my fine fellows, go!" 

The worthy officer relied on the honour of the magistrates, 
who, on their side, relied on his honour as a soldier. 

"I say, Captain," the first lieutenant whispered into the 
ear of the Count, "I hope the deputies will give these 
madmen a flat refusal; but, after all, it would do no harm 
if they would send us some reinforcement." 

In the meanwhile, John de Witt, whom we left climbing the 
stairs, after the conversation with the jailer Gryphus and 
his daughter Rosa, had reached the door of the cell, where 
on a mattress his brother Cornelius was resting, after 
having undergone the preparatory degrees of the torture. The 
sentence of banishment having been pronounced, there was no 
occasion for inflicting the torture extraordinary. 

Cornelius was stretched on his couch, with broken wrists and 
crushed fingers. He had not confessed a crime of which he 
was not guilty; and now, after three days of agony, he once 
more breathed freely, on being informed that the judges, 
from whom he had expected death, were only condemning him to 
exile. 

Endowed with an iron frame and a stout heart, how would he 
have disappointed his enemies if they could only have seen, 
in the dark cell of the Buytenhof, his pale face lit up by 
the smile of the martyr, who forgets the dross of this earth 
after having obtained a glimpse of the bright glory of 
heaven. 

The warden, indeed, had already recovered his full strength, 
much more owing to the force of his own strong will than to 
actual aid; and he was calculating how long the formalities 
of the law would still detain him in prison. 

This was just at the very moment when the mingled shouts of 
the burgher guard and of the mob were raging against the two 
brothers, and threatening Captain Tilly, who served as a 
rampart to them. This noise, which roared outside of the 
walls of the prison, as the surf dashing against the rocks, 
now reached the ears of the prisoner. 

But, threatening as it sounded, Cornelius appeared not to 
dream it worth his while to inquire after its cause; nor did 
he get up to look out of the narrow grated window, which 
gave access to the light and to the noise of the world 
without. 

He was so absorbed in his never-ceasing pain that it had 
almost become a habit with him. He felt with such delight 
the bonds which connected his immortal being with his 
perishable frame gradually loosening, that it seemed to him 
as if his spirit, freed from the trammels of the body, were 
hovering above it, like the expiring flame which rises from 
the half-extinguished embers. 

He also thought of his brother; and whilst the latter was 
thus vividly present to his mind the door opened, and John 
entered, hurrying to the bedside of the prisoner, who 
stretched out his broken limbs and his hands tied up in 
bandages towards that glorious brother, whom he now 
excelled, not in services rendered to the country, but in 
the hatred which the Dutch bore him. 

John tenderly kissed his brother on the forehead, and put 
his sore hands gently back on the mattress. 

"Cornelius, my poor brother, you are suffering great pain, 
are you not?" 

"I am suffering no longer, since I see you, my brother." 

"Oh, my poor dear Cornelius! I feel most wretched to see you 
in such a state." 

"And, indeed, I have thought more of you than of myself; and 
whilst they were torturing me, I never thought of uttering a 
complaint, except once, to say, 'Poor brother!' But now that 
you are here, let us forget all. You are coming to take me 
away, are you not?" 

"I am." 

"I am quite healed; help me to get up, and you shall see how 
I can walk." 

"You will not have to walk far, as I have my coach near the 
pond, behind Tilly's dragoons." 

"Tilly's dragoons! What are they near the pond for?" 

"Well," said the Grand Pensionary with a melancholy smile 
which was habitual to him, "the gentlemen at the Town-hall 
expect that the people at the Hague would like to see you 
depart, and there is some apprehension of a tumult." 

"Of a tumult?" replied Cornelius, fixing his eyes on his 
perplexed brother; "a tumult?" 

"Yes, Cornelius." 

"Oh! that's what I heard just now," said the prisoner, as if 
speaking to himself. Then, turning to his brother, he 
continued, -- 

"Are there many persons down before the prison." 

"Yes, my brother, there are." 

"But then, to come here to me ---- " 

"Well?" 

"How is it that they have allowed you to pass?" 

"You know well that we are not very popular, Cornelius," 
said the Grand Pensionary, with gloomy bitterness. "I have 
made my way through all sorts of bystreets and alleys." 

"You hid yourself, John?" 

"I wished to reach you without loss of time, and I did what 
people will do in politics, or on the sea when the wind is 
against them, -- I tacked." 

At this moment the noise in the square below was heard to 
roar with increasing fury. Tilly was parleying with the 
burghers. 

"Well, well," said Cornelius, "you are a very skilful pilot, 
John; but I doubt whether you will as safely guide your 
brother out of the Buytenhof in the midst of this gale, and 
through the raging surf of popular hatred, as you did the 
fleet of Van Tromp past the shoals of the Scheldt to 
Antwerp." 

"With the help of God, Cornelius, we'll at least try," 
answered John; "but, first of all, a word with you." 

"Speak!" 

The shouts began anew. 

"Hark, hark!" continued Cornelius, "how angry those people 
are! Is it against you, or against me?" 

"I should say it is against us both, Cornelius. I told you, 
my dear brother, that the Orange party, while assailing us 
with their absurd calumnies, have also made it a reproach 
against us that we have negotiated with France." 

"What blockheads they are!" 

"But, indeed, they reproach us with it." 

"And yet, if these negotiations had been successful, they 
would have prevented the defeats of Rees, Orsay, Wesel, and 
Rheinberg; the Rhine would not have been crossed, and 
Holland might still consider herself invincible in the midst 
of her marshes and canals." 

"All this is quite true, my dear Cornelius, but still more 
certain it is, that if at this moment our correspondence 
with the Marquis de Louvois were discovered, skilful pilot 
as I am, I should not be able to save the frail barque which 
is to carry the brothers De Witt and their fortunes out of 
Holland. That correspondence, which might prove to honest 
people how dearly I love my country, and what sacrifices I 
have offered to make for its liberty and glory, would be 
ruin to us if it fell into the hands of the Orange party. I 
hope you have burned the letters before you left Dort to 
join me at the Hague." 

"My dear brother," Cornelius answered, "your correspondence 
with M. de Louvois affords ample proof of your having been 
of late the greatest, most generous, and most able citizen 
of the Seven United Provinces. I rejoice in the glory of my 
country; and particularly do I rejoice in your glory, John. 
I have taken good care not to burn that correspondence." 

"Then we are lost, as far as this life is concerned," 
quietly said the Grand Pensionary, approaching the window. 

"No, on the contrary, John, we shall at the same time save 
our lives and regain our popularity." 

"But what have you done with these letters?" 

"I have intrusted them to the care of Cornelius van Baerle, 
my godson, whom you know, and who lives at Dort." 

"Poor honest Van Baerle! who knows so much, and yet thinks 
of nothing but of flowers and of God who made them. You have 
intrusted him with this fatal secret; it will be his ruin, 
poor soul!" 

"His ruin?" 

"Yes, for he will either be strong or he will be weak. If he 
is strong, he will, when he hears of what has happened to 
us, boast of our acquaintance; if he is weak, he will be 
afraid on account of his connection with us: if he is 
strong, he will betray the secret by his boldness; if he is 
weak, he will allow it to be forced from him. In either case 
he is lost, and so are we. Let us, therefore, fly, fly, as 
long as there is still time." 

Cornelius de Witt, raising himself on his couch, and 
grasping the hand of his brother, who shuddered at the touch 
of his linen bandages, replied, -- 

"Do not I know my godson? have not I been enabled to read 
every thought in Van Baerle's mind, and every sentiment in 
his heart? You ask whether he is strong or weak. He is 
neither the one nor the other; but that is not now the 
question. The principal point is, that he is sure not to 
divulge the secret, for the very good reason that he does 
not know it himself." 

John turned round in surprise. 

"You must know, my dear brother, that I have been trained in 
the school of that distinguished politician John de Witt; 
and I repeat to you, that Van Baerle is not aware of the 
nature and importance of the deposit which I have intrusted 
to him." 

"Quick then," cried John, "as there is still time, let us 
convey to him directions to burn the parcel." 

"Through whom?" 

"Through my servant Craeke, who was to have accompanied us 
on horseback, and who has entered the prison with me, to 
assist you downstairs." 

"Consider well before having those precious documents burnt, 
John!" 

"I consider, above all things, that the brothers De Witt 
must necessarily save their lives, to be able to save their 
character. If we are dead, who will defend us? Who will have 
fully understood our intentions?" 

"You expect, then, that they would kill us if those papers 
were found?" 

John, without answering, pointed with his hand to the 
square, whence, at that very moment, fierce shouts and 
savage yells made themselves heard. 

"Yes, yes," said Cornelius, "I hear these shouts very 
plainly, but what is their meaning?" 

John opened the window. 

"Death to the traitors!" howled the populace. 

"Do you hear now, Cornelius?" 

"To the traitors! that means us!" said the prisoner, raising 
his eyes to heaven and shrugging his shoulders. 

"Yes, it means us," repeated John. 

"Where is Craeke?" 

"At the door of your cell, I suppose." 

"Let him enter then." 

John opened the door; the faithful servant was waiting on 
the threshold. 

"Come in, Craeke, and mind well what my brother will tell 
you." 

"No, John; it will not suffice to send a verbal message; 
unfortunately, I shall be obliged to write." 

"And why that?" 

"Because Van Baerle will neither give up the parcel nor burn 
it without a special command to do so." 

"But will you be able to write, poor old fellow?" John 
asked, with a look on the scorched and bruised hands of the 
unfortunate sufferer. 

"If I had pen and ink you would soon see," said Cornelius. 

"Here is a pencil, at any rate." 

"Have you any paper? for they have left me nothing." 

"Here, take this Bible, and tear out the fly-leaf." 

"Very well, that will do." 

"But your writing will be illegible." 

"Just leave me alone for that," said Cornelius. "The 
executioners have indeed pinched me badly enough, but my 
hand will not tremble once in tracing the few lines which 
are requisite." 

And really Cornelius took the pencil and began to write, 
when through the white linen bandages drops of blood oozed 
out which the pressure of the fingers against the pencil 
squeezed from the raw flesh. 

A cold sweat stood on the brow of the Grand Pensionary. 

Cornelius wrote: -- 

"My dear Godson, -- 

"Burn the parcel which I have intrusted to you. Burn it 
without looking at it, and without opening it, so that its 
contents may for ever remain unknown to yourself. Secrets of 
this description are death to those with whom they are 
deposited. Burn it, and you will have saved John and 
Cornelius de Witt. 

"Farewell, and love me. 

"Cornelius de Witt 

"August 20th, 1672." 

John, with tears in his eyes, wiped off a drop of the noble 
blood which had soiled the leaf, and, after having handed 
the despatch to Craeke with a last direction, returned to 
Cornelius, who seemed overcome by intense pain, and near 
fainting. 

"Now," said he, "when honest Craeke sounds his coxswain's 
whistle, it will be a signal of his being clear of the 
crowd, and of his having reached the other side of the pond. 
And then it will be our turn to depart." 

Five minutes had not elapsed, before a long and shrill 
whistle was heard through the din and noise of the square of 
the Buytenhof. 

John gratefully raised his eyes to heaven. 

"And now," said he, "let us off, Cornelius." 




Chapter 3

The Pupil of John de Witt


Whilst the clamour of the crowd in the square of Buytenhof, 
which grew more and more menacing against the two brothers, 
determined John de Witt to hasten the departure of his 
brother Cornelius, a deputation of burghers had gone to the 
Town-hall to demand the withdrawal of Tilly's horse. 

It was not far from the Buytenhof to Hoogstraet (High 
Street); and a stranger, who since the beginning of this 
scene had watched all its incidents with intense interest, 
was seen to wend his way with, or rather in the wake of, the 
others towards the Town-hall, to hear as soon as possible 
the current news of the hour. 

This stranger was a very young man, of scarcely twenty-two 
or three, with nothing about him that bespoke any great 
energy. He evidently had his good reasons for not making 
himself known, as he hid his face in a handkerchief of fine 
Frisian linen, with which he incessantly wiped his brow or 
his burning lips. 

With an eye keen as that of a bird of prey, -- with a long 
aquiline nose, a finely cut mouth, which he generally kept 
open, or rather which was gaping like the edges of a wound, 
-- this man would have presented to Lavater, if Lavater had 
lived at that time, a subject for physiognomical 
observations which at the first blush would not have been 
very favourable to the person in question. 

"What difference is there between the figure of the 
conqueror and that of the pirate?" said the ancients. The 
difference only between the eagle and the vulture, -- 
serenity or restlessness. 

And indeed the sallow physiognomy, the thin and sickly body, 
and the prowling ways of the stranger, were the very type of 
a suspecting master, or an unquiet thief; and a police 
officer would certainly have decided in favour of the latter 
supposition, on account of the great care which the 
mysterious person evidently took to hide himself. 

He was plainly dressed, and apparently unarmed; his arm was 
lean but wiry, and his hands dry, but of an aristocratic 
whiteness and delicacy, and he leaned on the shoulder of an 
officer, who, with his hand on his sword, had watched the 
scenes in the Buytenhof with eager curiosity, very natural 
in a military man, until his companion drew him away with 
him. 

On arriving at the square of the Hoogstraet, the man with 
the sallow face pushed the other behind an open shutter, 
from which corner he himself began to survey the balcony of 
the Town-hall. 

At the savage yells of the mob, the window of the Town-hall 
opened, and a man came forth to address the people. 

"Who is that on the balcony?" asked the young man, glancing 
at the orator. 

"It is the Deputy Bowelt," replied the officer. 

"What sort of a man is he? Do you know anything of him?" 

"An honest man; at least I believe so, Monseigneur." 

Hearing this character given of Bowelt, the young man showed 
signs of such a strange disappointment and evident 
dissatisfaction that the officer could not but remark it, 
and therefore added, -- 

"At least people say so, Monseigneur. I cannot say anything 
about it myself, as I have no personal acquaintance with 
Mynheer Bowelt." 

"An honest man," repeated he who was addressed as 
Monseigneur; "do you mean to say that he is an honest man 
(brave homme), or a brave one (homme brave)?" 

"Ah, Monseigneur must excuse me; I would not presume to draw 
such a fine distinction in the case of a man whom, I assure 
your Highness once more, I know only by sight." 

"If this Bowelt is an honest man," his Highness continued, 
"he will give to the demand of these furibund petitioners a 
very queer reception." 

The nervous quiver of his hand, which moved on the shoulder 
of his companion as the fingers of a player on the keys of a 
harpsichord, betrayed his burning impatience, so ill 
concealed at certain times, and particularly at that moment, 
under the icy and sombre expression of his face. 

The chief of the deputation of the burghers was then heard 
addressing an interpellation to Mynheer Bowelt, whom he 
requested to let them know where the other deputies, his 
colleagues, were. 

"Gentlemen," Bowelt repeated for the second time, "I assure 
you that in this moment I am here alone with Mynheer 
d'Asperen, and I cannot take any resolution on my own 
responsibility." 

"The order! we want the order!" cried several thousand 
voices. 

Mynheer Bowelt wished to speak, but his words were not 
heard, and he was only seen moving his arms in all sorts of 
gestures, which plainly showed that he felt his position to 
be desperate. When, at last, he saw that he could not make 
himself heard, he turned round towards the open window, and 
called Mynheer d'Asperen. 

The latter gentleman now made his appearance on the balcony, 
where he was saluted with shouts even more energetic than 
those with which, ten minutes before, his colleague had been 
received. 

This did not prevent him from undertaking the difficult task 
of haranguing the mob; but the mob preferred forcing the 
guard of the States -- which, however, offered no resistance 
to the sovereign people -- to listening to the speech of 
Mynheer d'Asperen. 

"Now, then," the young man coolly remarked, whilst the crowd 
was rushing into the principal gate of the Town-hall, "it 
seems the question will be discussed indoors, Captain. Come 
along, and let us hear the debate." 

"Oh, Monseigneur! Monseigneur! take care!" 

"Of what?" 

"Among these deputies there are many who have had dealings 
with you, and it would be sufficient, that one of them 
should recognize your Highness." 

"Yes, that I might be charged with having been the 
instigator of all this work, indeed, you are right," said 
the young man, blushing for a moment from regret of having 
betrayed so much eagerness. "From this place we shall see 
them return with or without the order for the withdrawal of 
the dragoons, then we may judge which is greater, Mynheer 
Bowelt's honesty or his courage." 

"But," replied the officer, looking with astonishment at the 
personage whom he addressed as Monseigneur, "but your 
Highness surely does not suppose for one instant that the 
deputies will order Tilly's horse to quit their post?" 

"Why not?" the young man quietly retorted. 

"Because doing so would simply be signing the death warrant 
of Cornelius and John de Witt." 

"We shall see," his Highness replied, with the most perfect 
coolness; "God alone knows what is going on within the 
hearts of men." 

The officer looked askance at the impassible figure of his 
companion, and grew pale: he was an honest man as well as a 
brave one. 

From the spot where they stood, his Highness and his 
attendant heard the tumult and the heavy tramp of the crowd 
on the staircase of the Town-hall. The noise thereupon 
sounded through the windows of the hall, on the balcony of 
which Mynheers Bowelt and D'Asperen had presented 
themselves. These two gentlemen had retired into the 
building, very likely from fear of being forced over the 
balustrade by the pressure of the crowd. 

After this, fluctuating shadows in tumultuous confusion were 
seen flitting to and fro across the windows: the council 
hall was filling. 

Suddenly the noise subsided, and as suddenly again it rose 
with redoubled intensity, and at last reached such a pitch 
that the old building shook to the very roof. 

At length, the living stream poured back through the 
galleries and stairs to the arched gateway, from which it 
was seen issuing like waters from a spout. 

At the head of the first group, man was flying rather than 
running, his face hideously distorted with satanic glee: 
this man was the surgeon Tyckelaer. 

"We have it! we have it!" he cried, brandishing a paper in 
the air. 

"They have got the order!" muttered the officer in 
amazement. 

"Well, then," his Highness quietly remarked, "now I know 
what to believe with regard to Mynheer Bowelt's honesty and 
courage: he has neither the one nor the other." 

Then, looking with a steady glance after the crowd which was 
rushing along before him, he continued, -- 

"Let us now go to the Buytenhof, Captain; I expect we shall 
see a very strange sight there." 

The officer bowed, and, without making any reply, followed 
in the steps of his master. 

There was an immense crowd in the square and about the 
neighbourhood of the prison. But the dragoons of Tilly still 
kept it in check with the same success and with the same 
firmness. 

It was not long before the Count heard the increasing din of 
the approaching multitude, the first ranks of which rushed 
on with the rapidity of a cataract. 

At the same time he observed the paper, which was waving 
above the surface of clenched fists and glittering arms. 

"Halloa!" he said, rising in his stirrups, and touching his 
lieutenant with the knob of his sword; "I really believe 
those rascals have got the order." 

"Dastardly ruffians they are," cried the lieutenant. 

It was indeed the order, which the burgher guard received 
with a roar of triumph. They immediately sallied forth, with 
lowered arms and fierce shouts, to meet Count Tilly's 
dragoons. 

But the Count was not the man to allow them to approach 
within an inconvenient distance. 

"Stop!" he cried, "stop, and keep off from my horse, or I 
shall give the word of command to advance." 

"Here is the order!" a hundred insolent voices answered at 
once. 

He took it in amazement, cast a rapid glance on it, and said 
quite aloud, -- 

"Those who have signed this order are the real murderers of 
Cornelius de Witt. I would rather have my two hands cut off 
than have written one single letter of this infamous order." 

And, pushing back with the hilt of his sword the man who 
wanted to take it from him, he added, -- 

"Wait a minute, papers like this are of importance, and are 
to be kept." 

Saying this, he folded up the document, and carefully put it 
in the pocket of his coat. 

Then, turning round towards his troop, he gave the word of 
command, -- 

"Tilly's dragoons, wheel to the right!" 

After this, he added, in an undertone, yet loud enough for 
his words to be not altogether lost to those about him, -- 

"And now, ye butchers, do your work!" 

A savage yell, in which all the keen hatred and ferocious 
triumph rife in the precincts of the prison simultaneously 
burst forth, and accompanied the departure of the dragoons, 
as they were quietly filing off. 

The Count tarried behind, facing to the last the infuriated 
populace, which advanced at the same rate as the Count 
retired. 

John de Witt, therefore, had by no means exaggerated the 
danger, when, assisting his brother in getting up, he 
hurried his departure. Cornelius, leaning on the arm of the 
Ex-Grand Pensionary, descended the stairs which led to the 
courtyard. At the bottom of the staircase he found little 
Rosa, trembling all over. 

"Oh, Mynheer John," she said, "what a misfortune!" 

"What is it, my child?" asked De Witt. 

"They say that they are gone to the Town-hall to fetch the 
order for Tilly's horse to withdraw." 

"You do not say so!" replied John. "Indeed, my dear child, 
if the dragoons are off, we shall be in a very sad plight." 

"I have some advice to give you," Rosa said, trembling even 
more violently than before. 

"Well, let us hear what you have to say, my child. Why 
should not God speak by your mouth?" 

"Now, then, Mynheer John, if I were in your place, I should 
not go out through the main street." 

"And why so, as the dragoons of Tilly are still at their 
post?" 

"Yes, but their order, as long as it is not revoked, enjoins 
them to stop before the prison." 

"Undoubtedly." 

"Have you got an order for them to accompany you out of the 
town?" 

"We have not?" 

"Well, then, in the very moment when you have passed the 
ranks of the dragoons you will fall into the hands of the 
people." 

"But the burgher guard?" 

"Alas! the burgher guard are the most enraged of all." 

"What are we to do, then?" 

"If I were in your place, Mynheer John," the young girl 
timidly continued, "I should leave by the postern, which 
leads into a deserted by-lane, whilst all the people are 
waiting in the High Street to see you come out by the 
principal entrance. From there I should try to reach the 
gate by which you intend to leave the town." 

"But my brother is not able to walk," said John. 

"I shall try," Cornelius said, with an expression of most 
sublime fortitude. 

"But have you not got your carriage?" asked the girl. 

"The carriage is down near the great entrance." 

"Not so," she replied. "I considered your coachman to be a 
faithful man, and I told him to wait for you at the 
postern." 

The two brothers looked first at each other, and then at 
Rosa, with a glance full of the most tender gratitude. 

"The question is now," said the Grand Pensionary, "whether 
Gryphus will open this door for us." 

"Indeed, he will do no such thing," said Rosa. 

"Well, and how then?" 

"I have foreseen his refusal, and just now whilst he was 
talking from the window of the porter's lodge with a 
dragoon, I took away the key from his bunch." 

"And you have got it?" 

"Here it is, Mynheer John." 

"My child," said Cornelius, "I have nothing to give you in 
exchange for the service you are rendering us but the Bible 
which you will find in my room; it is the last gift of an 
honest man; I hope it will bring you good luck." 

"I thank you, Master Cornelius, it shall never leave me," 
replied Rosa. 

And then, with a sigh, she said to herself, "What a pity 
that I do not know how to read!" 

"The shouts and cries are growing louder and louder," said 
John; "there is not a moment to be lost." 

"Come along, gentlemen," said the girl, who now led the two 
brothers through an inner lobby to the back of the prison. 
Guided by her, they descended a staircase of about a dozen 
steps; traversed a small courtyard, which was surrounded by 
castellated walls; and, the arched door having been opened 
for them by Rosa, they emerged into a lonely street where 
their carriage was ready to receive them. 

"Quick, quick, my masters! do you hear them?" cried the 
coachman, in a deadly fright. 

Yet, after having made Cornelius get into the carriage 
first, the Grand Pensionary turned round towards the girl, 
to whom he said, -- 

"Good-bye, my child! words could never express our 
gratitude. God will reward you for having saved the lives of 
two men." 

Rosa took the hand which John de Witt proffered to her, and 
kissed it with every show of respect. 

"Go! for Heaven's sake, go!" she said; "it seems they are 
going to force the gate." 

John de Witt hastily got in, sat himself down by the side of 
his brother, and, fastening the apron of the carriage, 
called out to the coachman, -- 

"To the Tol-Hek!" 

The Tol-Hek was the iron gate leading to the harbor of 
Schevening, in which a small vessel was waiting for the two 
brothers. 

The carriage drove off with the fugitives at the full speed 
of a pair of spirited Flemish horses. Rosa followed them 
with her eyes until they turned the corner of the street, 
upon which, closing the door after her, she went back and 
threw the key into a cell. 

The noise which had made Rosa suppose that the people were 
forcing the prison door was indeed owing to the mob 
battering against it after the square had been left by the 
military. 

Solid as the gate was, and although Gryphus, to do him 
justice, stoutly enough refused to open it, yet evidently it 
could not resist much longer, and the jailer, growing very 
pale, put to himself the question whether it would not be 
better to open the door than to allow it to be forced, when 
he felt some one gently pulling his coat. 

He turned round and saw Rosa. 

"Do you hear these madmen?" he said. 

"I hear them so well, my father, that in your place ---- " 

"You would open the door?" 

"No, I should allow it to be forced." 

"But they will kill me!" 

"Yes, if they see you." 

"How shall they not see me?" 

"Hide yourself." 

"Where?" 

"In the secret dungeon." 

"But you, my child?" 

"I shall get into it with you. We shall lock the door and 
when they have left the prison, we shall again come forth 
from our hiding place." 

"Zounds, you are right, there!" cried Gryphus; "it's 
surprising how much sense there is in such a little head!" 

Then, as the gate began to give way amidst the triumphant 
shouts of the mob, she opened a little trap-door, and said, 
-- 

"Come along, come along, father." 

"But our prisoners?" 

"God will watch over them, and I shall watch over you." 

Gryphus followed his daughter, and the trap-door closed over 
his head, just as the broken gate gave admittance to the 
populace. 

The dungeon where Rosa had induced her father to hide 
himself, and where for the present we must leave the two, 
offered to them a perfectly safe retreat, being known only 
to those in power, who used to place there important 
prisoners of state, to guard against a rescue or a revolt. 

The people rushed into the prison, with the cry -- 

"Death to the traitors! To the gallows with Cornelius de 
Witt! Death! death!" 




Chapter 4

The Murderers


The young man with his hat slouched over his eyes, still 
leaning on the arm of the officer, and still wiping from 
time to time his brow with his handkerchief, was watching in 
a corner of the Buytenhof, in the shade of the overhanging 
weather-board of a closed shop, the doings of the infuriated 
mob, a spectacle which seemed to draw near its catastrophe. 

"Indeed," said he to the officer, "indeed, I think you were 
right, Van Deken; the order which the deputies have signed 
is truly the death-warrant of Master Cornelius. Do you hear 
these people? They certainly bear a sad grudge to the two De 
Witts." 

"In truth," replied the officer, "I never heard such 
shouts." 

"They seem to have found out the cell of the man. Look, 
look! is not that the window of the cell where Cornelius was 
locked up?" 

A man had seized with both hands and was shaking the iron 
bars of the window in the room which Cornelius had left only 
ten minutes before. 

"Halloa, halloa!" the man called out, "he is gone." 

"How is that? gone?" asked those of the mob who had not been 
able to get into the prison, crowded as it was with the mass 
of intruders. 

"Gone, gone," repeated the man in a rage, "the bird has 
flown." 

"What does this man say?" asked his Highness, growing quite 
pale. 

"Oh, Monseigneur, he says a thing which would be very 
fortunate if it should turn out true!" 

"Certainly it would be fortunate if it were true," said the 
young man; "unfortunately it cannot be true." 

"However, look!" said the officer. 

And indeed, some more faces, furious and contorted with 
rage, showed themselves at the windows, crying, -- 

"Escaped, gone, they have helped them off!" 

And the people in the street repeated, with fearful 
imprecations, -- 

"Escaped gone! After them, and catch them!" 

"Monseigneur, it seems that Mynheer Cornelius has really 
escaped," said the officer. 

"Yes, from prison, perhaps, but not from the town; you will 
see, Van Deken, that the poor fellow will find the gate 
closed against him which he hoped to find open." 

"Has an order been given to close the town gates, 
Monseigneur?" 

"No, -- at least I do not think so; who could have given 
such an order?" 

"Indeed, but what makes your Highness suppose?" 

"There are fatalities," Monseigneur replied, in an offhand 
manner; "and the greatest men have sometimes fallen victims 
to such fatalities." 

At these words the officer felt his blood run cold, as 
somehow or other he was convinced that the prisoner was 
lost. 

At this moment the roar of the multitude broke forth like 
thunder, for it was now quite certain that Cornelius de Witt 
was no longer in the prison. 



Cornelius and John, after driving along the pond, had taken
the main street, which leads to the Tol-Hek, giving 
directions to the coachman to slacken his pace, in order not 
to excite any suspicion. 

But when, on having proceeded half-way down that street, the 
man felt that he had left the prison and death behind, and 
before him there was life and liberty, he neglected every 
precaution, and set his horses off at a gallop. 

All at once he stopped. 

"What is the matter?" asked John, putting his head out of 
the coach window. 

"Oh, my masters!" cried the coachman, "it is ---- " 

Terror choked the voice of the honest fellow. 

"Well, say what you have to say!" urged the Grand 
Pensionary. 

"The gate is closed, that's what it is." 

"How is this? It is not usual to close the gate by day." 

"Just look!" 

John de Witt leaned out of the window, and indeed saw that 
the man was right. 

"Never mind, but drive on," said John, "I have with me the 
order for the commutation of the punishment, the gate-keeper 
will let us through." 

The carriage moved along, but it was evident that the driver 
was no longer urging his horses with the same degree of 
confidence. 

Moreover, as John de Witt put his head out of the carriage 
window, he was seen and recognized by a brewer, who, being 
behind his companions, was just shutting his door in all 
haste to join them at the Buytenhof. He uttered a cry of 
surprise, and ran after two other men before him, whom he 
overtook about a hundred yards farther on, and told them 
what he had seen. The three men then stopped, looking after 
the carriage, being however not yet quite sure as to whom it 
contained. 

The carriage in the meanwhile arrived at the Tol-Hek. 

"Open!" cried the coachman. 

"Open!" echoed the gatekeeper, from the threshold of his 
lodge; "it's all very well to say 'Open!' but what am I to 
do it with?" 

"With the key, to be sure!" said the coachman. 

"With the key! Oh, yes! but if you have not got it?" 

"How is that? Have not you got the key?" asked the coachman. 

"No, I haven't." 

"What has become of it?" 

"Well, they have taken it from me." 

"Who?" 

"Some one, I dare say, who had a mind that no one should 
leave the town." 

"My good man," said the Grand Pensionary, putting out his 
head from the window, and risking all for gaining all; "my 
good man, it is for me, John de Witt, and for my brother 
Cornelius, who I am taking away into exile." 

"Oh, Mynheer de Witt! I am indeed very much grieved," said 
the gatekeeper, rushing towards the carriage; "but, upon my 
sacred word, the key has been taken from me." 

"When?" 

"This morning." 

"By whom?" 

"By a pale and thin young man, of about twenty-two." 

"And wherefore did you give it up to him?" 

"Because he showed me an order, signed and sealed." 

"By whom?" 

"By the gentlemen of the Town-hall." 

"Well, then," said Cornelius calmly, "our doom seems to be 
fixed." 

"Do you know whether the same precaution has been taken at 
the other gates?" 

"I do not." 

"Now then," said John to the coachman, "God commands man to 
do all that is in his power to preserve his life; go, and 
drive to another gate." 

And whilst the servant was turning round the vehicle the 
Grand Pensionary said to the gatekeeper, -- 

"Take our thanks for your good intentions; the will must 
count for the deed; you had the will to save us, and that, 
in the eyes of the Lord, is as if you had succeeded in doing 
so." 

"Alas!" said the gatekeeper, "do you see down there?" 

"Drive at a gallop through that group," John called out to 
the coachman, "and take the street on the left; it is our 
only chance." 

The group which John alluded to had, for its nucleus, those 
three men whom we left looking after the carriage, and who, 
in the meanwhile, had been joined by seven or eight others. 

These new-comers evidently meant mischief with regard to the 
carriage. 

When they saw the horses galloping down upon them, they 
placed themselves across the street, brandishing cudgels in 
their hands, and calling out, -- 

"Stop! stop!" 

The coachman, on his side, lashed his horses into increased 
speed, until the coach and the men encountered. 

The brothers De Witt, enclosed within the body of the 
carriage, were not able to see anything; but they felt a 
severe shock, occasioned by the rearing of the horses. The 
whole vehicle for a moment shook and stopped; but 
immediately after, passing over something round and elastic, 
which seemed to be the body of a prostrate man set off again 
amidst a volley of the fiercest oaths. 

"Alas!" said Cornelius, "I am afraid we have hurt some one." 

"Gallop! gallop!" called John. 

But, notwithstanding this order, the coachman suddenly came 
to a stop. 

"Now, then, what is the matter again?" asked John. 

"Look there!" said the coachman. 

John looked. The whole mass of the populace from the 
Buytenhof appeared at the extremity of the street along 
which the carriage was to proceed, and its stream moved 
roaring and rapid, as if lashed on by a hurricane. 

"Stop and get off," said John to the coachman; "it is 
useless to go any farther; we are lost!" 

"Here they are! here they are!" five hundred voices were 
crying at the same time. 

"Yes, here they are, the traitors, the murderers, the 
assassins!" answered the men who were running after the 
carriage to the people who were coming to meet it. The 
former carried in their arms the bruised body of one of 
their companions, who, trying to seize the reins of the 
horses, had been trodden down by them. 

This was the object over which the two brothers had felt 
their carriage pass. 

The coachman stopped, but, however strongly his master urged 
him, he refused to get off and save himself. 

In an instant the carriage was hemmed in between those who 
followed and those who met it. It rose above the mass of 
moving heads like a floating island. But in another instant 
it came to a dead stop. A blacksmith had with his hammer 
struck down one of the horses, which fell in the traces. 

At this moment, the shutter of a window opened, and 
disclosed the sallow face and the dark eyes of the young 
man, who with intense interest watched the scene which was 
preparing. Behind him appeared the head of the officer, 
almost as pale as himself. 

"Good heavens, Monseigneur, what is going on there?" 
whispered the officer. 

"Something very terrible, to a certainty," replied the 
other. 

"Don't you see, Monseigneur, they are dragging the Grand 
Pensionary from the carriage, they strike him, they tear him 
to pieces!" 

"Indeed, these people must certainly be prompted by a most 
violent indignation," said the young marl, with the same 
impassible tone which he had preserved all along. 

"And here is Cornelius, whom they now likewise drag out of 
the carriage, -- Cornelius, who is already quite broken and 
mangled by the torture. Only look, look!" 

"Indeed, it is Cornelius, and no mistake." 

The officer uttered a feeble cry, and turned his head away; 
the brother of the Grand Pensionary, before having set foot 
on the ground, whilst still on the bottom step of the 
carriage, was struck down with an iron bar which broke his 
skull. He rose once more, but immediately fell again. 

Some fellows then seized him by the feet, and dragged him 
into the crowd, into the middle of which one might have 
followed his bloody track, and he was soon closed in among 
the savage yells of malignant exultation. 

The young man -- a thing which would have been thought 
impossible -- grew even paler than before, and his eyes were 
for a moment veiled behind the lids. 

The officer saw this sign of compassion, and, wishing to 
avail himself of this softened tone of his feelings, 
continued, -- 

"Come, come, Monseigneur, for here they are also going to 
murder the Grand Pensionary." 

But the young man had already opened his eyes again. 

"To be sure," he said. "These people are really implacable. 
It does no one good to offend them." 

"Monseigneur," said the officer, "may not one save this poor 
man, who has been your Highness's instructor? If there be 
any means, name it, and if I should perish in the attempt 
---- " 

William of Orange -- for he it was -- knit his brows in a 
very forbidding manner, restrained the glance of gloomy 
malice which glistened in his half-closed eye, and answered, 
-- 

"Captain Van Deken, I request you to go and look after my 
troops, that they may be armed for any emergency." 

"But am I to leave your Highness here, alone, in the 
presence of all these murderers?" 

"Go, and don't you trouble yourself about me more than I do 
myself," the Prince gruffly replied. 

The officer started off with a speed which was much less 
owing to his sense of military obedience than to his 
pleasure at being relieved from the necessity of witnessing 
the shocking spectacle of the murder of the other brother. 

He had scarcely left the room, when John -- who, with an 
almost superhuman effort, had reached the stone steps of a 
house nearly opposite that where his former pupil concealed 
himself -- began to stagger under the blows which were 
inflicted on him from all sides, calling out, -- 

"My brother! where is my brother?" 

One of the ruffians knocked off his hat with a blow of his 
clenched fist. 

Another showed to him his bloody hands; for this fellow had 
ripped open Cornelius and disembowelled him, and was now 
hastening to the spot in order not to lose the opportunity 
of serving the Grand Pensionary in the same manner, whilst 
they were dragging the dead body of Cornelius to the gibbet. 

John uttered a cry of agony and grief, and put one of his 
hands before his eyes. 

"Oh, you close your eyes, do you?" said one of the soldiers 
of the burgher guard; "well, I shall open them for you." 

And saying this he stabbed him with his pike in the face, 
and the blood spurted forth. 

"My brother!" cried John de Witt, trying to see through the 
stream of blood which blinded him, what had become of 
Cornelius; "my brother, my brother!" 

"Go and run after him!" bellowed another murderer, putting 
his musket to his temples and pulling the trigger. 

But the gun did not go off. 

The fellow then turned his musket round, and, taking it by 
the barrel with both hands, struck John de Witt down with 
the butt-end. John staggered and fell down at his feet, but, 
raising himself with a last effort, he once more called out, 
-- 

"My brother!" with a voice so full of anguish that the young 
man opposite closed the shutter. 

There remained little more to see; a third murderer fired a 
pistol with the muzzle to his face; and this time the shot 
took effect, blowing out his brains. John de Witt fell to 
rise no more. 

On this, every one of the miscreants, emboldened by his 
fall, wanted to fire his gun at him, or strike him with 
blows of the sledge-hammer, or stab him with a knife or 
swords, every one wanted to draw a drop of blood from the 
fallen hero, and tear off a shred from his garments. 

And after having mangled, and torn, and completely stripped 
the two brothers, the mob dragged their naked and bloody 
bodies to an extemporised gibbet, where amateur executioners 
hung them up by the feet. 

Then came the most dastardly scoundrels of all, who not 
having dared to strike the living flesh, cut the dead in 
pieces, and then went about the town selling small slices of 
the bodies of John and Cornelius at ten sous a piece. 

We cannot take upon ourselves to say whether, through the 
almost imperceptible chink of the shutter, the young man 
witnessed the conclusion of this shocking scene; but at the 
very moment when they were hanging the two martyrs on the 
gibbet he passed through the terrible mob, which was too 
much absorbed in the task, so grateful to its taste, to take 
any notice of him, and thus he reached unobserved the 
Tol-Hek, which was still closed. 

"Ah! sir," said the gatekeeper, "do you bring me the key?" 

"Yes, my man, here it is." 

"It is most unfortunate that you did not bring me that key 
only one quarter of an hour sooner," said the gatekeeper, 
with a sigh. 

"And why that?" asked the other. 

"Because I might have opened the gate to Mynheers de Witt; 
whereas, finding the gate locked, they were obliged to 
retrace their steps." 

"Gate! gate!" cried a voice which seemed to be that of a man 
in a hurry. 

The Prince, turning round, observed Captain Van Deken. 

"Is that you, Captain?" he said. "You are not yet out of the 
Hague? This is executing my orders very slowly." 

"Monseigneur," replied the Captain, "this is the third gate 
at which I have presented myself; the other two were 
closed." 

"Well, this good man will open this one for you; do it, my 
friend." 

The last words were addressed to the gatekeeper, who stood 
quite thunderstruck on hearing Captain Van Deken addressing 
by the title of Monseigneur this pale young man, to whom he 
himself had spoken in such a familiar way. 

As it were to make up for his fault, he hastened to open the 
gate, which swung creaking on its hinges. 

"Will Monseigneur avail himself of my horse?" asked the 
Captain. 

"I thank you, Captain, I shall use my own steed, which is 
waiting for me close at hand." 

And taking from his pocket a golden whistle, such as was 
generally used at that time for summoning the servants, he 
sounded it with a shrill and prolonged call, on which an 
equerry on horseback speedily made his appearance, leading 
another horse by the bridle. 

William, without touching the stirrup, vaulted into the 
saddle of the led horse, and, setting his spurs into its 
flanks, started off for the Leyden road. Having reached it, 
he turned round and beckoned to the Captain who was far 
behind, to ride by his side. 

"Do you know," he then said, without stopping, "that those 
rascals have killed John de Witt as well as his brother?" 

"Alas! Monseigneur," the Captain answered sadly, "I should 
like it much better if these two difficulties were still in 
your Highness's way of becoming de facto Stadtholder of 
Holland." 

"Certainly, it would have been better," said William, "if 
what did happen had not happened. But it cannot be helped 
now, and we have had nothing to do with it. Let us push on, 
Captain, that we may arrive at Alphen before the message 
which the States-General are sure to send to me to the 
camp." 

The Captain bowed, allowed the Prince to ride ahead and, for 
the remainder of the journey, kept at the same respectful 
distance as he had done before his Highness called him to 
his side. 

"How I should wish," William of Orange malignantly muttered 
to himself, with a dark frown and setting the spurs to his 
horse, "to see the figure which Louis will cut when he is 
apprised of the manner in which his dear friends De Witt 
have been served! Oh thou Sun! thou Sun! as truly as I am 
called William the Silent, thou Sun, thou hadst best look to 
thy rays!" 

And the young Prince, the relentless rival of the Great 
King, sped away upon his fiery steed, -- this future 
Stadtholder who had been but the day before very uncertainly 
established in his new power, but for whom the burghers of 
the Hague had built a staircase with the bodies of John and 
Cornelius, two princes as noble as he in the eyes of God and man. 




Chapter 5

The Tulip-fancier and his Neighbour


Whilst the burghers of the Hague were tearing in pieces the 
bodies of John and Cornelius de Witt, and whilst William of 
Orange, after having made sure that his two antagonists were 
really dead, was galloping over the Leyden road, followed by 
Captain van Deken, whom he found a little too compassionate 
to honour him any longer with his confidence, Craeke, the 
faithful servant, mounted on a good horse, and little 
suspecting what terrible events had taken place since his 
departure, proceeded along the high road lined with trees, 
until he was clear of the town and the neighbouring 
villages. 

Being once safe, he left his horse at a livery stable in 
order not to arouse suspicion, and tranquilly continued his 
journey on the canal-boats, which conveyed him by easy 
stages to Dort, pursuing their way under skilful guidance by 
the shortest possible routes through the windings of the 
river, which held in its watery embrace so many enchanting 
little islands, edged with willows and rushes, and abounding 
in luxurious vegetation, whereon flocks of fat sheep browsed 
in peaceful sleepiness. Craeke from afar off recognised 
Dort, the smiling city, at the foot of a hill dotted with 
windmills. He saw the fine red brick houses, mortared in 
white lines, standing on the edge of the water, and their 
balconies, open towards the river, decked out with silk 
tapestry embroidered with gold flowers, the wonderful 
manufacture of India and China; and near these brilliant 
stuffs, large lines set to catch the voracious eels, which 
are attracted towards the houses by the garbage thrown every 
day from the kitchens into the river. 

Craeke, standing on the deck of the boat, saw, across the 
moving sails of the windmills, on the slope of the hill, the 
red and pink house which was the goal of his errand. The 
outlines of its roof were merging in the yellow foliage of a 
curtain of poplar trees, the whole habitation having for 
background a dark grove of gigantic elms. The mansion was 
situated in such a way that the sun, falling on it as into a 
funnel, dried up, warmed, and fertilised the mist which the 
verdant screen could not prevent the river wind from 
carrying there every morning and evening. 

Having disembarked unobserved amid the usual bustle of the 
city, Craeke at once directed his steps towards the house 
which we have just described, and which -- white, trim, and 
tidy, even more cleanly scoured and more carefully waxed in 
the hidden corners than in the places which were exposed to 
view -- enclosed a truly happy mortal. 

This happy mortal, rara avis, was Dr. van Baerle, the godson 
of Cornelius de Witt. He had inhabited the same house ever 
since his childhood, for it was the house in which his 
father and grandfather, old established princely merchants 
of the princely city of Dort, were born. 

Mynheer van Baerle the father had amassed in the Indian 
trade three or four hundred thousand guilders, which Mynheer 
van Baerle the son, at the death of his dear and worthy 
parents, found still quite new, although one set of them 
bore the date of coinage of 1640, and the other that of 
1610, a fact which proved that they were guilders of Van 
Baerle the father and of Van Baerle the grandfather; but we 
will inform the reader at once that these three or four 
hundred thousand guilders were only the pocket money, or 
sort of purse, for Cornelius van Baerle, the hero of this 
story, as his landed property in the province yielded him an 
income of about ten thousand guilders a year. 

When the worthy citizen, the father of Cornelius, passed 
from time into eternity, three months after having buried 
his wife, who seemed to have departed first to smooth for 
him the path of death as she had smoothed for him the path 
of life, he said to his son, as he embraced him for the last 
time, -- 

"Eat, drink, and spend your money, if you wish to know what 
life really is, for as to toiling from morn to evening on a 
wooden stool, or a leathern chair, in a counting-house or a 
laboratory, that certainly is not living. Your time to die 
will also come; and if you are not then so fortunate as to 
have a son, you will let my name grow extinct, and my 
guilders, which no one has ever fingered but my father, 
myself, and the coiner, will have the surprise of passing to 
an unknown master. And least of all, imitate the example of 
your godfather, Cornelius de Witt, who has plunged into 
politics, the most ungrateful of all careers, and who will 
certainly come to an untimely end." 

Having given utterance to this paternal advice, the worthy 
Mynheer van Baerle died, to the intense grief of his son 
Cornelius, who cared very little for the guilders, and very 
much for his father. 

Cornelius then remained alone in his large house. In vain 
his godfather offered to him a place in the public service, 
-- in vain did he try to give him a taste for glory, -- 
although Cornelius, to gratify his godfather, did embark 
with De Ruyter upon "The Seven Provinces," the flagship of a 
fleet of one hundred and thirty-nine sail, with which the 
famous admiral set out to contend singlehanded against the 
combined forces of France and England. When, guided by the 
pilot Leger, he had come within musket-shot of the "Prince," 
with the Duke of York (the English king's brother) aboard, 
upon which De Ruyter, his mentor, made so sharp and well 
directed an attack that the Duke, perceiving that his vessel 
would soon have to strike, made the best of his way aboard 
the "Saint Michael"; when he had seen the "Saint Michael," 
riddled and shattered by the Dutch broadside, drift out of 
the line; when he had witnessed the sinking of the "Earl of 
Sandwich," and the death by fire or drowning of four hundred 
sailors; when he realized that the result of all this 
destruction -- after twenty ships had been blown to pieces, 
three thousand men killed and five thousand injured -- was 
that nothing was decided, that both sides claimed the 
victory, that the fighting would soon begin again, and that 
just one more name, that of Southwold Bay, had been added to 
the list of battles; when he had estimated how much time is 
lost simply in shutting his eyes and ears by a man who likes 
to use his reflective powers even while his fellow creatures 
are cannonading one another; -- Cornelius bade farewell to 
De Ruyter, to the Ruart de Pulten, and to glory, kissed the 
knees of the Grand Pensionary, for whom he entertained the 
deepest veneration, and retired to his house at Dort, rich 
in his well-earned repose, his twenty-eight years, an iron 
constitution and keen perceptions, and his capital of more 
than four hundred thousands of florins and income of ten 
thousand, convinced that a man is always endowed by Heaven 
with too much for his own happiness, and just enough to make 
him miserable. 

Consequently, and to indulge his own idea of happiness, 
Cornelius began to be interested in the study of plants and 
insects, collected and classified the Flora of all the Dutch 
islands, arranged the whole entomology of the province, on 
which he wrote a treatise, with plates drawn by his own 
hands; and at last, being at a loss what to do with his 
time, and especially with his money, which went on 
accumulating at a most alarming rate, he took it into his 
head to select for himself, from all the follies of his 
country and of his age, one of the most elegant and 
expensive, -- he became a tulip-fancier. 

It was the time when the Dutch and the Portuguese, rivalling 
each other in this branch of horticulture, had begun to 
worship that flower, and to make more of a cult of it than 
ever naturalists dared to make of the human race for fear of 
arousing the jealousy of God. 

Soon people from Dort to Mons began to talk of Mynheer van 
Baerle's tulips; and his beds, pits, drying-rooms, and 
drawers of bulbs were visited, as the galleries and 
libraries of Alexandria were by illustrious Roman 
travellers. 

Van Baerle began by expending his yearly revenue in laying 
the groundwork of his collection, after which he broke in 
upon his new guilders to bring it to perfection. His 
exertions, indeed, were crowned with a most magnificent 
result: he produced three new tulips, which he called the 
"Jane," after his mother; the "Van Baerle," after his 
father; and the "Cornelius," after his godfather; the other 
names have escaped us, but the fanciers will be sure to find 
them in the catalogues of the times. 

In the beginning of the year 1672, Cornelius de Witt came to 
Dort for three months, to live at his old family mansion; 
for not only was he born in that city, but his family had 
been resident there for centuries. 

Cornelius, at that period, as William of Orange said, began 
to enjoy the most perfect unpopularity. To his fellow 
citizens, the good burghers of Dort, however, he did not 
appear in the light of a criminal who deserved to be hung. 
It is true, they did not particularly like his somewhat 
austere republicanism, but they were proud of his valour; 
and when he made his entrance into their town, the cup of 
honour was offered to him, readily enough, in the name of 
the city. 

After having thanked his fellow citizens, Cornelius 
proceeded to his old paternal house, and gave directions for 
some repairs, which he wished to have executed before the 
arrival of his wife and children; and thence he wended his 
way to the house of his godson, who perhaps was the only 
person in Dort as yet unacquainted with the presence of 
Cornelius in the town. 

In the same degree as Cornelius de Witt had excited the 
hatred of the people by sowing those evil seeds which are 
called political passions, Van Baerle had gained the 
affections of his fellow citizens by completely shunning the 
pursuit of politics, absorbed as he was in the peaceful 
pursuit of cultivating tulips. 

Van Baerle was truly beloved by his servants and labourers; 
nor had he any conception that there was in this world a man 
who wished ill to another. 

And yet it must be said, to the disgrace of mankind, that 
Cornelius van Baerle, without being aware of the fact, had a 
much more ferocious, fierce, and implacable enemy than the 
Grand Pensionary and his brother had among the Orange party, 
who were most hostile to the devoted brothers, who had never 
been sundered by the least misunderstanding during their 
lives, and by their mutual devotion in the face of death 
made sure the existence of their brotherly affection beyond 
the grave. 

At the time when Cornelius van Baerle began to devote 
himself to tulip-growing, expending on this hobby his yearly 
revenue and the guilders of his father, there was at Dort, 
living next door to him, a citizen of the name of Isaac 
Boxtel who from the age when he was able to think for 
himself had indulged the same fancy, and who was in 
ecstasies at the mere mention of the word "tulban," which 
(as we are assured by the "Floriste Francaise," the most 
highly considered authority in matters relating to this 
flower) is the first word in the Cingalese tongue which was 
ever used to designate that masterpiece of floriculture 
which is now called the tulip. 

Boxtel had not the good fortune of being rich, like Van 
Baerle. He had therefore, with great care and patience, and 
by dint of strenuous exertions, laid out near his house at 
Dort a garden fit for the culture of his cherished flower; 
he had mixed the soil according to the most approved 
prescriptions, and given to his hotbeds just as much heat 
and fresh air as the strictest rules of horticulture exact. 

Isaac knew the temperature of his frames to the twentieth 
part of a degree. He knew the strength of the current of 
air, and tempered it so as to adapt it to the wave of the 
stems of his flowers. His productions also began to meet 
with the favour of the public. They were beautiful, nay, 
distinguished. Several fanciers had come to see Boxtel's 
tulips. At last he had even started amongst all the 
Linnaeuses and Tourneforts a tulip which bore his name, and 
which, after having travelled all through France, had found 
its way into Spain, and penetrated as far as Portugal; and 
the King, Don Alfonso VI. -- who, being expelled from 
Lisbon, had retired to the island of Terceira, where he 
amused himself, not, like the great Conde, with watering his 
carnations, but with growing tulips -- had, on seeing the 
Boxtel tulip, exclaimed, "Not so bad, by any means!" 

All at once, Cornelius van Baerle, who, after all his 
learned pursuits, had been seized with the tulipomania, made 
some changes in his house at Dort, which, as we have stated, 
was next door to that of Boxtel. He raised a certain 
building in his court-yard by a story, which shutting out 
the sun, took half a degree of warmth from Boxtel's garden, 
and, on the other hand, added half a degree of cold in 
winter; not to mention that it cut the wind, and disturbed 
all the horticultural calculations and arrangements of his 
neighbour. 

After all, this mishap appeared to Boxtel of no great 
consequence. Van Baerle was but a painter, a sort of fool 
who tried to reproduce and disfigure on canvas the wonders 
of nature. The painter, he thought, had raised his studio by 
a story to get better light, and thus far he had only been 
in the right. Mynheer van Baerle was a painter, as Mynheer 
Boxtel was a tulip-grower; he wanted somewhat more sun for 
his paintings, and he took half a degree from his 
neighbour's tulips. 

The law was for Van Baerle, and Boxtel had to abide by it. 

Besides, Isaac had made the discovery that too much sun was 
injurious to tulips, and that this flower grew quicker, and 
had a better colouring, with the temperate warmth of 
morning, than with the powerful heat of the midday sun. He 
therefore felt almost grateful to Cornelius van Baerle for 
having given him a screen gratis. 

Maybe this was not quite in accordance with the true state 
of things in general, and of Isaac Boxtel's feelings in 
particular. It is certainly astonishing what rich comfort 
great minds, in the midst of momentous catastrophes, will 
derive from the consolations of philosophy. 

But alas! What was the agony of the unfortunate Boxtel on 
seeing the windows of the new story set out with bulbs and 
seedlings of tulips for the border, and tulips in pots; in 
short, with everything pertaining to the pursuits of a 
tulip-monomaniac! 

There were bundles of labels, cupboards, and drawers with 
compartments, and wire guards for the cupboards, to allow 
free access to the air whilst keeping out slugs, mice, 
dormice, and rats, all of them very curious fanciers of 
tulips at two thousand francs a bulb. 

Boxtel was quite amazed when he saw all this apparatus, but 
he was not as yet aware of the full extent of his 
misfortune. Van Baerle was known to be fond of everything 
that pleases the eye. He studied Nature in all her aspects 
for the benefit of his paintings, which were as minutely 
finished as those of Gerard Dow, his master, and of Mieris, 
his friend. Was it not possible, that, having to paint the 
interior of a tulip-grower's, he had collected in his new 
studio all the accessories of decoration? 

Yet, although thus consoling himself with illusory 
suppositions, Boxtel was not able to resist the burning 
curiosity which was devouring him. In the evening, 
therefore, he placed a ladder against the partition wall 
between their gardens, and, looking into that of his 
neighbour Van Baerle, he convinced himself that the soil of 
a large square bed, which had formerly been occupied by 
different plants, was removed, and the ground disposed in 
beds of loam mixed with river mud (a combination which is 
particularly favourable to the tulip), and the whole 
surrounded by a border of turf to keep the soil in its 
place. Besides this, sufficient shade to temper the noonday 
heat; aspect south-southwest; water in abundant supply, and 
at hand; in short, every requirement to insure not only 
success but also progress. There could not be a doubt that 
Van Baerle had become a tulip-grower. 

Boxtel at once pictured to himself this learned man, with a 
capital of four hundred thousand and a yearly income of ten 
thousand guilders, devoting all his intellectual and 
financial resources to the cultivation of the tulip. He 
foresaw his neighbour's success, and he felt such a pang at 
the mere idea of this success that his hands dropped 
powerless, his knees trembled, and he fell in despair from 
the ladder. 

And thus it was not for the sake of painted tulips, but for 
real ones, that Van Baerle took from him half a degree of 
warmth. And thus Van Baerle was to have the most admirably 
fitted aspect, and, besides, a large, airy, and well 
ventilated chamber where to preserve his bulbs and 
seedlings; while he, Boxtel, had been obliged to give up for 
this purpose his bedroom, and, lest his sleeping in the same 
apartment might injure his bulbs and seedlings, had taken up 
his abode in a miserable garret. 

Boxtel, then, was to have next door to him a rival and 
successful competitor; and his rival, instead of being some 
unknown, obscure gardener, was the godson of Mynheer 
Cornelius de Witt, that is to say, a celebrity. 

Boxtel, as the reader may see, was not possessed of the 
spirit of Porus, who, on being conquered by Alexander, 
consoled himself with the celebrity of his conqueror. 

And now if Van Baerle produced a new tulip, and named it the 
John de Witt, after having named one the Cornelius? It was 
indeed enough to choke one with rage. 

Thus Boxtel, with jealous foreboding, became the prophet of 
his own misfortune. And, after having made this melancholy 
discovery, he passed the most wretched night imaginable. 




Chapter 6

The Hatred of a Tulip-fancier


From that moment Boxtel's interest in tulips was no longer a 
stimulus to his exertions, but a deadening anxiety. 
Henceforth all his thoughts ran only upon the injury which 
his neighbour would cause him, and thus his favourite 
occupation was changed into a constant source of misery to him. 

Van Baerle, as may easily be imagined, had no sooner begun 
to apply his natural ingenuity to his new fancy, than he 
succeeded in growing the finest tulips. Indeed; he knew 
better than any one else at Haarlem or Leyden -- the two 
towns which boast the best soil and the most congenial 
climate -- how to vary the colours, to modify the shape, and 
to produce new species. 

He belonged to that natural, humorous school who took for 
their motto in the seventeenth century the aphorism uttered 
by one of their number in 1653, -- "To despise flowers is to 
offend God." 

From that premise the school of tulip-fanciers, the most 
exclusive of all schools, worked out the following syllogism 
in the same year: -- 

"To despise flowers is to offend God. 

"The more beautiful the flower is, the more does one offend 
God in despising it. 

"The tulip is the most beautiful of all flowers. 

"Therefore, he who despises the tulip offends God beyond 
measure." 

By reasoning of this kind, it can be seen that the four or 
five thousand tulip-growers of Holland, France, and 
Portugal, leaving out those of Ceylon and China and the 
Indies, might, if so disposed, put the whole world under the 
ban, and condemn as schismatics and heretics and deserving 
of death the several hundred millions of mankind whose hopes 
of salvation were not centred upon the tulip. 

We cannot doubt that in such a cause Boxtel, though he was 
Van Baerle's deadly foe, would have marched under the same 
banner with him. 

Mynheer van Baerle and his tulips, therefore, were in the 
mouth of everybody; so much so, that Boxtel's name 
disappeared for ever from the list of the notable 
tulip-growers in Holland, and those of Dort were now 
represented by Cornelius van Baerle, the modest and 
inoffensive savant. 

Engaging, heart and soul, in his pursuits of sowing, 
planting, and gathering, Van Baerle, caressed by the whole 
fraternity of tulip-growers in Europe, entertained nor the 
least suspicion that there was at his very door a pretender 
whose throne he had usurped. 

He went on in his career, and consequently in his triumphs; 
and in the course of two years he covered his borders with 
such marvellous productions as no mortal man, following in 
the tracks of the Creator, except perhaps Shakespeare and 
Rubens, have equalled in point of numbers. 

And also, if Dante had wished for a new type to be added to 
his characters of the Inferno, he might have chosen Boxtel 
during the period of Van Baerle's successes. Whilst 
Cornelius was weeding, manuring, watering his beds, whilst, 
kneeling on the turf border, he analysed every vein of the 
flowering tulips, and meditated on the modifications which 
might be effected by crosses of colour or otherwise, Boxtel, 
concealed behind a small sycamore which he had trained at 
the top of the partition wall in the shape of a fan, 
watched, with his eyes starting from their sockets and with 
foaming mouth, every step and every gesture of his 
neighbour; and whenever he thought he saw him look happy, or 
descried a smile on his lips, or a flash of contentment 
glistening in his eyes, he poured out towards him such a 
volley of maledictions and furious threats as to make it 
indeed a matter of wonder that this venomous breath of envy 
and hatred did not carry a blight on the innocent flowers 
which had excited it. 

When the evil spirit has once taken hold of the heart of 
man, it urges him on, without letting him stop. Thus Boxtel 
soon was no longer content with seeing Van Baerle. He wanted 
to see his flowers, too; he had the feelings of an artist, 
the master-piece of a rival engrossed his interest. 

He therefore bought a telescope, which enabled him to watch 
as accurately as did the owner himself every progressive 
development of the flower, from the moment when, in the 
first year, its pale seed-leaf begins to peep from the 
ground, to that glorious one, when, after five years, its 
petals at last reveal the hidden treasures of its chalice. 
How often had the miserable, jealous man to observe in Van 
Baerle's beds tulips which dazzled him by their beauty, and 
almost choked him by their perfection! 

And then, after the first blush of the admiration which he 
could not help feeling, he began to be tortured by the pangs 
of envy, by that slow fever which creeps over the heart and 
changes it into a nest of vipers, each devouring the other 
and ever born anew. How often did Boxtel, in the midst of 
tortures which no pen is able fully to describe, -- how 
often did he feel an inclination to jump down into the 
garden during the night, to destroy the plants, to tear the 
bulbs with his teeth, and to sacrifice to his wrath the 
owner himself, if he should venture to stand up for the 
defence of his tulips! 

But to kill a tulip was a horrible crime in the eyes of a 
genuine tulip-fancier; as to killing a man, it would not 
have mattered so very much. 

Yet Van Baerle made such progress in the noble science of 
growing tulips, which he seemed to master with the true 
instinct of genius, that Boxtel at last was maddened to such 
a degree as to think of throwing stones and sticks into the 
flower-stands of his neighbour. But, remembering that he 
would be sure to be found out, and that he would not only be 
punished by law, but also dishonoured for ever in the face 
of all the tulip-growers of Europe, he had recourse to 
stratagem, and, to gratify his hatred, tried to devise a 
plan by means of which he might gain his ends without being 
compromised himself. 

He considered a long time, and at last his meditations were 
crowned with success. 

One evening he tied two cats together by their hind legs 
with a string about six feet in length, and threw them from 
the wall into the midst of that noble, that princely, that 
royal bed, which contained not only the "Cornelius de Witt," 
but also the "Beauty of Brabant," milk-white, edged with 
purple and pink, the "Marble of Rotterdam," colour of flax, 
blossoms feathered red and flesh colour, the "Wonder of 
Haarlem," the "Colombin obscur," and the "Columbin clair 
terni." 

The frightened cats, having alighted on the ground, first 
tried to fly each in a different direction, until the string 
by which they were tied together was tightly stretched 
across the bed; then, however, feeling that they were not 
able to get off, they began to pull to and fro, and to wheel 
about with hideous caterwaulings, mowing down with their 
string the flowers among which they were struggling, until, 
after a furious strife of about a quarter of an hour, the 
string broke and the combatants vanished. 

Boxtel, hidden behind his sycamore, could not see anything, 
as it was pitch-dark; but the piercing cries of the cats 
told the whole tale, and his heart overflowing with gall now 
throbbed with triumphant joy. 

Boxtel was so eager to ascertain the extent of the injury, 
that he remained at his post until morning to feast his eyes 
on the sad state in which the two cats had left the 
flower-beds of his neighbour. The mists of the morning 
chilled his frame, but he did not feel the cold, the hope of 
revenge keeping his blood at fever heat. The chagrin of his 
rival was to pay for all the inconvenience which he incurred 
himself. 

At the earliest dawn the door of the white house opened, and 
Van Baerle made his appearance, approaching the flower-beds 
with the smile of a man who has passed the night comfortably 
in his bed, and has had happy dreams. 

All at once he perceived furrows and little mounds of earth 
on the beds which only the evening before had been as smooth 
as a mirror, all at once he perceived the symmetrical rows 
of his tulips to be completely disordered, like the pikes of 
a battalion in the midst of which a shell has fallen. 

He ran up to them with blanched cheek. 

Boxtel trembled with joy. Fifteen or twenty tulips, torn and 
crushed, were lying about, some of them bent, others 
completely broken and already withering, the sap oozing from 
their bleeding bulbs: how gladly would Van Baerle have 
redeemed that precious sap with his own blood! 

But what were his surprise and his delight! what was the 
disappointment of his rival! Not one of the four tulips 
which the latter had meant to destroy was injured at all. 
They raised proudly their noble heads above the corpses of 
their slain companions. This was enough to console Van 
Baerle, and enough to fan the rage of the horticultural 
murderer, who tore his hair at the sight of the effects of 
the crime which he had committed in vain. 

Van Baerle could not imagine the cause of the mishap, which, 
fortunately, was of far less consequence than it might have 
been. On making inquiries, he learned that the whole night 
had been disturbed by terrible caterwaulings. He besides 
found traces of the cats, their footmarks and hairs left 
behind on the battle-field; to guard, therefore, in future 
against a similar outrage, he gave orders that henceforth 
one of the under gardeners should sleep in the garden in a 
sentry-box near the flower-beds. 

Boxtel heard him give the order, and saw the sentry-box put 
up that very day; but he deemed himself lucky in not having 
been suspected, and, being more than ever incensed against 
the successful horticulturist, he resolved to bide his time. 

Just then the Tulip Society of Haarlem offered a prize for 
the discovery (we dare not say the manufacture) of a large 
black tulip without a spot of colour, a thing which had not 
yet been accomplished, and was considered impossible, as at 
that time there did not exist a flower of that species 
approaching even to a dark nut brown. It was, therefore, 
generally said that the founders of the prize might just as 
well have offered two millions as a hundred thousand 
guilders, since no one would be able to gain it. 

The tulip-growing world, however, was thrown by it into a 
state of most active commotion. Some fanciers caught at the 
idea without believing it practicable, but such is the power 
of imagination among florists, that although considering the 
undertaking as certain to fail, all their thoughts were 
engrossed by that great black tulip, which was looked upon 
to be as chimerical as the black swan of Horace or the white 
raven of French tradition. 

Van Baerle was one of the tulip-growers who were struck with 
the idea; Boxtel thought of it in the light of a 
speculation. Van Baerle, as soon as the idea had once taken 
root in his clear and ingenious mind, began slowly the 
necessary planting and cross-breeding to reduce the tulips 
which he had grown already from red to brown, and from brown 
to dark brown. 

By the next year he had obtained flowers of a perfect 
nut-brown, and Boxtel espied them in the border, whereas he 
had himself as yet only succeeded in producing the light 
brown. 

It might perhaps be interesting to explain to the gentle 
reader the beautiful chain of theories which go to prove 
that the tulip borrows its colors from the elements; perhaps 
we should give him pleasure if we were to maintain and 
establish that nothing is impossible for a florist who 
avails himself with judgment and discretion and patience of 
the sun's heat; the clear water, the juices of the earth, 
and the cool breezes. But this is not a treatise upon tulips 
in general; it is the story of one particular tulip which we 
have undertaken to write, and to that we limit ourselves, 
however alluring the subject which is so closely allied to 
ours. 

Boxtel, once more worsted by the superiority of his hated 
rival, was now completely disgusted with tulip-growing, and, 
being driven half mad, devoted himself entirely to 
observation. 

The house of his rival was quite open to view; a garden 
exposed to the sun; cabinets with glass walls, shelves, 
cupboards, boxes, and ticketed pigeon-holes, which could 
easily be surveyed by the telescope. Boxtel allowed his 
bulbs to rot in the pits, his seedlings to dry up in their 
cases, and his tulips to wither in the borders and 
henceforward occupied himself with nothing else but the 
doings at Van Baerle's. He breathed through the stalks of 
Van Baerle's tulips, quenched his thirst with the water he 
sprinkled upon them, and feasted on the fine soft earth 
which his neighbour scattered upon his cherished bulbs. 

But the most curious part of the operations was not 
performed in the garden. 

It might be one o'clock in the morning when Van Baerle went 
up to his laboratory, into the glazed cabinet whither 
Boxtel's telescope had such an easy access; and here, as 
soon as the lamp illuminated the walls and windows, Boxtel 
saw the inventive genius of his rival at work. 

He beheld him sifting his seeds, and soaking them in liquids 
which were destined to modify or to deepen their colours. He 
knew what Cornelius meant when heating certain grains, then 
moistening them, then combining them with others by a sort 
of grafting, -- a minute and marvellously delicate 
manipulation, -- and when he shut up in darkness those which 
were expected to furnish the black colour, exposed to the 
sun or to the lamp those which were to produce red, and 
placed between the endless reflections of two water-mirrors 
those intended for white, the pure representation of the 
limpid element. 

This innocent magic, the fruit at the same time of 
child-like musings and of manly genius -- this patient 
untiring labour, of which Boxtel knew himself to be 
incapable -- made him, gnawed as he was with envy, centre 
all his life, all his thoughts, and all his hopes in his 
telescope. 

For, strange to say, the love and interest of horticulture 
had not deadened in Isaac his fierce envy and thirst of 
revenge. Sometimes, whilst covering Van Baerle with his 
telescope, he deluded himself into a belief that he was 
levelling a never-failing musket at him; and then he would 
seek with his finger for the trigger to fire the shot which 
was to have killed his neighbour. But it is time that we 
should connect with this epoch of the operations of the one, 
and the espionage of the other, the visit which Cornelius de 
Witt came to pay to his native town. 




Chapter 7

The Happy Man makes Acquaintance with Misfortune


Cornelius de Witt, after having attended to his family 
affairs, reached the house of his godson, Cornelius van 
Baerle, one evening in the month of January, 1672. 

De Witt, although being very little of a horticulturist or 
of an artist, went over the whole mansion, from the studio 
to the green-house, inspecting everything, from the pictures 
down to the tulips. He thanked his godson for having joined 
him on the deck of the admiral's ship "The Seven Provinces," 
during the battle of Southwold Bay, and for having given his 
name to a magnificent tulip; and whilst he thus, with the 
kindness and affability of a father to a son, visited Van 
Baerle's treasures, the crowd gathered with curiosity, and 
even respect, before the door of the happy man. 

All this hubbub excited the attention of Boxtel, who was 
just taking his meal by his fireside. He inquired what it 
meant, and, on being informed of the cause of all this stir, 
climbed up to his post of observation, where in spite of the 
cold, he took his stand, with the telescope to his eye. 

This telescope had not been of great service to him since 
the autumn of 1671. The tulips, like true daughters of the 
East, averse to cold, do not abide in the open ground in 
winter. They need the shelter of the house, the soft bed on 
the shelves, and the congenial warmth of the stove. Van 
Baerle, therefore, passed the whole winter in his 
laboratory, in the midst of his books and pictures. He went 
only rarely to the room where he kept his bulbs, unless it 
were to allow some occasional rays of the sun to enter, by 
opening one of the movable sashes of the glass front. 

On the evening of which we are speaking, after the two 
Corneliuses had visited together all the apartments of the 
house, whilst a train of domestics followed their steps, De 
Witt said in a low voice to Van Baerle, -- 

"My dear son, send these people away, and let us be alone 
for some minutes." 

The younger Cornelius, bowing assent, said aloud, -- 

"Would you now, sir, please to see my dry-room?" 

The dry-room, this pantheon, this sanctum sanctorum of the 
tulip-fancier, was, as Delphi of old, interdicted to the 
profane uninitiated. 

Never had any of his servants been bold enough to set his 
foot there. Cornelius admitted only the inoffensive broom of 
an old Frisian housekeeper, who had been his nurse, and who 
from the time when he had devoted himself to the culture of 
tulips ventured no longer to put onions in his stews, for 
fear of pulling to pieces and mincing the idol of her foster 
child. 

At the mere mention of the dry-room, therefore, the servants 
who were carrying the lights respectfully fell back. 
Cornelius, taking the candlestick from the hands of the 
foremost, conducted his godfather into that room, which was 
no other than that very cabinet with a glass front into 
which Boxtel was continually prying with his telescope. 

The envious spy was watching more intently than ever. 

First of all he saw the walls and windows lit up. 

Then two dark figures appeared. 

One of them, tall, majestic, stern, sat down near the table 
on which Van Baerle had placed the taper. 

In this figure, Boxtel recognised the pale features of 
Cornelius de Witt, whose long hair, parted in front, fell 
over his shoulders. 

De Witt, after having said some few words to Cornelius, the 
meaning of which the prying neighbour could not read in the 
movement of his lips, took from his breast pocket a white 
parcel, carefully sealed, which Boxtel, judging from the 
manner in which Cornelius received it, and placed it in one 
of the presses, supposed to contain papers of the greatest 
importance. 

His first thought was that this precious deposit enclosed 
some newly imported bulbs from Bengal or Ceylon; but he soon 
reflected that Cornelius de Witt was very little addicted to 
tulip-growing, and that he only occupied himself with the 
affairs of man, a pursuit by far less peaceful and agreeable 
than that of the florist. He therefore came to the 
conclusion that the parcel contained simply some papers, and 
that these papers were relating to politics. 

But why should papers of political import be intrusted to 
Van Baerle, who not only was, but also boasted of being, an 
entire stranger to the science of government, which, in his 
opinion, was more occult than alchemy itself? 

It was undoubtedly a deposit which Cornelius de Witt, 
already threatened by the unpopularity with which his 
countrymen were going to honour him, was placing in the 
hands of his godson; a contrivance so much the more cleverly 
devised, as it certainly was not at all likely that it 
should be searched for at the house of one who had always 
stood aloof from every sort of intrigue. 

And, besides, if the parcel had been made up of bulbs, 
Boxtel knew his neighbour too well not to expect that Van 
Baerle would not have lost one moment in satisfying his 
curiosity and feasting his eyes on the present which he had 
received. 

But, on the contrary, Cornelius had received the parcel from 
the hands of his godfather with every mark of respect, and 
put it by with the same respectful manner in a drawer, 
stowing it away so that it should not take up too much of 
the room which was reserved to his bulbs. 

The parcel thus being secreted, Cornelius de Witt got up, 
pressed the hand of his godson, and turned towards the door, 
Van Baerle seizing the candlestick, and lighting him on his 
way down to the street, which was still crowded with people 
who wished to see their great fellow citizen getting into 
his coach. 

Boxtel had not been mistaken in his supposition. The deposit 
intrusted to Van Baerle, and carefully locked up by him, was 
nothing more nor less than John de Witt's correspondence 
with the Marquis de Louvois, the war minister of the King of 
France; only the godfather forbore giving to his godson the 
least intimation concerning the political importance of the 
secret, merely desiring him not to deliver the parcel to any 
one but to himself, or to whomsoever he should send to claim 
it in his name. 

And Van Baerle, as we have seen, locked it up with his most 
precious bulbs, to think no more of it, after his godfather 
had left him; very unlike Boxtel, who looked upon this 
parcel as a clever pilot does on the distant and scarcely 
perceptible cloud which is increasing on its way and which 
is fraught with a storm. 

Little dreaming of the jealous hatred of his neighbour, Van 
Baerle had proceeded step by step towards gaining the prize 
offered by the Horticultural Society of Haarlem. He had 
progressed from hazel-nut shade to that of roasted coffee, 
and on the very day when the frightful events took place at 
the Hague which we have related in the preceding chapters, 
we find him, about one o'clock in the day, gathering from 
the border the young suckers raised from tulips of the 
colour of roasted coffee; and which, being expected to 
flower for the first time in the spring of 1675, would 
undoubtedly produce the large black tulip required by the 
Haarlem Society. 

On the 20th of August, 1672, at one o'clock, Cornelius was 
therefore in his dry-room, with his feet resting on the 
foot-bar of the table, and his elbows on the cover, looking 
with intense delight on three suckers which he had just 
detached from the mother bulb, pure, perfect, and entire, 
and from which was to grow that wonderful produce of 
horticulture which would render the name of Cornelius van 
Baerle for ever illustrious. 

"I shall find the black tulip," said Cornelius to himself, 
whilst detaching the suckers. "I shall obtain the hundred 
thousand guilders offered by the Society. I shall distribute 
them among the poor of Dort; and thus the hatred which every 
rich man has to encounter in times of civil wars will be 
soothed down, and I shall be able, without fearing any harm 
either from Republicans or Orangists, to keep as heretofore 
my borders in splendid condition. I need no more be afraid 
lest on the day of a riot the shopkeepers of the town and 
the sailors of the port should come and tear out my bulbs, 
to boil them as onions for their families, as they have 
sometimes quietly threatened when they happened to remember 
my having paid two or three hundred guilders for one bulb. 
It is therefore settled I shall give the hundred thousand 
guilders of the Haarlem prize to-the poor. And yet ---- " 

Here Cornelius stopped and heaved a sigh. "And yet," he 
continued, "it would have been so very delightful to spend 
the hundred thousand guilders on the enlargement of my 
tulip-bed or even on a journey to the East, the country of 
beautiful flowers. But, alas! these are no thoughts for the 
present times, when muskets, standards, proclamations, and 
beating of drums are the order of the day." 

Van Baerle raised his eyes to heaven and sighed again. Then 
turning his glance towards his bulbs, -- objects of much 
greater importance to him than all those muskets, standards, 
drums, and proclamations, which he conceived only to be fit 
to disturb the minds of honest people, -- he said: -- 

"These are, indeed, beautiful bulbs; how smooth they are, 
how well formed; there is that air of melancholy about them 
which promises to produce a flower of the colour of ebony. 
On their skin you cannot even distinguish the circulating 
veins with the naked eye. Certainly, certainly, not a light 
spot will disfigure the tulip which I have called into 
existence. And by what name shall we call this offspring of 
my sleepless nights, of my labour and my thought? Tulipa 
nigra Barlaensis? 

"Yes Barlaensis: a fine name. All the tulip-fanciers -- that 
is to say, all the intelligent people of Europe -- will feel 
a thrill of excitement when the rumour spreads to the four 
quarters of the globe: The grand black tulip is found! 'How 
is it called?' the fanciers will ask. -- 'Tulipa nigra 
Barlaensis!' -- 'Why Barlaensis?' -- 'After its grower, Van 
Baerle,' will be the answer. -- 'And who is this Van 
Baerle?' -- 'It is the same who has already produced five 
new tulips: the Jane, the John de Witt, the Cornelius de 
Witt, etc.' Well, that is what I call my ambition. It will 
cause tears to no one. And people will talk of my Tulipa 
nigra Barlaensis when perhaps my godfather, this sublime 
politician, is only known from the tulip to which I have 
given his name. 

"Oh! these darling bulbs! 

"When my tulip has flowered," Baerle continued in his 
soliloquy, "and when tranquillity is restored in Holland, I 
shall give to the poor only fifty thousand guilders, which, 
after all, is a goodly sum for a man who is under no 
obligation whatever. Then, with the remaining fifty thousand 
guilders, I shall make experiments. With them I shall 
succeed in imparting scent to the tulip. Ah! if I succeed in 
giving it the odour of the rose or the carnation, or, what 
would be still better, a completely new scent; if I restored 
to this queen of flowers its natural distinctive perfume, 
which she has lost in passing from her Eastern to her 
European throne, and which she must have in the Indian 
peninsula at Goa, Bombay, and Madras, and especially in that 
island which in olden times, as is asserted, was the 
terrestrial paradise, and which is called Ceylon, -- oh, 
what glory! I must say, I would then rather be Cornelius van 
Baerle than Alexander, Caesar, or Maximilian. 

"Oh the admirable bulbs!" 

Thus Cornelius indulged in the delights of contemplation, 
and was carried away by the sweetest dreams. 

Suddenly the bell of his cabinet was rung much more 
violently than usual. 

Cornelius, startled, laid his hands on his bulbs, and turned 
round. 

"Who is here?" he asked. 

"Sir," answered the servant, "it is a messenger from the 
Hague." 

"A messenger from the Hague! What does he want?" 

"Sir, it is Craeke." 

"Craeke! the confidential servant of Mynheer John de Witt? 
Good, let him wait." 

"I cannot wait," said a voice in the lobby. 

And at the same time forcing his way in, Craeke rushed into 
the dry-room. 

This abrupt entrance was such an infringement on the 
established rules of the household of Cornelius van Baerle, 
that the latter, at the sight of Craeke, almost convulsively 
moved his hand which covered the bulbs, so that two of them 
fell on the floor, one of them rolling under a small table, 
and the other into the fireplace. 

"Zounds!" said Cornelius, eagerly picking up his precious 
bulbs, "what's the matter?" 

"The matter, sir!" said Craeke, laying a paper on the large 
table, on which the third bulb was lying, -- "the matter is, 
that you are requested to read this paper without losing one 
moment." 

And Craeke, who thought he had remarked in the streets of 
Dort symptoms of a tumult similar to that which he had 
witnessed before his departure from the Hague, ran off 
without even looking behind him. 

"All right! all right! my dear Craeke," said Cornelius, 
stretching his arm under the table for the bulb; "your paper 
shall be read, indeed it shall." 

Then, examining the bulb which he held in the hollow of his 
hand, he said: "Well, here is one of them uninjured. That 
confounded Craeke! thus to rush into my dry-room; let us now 
look after the other." 

And without laying down the bulb which he already held, 
Baerle went to the fireplace, knelt down and stirred with 
the tip of his finger the ashes, which fortunately were 
quite cold. 

He at once felt the other bulb. 

"Well, here it is," he said; and, looking at it with almost 
fatherly affection, he exclaimed, "Uninjured as the first!" 

At this very instant, and whilst Cornelius, still on his 
knees, was examining his pets, the door of the dry-room was 
so violently shaken, and opened in such a brusque manner, 
that Cornelius felt rising in his cheeks and his ears the 
glow of that evil counsellor which is called wrath. 

"Now, what is it again," he demanded; "are people going mad 
here?" 

"Oh, sir! sir!" cried the servant, rushing into the dry-room 
with a much paler face and with a much more frightened mien 
than Craeke had shown. 

"Well!" asked Cornelius, foreboding some mischief from the 
double breach of the strict rule of his house. 

"Oh, sir, fly! fly quick!" cried the servant. 

"Fly! and what for?" 

"Sir, the house is full of the guards of the States." 

"What do they want?" 

"They want you." 

"What for?" 

"To arrest you." 

"Arrest me? arrest me, do you say?" 

"Yes, sir, and they are headed by a magistrate." 

"What's the meaning of all this?" said Van Baerle, grasping 
in his hands the two bulbs, and directing his terrified 
glance towards the staircase. 

"They are coming up! they are coming up!" cried the servant. 

"Oh, my dear child, my worthy master!" cried the old 
housekeeper, who now likewise made her appearance in the 
dry-room, "take your gold, your jewelry, and fly, fly!" 

"But how shall I make my escape, nurse?" said Van Baerle. 

"Jump out of the window." 

"Twenty-five feet from the ground!" 

"But you will fall on six feet of soft soil!" 

"Yes, but I should fall on my tulips." 

"Never mind, jump out." 

Cornelius took the third bulb, approached the window and 
opened it, but seeing what havoc he would necessarily cause 
in his borders, and, more than this, what a height he would 
have to jump, he called out, "Never!" and fell back a step. 

At this moment they saw across the banister of the staircase 
the points of the halberds of the soldiers rising. 

The housekeeper raised her hands to heaven. 

As to Cornelius van Baerle, it must be stated to his honour, 
not as a man, but as a tulip-fancier, his only thought was 
for his inestimable bulbs. 

Looking about for a paper in which to wrap them up, he 
noticed the fly-leaf from the Bible, which Craeke had laid 
upon the table, took it without in his confusion remembering 
whence it came, folded in it the three bulbs, secreted them 
in his bosom, and waited. 

At this very moment the soldiers, preceded by a magistrate, 
entered the room. 

"Are you Dr. Cornelius van Baerle?" demanded the magistrate 
(who, although knowing the young man very well, put his 
question according to the forms of justice, which gave his 
proceedings a much more dignified air). 

"I am that person, Master van Spennen," answered Cornelius, 
politely, to his judge, "and you know it very well." 

"Then give up to us the seditious papers which you secrete 
in your house." 

"The seditious papers!" repeated Cornelius, quite dumfounded 
at the imputation. 

"Now don't look astonished, if you please." 

"I vow to you, Master van Spennen, "Cornelius replied, "that 
I am completely at a loss to understand what you want." 

"Then I shall put you in the way, Doctor," said the judge; 
"give up to us the papers which the traitor Cornelius de 
Witt deposited with you in the month of January last." 

A sudden light came into the mind of Cornelius. 

"Halloa!" said Van Spennen, "you begin now to remember, 
don't you?" 

"Indeed I do, but you spoke of seditious papers, and I have 
none of that sort." 

"You deny it then?" 

"Certainly I do." 

The magistrate turned round and took a rapid survey of the 
whole cabinet. 

"Where is the apartment you call your dry-room?" he asked. 

"The very same where you now are, Master van Spennen." 

The magistrate cast a glance at a small note at the top of 
his papers. 

"All right," he said, like a man who is sure of his ground. 

Then, turning round towards Cornelius, he continued, "Will 
you give up those papers to me?" 

"But I cannot, Master van Spennen; those papers do not 
belong to me; they have been deposited with me as a trust, 
and a trust is sacred." 

"Dr. Cornelius," said the judge, "in the name of the States, 
I order you to open this drawer, and to give up to me the 
papers which it contains." 

Saying this, the judge pointed with his finger to the third 
drawer of the press, near the fireplace. 

In this very drawer, indeed the papers deposited by the 
Warden of the Dikes with his godson were lying; a proof that 
the police had received very exact information. 

"Ah! you will not," said Van Spennen, when he saw Cornelius 
standing immovable and bewildered, "then I shall open the 
drawer myself." 

And, pulling out the drawer to its full length, the 
magistrate at first alighted on about twenty bulbs, 
carefully arranged and ticketed, and then on the paper 
parcel, which had remained in exactly the same state as it 
was when delivered by the unfortunate Cornelius de Witt to 
his godson. 

The magistrate broke the seals, tore off the envelope, cast 
an eager glance on the first leaves which met his eye and 
then exclaimed, in a terrible voice, -- 

"Well, justice has been rightly informed after all!" 

"How," said Cornelius, "how is this?" 

"Don't pretend to be ignorant, Mynheer van Baerle," answered 
the magistrate. "Follow me." 

"How's that! follow you?" cried the Doctor. 

"Yes, sir, for in the name of the States I arrest you." 

Arrests were not as yet made in the name of William of 
Orange; he had not been Stadtholder long enough for that. 

"Arrest me!" cried Cornelius; "but what have I done?" 

"That's no affair of mine, Doctor; you will explain all that 
before your judges." 

"Where?" 

"At the Hague." 

Cornelius, in mute stupefaction, embraced his old nurse, who 
was in a swoon; shook hands with his servants, who were 
bathed in tears, and followed the magistrate, who put him in 
a coach as a prisoner of state and had him driven at full 
gallop to the Hague. 




Chapter 8

An Invasion


The incident just related was, as the reader has guessed 
before this, the diabolical work of Mynheer Isaac Boxtel. 

It will be remembered that, with the help of his telescope, 
not even the least detail of the private meeting between 
Cornelius de Witt and Van Baerle had escaped him. He had, 
indeed, heard nothing, but he had seen everything, and had 
rightly concluded that the papers intrusted by the Warden to 
the Doctor must have been of great importance, as he saw Van 
Baerle so carefully secreting the parcel in the drawer where 
he used to keep his most precious bulbs. 

The upshot of all this was that when Boxtel, who watched the 
course of political events much more attentively than his 
neighbour Cornelius was used to do, heard the news of the 
brothers De Witt being arrested on a charge of high treason 
against the States, he thought within his heart that very 
likely he needed only to say one word, and the godson would 
be arrested as well as the godfather. 

Yet, full of happiness as was Boxtel's heart at the chance, 
he at first shrank with horror from the idea of informing 
against a man whom this information might lead to the 
scaffold. 

But there is this terrible thing in evil thoughts, that evil 
minds soon grow familiar with them. 

Besides this, Mynheer Isaac Boxtel encouraged himself with 
the following sophism: -- 

"Cornelius de Witt is a bad citizen, as he is charged with 
high treason, and arrested. 

"I, on the contrary, am a good citizen, as I am not charged 
with anything in the world, as I am as free as the air of 
heaven." 

"If, therefore, Cornelius de Witt is a bad citizen, -- of 
which there can be no doubt, as he is charged with high 
treason, and arrested, -- his accomplice, Cornelius van 
Baerle, is no less a bad citizen than himself. 

"And, as I am a good citizen, and as it is the duty of every 
good citizen to inform against the bad ones, it is my duty 
to inform against Cornelius van Baerle." 

Specious as this mode of reasoning might sound, it would not 
perhaps have taken so complete a hold of Boxtel, nor would 
he perhaps have yielded to the mere desire of vengeance 
which was gnawing at his heart, had not the demon of envy 
been joined with that of cupidity. 

Boxtel was quite aware of the progress which Van Baerle had 
made towards producing the grand black tulip. 

Dr. Cornelius, notwithstanding all his modesty, had not been 
able to hide from his most intimate friends that he was all 
but certain to win, in the year of grace 1673, the prize of 
a hundred thousand guilders offered by the Horticultural 
Society of Haarlem. 

It was just this certainty of Cornelius van Baerle that 
caused the fever which raged in the heart of Isaac Boxtel. 

If Cornelius should be arrested there would necessarily be a 
great upset in his house, and during the night after his 
arrest no one would think of keeping watch over the tulips 
in his garden. 

Now in that night Boxtel would climb over the wall and, as 
he knew the position of the bulb which was to produce the 
grand black tulip, he would filch it; and instead of 
flowering for Cornelius, it would flower for him, Isaac; he 
also, instead of Van Baerle, would have the prize of a 
hundred thousand guilders, not to speak of the sublime 
honour of calling the new flower Tulipa nigra Boxtellensis, 
-- a result which would satisfy not only his vengeance, but 
also his cupidity and his ambition. 

Awake, he thought of nothing but the grand black tulip; 
asleep, he dreamed of it. 

At last, on the 19th of August, about two o'clock in the 
afternoon, the temptation grew so strong, that Mynheer Isaac 
was no longer able to resist it. 

Accordingly, he wrote an anonymous information, the minute 
exactness of which made up for its want of authenticity, and 
posted his letter. 

Never did a venomous paper, slipped into the jaws of the 
bronze lions at Venice, produce a more prompt and terrible 
effect. 

On the same evening the letter reached the principal 
magistrate, who without a moment's delay convoked his 
colleagues early for the next morning. On the following 
morning, therefore, they assembled, and decided on Van 
Baerle's arrest, placing the order for its execution in the 
hands of Master van Spennen, who, as we have seen, performed 
his duty like a true Hollander, and who arrested the Doctor 
at the very hour when the Orange party at the Hague were 
roasting the bleeding shreds of flesh torn from the corpses 
of Cornelius and John de Witt. 

But, whether from a feeling of shame or from craven 
weakness, Isaac Boxtel did not venture that day to point his 
telescope either at the garden, or at the laboratory, or at 
the dry-room. 

He knew too well what was about to happen in the house of 
the poor doctor to feel any desire to look into it. He did 
not even get up when his only servant -- who envied the lot 
of the servants of Cornelius just as bitterly as Boxtel did 
that of their master -- entered his bedroom. He said to the 
man, -- 

"I shall not get up to-day, I am ill." 

About nine o'clock he heard a great noise in the street 
which made him tremble, at this moment he was paler than a 
real invalid, and shook more violently than a man in the 
height of fever. 

His servant entered the room; Boxtel hid himself under the 
counterpane. 

"Oh, sir!" cried the servant, not without some inkling that, 
whilst deploring the mishap which had befallen Van Baerle, 
he was announcing agreeable news to his master, -- "oh, sir! 
you do not know, then, what is happening at this moment?" 

"How can I know it?" answered Boxtel, with an almost 
unintelligible voice. 

"Well, Mynheer Boxtel, at this moment your neighbour 
Cornelius van Baerle is arrested for high treason." 

"Nonsense!" Boxtel muttered, with a faltering voice; "the 
thing is impossible." 

"Faith, sir, at any rate that's what people say; and, 
besides, I have seen Judge van Spennen with the archers 
entering the house." 

"Well, if you have seen it with your own eyes, that's a 
different case altogether." 

"At all events," said the servant, "I shall go and inquire 
once more. Be you quiet, sir, I shall let you know all about 
it." 

Boxtel contented himself with signifying his approval of the 
zeal of his servant by dumb show. 

The man went out, and returned in half an hour. 

"Oh, sir, all that I told you is indeed quite true." 

"How so?" 

"Mynheer van Baerle is arrested, and has been put into a 
carriage, and they are driving him to the Hague." 

"To the Hague!" 

"Yes, to the Hague, and if what people say is true, it won't 
do him much good." 

"And what do they say?" Boxtel asked. 

"Faith, sir, they say -- but it is not quite sure -- that by 
this hour the burghers must be murdering Mynheer Cornelius 
and Mynheer John de Witt." 

"Oh," muttered, or rather growled Boxtel, closing his eyes 
from the dreadful picture which presented itself to his 
imagination. 

"Why, to be sure," said the servant to himself, whilst 
leaving the room, "Mynheer Isaac Boxtel must be very sick 
not to have jumped from his bed on hearing such good news." 

And, in reality, Isaac Boxtel was very sick, like a man who 
has murdered another. 

But he had murdered his man with a double object; the first 
was attained, the second was still to be attained. 

Night closed in. It was the night which Boxtel had looked 
forward to. 

As soon as it was dark he got up. 

He then climbed into his sycamore. 

He had calculated correctly; no one thought of keeping watch 
over the garden; the house and the servants were all in the 
utmost confusion. 

He heard the clock strike -- ten, eleven, twelve. 

At midnight, with a beating heart, trembling hands, and a 
livid countenance, he descended from the tree, took a 
ladder, leaned it against the wall, mounted it to the last 
step but one, and listened. 

All was perfectly quiet, not a sound broke the silence of 
the night; one solitary light, that of the housekeeper, was 
burning in the house. 

This silence and this darkness emboldened Boxtel; he got 
astride the wall, stopped for an instant, and, after having 
ascertained that there was nothing to fear, he put his 
ladder from his own garden into that of Cornelius, and 
descended. 

Then, knowing to an inch where the bulbs which were to 
produce the black tulip were planted, he ran towards the 
spot, following, however, the gravelled walks in order not 
to be betrayed by his footprints, and, on arriving at the 
precise spot, he proceeded, with the eagerness of a tiger, 
to plunge his hand into the soft ground. 

He found nothing, and thought he was mistaken. 

In the meanwhile, the cold sweat stood on his brow. 

He felt about close by it, -- nothing. 

He felt about on the right, and on the left, -- nothing. 

He felt about in front and at the back, -- nothing. 

He was nearly mad, when at last he satisfied himself that on 
that very morning the earth had been disturbed. 

In fact, whilst Boxtel was lying in bed, Cornelius had gone 
down to his garden, had taken up the mother bulb, and, as we 
have seen, divided it into three. 

Boxtel could not bring himself to leave the place. He dug up 
with his hands more than ten square feet of ground. 

At last no doubt remained of his misfortune. Mad with rage, 
he returned to his ladder, mounted the wall, drew up the 
ladder, flung it into his own garden, and jumped after it. 

All at once, a last ray of hope presented itself to his 
mind: the seedling bulbs might be in the dry-room; it was 
therefore only requisite to make his entry there as he had 
done into the garden. 

There he would find them, and, moreover, it was not at all 
difficult, as the sashes of the dry-room might be raised 
like those of a greenhouse. Cornelius had opened them on 
that morning, and no one had thought of closing them again. 

Everything, therefore, depended upon whether he could 
procure a ladder of sufficient length, -- one of twenty-five 
feet instead of ten. 

Boxtel had noticed in the street where he lived a house 
which was being repaired, and against which a very tall 
ladder was placed. 

This ladder would do admirably, unless the workmen had taken 
it away. 

He ran to the house: the ladder was there. Boxtel took it, 
carried it with great exertion to his garden, and with even 
greater difficulty raised it against the wall of Van 
Baerle's house, where it just reached to the window. 

Boxtel put a lighted dark lantern into his pocket, mounted 
the ladder, and slipped into the dry-room. 

On reaching this sanctuary of the florist he stopped, 
supporting himself against the table; his legs failed him, 
his heart beat as if it would choke him. Here it was even 
worse than in the garden; there Boxtel was only a 
trespasser, here he was a thief. 

However, he took courage again: he had not gone so far to 
turn back with empty hands. 

But in vain did he search the whole room, open and shut all 
the drawers, even that privileged one where the parcel which 
had been so fatal to Cornelius had been deposited; he found 
ticketed, as in a botanical garden, the "Jane," the "John de 
Witt," the hazel-nut, and the roasted-coffee coloured tulip; 
but of the black tulip, or rather the seedling bulbs within 
which it was still sleeping, not a trace was found. 

And yet, on looking over the register of seeds and bulbs, 
which Van Baerle kept in duplicate, if possible even with 
greater exactitude and care than the first commercial houses 
of Amsterdam their ledgers, Boxtel read these lines: -- 

"To-day, 20th of August, 1672, I have taken up the mother 
bulb of the grand black tulip, which I have divided into 
three perfect suckers." 

"Oh these bulbs, these bulbs!" howled Boxtel, turning over 
everything in the dry-room, "where could he have concealed 
them?" 

Then, suddenly striking his forehead in his frenzy, he 
called out, "Oh wretch that I am! Oh thrice fool Boxtel! 
Would any one be separated from his bulbs? Would any one 
leave them at Dort, when one goes to the Hague? Could one 
live far from one's bulbs, when they enclose the grand black 
tulip? He had time to get hold of them, the scoundrel, he 
has them about him, he has taken them to the Hague!" 

It was like a flash of lightning which showed to Boxtel the 
abyss of a uselessly committed crime. 

Boxtel sank quite paralyzed on that very table, and on that 
very spot where, some hours before, the unfortunate Van 
Baerle had so leisurely, and with such intense delight, 
contemplated his darling bulbs. 

"Well, then, after all," said the envious Boxtel, -- raising 
his livid face from his hands in which it had been buried -- 
"if he has them, he can keep them only as long as he lives, 
and ---- " 

The rest of this detestable thought was expressed by a 
hideous smile. 

"The bulbs are at the Hague," he said, "therefore, I can no 
longer live at Dort: away, then, for them, to the Hague! to 
the Hague!" 

And Boxtel, without taking any notice of the treasures about 
him, so entirely were his thoughts absorbed by another 
inestimable treasure, let himself out by the window, glided 
down the ladder, carried it back to the place whence he had 
taken it, and, like a beast of prey, returned growling to 
his house. 




Chapter 9

The Family Cell


It was about midnight when poor Van Baerle was locked up in 
the prison of the Buytenhof. 

What Rosa foresaw had come to pass. On finding the cell of 
Cornelius de Witt empty, the wrath of the people ran very 
high, and had Gryphus fallen into the hands of those madmen 
he would certainly have had to pay with his life for the 
prisoner. 

But this fury had vented itself most fully on the two 
brothers when they were overtaken by the murderers, thanks 
to the precaution which William -- the man of precautions -- 
had taken in having the gates of the city closed. 

A momentary lull had therefore set in whilst the prison was 
empty, and Rosa availed herself of this favourable moment to 
come forth from her hiding place, which she also induced her 
father to leave. 

The prison was therefore completely deserted. Why should 
people remain in the jail whilst murder was going on at the 
Tol-Hek? 

Gryphus came forth trembling behind the courageous Rosa. 
They went to close the great gate, at least as well as it 
would close, considering that it was half demolished. It was 
easy to see that a hurricane of mighty fury had vented 
itself upon it. 

About four o'clock a return of the noise was heard, but of 
no threatening character to Gryphus and his daughter. The 
people were only dragging in the two corpses, which they 
came back to gibbet at the usual place of execution. 

Rosa hid herself this time also, but only that she might not 
see the ghastly spectacle. 

At midnight, people again knocked at the gate of the jail, 
or rather at the barricade which served in its stead: it was 
Cornelius van Baerle whom they were bringing. 

When the jailer received this new inmate, and saw from the 
warrant the name and station of his prisoner, he muttered 
with his turnkey smile, -- 

"Godson of Cornelius de Witt! Well, young man, we have the 
family cell here, and we will give it to you." 

And quite enchanted with his joke, the ferocious Orangeman 
took his cresset and his keys to conduct Cornelius to the 
cell, which on that very morning Cornelius de Witt had left 
to go into exile, or what in revolutionary times is meant 
instead by those sublime philosophers who lay it down as an 
axiom of high policy, "It is the dead only who do not 
return." 

On the way which the despairing florist had to traverse to 
reach that cell he heard nothing but the barking of a dog, 
and saw nothing but the face of a young girl. 

The dog rushed forth from a niche in the wall, shaking his 
heavy chain, and sniffing all round Cornelius in order so 
much the better to recognise him in case he should be 
ordered to pounce upon him. 

The young girl, whilst the prisoner was mounting the 
staircase, appeared at the narrow door of her chamber, which 
opened on that very flight of steps; and, holding the lamp 
in her right hand, she at the same time lit up her pretty 
blooming face, surrounded by a profusion of rich wavy golden 
locks, whilst with her left she held her white night-dress 
closely over her breast, having been roused from her first 
slumber by the unexpected arrival of Van Baerle. 

It would have made a fine picture, worthy of Rembrandt, the 
gloomy winding stairs illuminated by the reddish glare of 
the cresset of Gryphus, with his scowling jailer's 
countenance at the top, the melancholy figure of Cornelius 
bending over the banister to look down upon the sweet face 
of Rosa, standing, as it were, in the bright frame of the 
door of her chamber, with embarrassed mien at being thus 
seen by a stranger. 

And at the bottom, quite in the shade, where the details are 
absorbed in the obscurity, the mastiff, with his eyes 
glistening like carbuncles, and shaking his chain, on which 
the double light from the lamp of Rosa and the lantern of 
Gryphus threw a brilliant glitter. 

The sublime master would, however, have been altogether 
unable to render the sorrow expressed in the face of Rosa, 
when she saw this pale, handsome young man slowly climbing 
the stairs, and thought of the full import of the words, 
which her father had just spoken, "You will have the family 
cell." 

This vision lasted but a moment, -- much less time than we 
have taken to describe it. Gryphus then proceeded on his 
way, Cornelius was forced to follow him, and five minutes 
afterwards he entered his prison, of which it is unnecessary 
to say more, as the reader is already acquainted with it. 

Gryphus pointed with his finger to the bed on which the 
martyr had suffered so much, who on that day had rendered 
his soul to God. Then, taking up his cresset, he quitted the 
cell. 

Thus left alone, Cornelius threw himself on his bed, but he 
slept not, he kept his eye fixed on the narrow window, 
barred with iron, which looked on the Buytenhof; and in this 
way saw from behind the trees that first pale beam of light 
which morning sheds on the earth as a white mantle. 

Now and then during the night horses had galloped at a smart 
pace over the Buytenhof, the heavy tramp of the patrols had 
resounded from the pavement, and the slow matches of the 
arquebuses, flaring in the east wind, had thrown up at 
intervals a sudden glare as far as to the panes of his 
window. 

But when the rising sun began to gild the coping stones at 
the gable ends of the houses, Cornelius, eager to know 
whether there was any living creature about him, approached 
the window, and cast a sad look round the circular yard 
before him 

At the end of the yard a dark mass, tinted with a dingy blue 
by the morning dawn, rose before him, its dark outlines 
standing out in contrast to the houses already illuminated 
by the pale light of early morning. 

Cornelius recognised the gibbet. 

On it were suspended two shapeless trunks, which indeed were 
no more than bleeding skeletons. 

The good people of the Hague had chopped off the flesh of 
its victims, but faithfully carried the remainder to the 
gibbet, to have a pretext for a double inscription written 
on a huge placard, on which Cornelius; with the keen sight 
of a young man of twenty-eight, was able to read the 
following lines, daubed by the coarse brush of a 
sign-painter: -- 

"Here are hanging the great rogue of the name of John de 
Witt, and the little rogue Cornelius de Witt, his brother, 
two enemies of the people, but great friends of the king of 
France." 

Cornelius uttered a cry of horror, and in the agony of his 
frantic terror knocked with his hands and feet at the door 
so violently and continuously, that Gryphus, with his huge 
bunch of keys in his hand, ran furiously up. 

The jailer opened the door, with terrible imprecations 
against the prisoner who disturbed him at an hour which 
Master Gryphus was not accustomed to be aroused. 

"Well, now, by my soul, he is mad, this new De Witt," he 
cried, "but all those De Witts have the devil in them." 

"Master, master," cried Cornelius, seizing the jailer by the 
arm and dragging him towards the window, -- "master, what 
have I read down there?" 

"Where down there?" 

"On that placard." 

And, trembling, pale, and gasping for breath, he pointed to 
the gibbet at the other side of the yard, with the cynical 
inscription surmounting it. 

Gryphus broke out into a laugh. 

"Eh! eh!" he answered, "so, you have read it. Well, my good 
sir, that's what people will get for corresponding with the 
enemies of his Highness the Prince of Orange." 

"The brothers De Witt are murdered!" Cornelius muttered, 
with the cold sweat on his brow, and sank on his bed, his 
arms hanging by his side, and his eyes closed. 

"The brothers De Witt have been judged by the people," said 
Gryphus; "you call that murdered, do you? well, I call it 
executed." 

And seeing that the prisoner was not only quiet, but 
entirely prostrate and senseless, he rushed from the cell, 
violently slamming the door, and noisily drawing the bolts. 

Recovering his consciousness, Cornelius found himself alone, 
and recognised the room where he was, -- "the family cell," 
as Gryphus had called it, -- as the fatal passage leading to 
ignominious death. 

And as he was a philosopher, and, more than that, as he was 
a Christian, he began to pray for the soul of his godfather, 
then for that of the Grand Pensionary, and at last submitted 
with resignation to all the sufferings which God might 
ordain for him. 

Then turning again to the concerns of earth, and having 
satisfied himself that he was alone in his dungeon, he drew 
from his breast the three bulbs of the black tulip, and 
concealed them behind a block of stone, on which the 
traditional water-jug of the prison was standing, in the 
darkest corner of his cell. 

Useless labour of so many years! such sweet hopes crushed; 
his discovery was, after all, to lead to naught, just as his 
own career was to be cut short. Here, in his prison, there 
was not a trace of vegetation, not an atom of soil, not a 
ray of sunshine. 

At this thought Cornelius fell into a gloomy despair, from 
which he was only aroused by an extraordinary circumstance. 

What was this circumstance? 

We shall inform the reader in our next chapter. 




Chapter 10

The Jailer's Daughter


On the same evening Gryphus, as he brought the prisoner his 
mess, slipped on the damp flags whilst opening the door of 
the cell, and fell, in the attempt to steady himself, on his 
hand; but as it was turned the wrong way, he broke his arm 
just above the wrist. 

Cornelius rushed forward towards the jailer, but Gryphus, 
who was not yet aware of the serious nature of his injury, 
called out to him, -- 

"It is nothing: don't you stir." 

He then tried to support himself on his arm, but the bone 
gave way; then only he felt the pain, and uttered a cry. 

When he became aware that his arm was broken, this man, so 
harsh to others, fell swooning on the threshold, where he 
remained motionless and cold, as if dead. 

During all this time the door of the cell stood open and 
Cornelius found himself almost free. But the thought never 
entered his mind of profiting by this accident; he had seen 
from the manner in which the arm was bent, and from the 
noise it made in bending, that the bone was fractured, and 
that the patient must be in great pain; and now he thought 
of nothing else but of administering relief to the sufferer, 
however little benevolent the man had shown himself during 
their short interview. 

At the noise of Gryphus's fall, and at the cry which escaped 
him, a hasty step was heard on the staircase, and 
immediately after a lovely apparition presented itself to 
the eyes of Cornelius. 

It was the beautiful young Frisian, who, seeing her father 
stretched on the ground, and the prisoner bending over him, 
uttered a faint cry, as in the first fright she thought 
Gryphus, whose brutality she well knew, had fallen in 
consequence of a struggle between him and the prisoner. 

Cornelius understood what was passing in the mind of the 
girl, at the very moment when the suspicion arose in her 
heart. 

But one moment told her the true state of the case and, 
ashamed of her first thoughts, she cast her beautiful eyes, 
wet with tears, on the young man, and said to him, -- 

"I beg your pardon, and thank you, sir; the first for what I 
have thought, and the second for what you are doing." 

Cornelius blushed, and said, "I am but doing my duty as a 
Christian in helping my neighbour." 

"Yes, and affording him your help this evening, you have 
forgotten the abuse which he heaped on you this morning. Oh, 
sir! this is more than humanity, -- this is indeed Christian 
charity." 

Cornelius cast his eyes on the beautiful girl, quite 
astonished to hear from the mouth of one so humble such a 
noble and feeling speech. 

But he had no time to express his surprise. Gryphus 
recovered from his swoon, opened his eyes, and as his 
brutality was returning with his senses, he growled "That's 
it, a fellow is in a hurry to bring to a prisoner his 
supper, and falls and breaks his arm, and is left lying on 
the ground." 

"Hush, my father," said Rosa, "you are unjust to this 
gentleman, whom I found endeavouring to give you his aid." 

"His aid?" Gryphus replied, with a doubtful air. 

"It is quite true, master! I am quite ready to help you 
still more." 

"You!" said Gryphus, "are you a medical man?" 

"It was formerly my profession." 

"And so you would be able to set my arm?" 

"Perfectly." 

"And what would you need to do it? let us hear." 

"Two splinters of wood, and some linen for a bandage." 

"Do you hear, Rosa?" said Gryphus, "the prisoner is going to 
set my arm, that's a saving; come, assist me to get up, I 
feel as heavy as lead." 

Rosa lent the sufferer her shoulder; he put his unhurt arm 
around her neck, and making an effort, got on his legs, 
whilst Cornelius, to save him a walk, pushed a chair towards 
him. 

Gryphus sat down; then, turning towards his daughter, he 
said, -- 

"Well, didn't you hear? go and fetch what is wanted." 

Rosa went down, and immediately after returned with two 
staves of a small barrel and a large roll of linen bandage. 

Cornelius had made use of the intervening moments to take 
off the man's coat, and to tuck up his shirt sleeve. 

"Is this what you require, sir?" asked Rosa. 

"Yes, mademoiselle," answered Cornelius, looking at the 
things she had brought, -- "yes, that's right. Now push this 
table, whilst I support the arm of your father." 

Rosa pushed the table, Cornelius placed the broken arm on it 
so as to make it flat, and with perfect skill set the bone, 
adjusted the splinters, and fastened the bandages. 

At the last touch, the jailer fainted a second time. 

"Go and fetch vinegar, mademoiselle," said Cornelius; "we 
will bathe his temples, and he will recover." 

But, instead of acting up to the doctor's prescription, 
Rosa, after having satisfied herself that her father was 
still unconscious, approached Cornelius and said, -- 

"Service for service, sir." 

"What do you mean, my pretty child?" said Cornelius. 

"I mean to say, sir, that the judge who is to examine you 
to-morrow has inquired to-day for the room in which you are 
confined, and, on being told that you are occupying the cell 
of Mynheer Cornelius de Witt, laughed in a very strange and 
very disagreeable manner, which makes me fear that no good 
awaits you." 

"But," asked Cornelius, "what harm can they do to me?" 

"Look at that gibbet." 

"But I am not guilty," said Cornelius. 

"Were they guilty whom you see down there gibbeted, mangled, 
and torn to pieces?" 

"That's true," said Cornelius, gravely. 

"And besides," continued Rosa, "the people want to find you 
guilty. But whether innocent or guilty, your trial begins 
to-morrow, and the day after you will be condemned. Matters 
are settled very quickly in these times." 

"Well, and what do you conclude from all this?" 

"I conclude that I am alone, that I am weak, that my father 
is lying in a swoon, that the dog is muzzled, and that 
consequently there is nothing to prevent your making your 
escape. Fly, then; that's what I mean." 

"What do you say?" 

"I say that I was not able to save Mynheer Cornelius or 
Mynheer John de Witt, and that I should like to save you. 
Only be quick; there, my father is regaining his breath, one 
minute more, and he will open his eyes, and it will be too 
late. Do you hesitate?" 

In fact, Cornelius stood immovable, looking at Rosa, yet 
looking at her as if he did not hear her. 

"Don't you understand me?" said the young girl, with some 
impatience. 

"Yes, I do," said Cornelius, "but ---- " 

"But?" 

"I will not, they would accuse you." 

"Never mind," said Rosa, blushing, "never mind that." 

"You are very good, my dear child," replied Cornelius, "but 
I stay." 

"You stay, oh, sir! oh, sir! don't you understand that you 
will be condemned to death, executed on the scaffold, 
perhaps assassinated and torn to pieces, just like Mynheer 
John and Mynheer Cornelius. For heaven's sake, don't think 
of me, but fly from this place, Take care, it bears ill luck 
to the De Witts!" 

"Halloa!" cried the jailer, recovering his senses, "who is 
talking of those rogues, those wretches, those villains, the 
De Witts?" 

"Don't be angry, my good man," said Cornelius, with his 
good-tempered smile, "the worst thing for a fracture is 
excitement, by which the blood is heated." 

Thereupon, he said in an undertone to Rosa -- 

"My child, I am innocent, and I shall await my trial with 
tranquillity and an easy mind." 

"Hush," said Rosa. 

"Why hush?" 

"My father must not suppose that we have been talking to 
each other." 

"What harm would that do?" 

"What harm? He would never allow me to come here any more," 
said Rosa. 

Cornelius received this innocent confidence with a smile; he 
felt as if a ray of good fortune were shining on his path. 

"Now, then, what are you chattering there together about?" 
said Gryphus, rising and supporting his right arm with his 
left. 

"Nothing," said Rosa; "the doctor is explaining to me what 
diet you are to keep." 

"Diet, diet for me? Well, my fine girl, I shall put you on 
diet too." 

"On what diet, my father?" 

"Never to go to the cells of the prisoners, and, if ever you 
should happen to go, to leave them as soon as possible. 
Come, off with me, lead the way, and be quick." 

Rosa and Cornelius exchanged glances. 

That of Rosa tried to express, -- 

"There, you see?" 

That of Cornelius said, -- 

"Let it be as the Lord wills." 




Chapter 11

Cornelius van Baerle's Will


Rosa had not been mistaken; the judges came on the following 
day to the Buytenhof, and proceeded with the trial of 
Cornelius van Baerle. The examination, however, did not last 
long, it having appeared on evidence that Cornelius had kept 
at his house that fatal correspondence of the brothers De 
Witt with France. 

He did not deny it. 

The only point about which there seemed any difficulty was 
whether this correspondence had been intrusted to him by his 
godfather, Cornelius de Witt. 

But as, since the death of those two martyrs, Van Baerle had 
no longer any reason for withholding the truth, he not only 
did not deny that the parcel had been delivered to him by 
Cornelius de Witt himself, but he also stated all the 
circumstances under which it was done. 

This confession involved the godson in the crime of the 
godfather; manifest complicity being considered to exist 
between Cornelius de Witt and Cornelius van Baerle. 

The honest doctor did not confine himself to this avowal, 
but told the whole truth with regard to his own tastes, 
habits, and daily life. He described his indifference to 
politics, his love of study, of the fine arts, of science, 
and of flowers. He explained that, since the day when 
Cornelius de Witt handed to him the parcel at Dort, he 
himself had never touched, nor even noticed it. 

To this it was objected, that in this respect he could not 
possibly be speaking the truth, since the papers had been 
deposited in a press in which both his hands and his eyes 
must have been engaged every day. 

Cornelius answered that it was indeed so; that, however, he 
never put his hand into the press but to ascertain whether 
his bulbs were dry, and that he never looked into it but to 
see if they were beginning to sprout. 

To this again it was objected, that his pretended 
indifference respecting this deposit was not to be 
reasonably entertained, as he could not have received such 
papers from the hand of his godfather without being made 
acquainted with their important character. 

He replied that his godfather Cornelius loved him too well, 
and, above all, that he was too considerate a man to have 
communicated to him anything of the contents of the parcel, 
well knowing that such a confidence would only have caused 
anxiety to him who received it. 

To this it was objected that, if De Witt had wished to act 
in such a way, he would have added to the parcel, in case of 
accidents, a certificate setting forth that his godson was 
an entire stranger to the nature of this correspondence, or 
at least he would during his trial have written a letter to 
him, which might be produced as his justification. 

Cornelius replied that undoubtedly his godfather could not 
have thought that there was any risk for the safety of his 
deposit, hidden as it was in a press which was looked upon 
as sacred as the tabernacle by the whole household of Van 
Baerle; and that consequently he had considered the 
certificate as useless. As to a letter, he certainly had 
some remembrance that some moments previous to his arrest, 
whilst he was absorbed in the contemplation of one of the 
rarest of his bulbs, John de Witt's servant entered his 
dry-room, and handed to him a paper, but the whole was to 
him only like a vague dream; the servant had disappeared, 
and as to the paper, perhaps it might be found if a proper 
search were made. 

As far as Craeke was concerned, it was impossible to find 
him, as he had left Holland. 

The paper also was not very likely to be found, and no one 
gave himself the trouble to look for it. 

Cornelius himself did not much press this point, since, even 
supposing that the paper should turn up, it could not have 
any direct connection with the correspondence which 
constituted the crime. 

The judges wished to make it appear as though they wanted to 
urge Cornelius to make a better defence; they displayed that 
benevolent patience which is generally a sign of the 
magistrate's being interested for the prisoner, or of a 
man's having so completely got the better of his adversary 
that he needs no longer any oppressive means to ruin him. 

Cornelius did not accept of this hypocritical protection, 
and in a last answer, which he set forth with the noble 
bearing of a martyr and the calm serenity of a righteous 
man, he said, -- 

"You ask me things, gentlemen, to which I can answer only 
the exact truth. Hear it. The parcel was put into my hands 
in the way I have described; I vow before God that I was, 
and am still, ignorant of its contents, and that it was not 
until my arrest that I learned that this deposit was the 
correspondence of the Grand Pensionary with the Marquis de 
Louvois. And lastly, I vow and protest that I do not 
understand how any one should have known that this parcel 
was in my house; and, above all, how I can be deemed 
criminal for having received what my illustrious and 
unfortunate godfather brought to my house." 

This was Van Baerle's whole defence; after which the judges 
began to deliberate on the verdict. 

They considered that every offshoot of civil discord is 
mischievous, because it revives the contest which it is the 
interest of all to put down. 

One of them, who bore the character of a profound observer, 
laid down as his opinion that this young man, so phlegmatic 
in appearance, must in reality be very dangerous, as under 
this icy exterior he was sure to conceal an ardent desire to 
avenge his friends, the De Witts. 

Another observed that the love of tulips agreed perfectly 
well with that of politics, and that it was proved in 
history that many very dangerous men were engaged in 
gardening, just as if it had been their profession, whilst 
really they occupied themselves with perfectly different 
concerns; witness Tarquin the Elder, who grew poppies at 
Gabii, and the Great Conde, who watered his carnations at 
the dungeon of Vincennes at the very moment when the former 
meditated his return to Rome, and the latter his escape from 
prison. 

The judge summed up with the following dilemma: -- 

"Either Cornelius van Baerle is a great lover of tulips, or 
a great lover of politics; in either case, he has told us a 
falsehood; first, because his having occupied himself with 
politics is proved by the letters which were found at his 
house; and secondly, because his having occupied himself 
with tulips is proved by the bulbs which leave no doubt of 
the fact. And herein lies the enormity of the case. As 
Cornelius van Baerle was concerned in the growing of tulips 
and in the pursuit of politics at one and the same time, the 
prisoner is of hybrid character, of an amphibious 
organisation, working with equal ardour at politics and at 
tulips, which proves him to belong to the class of men most 
dangerous to public tranquillity, and shows a certain, or 
rather a complete, analogy between his character and that of 
those master minds of which Tarquin the Elder and the Great 
Conde have been felicitously quoted as examples." 

The upshot of all these reasonings was, that his Highness 
the Prince Stadtholder of Holland would feel infinitely 
obliged to the magistracy of the Hague if they simplified 
for him the government of the Seven Provinces by destroying 
even the least germ of conspiracy against his authority. 

This argument capped all the others, and, in order so much 
the more effectually to destroy the germ of conspiracy, 
sentence of death was unanimously pronounced against 
Cornelius van Baerle, as being arraigned, and convicted, for 
having, under the innocent appearance of a tulip-fancier, 
participated in the detestable intrigues and abominable 
plots of the brothers De Witt against Dutch nationality and 
in their secret relations with their French enemy. 

A supplementary clause was tacked to the sentence, to the 
effect that "the aforesaid Cornelius van Baerle should be 
led from the prison of the Buytenhof to the scaffold in the 
yard of the same name, where the public executioner would 
cut off his head." 

As this deliberation was a most serious affair, it lasted a 
full half-hour, during which the prisoner was remanded to 
his cell. 

There the Recorder of the States came to read the sentence 
to him. 

Master Gryphus was detained in bed by the fever caused by 
the fracture of his arm. His keys passed into the hands of 
one of his assistants. Behind this turnkey, who introduced 
the Recorder, Rosa, the fair Frisian maid, had slipped into 
the recess of the door, with a handkerchief to her mouth to 
stifle her sobs. 

Cornelius listened to the sentence with an expression rather 
of surprise than sadness. 

After the sentence was read, the Recorder asked him whether 
he had anything to answer. 

"Indeed, I have not," he replied. "Only I confess that, 
among all the causes of death against which a cautious man 
may guard, I should never have supposed this to be 
comprised." 

On this answer, the Recorder saluted Van Baerle with all 
that consideration which such functionaries generally bestow 
upon great criminals of every sort. 

But whilst he was about to withdraw, Cornelius asked, "By 
the bye, Mr. Recorder, what day is the thing -- you know 
what I mean -- to take place?" 

"Why, to-day," answered the Recorder, a little surprised by 
the self-possession of the condemned man. 

A sob was heard behind the door, and Cornelius turned round 
to look from whom it came; but Rosa, who had foreseen this 
movement, had fallen back. 

"And," continued Cornelius, "what hour is appointed?" 

"Twelve o'clock, sir." 

"Indeed," said Cornelius, "I think I heard the clock strike 
ten about twenty minutes ago; I have not much time to 
spare." 

"Indeed you have not, if you wish to make your peace with 
God," said the Recorder, bowing to the ground. "You may ask 
for any clergyman you please." 

Saying these words he went out backwards, and the assistant 
turnkey was going to follow him, and to lock the door of 
Cornelius's cell, when a white and trembling arm interposed 
between him and the heavy door. 

Cornelius saw nothing but the golden brocade cap, tipped 
with lace, such as the Frisian girls wore; he heard nothing 
but some one whispering into the ear of the turnkey. But the 
latter put his heavy keys into the white hand which was 
stretched out to receive them, and, descending some steps, 
sat down on the staircase which was thus guarded above by 
himself, and below by the dog. The head-dress turned round, 
and Cornelius beheld the face of Rosa, blanched with grief, 
and her beautiful eyes streaming with tears. 

She went up to Cornelius, crossing her arms on her heaving 
breast. 

"Oh, sir, sir!" she said, but sobs choked her utterance. 

"My good girl," Cornelius replied with emotion, "what do you 
wish? I may tell you that my time on earth is short." 

"I come to ask a favour of you," said Rosa, extending her 
arms partly towards him and partly towards heaven. 

"Don't weep so, Rosa," said the prisoner, "for your tears go 
much more to my heart than my approaching fate, and you 
know, the less guilty a prisoner is, the more it is his duty 
to die calmly, and even joyfully, as he dies a martyr. Come, 
there's a dear, don't cry any more, and tell me what you 
want, my pretty Rosa." 

She fell on her knees. "Forgive my father," she said. 

"Your father, your father!" said Cornelius, astonished. 

"Yes, he has been so harsh to you; but it is his nature, he 
is so to every one, and you are not the only one whom he has 
bullied." 

"He is punished, my dear Rosa, more than punished, by the 
accident that has befallen him, and I forgive him." 

"I thank you, sir," said Rosa. "And now tell me -- oh, tell 
me -- can I do anything for you?" 

"You can dry your beautiful eyes, my dear child," answered 
Cornelius, with a good-tempered smile. 

"But what can I do for you, -- for you I mean?" 

"A man who has only one hour longer to live must be a great 
Sybarite still to want anything, my dear Rosa." 

"The clergyman whom they have proposed to you?" 

"I have worshipped God all my life, I have worshipped Him in 
His works, and praised Him in His decrees. I am at peace 
with Him and do not wish for a clergyman. The last thought 
which occupies my mind, however has reference to the glory 
of the Almighty, and, indeed, my dear, I should ask you to 
help me in carrying out this last thought." 

"Oh, Mynheer Cornelius, speak, speak!" exclaimed Rosa, still 
bathed in tears. 

"Give me your hand, and promise me not to laugh, my dear 
child." 

"Laugh," exclaimed Rosa, frantic with grief, "laugh at this 
moment! do you not see my tears?" 

"Rosa, you are no stranger to me. I have not seen much of 
you, but that little is enough to make me appreciate your 
character. I have never seen a woman more fair or more pure 
than you are, and if from this moment I take no more notice 
of you, forgive me; it is only because, on leaving this 
world, I do not wish to have any further regret." 

Rosa felt a shudder creeping over her frame, for, whilst the 
prisoner pronounced these words, the belfry clock of the 
Buytenhof struck eleven. 

Cornelius understood her. "Yes, yes, let us make haste," he 
said, "you are right, Rosa." 

Then, taking the paper with the three suckers from his 
breast, where he had again put it, since he had no longer 
any fear of being searched, he said: "My dear girl, I have 
been very fond of flowers. That was at a time when I did not 
know that there was anything else to be loved. Don't blush, 
Rosa, nor turn away; and even if I were making you a 
declaration of love, alas! poor dear, it would be of no more 
consequence. Down there in the yard, there is an instrument 
of steel, which in sixty minutes will put an end to my 
boldness. Well, Rosa, I loved flowers dearly, and I have 
found, or at least I believe so, the secret of the great 
black tulip, which it has been considered impossible to 
grow, and for which, as you know, or may not know, a prize 
of a hundred thousand guilders has been offered by the 
Horticultural Society of Haarlem. These hundred thousand 
guilders -- and Heaven knows I do not regret them -- these 
hundred thousand guilders I have here in this paper, for 
they are won by the three bulbs wrapped up in it, which you 
may take, Rosa, as I make you a present of them." 

"Mynheer Cornelius!" 

"Yes, yes, Rosa, you may take them; you are not wronging any 
one, my child. I am alone in this world; my parents are 
dead; I never had a sister or a brother. I have never had a 
thought of loving any one with what is called love, and if 
any one has loved me, I have not known it. However, you see 
well, Rosa, that I am abandoned by everybody, as in this sad 
hour you alone are with me in my prison, consoling and 
assisting me." 

"But, sir, a hundred thousand guilders!" 

"Well, let us talk seriously, my dear child: those hundred 
thousand guilders will be a nice marriage portion, with your 
pretty face; you shall have them, Rosa, dear Rosa, and I ask 
nothing in return but your promise that you will marry a 
fine young man, whom you love, and who will love you, as 
dearly as I loved my flowers. Don't interrupt me, Rosa dear, 
I have only a few minutes more." 

The poor girl was nearly choking with her sobs. 

Cornelius took her by the hand. 

"Listen to me," he continued: "I'll tell you how to manage 
it. Go to Dort and ask Butruysheim, my gardener, for soil 
from my border number six, fill a deep box with it, and 
plant in it these three bulbs. They will flower next May, 
that is to say, in seven months; and, when you see the 
flower forming on the stem, be careful at night to protect 
them from the wind, and by day to screen them from the sun. 
They will flower black, I am quite sure of it. You are then 
to apprise the President of the Haarlem Society. He will 
cause the color of the flower to be proved before a 
committee and these hundred thousand guilders will be paid 
to you." 

Rosa heaved a deep sigh. 

"And now," continued Cornelius, -- wiping away a tear which 
was glistening in his eye, and which was shed much more for 
that marvellous black tulip which he was not to see than for 
the life which he was about to lose, -- "I have no wish 
left, except that the tulip should be called Rosa 
Barlaensis, that is to say, that its name should combine 
yours and mine; and as, of course, you do not understand 
Latin, and might therefore forget this name, try to get for 
me pencil and paper, that I may write it down for you." 

Rosa sobbed afresh, and handed to him a book, bound in 
shagreen, which bore the initials C. W. 

"What is this?" asked the prisoner. 

"Alas!" replied Rosa, "it is the Bible of your poor 
godfather, Cornelius de Witt. From it he derived strength to 
endure the torture, and to bear his sentence without 
flinching. I found it in this cell, after the death of the 
martyr, and have preserved it as a relic. To-day I brought 
it to you, for it seemed to me that this book must possess 
in itself a divine power. Write in it what you have to 
write, Mynheer Cornelius; and though, unfortunately, I am 
not able to read, I will take care that what you write shall 
be accomplished." 

Cornelius took the Bible, and kissed it reverently. 

"With what shall I write?" asked Cornelius. 

"There is a pencil in the Bible," said Rosa. 

This was the pencil which John de Witt had lent to his 
brother, and which he had forgotten to take away with him. 

Cornelius took it, and on the second fly leaf (for it will 
be remembered that the first was torn out), drawing near his 
end like his godfather, he wrote with a no less firm hand: 
-- 

"On this day, the 23d of August, 1672, being on the point of 
rendering, although innocent, my soul to God on the 
scaffold, I bequeath to Rosa Gryphus the only worldly goods 
which remain to me of all that I have possessed in this 
world, the rest having been confiscated; I bequeath, I say, 
to Rosa Gryphus three bulbs, which I am convinced must 
produce, in the next May, the Grand Black Tulip for which a 
prize of a hundred thousand guilders has been offered by the 
Haarlem Society, requesting that she may be paid the same 
sum in my stead, as my sole heiress, under the only 
condition of her marrying a respectable young man of about 
my age, who loves her, and whom she loves, and of her giving 
the black tulip, which will constitute a new species, the 
name of Rosa Barlaensis, that is to say, hers and mine 
combined. 

"So may God grant me mercy, and to her health and long life! 

"Cornelius van Baerle." 

The prisoner then, giving the Bible to Rosa, said, -- 

"Read." 

"Alas!" she answered, "I have already told you I cannot 
read." 

Cornelius then read to Rosa the testament that he had just 
made. 

The agony of the poor girl almost overpowered her. 

"Do you accept my conditions?" asked the prisoner, with a 
melancholy smile, kissing the trembling hands of the 
afflicted girl. 

"Oh, I don't know, sir," she stammered. 

"You don't know, child, and why not?" 

"Because there is one condition which I am afraid I cannot 
keep." 

"Which? I should have thought that all was settled between 
us." 

"You give me the hundred thousand guilders as a marriage 
portion, don't you? 

"And under the condition of my marrying a man whom I love?" 

"Certainly." 

"Well, then, sir, this money cannot belong to me. I shall 
never love any one; neither shall I marry." 

And, after having with difficulty uttered these words, Rosa 
almost swooned away in the violence of her grief. 

Cornelius, frightened at seeing her so pale and sinking, was 
going to take her in his arms, when a heavy step, followed 
by other dismal sounds, was heard on the staircase, amidst 
the continued barking of the dog. 

"They are coming to fetch you. Oh God! Oh God!" cried Rosa, 
wringing her hands. "And have you nothing more to tell me?" 

She fell on her knees with her face buried in her hands and 
became almost senseless. 

"I have only to say, that I wish you to preserve these bulbs 
as a most precious treasure, and carefully to treat them 
according to the directions I have given you. Do it for my 
sake, and now farewell, Rosa." 

"Yes, yes," she said, without raising her head, "I will do 
anything you bid me, except marrying," she added, in a low 
voice, "for that, oh! that is impossible for me." 

She then put the cherished treasure next her beating heart. 

The noise on the staircase which Cornelius and Rosa had 
heard was caused by the Recorder, who was coming for the 
prisoner. He was followed by the executioner, by the 
soldiers who were to form the guard round the scaffold, and 
by some curious hangers-on of the prison. 

Cornelius, without showing any weakness, but likewise 
without any bravado, received them rather as friends than as 
persecutors, and quietly submitted to all those preparations 
which these men were obliged to make in performance of their 
duty. 

Then, casting a glance into the yard through the narrow 
iron-barred window of his cell, he perceived the scaffold, 
and, at twenty paces distant from it, the gibbet, from 
which, by order of the Stadtholder, the outraged remains of 
the two brothers De Witt had been taken down. 

When the moment came to descend in order to follow the 
guards, Cornelius sought with his eyes the angelic look of 
Rosa, but he saw, behind the swords and halberds, only a 
form lying outstretched near a wooden bench, and a deathlike 
face half covered with long golden locks. 

But Rosa, whilst falling down senseless, still obeying her 
friend, had pressed her hand on her velvet bodice and, 
forgetting everything in the world besides, instinctively 
grasped the precious deposit which Cornelius had intrusted 
to her care. 

Leaving the cell, the young man could still see in the 
convulsively clinched fingers of Rosa the yellowish leaf 
from that Bible on which Cornelius de Witt had with such 
difficulty and pain written these few lines, which, if Van 
Baerle had read them, would undoubtedly have been the saving 
of a man and a tulip. 




Chapter 12

The Execution


Cornelius had not three hundred paces to walk outside the 
prison to reach the foot of the scaffold. At the bottom of 
the staircase, the dog quietly looked at him whilst he was 
passing; Cornelius even fancied he saw in the eyes of the 
monster a certain expression as it were of compassion. 

The dog perhaps knew the condemned prisoners, and only bit 
those who left as free men. 

The shorter the way from the door of the prison to the foot 
of the scaffold, the more fully, of course, it was crowded 
with curious people. 

These were the same who, not satisfied with the blood which 
they had shed three days before, were now craving for a new 
victim. 

And scarcely had Cornelius made his appearance than a fierce 
groan ran through the whole street, spreading all over the 
yard, and re-echoing from the streets which led to the 
scaffold, and which were likewise crowded with spectators. 

The scaffold indeed looked like an islet at the confluence 
of several rivers. 

In the midst of these threats, groans, and yells, Cornelius, 
very likely in order not to hear them, had buried himself in 
his own thoughts. 

And what did he think of in his last melancholy journey? 

Neither of his enemies, nor of his judges, nor of his 
executioners. 

He thought of the beautiful tulips which he would see from 
heaven above, at Ceylon, or Bengal, or elsewhere, when he 
would be able to look with pity on this earth, where John 
and Cornelius de Witt had been murdered for having thought 
too much of politics, and where Cornelius van Baerle was 
about to be murdered for having thought too much of tulips. 

"It is only one stroke of the axe," said the philosopher to 
himself, "and my beautiful dream will begin to be realised." 

Only there was still a chance, just as it had happened 
before to M. de Chalais, to M. de Thou, and other slovenly 
executed people, that the headsman might inflict more than 
one stroke, that is to say, more than one martyrdom, on the 
poor tulip-fancier. 

Yet, notwithstanding all this, Van Baerle mounted the 
scaffold not the less resolutely, proud of having been the 
friend of that illustrious John, and godson of that noble 
Cornelius de Witt, whom the ruffians, who were now crowding 
to witness his own doom, had torn to pieces and burnt three 
days before. 

He knelt down, said his prayers, and observed, not without a 
feeling of sincere joy, that, laying his head on the block, 
and keeping his eyes open, he would be able to his last 
moment to see the grated window of the Buytenhof. 

At length the fatal moment arrived, and Cornelius placed his 
chin on the cold damp block. But at this moment his eyes 
closed involuntarily, to receive more resolutely the 
terrible avalanche which was about to fall on his head, and 
to engulf his life. 

A gleam like that of lightning passed across the scaffold: 
it was the executioner raising his sword. 

Van Baerle bade farewell to the great black tulip, certain 
of awaking in another world full of light and glorious 
tints. 

Three times he felt, with a shudder, the cold current of air 
from the knife near his neck, but what a surprise! he felt 
neither pain nor shock. 

He saw no change in the colour of the sky, or of the world 
around him. 

Then suddenly Van Baerle felt gentle hands raising him, and 
soon stood on his feet again, although trembling a little. 

He looked around him. There was some one by his side, 
reading a large parchment, sealed with a huge seal of red 
wax. 

And the same sun, yellow and pale, as it behooves a Dutch 
sun to be, was shining in the skies; and the same grated 
window looked down upon him from the Buytenhof; and the same 
rabble, no longer yelling, but completely thunderstruck, 
were staring at him from the streets below. 

Van Baerle began to be sensible to what was going on around 
him. 

His Highness, William, Prince of Orange, very likely afraid 
that Van Baerle's blood would turn the scale of judgment 
against him, had compassionately taken into consideration 
his good character, and the apparent proofs of his 
innocence. 

His Highness, accordingly, had granted him his life. 

Cornelius at first hoped that the pardon would be complete, 
and that he would be restored to his full liberty and to his 
flower borders at Dort. 

But Cornelius was mistaken. To use an expression of Madame 
de Sevigne, who wrote about the same time, "there was a 
postscript to the letter;" and the most important part of 
the letter was contained in the postscript. 

In this postscript, William of Orange, Stadtholder of 
Holland, condemned Cornelius van Baerle to imprisonment for 
life. He was not sufficiently guilty to suffer death, but he 
was too much so to be set at liberty. 

Cornelius heard this clause, but, the first feeling of 
vexation and disappointment over, he said to himself, -- 

"Never mind, all this is not lost yet; there is some good in 
this perpetual imprisonment; Rosa will be there, and also my 
three bulbs of the black tulip are there." 

But Cornelius forgot that the Seven Provinces had seven 
prisons, one for each, and that the board of the prisoner is 
anywhere else less expensive than at the Hague, which is a 
capital. 

His Highness, who, as it seems, did not possess the means to 
feed Van Baerle at the Hague, sent him to undergo his 
perpetual imprisonment at the fortress of Loewestein, very 
near Dort, but, alas! also very far from it; for Loewestein, 
as the geographers tell us, is situated at the point of the 
islet which is formed by the confluence of the Waal and the 
Meuse, opposite Gorcum. 

Van Baerle was sufficiently versed in the history of his 
country to know that the celebrated Grotius was confined in 
that castle after the death of Barneveldt; and that the 
States, in their generosity to the illustrious publicist, 
jurist, historian, poet, and divine, had granted to him for 
his daily maintenance the sum of twenty-four stivers. 

"I," said Van Baerle to himself, "I am worth much less than 
Grotius. They will hardly give me twelve stivers, and I 
shall live miserably; but never mind, at all events I shall 
live." 

Then suddenly a terrible thought struck him. 

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "how damp and misty that part of the 
country is, and the soil so bad for the tulips! And then 
Rosa will not be at Loewestein!" 




Chapter 13

What was going on all this Time in the Mind of one of the Spectators


Whilst Cornelius was engaged with his own thoughts, a coach 
had driven up to the scaffold. This vehicle was for the 
prisoner. He was invited to enter it, and he obeyed. 

His last look was towards the Buytenhof. He hoped to see at 
the window the face of Rosa, brightening up again. 

But the coach was drawn by good horses, who soon carried Van 
Baerle away from among the shouts which the rabble roared in 
honour of the most magnanimous Stadtholder, mixing with it a 
spice of abuse against the brothers De Witt and the godson 
of Cornelius, who had just now been saved from death. 

This reprieve suggested to the worthy spectators remarks 
such as the following: -- 

"It's very fortunate that we used such speed in having 
justice done to that great villain John, and to that little 
rogue Cornelius, otherwise his Highness might have snatched 
them from us, just as he has done this fellow." 

Among all the spectators whom Van Baerle's execution had 
attracted to the Buytenhof, and whom the sudden turn of 
affairs had disagreeably surprised, undoubtedly the one most 
disappointed was a certain respectably dressed burgher, who 
from early morning had made such a good use of his feet and 
elbows that he at last was separated from the scaffold only 
by the file of soldiers which surrounded it. 

Many had shown themselves eager to see the perfidious blood 
of the guilty Cornelius flow, but not one had shown such a 
keen anxiety as the individual just alluded to. 

The most furious had come to the Buytenhof at daybreak, to 
secure a better place; but he, outdoing even them, had 
passed the night at the threshold of the prison, from 
whence, as we have already said, he had advanced to the very 
foremost rank, unguibus et rostro, -- that is to say, 
coaxing some, and kicking the others. 

And when the executioner had conducted the prisoner to the 
scaffold, the burgher, who had mounted on the stone of the 
pump the better to see and be seen, made to the executioner 
a sign which meant, -- 

"It's a bargain, isn't it?" 

The executioner answered by another sign, which was meant to 
say, -- 

"Be quiet, it's all right." 

This burgher was no other than Mynheer Isaac Boxtel, who 
since the arrest of Cornelius had come to the Hague to try 
if he could not get hold of the three bulbs of the black 
tulip. 

Boxtel had at first tried to gain over Gryphus to his 
interest, but the jailer had not only the snarling 
fierceness, but likewise the fidelity, of a dog. He had 
therefore bristled up at Boxtel's hatred, whom he had 
suspected to be a warm friend of the prisoner, making 
trifling inquiries to contrive with the more certainty some 
means of escape for him. 

Thus to the very first proposals which Boxtel made to 
Gryphus to filch the bulbs which Cornelius van Baerle must 
be supposed to conceal, if not in his breast, at least in 
some corner of his cell, the surly jailer had only answered 
by kicking Mynheer Isaac out, and setting the dog at him. 

The piece which the mastiff had torn from his hose did not 
discourage Boxtel. He came back to the charge, but this time 
Gryphus was in bed, feverish, and with a broken arm. He 
therefore was not able to admit the petitioner, who then 
addressed himself to Rosa, offering to buy her a head-dress 
of pure gold if she would get the bulbs for him. On this, 
the generous girl, although not yet knowing the value of the 
object of the robbery, which was to be so well remunerated, 
had directed the tempter to the executioner, as the heir of 
the prisoner. 

In the meanwhile the sentence had been pronounced. Thus 
Isaac had no more time to bribe any one. He therefore clung 
to the idea which Rosa had suggested: he went to the 
executioner. 

Isaac had not the least doubt that Cornelius would die with 
the bulbs on his heart. 

But there were two things which Boxtel did not calculate 
upon: -- 

Rosa, that is to say, love; 

William of Orange, that is to say, clemency. 

But for Rosa and William, the calculations of the envious 
neighbour would have been correct. 

But for William, Cornelius would have died. 

But for Rosa, Cornelius would have died with his bulbs on 
his heart. 

Mynheer Boxtel went to the headsman, to whom he gave himself 
out as a great friend of the condemned man; and from whom he 
bought all the clothes of the dead man that was to be, for 
one hundred guilders; rather an exorbitant sum, as he 
engaged to leave all the trinkets of gold and silver to the 
executioner. 

But what was the sum of a hundred guilders to a man who was 
all but sure to buy with it the prize of the Haarlem 
Society? 

It was money lent at a thousand per cent., which, as nobody 
will deny, was a very handsome investment. 

The headsman, on the other hand, had scarcely anything to do 
to earn his hundred guilders. He needed only, as soon as the 
execution was over, to allow Mynheer Boxtel to ascend the 
scaffold with his servants, to remove the inanimate remains 
of his friend. 

The thing was, moreover, quite customary among the "faithful 
brethren," when one of their masters died a public death in 
the yard of the Buytenhof. 

A fanatic like Cornelius might very easily have found 
another fanatic who would give a hundred guilders for his 
remains. 

The executioner also readily acquiesced in the proposal, 
making only one condition, -- that of being paid in advance. 

Boxtel, like the people who enter a show at a fair, might be 
disappointed, and refuse to pay on going out. 

Boxtel paid in advance, and waited. 

After this, the reader may imagine how excited Boxtel was; 
with what anxiety he watched the guards, the Recorder, and 
the executioner; and with what intense interest he surveyed 
the movements of Van Baerle. How would he place himself on 
the block? how would he fall? and would he not, in falling, 
crush those inestimable bulbs? had not he at least taken 
care to enclose them in a golden box, -- as gold is the 
hardest of all metals? 

Every trifling delay irritated him. Why did that stupid 
executioner thus lose time in brandishing his sword over the 
head of Cornelius, instead of cutting that head off? 

But when he saw the Recorder take the hand of the condemned, 
and raise him, whilst drawing forth the parchment from his 
pocket, -- when he heard the pardon of the Stadtholder 
publicly read out, -- then Boxtel was no more like a human 
being; the rage and malice of the tiger, of the hyena, and 
of the serpent glistened in his eyes, and vented itself in 
his yell and his movements. Had he been able to get at Van 
Baerle, he would have pounced upon him and strangled him. 

And so, then, Cornelius was to live, and was to go with him 
to Loewestein, and thither to his prison he would take with 
him his bulbs; and perhaps he would even find a garden where 
the black tulip would flower for him. 

Boxtel, quite overcome by his frenzy, fell from the stone 
upon some Orangemen, who, like him, were sorely vexed at the 
turn which affairs had taken. They, mistaking the frantic 
cries of Mynheer Isaac for demonstrations of joy, began to 
belabour him with kicks and cuffs, such as could not have 
been administered in better style by any prize-fighter on 
the other side of the Channel. 

Blows were, however, nothing to him. He wanted to run after 
the coach which was carrying away Cornelius with his bulbs. 
But in his hurry he overlooked a paving-stone in his way, 
stumbled, lost his centre of gravity, rolled over to a 
distance of some yards, and only rose again, bruised and 
begrimed, after the whole rabble of the Hague, with their 
muddy feet, had passed over him. 

One would think that this was enough for one day, but 
Mynheer Boxtel did not seem to think so, as, in addition to 
having his clothes torn, his back bruised, and his hands 
scratched, he inflicted upon himself the further punishment 
of tearing out his hair by handfuls, as an offering to that 
goddess of envy who, as mythology teaches us, wears a 
head-dress of serpents. 




Chapter 14

The Pigeons of Dort


It was indeed in itself a great honour for Cornelius van 
Baerle to be confined in the same prison which had once 
received the learned master Grotius. 

But on arriving at the prison he met with an honour even 
greater. As chance would have it, the cell formerly 
inhabited by the illustrious Barneveldt happened to be 
vacant, when the clemency of the Prince of Orange sent the 
tulip-fancier Van Baerle there. 

The cell had a very bad character at the castle since the 
time when Grotius, by means of the device of his wife, made 
escape from it in that famous book-chest which the jailers 
forgot to examine. 

On the other hand, it seemed to Van Baerle an auspicious 
omen that this very cell was assigned to him, for according 
to his ideas, a jailer ought never to have given to a second 
pigeon the cage from which the first had so easily flown. 

The cell had an historical character. We will only state 
here that, with the exception of an alcove which was 
contrived there for the use of Madame Grotius, it differed 
in no respect from the other cells of the prison; only, 
perhaps, it was a little higher, and had a splendid view 
from the grated window. 

Cornelius felt himself perfectly indifferent as to the place 
where he had to lead an existence which was little more than 
vegetation. There were only two things now for which he 
cared, and the possession of which was a happiness enjoyed 
only in imagination. 

A flower, and a woman; both of them, as he conceived, lost 
to him for ever. 

Fortunately the good doctor was mistaken. In his prison cell 
the most adventurous life which ever fell to the lot of any 
tulip-fancier was reserved for him. 

One morning, whilst at his window inhaling the fresh air 
which came from the river, and casting a longing look to the 
windmills of his dear old city Dort, which were looming in 
the distance behind a forest of chimneys, he saw flocks of 
pigeons coming from that quarter to perch fluttering on the 
pointed gables of Loewestein. 

These pigeons, Van Baerle said to himself, are coming from 
Dort, and consequently may return there. By fastening a 
little note to the wing of one of these pigeons, one might 
have a chance to send a message there. Then, after a few 
moments' consideration, he exclaimed, -- 

"I will do it." 

A man grows very patient who is twenty-eight years of age, 
and condemned to a prison for life, -- that is to say, to 
something like twenty-two or twenty-three thousand days of 
captivity. 

Van Baerle, from whose thoughts the three bulbs were never 
absent, made a snare for catching the pigeons, baiting the 
birds with all the resources of his kitchen, such as it was 
for eight slivers (sixpence English) a day; and, after a 
month of unsuccessful attempts, he at last caught a female 
bird. 

It cost him two more months to catch a male bird; he then 
shut them up together, and having about the beginning of the 
year 1673 obtained some eggs from them, he released the 
female, which, leaving the male behind to hatch the eggs in 
her stead, flew joyously to Dort, with the note under her 
wing. 

She returned in the evening. She had preserved the note. 

Thus it went on for fifteen days, at first to the 
disappointment, and then to the great grief, of Van Baerle. 

On the sixteenth day, at last, she came back without it. 

Van Baerle had addressed it to his nurse, the old Frisian 
woman; and implored any charitable soul who might find it to 
convey it to her as safely and as speedily as possible. 

In this letter there was a little note enclosed for Rosa. 

Van Baerle's nurse had received the letter in the following 
way. 

Leaving Dort, Mynheer Isaac Boxtel had abandoned, not only 
his house, his servants, his observatory, and his telescope, 
but also his pigeons. 

The servant, having been left without wages, first lived on 
his little savings, and then on his master's pigeons. 

Seeing this, the pigeons emigrated from the roof of Isaac 
Boxtel to that of Cornelius van Baerle. 

The nurse was a kind-hearted woman, who could not live 
without something to love. She conceived an affection for 
the pigeons which had thrown themselves on her hospitality; 
and when Boxtel's servant reclaimed them with culinary 
intentions, having eaten the first fifteen already, and now 
wishing to eat the other fifteen, she offered to buy them 
from him for a consideration of six stivers per head. 

This being just double their value, the man was very glad to 
close the bargain, and the nurse found herself in undisputed 
possession of the pigeons of her master's envious neighbour. 

In the course of their wanderings, these pigeons with others 
visited the Hague, Loewestein, and Rotterdam, seeking 
variety, doubtless, in the flavour of their wheat or 
hempseed. 

Chance, or rather God, for we can see the hand of God in 
everything, had willed that Cornelius van Baerle should 
happen to hit upon one of these very pigeons. 

Therefore, if the envious wretch had not left Dort to follow 
his rival to the Hague in the first place, and then to 
Gorcum or to Loewestein, -- for the two places are separated 
only by the confluence of the Waal and the Meuse, -- Van 
Baerle's letter would have fallen into his hands and not the 
nurse's: in which event the poor prisoner, like the raven of 
the Roman cobbler, would have thrown away his time, his 
trouble, and, instead of having to relate the series of 
exciting events which are about to flow from beneath our pen 
like the varied hues of a many coloured tapestry, we should 
have naught to describe but a weary waste of days, dull and 
melancholy and gloomy as night's dark mantle. 

The note, as we have said, had reached Van Baerle's nurse. 

And also it came to pass, that one evening in the beginning 
of February, just when the stars were beginning to twinkle, 
Cornelius heard on the staircase of the little turret a 
voice which thrilled through him. 

He put his hand on his heart, and listened. 

It was the sweet harmonious voice of Rosa. 

Let us confess it, Cornelius was not so stupefied with 
surprise, or so beyond himself with joy, as he would have 
been but for the pigeon, which, in answer to his letter, had 
brought back hope to him under her empty wing; and, knowing 
Rosa, he expected, if the note had ever reached her, to hear 
of her whom he loved, and also of his three darling bulbs. 

He rose, listened once more, and bent forward towards the 
door. 

Yes, they were indeed the accents which had fallen so 
sweetly on his heart at the Hague. 

The question now was, whether Rosa, who had made the journey 
from the Hague to Loewestein, and who -- Cornelius did not 
understand how -- had succeeded even in penetrating into the 
prison, would also be fortunate enough in penetrating to the 
prisoner himself. 

Whilst Cornelius, debating this point within himself, was 
building all sorts of castles in the air, and was struggling 
between hope and fear, the shutter of the grating in the 
door opened, and Rosa, beaming with joy, and beautiful in 
her pretty national costume -- but still more beautiful from 
the grief which for the last five months had blanched her 
cheeks -- pressed her little face against the wire grating 
of the window, saying to him, -- 

"Oh, sir, sir! here I am!" 

Cornelius stretched out his arms, and, looking to heaven, 
uttered a cry of joy, -- 

"Oh, Rosa, Rosa!" 

"Hush! let us speak low: my father follows on my heels," 
said the girl. 

"Your father?" 

"Yes, he is in the courtyard at the bottom of the staircase, 
receiving the instructions of the Governor; he will 
presently come up." 

"The instructions of the Governor?" 

"Listen to me, I'll try to tell you all in a few words. The 
Stadtholder has a country-house, one league distant from 
Leyden, properly speaking a kind of large dairy, and my 
aunt, who was his nurse, has the management of it. As soon 
as I received your letter, which, alas! I could not read 
myself, but which your housekeeper read to me, I hastened to 
my aunt; there I remained until the Prince should come to 
the dairy; and when he came, I asked him as a favour to 
allow my father to exchange his post at the prison of the 
Hague with the jailer of the fortress of Loewestein. The 
Prince could not have suspected my object; had he known it, 
he would have refused my request, but as it is he granted 
it." 

"And so you are here?" 

"As you see." 

"And thus I shall see you every day?" 

"As often as I can manage it." 

"Oh, Rosa, my beautiful Rosa, do you love me a little?" 

"A little?" she said, "you make no great pretensions, 
Mynheer Cornelius." 

Cornelius tenderly stretched out his hands towards her, but 
they were only able to touch each other with the tips of 
their fingers through the wire grating. 

"Here is my father," said she. 

Rosa then abruptly drew back from the door, and ran to meet 
old Gryphus, who made his appearance at the top of the 
staircase. 




Chapter 15

The Little Grated Window


Gryphus was followed by the mastiff. 

The turnkey took the animal round the jail, so that, if 
needs be, he might recognize the prisoners. 

"Father," said Rosa, "here is the famous prison from which 
Mynheer Grotius escaped. You know Mynheer Grotius?" 

"Oh, yes, that rogue Grotius, a friend of that villain 
Barneveldt, whom I saw executed when I was a child. Ah! so 
Grotius; and that's the chamber from which he escaped. Well, 
I'll answer for it that no one shall escape after him in my 
time." 

And thus opening the door, he began in the dark to talk to 
the prisoner. 

The dog, on his part, went up to the prisoner, and, 
growling, smelled about his legs just as though to ask him 
what right he had still to be alive, after having left the 
prison in the company of the Recorder and the executioner. 

But the fair Rosa called him to her side. 

"Well, my master," said Gryphus, holding up his lantern to 
throw a little light around, "you see in me your new jailer. 
I am head turnkey, and have all the cells under my care. I 
am not vicious, but I'm not to be trifled with, as far as 
discipline goes." 

"My good Master Gryphus, I know you perfectly well," said 
the prisoner, approaching within the circle of light cast 
around by the lantern. 

"Halloa! that's you, Mynheer van Baerle," said Gryphus. 
"That's you; well, I declare, it's astonishing how people do 
meet." 

"Oh, yes; and it's really a great pleasure to me, good 
Master Gryphus, to see that your arm is doing well, as you 
are able to hold your lantern with it." 

Gryphus knitted his brow. "Now, that's just it," he said, 
"people always make blunders in politics. His Highness has 
granted you your life; I'm sure I should never have done 
so." 

"Don't say so," replied Cornelius; "why not?" 

"Because you are the very man to conspire again. You learned 
people have dealings with the devil." 

"Nonsense, Master Gryphus. Are you dissatisfied with the 
manner in which I have set your arm, or with the price that 
I asked you?" said Cornelius, laughing. 

"On the contrary," growled the jailer, "you have set it only 
too well. There is some witchcraft in this. After six weeks, 
I was able to use it as if nothing had happened, so much so, 
that the doctor of the Buytenhof, who knows his trade well, 
wanted to break it again, to set it in the regular way, and 
promised me that I should have my blessed three months for 
my money before I should be able to move it." 

"And you did not want that?" 

"I said, 'Nay, as long as I can make the sign of the cross 
with that arm' (Gryphus was a Roman Catholic), 'I laugh at 
the devil.'" 

"But if you laugh at the devil, Master Gryphus, you ought 
with so much more reason to laugh at learned people." 

"Ah, learned people, learned people! Why, I would rather 
have to guard ten soldiers than one scholar. The soldiers 
smoke, guzzle, and get drunk; they are gentle as lambs if 
you only give them brandy or Moselle, but scholars, and 
drink, smoke, and fuddle -- ah, yes, that's altogether 
different. They keep sober, spend nothing, and have their 
heads always clear to make conspiracies. But I tell you, at 
the very outset, it won't be such an easy matter for you to 
conspire. First of all, you will have no books, no paper, 
and no conjuring book. It's books that helped Mynheer 
Grotius to get off." 

"I assure you, Master Gryphus," replied Van Baerle, "that if 
I have entertained the idea of escaping, I most decidedly 
have it no longer." 

"Well, well," said Gryphus, "just look sharp: that's what I 
shall do also. But, for all that, I say his Highness has 
made a great mistake." 

"Not to have cut off my head? thank you, Master Gryphus." 

"Just so, look whether the Mynheer de Witt don't keep very 
quiet now." 

"That's very shocking what you say now, Master Gryphus," 
cried Van Baerle, turning away his head to conceal his 
disgust. "You forget that one of those unfortunate gentlemen 
was my friend, and the other my second father." 

"Yes, but I also remember that the one, as well as the 
other, was a conspirator. And, moreover, I am speaking from 
Christian charity." 

"Oh, indeed! explain that a little to me, my good Master 
Gryphus. I do not quite understand it." 

"Well, then, if you had remained on the block of Master 
Harbruck ---- " 

"What?" 

"You would not suffer any longer; whereas, I will not 
disguise it from you, I shall lead you a sad life of it." 

"Thank you for the promise, Master Gryphus." 

And whilst the prisoner smiled ironically at the old jailer, 
Rosa, from the outside, answered by a bright smile, which 
carried sweet consolation to the heart of Van Baerle. 

Gryphus stepped towards the window. 

It was still light enough to see, although indistinctly, 
through the gray haze of the evening, the vast expanse of 
the horizon. 

"What view has one from here?" asked Gryphus. 

"Why, a very fine and pleasant one," said Cornelius, looking 
at Rosa. 

"Yes, yes, too much of a view, too much." 

And at this moment the two pigeons, scared by the sight and 
especially by the voice of the stranger, left their nest, 
and disappeared, quite frightened in the evening mist. 

"Halloa! what's this?" cried Gryphus. 

"My pigeons," answered Cornelius. 

"Your pigeons," cried the jailer, "your pigeons! has a 
prisoner anything of his own?" 

"Why, then," said Cornelius, "the pigeons which a merciful 
Father in Heaven has lent to me." 

"So, here we have a breach of the rules already," replied 
Gryphus. "Pigeons! ah, young man, young man! I'll tell you 
one thing, that before to-morrow is over, your pigeons will 
boil in my pot." 

"First of all you should catch them, Master Gryphus. You 
won't allow these pigeons to be mine! Well, I vow they are 
even less yours than mine." 

"Omittance is no acquittance," growled the jailer, "and I 
shall certainly wring their necks before twenty-four hours 
are over: you may be sure of that." 

Whilst giving utterance to this ill-natured promise, Gryphus 
put his head out of the window to examine the nest. This 
gave Van Baerle time to run to the door, and squeeze the 
hand of Rosa, who whispered to him, -- 

"At nine o'clock this evening." 

Gryphus, quite taken up with the desire of catching the 
pigeons next day, as he had promised he would do, saw and 
heard nothing of this short interlude; and, after having 
closed the window, he took the arm of his daughter, left the 
cell, turned the key twice, drew the bolts, and went off to 
make the same kind promise to the other prisoners. 

He had scarcely withdrawn, when Cornelius went to the door 
to listen to the sound of his footsteps, and, as soon as 
they had died away, he ran to the window, and completely 
demolished the nest of the pigeons. 

Rather than expose them to the tender mercies of his 
bullying jailer, he drove away for ever those gentle 
messengers to whom he owed the happiness of having seen Rosa 
again. 

This visit of the jailer, his brutal threats, and the gloomy 
prospect of the harshness with which, as he had before 
experienced, Gryphus watched his prisoners, -- all this was 
unable to extinguish in Cornelius the sweet thoughts, and 
especially the sweet hope, which the presence of Rosa had 
reawakened in his heart. 

He waited eagerly to hear the clock of the tower of 
Loewestein strike nine. 

The last chime was still vibrating through the air, when 
Cornelius heard on the staircase the light step and the 
rustle of the flowing dress of the fair Frisian maid, and 
soon after a light appeared at the little grated window in 
the door, on which the prisoner fixed his earnest gaze. 

The shutter opened on the outside. 

"Here I am," said Rosa, out of breath from running up the 
stairs, "here I am." 

"Oh, my good Rosa." 

"You are then glad to see me?" 

"Can you ask? But how did you contrive to get here? tell 
me." 

"Now listen to me. My father falls asleep every evening 
almost immediately after his supper; I then make him lie 
down, a little stupefied with his gin. Don't say anything 
about it, because, thanks to this nap, I shall be able to 
come every evening and chat for an hour with you." 

"Oh, I thank you, Rosa, dear Rosa." 

Saying these words, Cornelius put his face so near the 
little window that Rosa withdrew hers. 

"I have brought back to you your bulbs." 

Cornelius's heart leaped with joy. He had not yet dared to 
ask Rosa what she had done with the precious treasure which 
he had intrusted to her. 

"Oh, you have preserved them, then?" 

"Did you not give them to me as a thing which was dear to 
you?" 

"Yes, but as I have given them to you, it seems to me that 
they belong to you." 

"They would have belonged to me after your death, but, 
fortunately, you are alive now. Oh how I blessed his 
Highness in my heart! If God grants to him all the happiness 
that I have wished him, certainly Prince William will be the 
happiest man on earth. When I looked at the Bible of your 
godfather Cornelius, I was resolved to bring back to you 
your bulbs, only I did not know how to accomplish it. I had, 
however, already formed the plan of going to the 
Stadtholder, to ask from him for my father the appointment 
of jailer of Loewestein, when your housekeeper brought me 
your letter. Oh, how we wept together! But your letter only 
confirmed me the more in my resolution. I then left for 
Leyden, and the rest you know." 

"What, my dear Rosa, you thought, even before receiving my 
letter, of coming to meet me again?" 

"If I thought of it," said Rosa, allowing her love to get 
the better of her bashfulness, "I thought of nothing else." 

And, saying these words, Rosa looked so exceedingly pretty, 
that for the second time Cornelius placed his forehead and 
lips against the wire grating; of course, we must presume 
with the laudable desire to thank the young lady. 

Rosa, however, drew back as before. 

"In truth," she said, with that coquetry which somehow or 
other is in the heart of every young girl, "I have often 
been sorry that I am not able to read, but never so much so 
as when your housekeeper brought me your letter. I kept the 
paper in my hands, which spoke to other people, and which 
was dumb to poor stupid me." 

"So you have often regretted not being able to read," said 
Cornelius. "I should just like to know on what occasions." 

"Troth," she said, laughing, "to read all the letters which 
were written to me." 

"Oh, you received letters, Rosa?" 

"By hundreds." 

"But who wrote to you?" 

"Who! why, in the first place, all the students who passed 
over the Buytenhof, all the officers who went to parade, all 
the clerks, and even the merchants who saw me at my little 
window." 

"And what did you do with all these notes, my dear Rosa?" 

"Formerly," she answered, "I got some friend to read them to 
me, which was capital fun, but since a certain time -- well, 
what use is it to attend to all this nonsense? -- since a 
certain time I have burnt them." 

"Since a certain time!" exclaimed Cornelius, with a look 
beaming with love and joy. 

Rosa cast down her eyes, blushing. In her sweet confusion, 
she did not observe the lips of Cornelius, which, alas! only 
met the cold wire-grating. Yet, in spite of this obstacle, 
they communicated to the lips of the young girl the glowing 
breath of the most tender kiss. 

At this sudden outburst of tenderness, Rosa grew very pale, 
-- perhaps paler than she had been on the day of the 
execution. She uttered a plaintive sob, closed her fine 
eyes, and fled, trying in vain to still the beating of her 
heart. 

And thus Cornelius was again alone. 

Rosa had fled so precipitately, that she completely forgot 
to return to Cornelius the three bulbs of the Black Tulip. 




Chapter 16

Master and Pupil


The worthy Master Gryphus, as the reader may have seen, was 
far from sharing the kindly feeling of his daughter for the 
godson of Cornelius de Witt. 

There being only five prisoners at Loewestein, the post of 
turnkey was not a very onerous one, but rather a sort of 
sinecure, given after a long period of service. 

But the worthy jailer, in his zeal, had magnified with all 
the power of his imagination the importance of his office. 
To him Cornelius had swelled to the gigantic proportions of 
a criminal of the first order. He looked upon him, 
therefore, as the most dangerous of all his prisoners. He 
watched all his steps, and always spoke to him with an angry 
countenance; punishing him for what he called his dreadful 
rebellion against such a clement prince as the Stadtholder. 

Three times a day he entered Van Baerle's cell, expecting to 
find him trespassing; but Cornelius had ceased to 
correspond, since his correspondent was at hand. It is even 
probable that, if Cornelius had obtained his full liberty, 
with permission to go wherever he liked, the prison, with 
Rosa and his bulbs, would have appeared to him preferable to 
any other habitation in the world without Rosa and his 
bulbs. 

Rosa, in fact, had promised to come and see him every 
evening, and from the first evening she had kept her word. 

On the following evening she went up as before, with the 
same mysteriousness and the same precaution. Only she had 
this time resolved within herself not to approach too near 
the grating. In order, however, to engage Van Baerle in a 
conversation from the very first which would seriously 
occupy his attention, she tendered to him through the 
grating the three bulbs, which were still wrapped up in the 
same paper. 

But to the great astonishment of Rosa, Van Baerle pushed 
back her white hand with the tips of his fingers. 

The young man had been considering about the matter. 

"Listen to me," he said. "I think we should risk too much by 
embarking our whole fortune in one ship. Only think, my dear 
Rosa, that the question is to carry out an enterprise which 
until now has been considered impossible, namely, that of 
making the great black tulip flower. Let us, therefore, take 
every possible precaution, so that in case of a failure we 
may not have anything to reproach ourselves with. I will now 
tell you the way I have traced out for us." 

Rosa was all attention to what he would say, much more on 
account of the importance which the unfortunate 
tulip-fancier attached to it, than that she felt interested 
in the matter herself. 

"I will explain to you, Rosa," he said. "I dare say you have 
in this fortress a small garden, or some courtyard, or, if 
not that, at least some terrace." 

"We have a very fine garden," said Rosa, "it runs along the 
edge of the Waal, and is full of fine old trees." 

"Could you bring me some soil from the garden, that I may 
judge?" 

"I will do so to-morrow." 

"Take some from a sunny spot, and some from a shady, so that 
I may judge of its properties in a dry and in a moist 
state." 

"Be assured I shall." 

"After having chosen the soil, and, if it be necessary, 
modified it, we will divide our three bulbs; you will take 
one and plant it, on the day that I will tell you, in the 
soil chosen by me. It is sure to flower, if you tend it 
according to my directions." 

"I will not lose sight of it for a minute." 

"You will give me another, which I will try to grow here in 
my cell, and which will help me to beguile those long weary 
hours when I cannot see you. I confess to you I have very 
little hope for the latter one, and I look beforehand on 
this unfortunate bulb as sacrificed to my selfishness. 
However, the sun sometimes visits me. I will, besides, try 
to convert everything into an artificial help, even the heat 
and the ashes of my pipe, and lastly, we, or rather you, 
will keep in reserve the third sucker as our last resource, 
in case our first two experiments should prove a failure. In 
this manner, my dear Rosa, it is impossible that we should 
not succeed in gaining the hundred thousand guilders for 
your marriage portion; and how dearly shall we enjoy that 
supreme happiness of seeing our work brought to a successful 
issue!" 

"I know it all now," said Rosa. "I will bring you the soil 
to-morrow, and you will choose it for your bulb and for 
mine. As to that in which yours is to grow, I shall have 
several journeys to convey it to you, as I cannot bring much 
at a time." 

"There is no hurry for it, dear Rosa; our tulips need not be 
put into the ground for a month at least. So you see we have 
plenty of time before us. Only I hope that, in planting your 
bulb, you will strictly follow all my instructions." 

"I promise you I will." 

"And when you have once planted it, you will communicate to 
me all the circumstances which may interest our nursling; 
such as change of weather, footprints on the walks, or 
footprints in the borders. You will listen at night whether 
our garden is not resorted to by cats. A couple of those 
untoward animals laid waste two of my borders at Dort." 

"I will listen." 

"On moonlight nights have you ever looked at your garden, my 
dear child?" 

"The window of my sleeping-room overlooks it." 

"Well, on moonlight nights you will observe whether any rats 
come out from the holes in the wall. The rats are most 
mischievous by their gnawing everything; and I have heard 
unfortunate tulip-growers complain most bitterly of Noah for 
having put a couple of rats in the ark." 

"I will observe, and if there are cats or rats ---- " 

"You will apprise me of it, -- that's right. And, moreover," 
Van Baerle, having become mistrustful in his captivity, 
continued, "there is an animal much more to be feared than 
even the cat or the rat." 

"What animal?" 

"Man. You comprehend, my dear Rosa, a man may steal a 
guilder, and risk the prison for such a trifle, and, 
consequently, it is much more likely that some one might 
steal a hundred thousand guilders." 

"No one ever enters the garden but myself." 

"Thank you, thank you, my dear Rosa. All the joy of my life 
has still to come from you." 

And as the lips of Van Baerle approached the grating with 
the same ardor as the day before, and as, moreover, the hour 
for retiring had struck, Rosa drew back her head, and 
stretched out her hand. 

In this pretty little hand, of which the coquettish damsel 
was particularly proud, was the bulb. 

Cornelius kissed most tenderly the tips of her fingers. Did 
he do so because the hand kept one of the bulbs of the great 
black tulip, or because this hand was Rosa's? We shall leave 
this point to the decision of wiser heads than ours. 

Rosa withdrew with the other two suckers, pressing them to 
her heart. 

Did she press them to her heart because they were the bulbs 
of the great black tulip, or because she had them from 
Cornelius? 

This point, we believe, might be more readily decided than 
the other. 

However that may have been, from that moment life became 
sweet, and again full of interest to the prisoner. 

Rosa, as we have seen, had returned to him one of the 
suckers. 

Every evening she brought to him, handful by handful, a 
quantity of soil from that part of the garden which he had 
found to be the best, and which, indeed, was excellent. 

A large jug, which Cornelius had skilfully broken, did 
service as a flower-pot. He half filled it, and mixed the 
earth of the garden with a small portion of dried river mud, 
a mixture which formed an excellent soil. 

Then, at the beginning of April, he planted his first sucker 
in that jug. 

Not a day passed on which Rosa did not come to have her chat 
with Cornelius. 

The tulips, concerning whose cultivation Rosa was taught all 
the mysteries of the art, formed the principal topic of the 
conversation; but, interesting as the subject was, people 
cannot always talk about tulips. 

They therefore began to chat also about other things, and 
the tulip-fancier found out to his great astonishment what a 
vast range of subjects a conversation may comprise. 

Only Rosa had made it a habit to keep her pretty face 
invariably six inches distant from the grating, having 
perhaps become distrustful of herself. 

There was one thing especially which gave Cornelius almost 
as much anxiety as his bulbs -- a subject to which he always 
returned -- the dependence of Rosa on her father. 

Indeed, Van Baerle's happiness depended on the whim of this 
man. He might one day find Loewestein dull, or the air of 
the place unhealthy, or the gin bad, and leave the fortress, 
and take his daughter with him, when Cornelius and Rosa 
would again be separated. 

"Of what use would the carrier pigeons then be?" said 
Cornelius to Rosa, "as you, my dear girl, would not be able 
to read what I should write to you, nor to write to me your 
thoughts in return." 

"Well," answered Rosa, who in her heart was as much afraid 
of a separation as Cornelius himself, "we have one hour 
every evening, let us make good use of it." 

"I don't think we make such a bad use of it as it is." 

"Let us employ it even better," said Rosa, smiling. "Teach 
me to read and write. I shall make the best of your lessons, 
believe me; and, in this way, we shall never be separated 
any more, except by our own will." 

"Oh, then, we have an eternity before us," said Cornelius. 

Rosa smiled, and quietly shrugged her shoulders. 

"Will you remain for ever in prison?" she said, "and after 
having granted you your life, will not his Highness also 
grant you your liberty? And will you not then recover your 
fortune, and be a rich man, and then, when you are driving 
in your own coach, riding your own horse, will you still 
look at poor Rosa, the daughter of a jailer, scarcely better 
than a hangman?" 

Cornelius tried to contradict her, and certainly he would 
have done so with all his heart, and with all the sincerity 
of a soul full of love. 

She, however, smilingly interrupted him, saying, "How is 
your tulip going on?" 

To speak to Cornelius of his tulip was an expedient resorted 
to by her to make him forget everything, even Rosa herself. 

"Very well, indeed," he said, "the coat is growing black, 
the sprouting has commenced, the veins of the bulb are 
swelling, in eight days hence, and perhaps sooner, we may 
distinguish the first buds of the leaves protruding. And 
yours Rosa?" 

"Oh, I have done things on a large scale, and according to 
your directions." 

"Now, let me hear, Rosa, what you have done," said 
Cornelius, with as tender an anxiety as he had lately shown 
to herself. 

"Well," she said, smiling, for in her own heart she could 
not help studying this double love of the prisoner for 
herself and for the black tulip, "I have done things on a 
large scale; I have prepared a bed as you described it to 
me, on a clear spot, far from trees and walls, in a soil 
slightly mixed with sand, rather moist than dry without a 
fragment of stone or pebble." 

"Well done, Rosa, well done." 

"I am now only waiting for your further orders to put in the 
bulb, you know that I must be behindhand with you, as I have 
in my favour all the chances of good air, of the sun, and 
abundance of moisture." 

"All true, all true," exclaimed Cornelius, clapping his 
hands with joy, "you are a good pupil, Rosa, and you are 
sure to gain your hundred thousand guilders." 

"Don't forget," said Rosa, smiling, "that your pupil, as you 
call me, has still other things to learn besides the 
cultivation of tulips." 

"Yes, yes, and I am as anxious as you are, Rosa, that you 
should learn to read." 

"When shall we begin?" 

"At once." 

"No, to-morrow." 

"Why to-morrow?" 

"Because to-day our hour is expired, and I must leave you." 

"Already? But what shall we read?" 

"Oh," said Rosa, "I have a book, -- a book which I hope will 
bring us luck." 

"To-morrow, then." 

"Yes, to-morrow." 

On the following evening Rosa returned with the Bible of 
Cornelius de Witt. 




Chapter 17

The First Bulb


On the following evening, as we have said, Rosa returned 
with the Bible of Cornelius de Witt. 

Then began between the master and the pupil one of those 
charming scenes which are the delight of the novelist who 
has to describe them. 

The grated window, the only opening through which the two 
lovers were able to communicate, was too high for 
conveniently reading a book, although it had been quite 
convenient for them to read each other's faces. 

Rosa therefore had to press the open book against the 
grating edgewise, holding above it in her right hand the 
lamp, but Cornelius hit upon the lucky idea of fixing it to 
the bars, so as to afford her a little rest. Rosa was then 
enabled to follow with her finger the letters and syllables, 
which she was to spell for Cornelius, who with a straw 
pointed out the letters to his attentive pupil through the 
holes of the grating. 

The light of the lamp illuminated the rich complexion of 
Rosa, her blue liquid eyes, and her golden hair under her 
head-dress of gold brocade, with her fingers held up, and 
showing in the blood, as it flowed downwards in the veins 
that pale pink hue which shines before the light owing to 
the living transparency of the flesh tint. 

Rosa's intellect rapidly developed itself under the 
animating influence of Cornelius, and when the difficulties 
seemed too arduous, the sympathy of two loving hearts seemed 
to smooth them away. 

And Rosa, after having returned to her room, repeated in her 
solitude the reading lessons, and at the same time recalled 
all the delight which she had felt whilst receiving them. 

One evening she came half an hour later than usual. This was 
too extraordinary an instance not to call forth at once 
Cornelius's inquiries after its cause. 

"Oh! do not be angry with me," she said, "it is not my 
fault. My father has renewed an acquaintance with an old 
crony who used to visit him at the Hague, and to ask him to 
let him see the prison. He is a good sort of fellow, fond of 
his bottle, tells funny stories, and moreover is very free 
with his money, so as always to be ready to stand a treat." 

"You don't know anything further of him?" asked Cornelius, 
surprised. 

"No," she answered; "it's only for about a fortnight that my 
father has taken such a fancy to this friend who is so 
assiduous in visiting him." 

"Ah, so," said Cornelius, shaking his head uneasily as every 
new incident seemed to him to forebode some catastrophe; 
"very likely some spy, one of those who are sent into jails 
to watch both prisoners and their keepers." 

"I don't believe that," said Rosa, smiling; "if that worthy 
person is spying after any one, it is certainly not after my 
father." 

"After whom, then?" 

"Me, for instance." 

"You?" 

"Why not?" said Rosa, smiling. 

"Ah, that's true," Cornelius observed, with a sigh. "You 
will not always have suitors in vain; this man may become 
your husband." 

"I don't say anything to the contrary." 

"What cause have you to entertain such a happy prospect?" 

"Rather say, this fear, Mynheer Cornelius." 

"Thank you, Rosa, you are right; well, I will say then, this 
fear?" 

"I have only this reason ---- " 

"Tell me, I am anxious to hear." 

"This man came several times before to the Buytenhof, at the 
Hague. I remember now, it was just about the time when you 
were confined there. When I left, he left too; when I came 
here, he came after me. At the Hague his pretext was that he 
wanted to see you." 

"See me?" 

"Yes, it must have undoubtedly been only a pretext for now, 
when he could plead the same reason, as you are my father's 
prisoner again, he does not care any longer for you; quite 
the contrary, -- I heard him say to my father only yesterday 
that he did not know you." 

"Go on, Rosa, pray do, that I may guess who that man is, and 
what he wants." 

"Are you quite sure, Mynheer Cornelius, that none of your 
friends can interest himself for you?" 

"I have no friends, Rosa; I have only my old nurse, whom you 
know, and who knows you. Alas, poor Sue! she would come 
herself, and use no roundabout ways. She would at once say 
to your father, or to you, 'My good sir, or my good miss, my 
child is here; see how grieved I am; let me see him only for 
one hour, and I'll pray for you as long as I live.' No, no," 
continued Cornelius; "with the exception of my poor old Sue, 
I have no friends in this world." 

"Then I come back to what I thought before; and the more so 
as last evening at sunset, whilst I was arranging the border 
where I am to plant your bulb, I saw a shadow gliding 
between the alder trees and the aspens. I did not appear to 
see him, but it was this man. He concealed himself and saw 
me digging the ground, and certainly it was me whom he 
followed, and me whom he was spying after. I could not move 
my rake, or touch one atom of soil, without his noticing 
it." 

"Oh, yes, yes, he is in love with you," said Cornelius. "Is 
he young? Is he handsome?" 

Saying this he looked anxiously at Rosa, eagerly waiting for 
her answer. 

"Young? handsome?" cried Rosa, bursting into a laugh. "He is 
hideous to look at; crooked, nearly fifty years of age, and 
never dares to look me in the face, or to speak, except in 
an undertone." 

"And his name?" 

"Jacob Gisels." 

"I don't know him." 

"Then you see that, at all events, he does not come after 
you." 

"At any rate, if he loves you, Rosa, which is very likely, 
as to see you is to love you, at least you don't love him." 

"To be sure I don't." 

"Then you wish me to keep my mind easy?" 

"I should certainly ask you to do so." 

"Well, then, now as you begin to know how to read you will 
read all that I write to you of the pangs of jealousy and of 
absence, won't you, Rosa?" 

"I shall read it, if you write with good big letters." 

Then, as the turn which the conversation took began to make 
Rosa uneasy, she asked, -- 

"By the bye, how is your tulip going on?" 

"Oh, Rosa, only imagine my joy, this morning I looked at it 
in the sun, and after having moved the soil aside which 
covers the bulb, I saw the first sprouting of the leaves. 
This small germ has caused me a much greater emotion than 
the order of his Highness which turned aside the sword 
already raised at the Buytenhof." 

"You hope, then?" said Rosa, smiling. 

"Yes, yes, I hope." 

"And I, in my turn, when shall I plant my bulb?" 

"Oh, the first favourable day I will tell you; but, whatever 
you do, let nobody help you, and don't confide your secret 
to any one in the world; do you see, a connoisseur by merely 
looking at the bulb would be able to distinguish its value; 
and so, my dearest Rosa, be careful in locking up the third 
sucker which remains to you." 

"It is still wrapped up in the same paper in which you put 
it, and just as you gave it me. I have laid it at the bottom 
of my chest under my point lace, which keeps it dry, without 
pressing upon it. But good night, my poor captive 
gentleman." 

"How? already?" 

"It must be, it must be." 

"Coming so late and going so soon." 

"My father might grow impatient not seeing me return, and 
that precious lover might suspect a rival." 

Here she listened uneasily. 

"What is it?" asked Van Baerle. "I thought I heard 
something." 

"What, then?" 

"Something like a step, creaking on the staircase." 

"Surely," said the prisoner, "that cannot be Master Gryphus, 
he is always heard at a distance" 

"No, it is not my father, I am quite sure, but ---- " 

"But?" 

"But it might be Mynheer Jacob." 

Rosa rushed toward the staircase, and a door was really 
heard rapidly to close before the young damsel had got down 
the first ten steps. 

Cornelius was very uneasy about it, but it was after all 
only a prelude to greater anxieties. 

The flowing day passed without any remarkable incident. 
Gryphus made his three visits, and discovered nothing. He 
never came at the same hours as he hoped thus to discover 
the secrets of the prisoner. Van Baerle, therefore, had 
devised a contrivance, a sort of pulley, by means of which 
he was able to lower or to raise his jug below the ledge of 
tiles and stone before his window. The strings by which this 
was effected he had found means to cover with that moss 
which generally grows on tiles, or in the crannies of the 
walls. 

Gryphus suspected nothing, and the device succeeded for 
eight days. One morning, however, when Cornelius, absorbed 
in the contemplation of his bulb, from which a germ of 
vegetation was already peeping forth, had not heard old 
Gryphus coming upstairs as a gale of wind was blowing which 
shook the whole tower, the door suddenly opened. 

Gryphus, perceiving an unknown and consequently a forbidden 
object in the hands of his prisoner, pounced upon it with 
the same rapidity as the hawk on its prey. 

As ill luck would have it, his coarse, hard hand, the same 
which he had broken, and which Cornelius van Baerle had set 
so well, grasped at once in the midst of the jug, on the 
spot where the bulb was lying in the soil. 

"What have you got here?" he roared. "Ah! have I caught 
you?" and with this he grabbed in the soil. 

"I? nothing, nothing," cried Cornelius, trembling. 

"Ah! have I caught you? a jug and earth in it There is some 
criminal secret at the bottom of all this." 

"Oh, my good Master Gryphus," said Van Baerle, imploringly, 
and anxious as the partridge robbed of her young by the 
reaper. 

In fact, Gryphus was beginning to dig the soil with his 
crooked fingers. 

"Take care, sir, take care," said Cornelius, growing quite 
pale. 

"Care of what? Zounds! of what?" roared the jailer. 

"Take care, I say, you will crush it, Master Gryphus." 

And with a rapid and almost frantic movement he snatched the 
jug from the hands of Gryphus, and hid it like a treasure 
under his arms. 

But Gryphus, obstinate, like an old man, and more and more 
convinced that he was discovering here a conspiracy against 
the Prince of Orange, rushed up to his prisoner, raising his 
stick; seeing, however, the impassible resolution of the 
captive to protect his flower-pot he was convinced that 
Cornelius trembled much less for his head than for his jug. 

He therefore tried to wrest it from him by force. 

"Halloa!" said the jailer, furious, "here, you see, you are 
rebelling." 

"Leave me my tulip," cried Van Baerle. 

"Ah, yes, tulip," replied the old man, "we know well the 
shifts of prisoners." 

"But I vow to you ---- " 

"Let go," repeated Gryphus, stamping his foot, "let go, or I 
shall call the guard." 

"Call whoever you like, but you shall not have this flower 
except with my life." 

Gryphus, exasperated, plunged his finger a second time into 
the soil, and now he drew out the bulb, which certainly 
looked quite black; and whilst Van Baerle, quite happy to 
have saved the vessel, did not suspect that the adversary 
had possessed himself of its precious contents, Gryphus 
hurled the softened bulb with all his force on the flags, 
where almost immediately after it was crushed to atoms under 
his heavy shoe. 

Van Baerle saw the work of destruction, got a glimpse of the 
juicy remains of his darling bulb, and, guessing the cause 
of the ferocious joy of Gryphus, uttered a cry of agony, 
which would have melted the heart even of that ruthless 
jailer who some years before killed Pelisson's spider. 

The idea of striking down this spiteful bully passed like 
lightning through the brain of the tulip-fancier. The blood 
rushed to his brow, and seemed like fire in his eyes, which 
blinded him, and he raised in his two hands the heavy jug 
with all the now useless earth which remained in it. One 
instant more, and he would have flung it on the bald head of 
old Gryphus. 

But a cry stopped him; a cry of agony, uttered by poor Rosa, 
who, trembling and pale, with her arms raised to heaven, 
made her appearance behind the grated window, and thus 
interposed between her father and her friend. 

Gryphus then understood the danger with which he had been 
threatened, and he broke out in a volley of the most 
terrible abuse. 

"Indeed," said Cornelius to him, "you must be a very mean 
and spiteful fellow to rob a poor prisoner of his only 
consolation, a tulip bulb." 

"For shame, my father," Rosa chimed in, "it is indeed a 
crime you have committed here." 

"Ah, is that you, my little chatter-box?" the old man cried, 
boiling with rage and turning towards her; "don't you meddle 
with what don't concern you, but go down as quickly as 
possible." 

"Unfortunate me," continued Cornelius, overwhelmed with 
grief. 

"After all, it is but a tulip," Gryphus resumed, as he began 
to be a little ashamed of himself. "You may have as many 
tulips as you like: I have three hundred of them in my 
loft." 

"To the devil with your tulips!" cried Cornelius; "you are 
worthy of each other: had I a hundred thousand millions of 
them, I would gladly give them for the one which you have 
just destroyed." 

"Oh, so!" Gryphus said, in a tone of triumph; "now there we 
have it. It was not your tulip you cared for. There was in 
that false bulb some witchcraft, perhaps some means of 
correspondence with conspirators against his Highness who 
has granted you your life. I always said they were wrong in 
not cutting your head off." 

"Father, father!" cried Rosa. 

"Yes, yes! it is better as it is now," repeated Gryphus, 
growing warm; "I have destroyed it, and I'll do the same 
again, as often as you repeat the trick. Didn't I tell you, 
my fine fellow, that I would make your life a hard one?" 

"A curse on you!" Cornelius exclaimed, quite beyond himself 
with despair, as he gathered, with his trembling fingers, 
the remnants of that bulb on which he had rested so many 
joys and so many hopes. 

"We shall plant the other to-morrow, my dear Mynheer 
Cornelius," said Rosa, in a low voice, who understood the 
intense grief of the unfortunate tulip-fancier, and who, 
with the pure sacred love of her innocent heart, poured 
these kind words, like a drop of balm, on the bleeding 
wounds of Cornelius. 




Chapter 18

Rosa's Lover


Rosa had scarcely pronounced these consolatory words when a 
voice was heard from the staircase asking Gryphus how 
matters were going on. 

"Do you hear, father?" said Rosa. 

"What?" 

"Master Jacob calls you, he is uneasy." 

"There was such a noise," said Gryphus; "wouldn't you have 
thought he would murder me, this doctor? They are always 
very troublesome fellows, these scholars." 

Then, pointing with his finger towards the staircase, he 
said to Rosa: "Just lead the way, Miss." 

After this he locked the door and called out: "I shall be 
with you directly, friend Jacob." 

Poor Cornelius, thus left alone with his bitter grief, 
muttered to himself, -- 

"Ah, you old hangman! it is me you have trodden under foot; 
you have murdered me; I shall not survive it." 

And certainly the unfortunate prisoner would have fallen ill 
but for the counterpoise which Providence had granted to his 
grief, and which was called Rosa. 

In the evening she came back. Her first words announced to 
Cornelius that henceforth her father would make no objection 
to his cultivating flowers. 

"And how do you know that?" the prisoner asked, with a 
doleful look. 

"I know it because he has said so." 

"To deceive me, perhaps." 

"No, he repents." 

"Ah yes! but too late." 

"This repentance is not of himself." 

"And who put it into him?" 

"If you only knew how his friend scolded him!" 

"Ah, Master Jacob; he does not leave you, then, that Master 
Jacob?" 

"At any rate, he leaves us as little as he can help." 

Saying this, she smiled in such a way that the little cloud 
of jealousy which had darkened the brow of Cornelius 
speedily vanished. 

"How was it?" asked the prisoner. 

"Well, being asked by his friend, my father told at supper 
the whole story of the tulip, or rather of the bulb, and of 
his own fine exploit of crushing it." 

Cornelius heaved a sigh, which might have been called a 
groan. 

"Had you only seen Master Jacob at that moment!" continued 
Rosa. "I really thought he would set fire to the castle; his 
eyes were like two flaming torches, his hair stood on end, 
and he clinched his fist for a moment; I thought he would 
have strangled my father." 

"'You have done that,' he cried, 'you have crushed the 
bulb?' 

"'Indeed I have.' 

"'It is infamous,' said Master Jacob, 'it is odious! You 
have committed a great crime!' 

"My father was quite dumbfounded. 

"'Are you mad, too?' he asked his friend." 

"Oh, what a worthy man is this Master Jacob!" muttered 
Cornelius, -- "an honest soul, an excellent heart that he 
is." 

"The truth is, that it is impossible to treat a man more 
rudely than he did my father; he was really quite in 
despair, repeating over and over again, -- 

"'Crushed, crushed the bulb! my God, my God! crushed!' 

"Then, turning toward me, he asked, 'But it was not the only 
one that he had?'" 

"Did he ask that?" inquired Cornelius, with some anxiety. 

"'You think it was not the only one?' said my father. 'Very 
well, we shall search for the others.' 

"'You will search for the others?' cried Jacob, taking my 
father by the collar; but he immediately loosed him. Then, 
turning towards me, he continued, asking 'And what did that 
poor young man say?' 

"I did not know what to answer, as you had so strictly 
enjoined me never to allow any one to guess the interest 
which you are taking in the bulb. Fortunately, my father 
saved me from the difficulty by chiming in, -- 

"'What did he say? Didn't he fume and fret?' 

"I interrupted him, saying, 'Was it not natural that be 
should be furious, you were so unjust and brutal, father?' 

"'Well, now, are you mad?' cried my father; 'what immense 
misfortune is it to crush a tulip bulb? You may buy a 
hundred of them in the market of Gorcum.' 

"'Perhaps some less precious one than that was!' I quite 
incautiously replied." 

"And what did Jacob say or do at these words?" asked 
Cornelius. 

"At these words, if I must say it, his eyes seemed to flash 
like lightning." 

"But," said Cornelius, "that was not all; I am sure he said 
something in his turn." 

"'So, then, my pretty Rosa,' he said, with a voice as sweet 
a honey, -- 'so you think that bulb to have been a precious 
one?' 

"I saw that I had made a blunder. 

"'What do I know?' I said, negligently; 'do I understand 
anything of tulips? I only know -- as unfortunately it is 
our lot to live with prisoners -- that for them any pastime 
is of value. This poor Mynheer van Baerle amused himself 
with this bulb. Well, I think it very cruel to take from him 
the only thing that he could have amused himself with.' 

"'But, first of all,' said my father, 'we ought to know how 
he has contrived to procure this bulb.' 

"I turned my eyes away to avoid my father's look; but I met 
those of Jacob. 

"It was as if he had tried to read my thoughts at the bottom 
of my heart. 

"Some little show of anger sometimes saves an answer. I 
shrugged my shoulders, turned my back, and advanced towards 
the door. 

"But I was kept by something which I heard, although it was 
uttered in a very low voice only. 

"Jacob said to my father, -- 

"'It would not be so difficult to ascertain that.' 

"'How so?' 

"'You need only search his person: and if he has the other 
bulbs, we shall find them, as there usually are three 
suckers!'" 

"Three suckers!" cried Cornelius. "Did you say that I have 
three?" 

"The word certainly struck me just as much as it does you. I 
turned round. They were both of them so deeply engaged in 
their conversation that they did not observe my movement. 

"'But,' said my father, 'perhaps he has not got his bulbs 
about him?' 

"'Then take him down, under some pretext or other and I will 
search his cell in the meanwhile.'" 

"Halloa, halloa!" said Cornelius. "But this Mr. Jacob of 
yours is a villain, it seems." 

"I am afraid he is." 

"Tell me, Rosa," continued Cornelius, with a pensive air. 

"What?" 

"Did you not tell me that on the day when you prepared your 
borders this man followed you?" 

"So he did." 

"That he glided like a shadow behind the elder trees?" 

"Certainly." 

"That not one of your movements escaped him?" 

"Not one, indeed." 

"Rosa," said Cornelius, growing quite pale. 

"Well?" 

"It was not you he was after." 

"Who else, then?" 

"It is not you that he was in love with!" 

"But with whom else?" 

"He was after my bulb, and is in love with my tulip!" 

"You don't say so! And yet it is very possible," said Rosa. 

"Will you make sure of it?" 

"In what manner?" 

"Oh, it would be very easy!" 

"Tell me." 

"Go to-morrow into the garden; manage matters so that Jacob 
may know, as he did the first time, that you are going 
there, and that he may follow you. Feign to put the bulb 
into the ground; leave the garden, but look through the 
keyhole of the door and watch him." 

"Well, and what then?" 

"What then? We shall do as he does." 

"Oh!" said Rosa, with a sigh, "you are very fond of your 
bulbs." 

"To tell the truth," said the prisoner, sighing likewise, 
"since your father crushed that unfortunate bulb, I feel as 
if part of my own self had been paralyzed." 

"Now just hear me," said Rosa; "will you try something 
else?" 

"What?" 

"Will you accept the proposition of my father?" 

"Which proposition?" 

"Did not he offer to you tulip bulbs by hundreds?" 

"Indeed he did." 

"Accept two or three, and, along with them, you may grow the 
third sucker." 

"Yes, that would do very well," said Cornelius, knitting his 
brow; "if your father were alone, but there is that Master 
Jacob, who watches all our ways." 

"Well, that is true; but only think! you are depriving 
yourself, as I can easily see, of a very great pleasure." 

She pronounced these words with a smile, which was not 
altogether without a tinge of irony. 

Cornelius reflected for a moment; he evidently was 
struggling against some vehement desire. 

"No!" he cried at last, with the stoicism of a Roman of old, 
"it would be a weakness, it would be a folly, it would be a 
meanness! If I thus give up the only and last resource which 
we possess to the uncertain chances of the bad passions of 
anger and envy, I should never deserve to be forgiven. No, 
Rosa, no; to-morrow we shall come to a conclusion as to the 
spot to be chosen for your tulip; you will plant it 
according to my instructions; and as to the third sucker," 
-- Cornelius here heaved a deep sigh, -- "watch over it as a 
miser over his first or last piece of gold; as the mother 
over her child; as the wounded over the last drop of blood 
in his veins; watch over it, Rosa! Some voice within me 
tells me that it will be our saving, that it will be a 
source of good to us." 

"Be easy, Mynheer Cornelius," said Rosa, with a sweet 
mixture of melancholy and gravity, "be easy; your wishes are 
commands to me." 

"And even," continued Van Baerle, warming more and more with 
his subject, "if you should perceive that your steps are 
watched, and that your speech has excited the suspicion of 
your father and of that detestable Master Jacob, -- well, 
Rosa, don't hesitate for one moment to sacrifice me, who am 
only still living through you, -- me, who have no one in the 
world but you; sacrifice me, -- don't come to see me any 
more." 

Rosa felt her heart sink within her, and her eyes were 
filling with tears. 

"Alas!" she said. 

"What is it?" asked Cornelius. 

"I see one thing." 

"What do you see?" 

"I see," said she, bursting out in sobs, "I see that you 
love your tulips with such love as to have no more room in 
your heart left for other affections." 

Saying this, she fled. 

Cornelius, after this, passed one of the worst nights he 
ever had in his life. 

Rosa was vexed with him, and with good reason. Perhaps she 
would never return to see the prisoner, and then he would 
have no more news, either of Rosa or of his tulips. 

We have to confess, to the disgrace of our hero and of 
floriculture, that of his two affections he felt most 
strongly inclined to regret the loss of Rosa; and when, at 
about three in the morning, he fell asleep overcome with 
fatigue, and harassed with remorse, the grand black tulip 
yielded precedence in his dreams to the sweet blue eyes of 
the fair maid of Friesland. 




Chapter 19

The Maid and the Flower

 
But poor Rosa, in her secluded chamber, could not have known 
of whom or of what Cornelius was dreaming. 

From what he had said she was more ready to believe that he 
dreamed of the black tulip than of her; and yet Rosa was 
mistaken. 

But as there was no one to tell her so, and as the words of 
Cornelius's thoughtless speech had fallen upon her heart 
like drops of poison, she did not dream, but she wept. 

The fact was, that, as Rosa was a high-spirited creature, of 
no mean perception and a noble heart, she took a very clear 
and judicious view of her own social position, if not of her 
moral and physical qualities. 

Cornelius was a scholar, and was wealthy, -- at least he had 
been before the confiscation of his property; Cornelius 
belonged to the merchant-bourgeoisie, who were prouder of 
their richly emblazoned shop signs than the hereditary 
nobility of their heraldic bearings. Therefore, although he 
might find Rosa a pleasant companion for the dreary hours of 
his captivity, when it came to a question of bestowing his 
heart it was almost certain that he would bestow it upon a 
tulip, -- that is to say, upon the proudest and noblest of 
flowers, rather than upon poor Rosa, the jailer's lowly 
child. 

Thus Rosa understood Cornelius's preference of the tulip to 
herself, but was only so much the more unhappy therefor. 

During the whole of this terrible night the poor girl did 
not close an eye, and before she rose in the morning she had 
come to the resolution of making her appearance at the 
grated window no more. 

But as she knew with what ardent desire Cornelius looked 
forward to the news about his tulip; and as, notwithstanding 
her determination not to see any more a man her pity for 
whose fate was fast growing into love, she did not, on the 
other hand, wish to drive him to despair, she resolved to 
continue by herself the reading and writing lessons; and, 
fortunately, she had made sufficient progress to dispense 
with the help of a master when the master was not to be 
Cornelius. 

Rosa therefore applied herself most diligently to reading 
poor Cornelius de Witt's Bible, on the second fly leaf of 
which the last will of Cornelius van Baerle was written. 

"Alas!" she muttered, when perusing again this document, 
which she never finished without a tear, the pearl of love, 
rolling from her limpid eyes on her pale cheeks -- "alas! at 
that time I thought for one moment he loved me." 

Poor Rosa! she was mistaken. Never had the love of the 
prisoner been more sincere than at the time at which we are 
now arrived, when in the contest between the black tulip and 
Rosa the tulip had had to yield to her the first and 
foremost place in Cornelius's heart. 

But Rosa was not aware of it. 

Having finished reading, she took her pen, and began with as 
laudable diligence the by far more difficult task of 
writing. 

As, however, Rosa was already able to write a legible hand 
when Cornelius so uncautiously opened his heart, she did not 
despair of progressing quickly enough to write, after eight 
days at the latest, to the prisoner an account of his tulip. 

She had not forgotten one word of the directions given to 
her by Cornelius, whose speeches she treasured in her heart, 
even when they did not take the shape of directions. 

He, on his part, awoke deeper in love than ever. The tulip, 
indeed, was still a luminous and prominent object in his 
mind; but he no longer looked upon it as a treasure to which 
he ought to sacrifice everything, and even Rosa, but as a 
marvellous combination of nature and art with which he would 
have been happy to adorn the bosom of his beloved one. 

Yet during the whole of that day he was haunted with a vague 
uneasiness, at the bottom of which was the fear lest Rosa 
should not come in the evening to pay him her usual visit. 
This thought took more and more hold of him, until at the 
approach of evening his whole mind was absorbed in it. 

How his heart beat when darkness closed in! The words which 
he had said to Rosa on the evening before and which had so 
deeply afflicted her, now came back to his mind more vividly 
than ever, and he asked himself how he could have told his 
gentle comforter to sacrifice him to his tulip, -- that is 
to say, to give up seeing him, if need be, -- whereas to him 
the sight of Rosa had become a condition of life. 

In Cornelius's cell one heard the chimes of the clock of the 
fortress. It struck seven, it struck eight, it struck nine. 
Never did the metal voice vibrate more forcibly through the 
heart of any man than did the last stroke, marking the ninth 
hour, through the heart of Cornelius. 

All was then silent again. Cornelius put his hand on his 
heart, to repress as it were its violent palpitation, and 
listened. 

The noise of her footstep, the rustling of her gown on the 
staircase, were so familiar to his ear, that she had no 
sooner mounted one step than he used to say to himself, -- 

"Here comes Rosa." 

This evening none of those little noises broke the silence 
of the lobby, the clock struck nine, and a quarter; the 
half-hour, then a quarter to ten, and at last its deep tone 
announced, not only to the inmates of the fortress, but also 
to all the inhabitants of Loewestein, that it was ten. 

This was the hour at which Rosa generally used to leave 
Cornelius. The hour had struck, but Rosa had not come. 

Thus then his foreboding had not deceived him; Rosa, being 
vexed, shut herself up in her room and left him to himself. 

"Alas!" he thought, "I have deserved all this. She will come 
no more, and she is right in staying away; in her place I 
should do just the same." 

Yet notwithstanding all this, Cornelius listened, waited, 
and hoped until midnight, then he threw himself upon the 
bed, with his clothes on. 

It was a long and sad night for him, and the day brought no 
hope to the prisoner. 

At eight in the morning, the door of his cell opened; but 
Cornelius did not even turn his head; he had heard the heavy 
step of Gryphus in the lobby, but this step had perfectly 
satisfied the prisoner that his jailer was coming alone. 

Thus Cornelius did not even look at Gryphus. 

And yet he would have been so glad to draw him out, and to 
inquire about Rosa. He even very nearly made this inquiry, 
strange as it would needs have appeared to her father. To 
tell the truth, there was in all this some selfish hope to 
hear from Gryphus that his daughter was ill. 

Except on extraordinary occasions, Rosa never came during 
the day. Cornelius therefore did not really expect her as 
long as the day lasted. Yet his sudden starts, his listening 
at the door, his rapid glances at every little noise towards 
the grated window, showed clearly that the prisoner 
entertained some latent hope that Rosa would, somehow or 
other, break her rule. 

At the second visit of Gryphus, Cornelius, contrary to all 
his former habits, asked the old jailer, with the most 
winning voice, about her health; but Gryphus contented 
himself with giving the laconical answer, -- 

"All's well." 

At the third visit of the day, Cornelius changed his former 
inquiry: -- 

"I hope nobody is ill at Loewestein?" 

"Nobody," replied, even more laconically, the jailer, 
shutting the door before the nose of the prisoner. 

Gryphus, being little used to this sort of civility on the 
part of Cornelius, began to suspect that his prisoner was 
about to try and bribe him. 

Cornelius was now alone once more; it was seven o'clock in 
the evening, and the anxiety of yesterday returned with 
increased intensity. 

But another time the hours passed away without bringing the 
sweet vision which lighted up, through the grated window, 
the cell of poor Cornelius, and which, in retiring, left 
light enough in his heart to last until it came back again. 

Van Baerle passed the night in an agony of despair. On the 
following day Gryphus appeared to him even more hideous, 
brutal, and hateful than usual; in his mind, or rather in 
his heart, there had been some hope that it was the old man 
who prevented his daughter from coming. 

In his wrath he would have strangled Gryphus, but would not 
this have separated him for ever from Rosa? 

The evening closing in, his despair changed into melancholy, 
which was the more gloomy as, involuntarily, Van Baerle 
mixed up with it the thought of his poor tulip. It was now 
just that week in April which the most experienced gardeners 
point out as the precise time when tulips ought to be 
planted. He had said to Rosa, -- 

"I shall tell you the day when you are to put the bulb in 
the ground." 

He had intended to fix, at the vainly hoped for interview, 
the following day as the time for that momentous operation. 
The weather was propitious; the air, though still damp, 
began to be tempered by those pale rays of the April sun 
which, being the first, appear so congenial, although so 
pale. How if Rosa allowed the right moment for planting the 
bulb to pass by, -- if, in addition to the grief of seeing 
her no more, he should have to deplore the misfortune of 
seeing his tulip fail on account of its having been planted 
too late, or of its not having been planted at all! 

These two vexations combined might well make him leave off 
eating and drinking. 

This was the case on the fourth day. 

It was pitiful to see Cornelius, dumb with grief, and pale 
from utter prostration, stretch out his head through the 
iron bars of his window, at the risk of not being able to 
draw it back again, to try and get a glimpse of the garden 
on the left spoken of by Rosa, who had told him that its 
parapet overlooked the river. He hoped that perhaps he might 
see, in the light of the April sun, Rosa or the tulip, the 
two lost objects of his love. 

In the evening, Gryphus took away the breakfast and dinner 
of Cornelius, who had scarcely touched them. 

On the following day he did not touch them at all, and 
Gryphus carried the dishes away just as he had brought them. 

Cornelius had remained in bed the whole day. 

"Well," said Gryphus, coming down from the last visit, "I 
think we shall soon get rid of our scholar." 

Rosa was startled. 

"Nonsense!" said Jacob. "What do you mean?" 

"He doesn't drink, he doesn't eat, he doesn't leave his bed. 
He will get out of it, like Mynheer Grotius, in a chest, 
only the chest will be a coffin." 

Rosa grew pale as death. 

"Ah!" she said to herself, "he is uneasy about his tulip." 

And, rising with a heavy heart, she returned to her chamber, 
where she took a pen and paper, and during the whole of that 
night busied herself with tracing letters. 

On the following morning, when Cornelius got up to drag 
himself to the window, he perceived a paper which had been 
slipped under the door. 

He pounced upon it, opened it, and read the following words, 
in a handwriting which he could scarcely have recognized as 
that of Rosa, so much had she improved during her short 
absence of seven days, -- 

"Be easy; your tulip is going on well." 

Although these few words of Rosa's somewhat soothed the 
grief of Cornelius, yet he felt not the less the irony which 
was at the bottom of them. Rosa, then, was not ill, she was 
offended; she had not been forcibly prevented from coming, 
but had voluntarily stayed away. Thus Rosa, being at 
liberty, found in her own will the force not to come and see 
him, who was dying with grief at not having seen her. 

Cornelius had paper and a pencil which Rosa had brought to 
him. He guessed that she expected an answer, but that she 
would not come before the evening to fetch it. He therefore 
wrote on a piece of paper, similar to that which he had 
received, -- 

"It was not my anxiety about the tulip that has made me ill, 
but the grief at not seeing you." 

After Gryphus had made his last visit of the day, and 
darkness had set in, he slipped the paper under the door, 
and listened with the most intense attention, but he neither 
heard Rosa's footsteps nor the rustling of her gown. 

He only heard a voice as feeble as a breath, and gentle like 
a caress, which whispered through the grated little window 
in the door the word, -- 

"To-morrow!" 

Now to-morrow was the eighth day. For eight days Cornelius 
and Rosa had not seen each other. 




Chapter 20

The Events which took place during those Eight Days


On the following evening, at the usual hour, Van Baerle 
heard some one scratch at the grated little window, just as 
Rosa had been in the habit of doing in the heyday of their 
friendship. 

Cornelius being, as may easily be imagined, not far off from 
the door, perceived Rosa, who at last was waiting again for 
him with her lamp in her hand. 

Seeing him so sad and pale, she was startled, and said, -- 

"You are ill, Mynheer Cornelius?" 

"Yes, I am," he answered, as indeed he was suffering in mind 
and in body. 

"I saw that you did not eat," said Rosa; "my father told me 
that you remained in bed all day. I then wrote to calm your 
uneasiness concerning the fate of the most precious object 
of your anxiety." 

"And I," said Cornelius, "I have answered. Seeing your 
return, my dear Rosa, I thought you had received my letter." 

"It is true; I have received it." 

"You cannot this time excuse yourself with not being able to 
read. Not only do you read very fluently, but also you have 
made marvellous progress in writing." 

"Indeed, I have not only received, but also read your note. 
Accordingly I am come to see whether there might not be some 
remedy to restore you to health." 

"Restore me to health?" cried Cornelius; "but have you any 
good news to communicate to me?" 

Saying this, the poor prisoner looked at Rosa, his eyes 
sparkling with hope. 

Whether she did not, or would not, understand this look, 
Rosa answered gravely, -- 

"I have only to speak to you about your tulip, which, as I 
well know, is the object uppermost in your mind." 

Rosa pronounced those few words in a freezing tone, which 
cut deeply into the heart of Cornelius. He did not suspect 
what lay hidden under this appearance of indifference with 
which the poor girl affected to speak of her rival, the 
black tulip. 

"Oh!" muttered Cornelius, "again! again! Have I not told 
you, Rosa, that I thought but of you? that it was you alone 
whom I regretted, you whom I missed, you whose absence I 
felt more than the loss of liberty and of life itself?" 

Rosa smiled with a melancholy air. 

"Ah!" she said, "your tulip has been in such danger." 

Cornelius trembled involuntarily, and showed himself clearly 
to be caught in the trap, if ever the remark was meant as 
such. 

"Danger!" he cried, quite alarmed; "what danger?" 

Rosa looked at him with gentle compassion; she felt that 
what she wished was beyond the power of this man, and that 
he must be taken as he was, with his little foible. 

"Yes," she said, "you have guessed the truth; that suitor 
and amorous swain, Jacob, did not come on my account." 

"And what did he come for?" Cornelius anxiously asked. 

"He came for the sake of the tulip." 

"Alas!" said Cornelius, growing even paler at this piece of 
information than he had been when Rosa, a fortnight before, 
had told him that Jacob was coming for her sake. 

Rosa saw this alarm, and Cornelius guessed, from the 
expression of her face, in what direction her thoughts were 
running. 

"Oh, pardon me, Rosa!" he said, "I know you, and I am well 
aware of the kindness and sincerity of your heart. To you 
God has given the thought and strength for defending 
yourself; but to my poor tulip, when it is in danger, God 
has given nothing of the sort." 

Rosa, without replying to this excuse of the prisoner, 
continued, -- 

"From the moment when I first knew that you were uneasy on 
account of the man who followed me, and in whom I had 
recognized Jacob, I was even more uneasy myself. On the day, 
therefore, after that on which I saw you last, and on which 
you said -- " 

Cornelius interrupted her. 

"Once more, pardon me, Rosa!" he cried. "I was wrong in 
saying to you what I said. I have asked your pardon for that 
unfortunate speech before. I ask it again: shall I always 
ask it in vain?" 

"On the following day," Rosa continued, "remembering what 
you had told me about the stratagem which I was to employ to 
ascertain whether that odious man was after the tulip, or 
after me ---- " 

"Yes, yes, odious. Tell me," he said, "do you hate that 
man?" 

"I do hate him," said Rosa, "as he is the cause of all the 
unhappiness I have suffered these eight days." 

"You, too, have been unhappy, Rosa? I thank you a thousand 
times for this kind confession." 

"Well, on the day after that unfortunate one, I went down 
into the garden and proceeded towards the border where I was 
to plant your tulip, looking round all the while to see 
whether I was again followed as I was last time." 

"And then?" Cornelius asked. 

"And then the same shadow glided between the gate and the 
wall, and once more disappeared behind the elder-trees." 

"You feigned not to see him, didn't you?" Cornelius asked, 
remembering all the details of the advice which he had given 
to Rosa. 

"Yes, and I stooped over the border, in which I dug with a 
spade, as if I was going to put the bulb in." 

"And he, -- what did he do during all this time?" 

"I saw his eyes glisten through the branches of the tree 
like those of a tiger." 

"There you see, there you see!" cried Cornelius. 

"Then, after having finished my make-believe work, I 
retired." 

"But only behind the garden door, I dare say, so that you 
might see through the keyhole what he was going to do when 
you had left?" 

"He waited for a moment, very likely to make sure of my not 
coming back, after which he sneaked forth from his 
hiding-place, and approached the border by a long 
round-about; at last, having reached his goal, that is to 
say, the spot where the ground was newly turned, he stopped 
with a careless air, looking about in all directions, and 
scanning every corner of the garden, every window of the 
neighbouring houses, and even the sky; after which, thinking 
himself quite alone, quite isolated, and out of everybody's 
sight, he pounced upon the border, plunged both his hands 
into the soft soil, took a handful of the mould, which he 
gently frittered between his fingers to see whether the bulb 
was in it, and repeated the same thing twice or three times, 
until at last he perceived that he was outwitted. Then, 
keeping down the agitation which was raging in his breast, 
he took up the rake, smoothed the ground, so as to leave it 
on his retiring in the same state as he had found it, and, 
quite abashed and rueful, walked back to the door, affecting 
the unconcerned air of an ordinary visitor of the garden." 

"Oh, the wretch!" muttered Cornelius, wiping the cold sweat 
from his brow. "Oh, the wretch! I guessed his intentions. 
But the bulb, Rosa; what have you done with it? It is 
already rather late to plant it." 

"The bulb? It has been in the ground for these six days." 

"Where? and how?" cried Cornelius. "Good Heaven, what 
imprudence! What is it? In what sort of soil is it? It what 
aspect? Good or bad? Is there no risk of having it filched 
by that detestable Jacob?" 

"There is no danger of its being stolen," said Rosa, "unless 
Jacob will force the door of my chamber." 

"Oh! then it is with you in your bedroom?" said Cornelius, 
somewhat relieved. "But in what soil? in what vessel? You 
don't let it grow, I hope, in water like those good ladies 
of Haarlem and Dort, who imagine that water could replace 
the earth?" 

"You may make yourself comfortable on that score," said 
Rosa, smiling; "your bulb is not growing in water." 

"I breathe again." 

"It is in a good, sound stone pot, just about the size of 
the jug in which you had planted yours. The soil is composed 
of three parts of common mould, taken from the best spot of 
the garden, and one of the sweepings of the road. I have 
heard you and that detestable Jacob, as you call him, so 
often talk about what is the soil best fitted for growing 
tulips, that I know it as well as the first gardener of 
Haarlem." 

"And now what is the aspect, Rosa?" 

"At present it has the sun all day long, -- that is to say 
when the sun shines. But when it once peeps out of the 
ground, I shall do as you have done here, dear Mynheer 
Cornelius: I shall put it out of my window on the eastern 
side from eight in the morning until eleven and in my window 
towards the west from three to five in the afternoon." 

"That's it! that's it!" cried Cornelius; "and you are a 
perfect gardener, my pretty Rosa. But I am afraid the 
nursing of my tulip will take up all your time." 

"Yes, it will," said Rosa; "but never mind. Your tulip is my 
daughter. I shall devote to it the same time as I should to 
a child of mine, if I were a mother. Only by becoming its 
mother," Rosa added, smilingly, "can I cease to be its 
rival." 

"My kind and pretty Rosa!" muttered Cornelius casting on her 
a glance in which there was much more of the lover than of 
the gardener, and which afforded Rosa some consolation. 

Then, after a silence of some moments, during which 
Cornelius had grasped through the openings of the grating 
for the receding hand of Rosa, he said, -- 

"Do you mean to say that the bulb has now been in the ground 
for six days?" 

"Yes, six days, Mynheer Cornelius," she answered. 

"And it does not yet show leaf" 

"No, but I think it will to-morrow." 

"Well, then, to-morrow you will bring me news about it, and 
about yourself, won't you, Rosa? I care very much for the 
daughter, as you called it just now, but I care even much 
more for the mother." 

"To-morrow?" said Rosa, looking at Cornelius askance. "I 
don't know whether I shall be able to come to-morrow." 

"Good heavens!" said Cornelius, "why can't you come 
to-morrow?" 

"Mynheer Cornelius, I have lots of things to do." 

"And I have only one," muttered Cornelius. 

"Yes," said Rosa, "to love your tulip." 

"To love you, Rosa." 

Rosa shook her head, after which followed a pause. 

"Well," -- Cornelius at last broke the silence, -- "well, 
Rosa, everything changes in the realm of nature; the flowers 
of spring are succeeded by other flowers; and the bees, 
which so tenderly caressed the violets and the wall-flowers, 
will flutter with just as much love about the honey-suckles, 
the rose, the jessamine, and the carnation." 

"What does all this mean?" asked Rosa. 

"You have abandoned me, Miss Rosa, to seek your pleasure 
elsewhere. You have done well, and I will not complain. What 
claim have I to your fidelity?" 

"My fidelity!" Rosa exclaimed, with her eyes full of tears, 
and without caring any longer to hide from Cornelius this 
dew of pearls dropping on her cheeks, "my fidelity! have I 
not been faithful to you?" 

"Do you call it faithful to desert me, and to leave me here 
to die?" 

"But, Mynheer Cornelius," said Rosa, "am I not doing 
everything for you that could give you pleasure? have I not 
devoted myself to your tulip?" 

"You are bitter, Rosa, you reproach me with the only 
unalloyed pleasure which I have had in this world." 

"I reproach you with nothing, Mynheer Cornelius, except, 
perhaps, with the intense grief which I felt when people 
came to tell me at the Buytenhof that you were about to be 
put to death." 

"You are displeased, Rosa, my sweet girl, with my loving 
flowers." 

"I am not displeased with your loving them, Mynheer 
Cornelius, only it makes me sad to think that you love them 
better than you do me." 

"Oh, my dear, dear Rosa! look how my hands tremble; look at 
my pale cheek, hear how my heart beats. It is for you, my 
love, not for the black tulip. Destroy the bulb, destroy the 
germ of that flower, extinguish the gentle light of that 
innocent and delightful dream, to which I have accustomed 
myself; but love me, Rosa, love me; for I feel deeply that I 
love but you." 

"Yes, after the black tulip," sighed Rosa, who at last no 
longer coyly withdrew her warm hands from the grating, as 
Cornelius most affectionately kissed them. 

"Above and before everything in this world, Rosa." 

"May I believe you?" 

"As you believe in your own existence." 

"Well, then, be it so; but loving me does not bind you too 
much." 

"Unfortunately, it does not bind me more than I am bound; 
but it binds you, Rosa, you." 

"To what?" 

"First of all, not to marry." 

She smiled. 

"That's your way," she said; "you are tyrants all of you. 
You worship a certain beauty, you think of nothing but her. 
Then you are condemned to death, and whilst walking to the 
scaffold, you devote to her your last sigh; and now you 
expect poor me to sacrifice to you all my dreams and my 
happiness." 

"But who is the beauty you are talking of, Rosa?" said 
Cornelius, trying in vain to remember a woman to whom Rosa 
might possibly be alluding. 

"The dark beauty with a slender waist, small feet, and a 
noble head; in short, I am speaking of your flower." 

Cornelius smiled. 

"That is an imaginary lady love, at all events; whereas, 
without counting that amorous Jacob, you by your own account 
are surrounded with all sorts of swains eager to make love 
to you. Do you remember Rosa, what you told me of the 
students, officers, and clerks of the Hague? Are there no 
clerks, officers, or students at Loewestein?" 

"Indeed there are, and lots of them." 

"Who write letters?" 

"They do write." 

"And now, as you know how to read ---- " 

Here Cornelius heaved a sigh at the thought, that, poor 
captive as he was, to him alone Rosa owed the faculty of 
reading the love-letters which she received. 

"As to that," said Rosa, "I think that in reading the notes 
addressed to me, and passing the different swains in review 
who send them to me, I am only following your instructions." 

"How so? My instructions?" 

"Indeed, your instructions, sir," said Rosa, sighing in her 
turn; "have you forgotten the will written by your hand on 
the Bible of Cornelius de Witt? I have not forgotten it; for 
now, as I know how to read, I read it every day over and 
over again. In that will you bid me to love and marry a 
handsome young man of twenty-six or eight years. I am on the 
look-out for that young man, and as the whole of my day is 
taken up with your tulip, you must needs leave me the 
evenings to find him." 

"But, Rosa, the will was made in the expectation of death, 
and, thanks to Heaven, I am still alive." 

"Well, then, I shall not be after the handsome young man, 
and I shall come to see you." 

"That's it, Rosa, come! come!" 

"Under one condition." 

"Granted beforehand!" 

"That the black tulip shall not be mentioned for the next 
three days." 

"It shall never be mentioned any more, if you wish it, 
Rosa." 

"No, no," the damsel said, laughing, "I will not ask for 
impossibilities." 

And, saying this, she brought her fresh cheek, as if 
unconsciously, so near the iron grating, that Cornelius was 
able to touch it with his lips. 

Rosa uttered a little scream, which, however, was full of 
love, and disappeared. 




Chapter 21

The Second Bulb


The night was a happy one, and the whole of the next day 
happier still. 

During the last few days, the prison had been heavy, dark, 
and lowering, as it were, with all its weight on the 
unfortunate captive. Its walls were black, its air chilling, 
the iron bars seemed to exclude every ray of light. 

But when Cornelius awoke next morning, a beam of the morning 
sun was playing about those iron bars; pigeons were hovering 
about with outspread wings, whilst others were lovingly 
cooing on the roof or near the still closed window. 

Cornelius ran to that window and opened it; it seemed to him 
as if new life, and joy, and liberty itself were entering 
with this sunbeam into his cell, which, so dreary of late, 
was now cheered and irradiated by the light of love. 

When Gryphus, therefore, came to see his prisoner in the 
morning, he no longer found him morose and lying in bed, but 
standing at the window, and singing a little ditty. 

"Halloa!" exclaimed the jailer. 

"How are you this morning?" asked Cornelius. 

Gryphus looked at him with a scowl. 

"And how is the dog, and Master Jacob, and our pretty Rosa?" 

Gryphus ground his teeth, saying. -- 

"Here is your breakfast." 

"Thank you, friend Cerberus," said the prisoner; "you are 
just in time; I am very hungry." 

"Oh! you are hungry, are you?" said Gryphus. 

"And why not?" asked Van Baerle. 

"The conspiracy seems to thrive," remarked Gryphus. 

"What conspiracy?" 

"Very well, I know what I know, Master Scholar; just be 
quiet, we shall be on our guard." 

"Be on your guard, friend Gryphus; be on your guard as long 
as you please; my conspiracy, as well as my person, is 
entirely at your service." 

"We'll see that at noon." 

Saying this, Gryphus went out. 

"At noon?" repeated Cornelius; "what does that mean? Well, 
let us wait until the clock strikes twelve, and we shall 
see." 

It was very easy for Cornelius to wait for twelve at midday, 
as he was already waiting for nine at night. 

It struck twelve, and there were heard on the staircase not 
only the steps of Gryphus, but also those of three or four 
soldiers, who were coming up with him. 

The door opened. Gryphus entered, led his men in, and shut 
the door after them. 

"There, now search!" 

They searched not only the pockets of Cornelius, but even 
his person; yet they found nothing. 

They then searched the sheets, the mattress, and the straw 
mattress of his bed; and again they found nothing. 

Now, Cornelius rejoiced that he had not taken the third 
sucker under his own care. Gryphus would have been sure to 
ferret it out in the search, and would then have treated it 
as he did the first. 

And certainly never did prisoner look with greater 
complacency at a search made in his cell than Cornelius. 

Gryphus retired with the pencil and the two or three leaves 
of white paper which Rosa had given to Van Baerle, this was 
the only trophy brought back from the expedition. 

At six Gryphus came back again, but alone; Cornelius tried 
to propitiate him, but Gryphus growled, showed a large tooth 
like a tusk, which he had in the corner of his mouth, and 
went out backwards, like a man who is afraid of being 
attacked from behind. 

Cornelius burst out laughing, to which Gryphus answered 
through the grating, -- 

"Let him laugh that wins." 

The winner that day was Cornelius; Rosa came at nine. 

She was without a lantern. She needed no longer a light, as 
she could now read. Moreover, the light might betray her, as 
Jacob was dogging her steps more than ever. And lastly, the 
light would have shown her blushes. 

Of what did the young people speak that evening? Of those 
matters of which lovers speak at the house doors in France, 
or from a balcony into the street in Spain, or down from a 
terrace into a garden in the East. 

They spoke of those things which give wings to the hours; 
they spoke of everything except the black tulip. 

At last, when the clock struck ten, they parted as usual. 

Cornelius was happy, as thoroughly happy as a tulip-fancier 
would be to whom one has not spoken of his tulip. 

He found Rosa pretty, good, graceful, and charming. 

But why did Rosa object to the tulip being spoken of? 

This was indeed a great defect in Rosa. 

Cornelius confessed to himself, sighing, that woman was not 
perfect. 

Part of the night he thought of this imperfection; that is 
to say, so long as he was awake he thought of Rosa. 

After having fallen asleep, he dreamed of her. 

But the Rosa of his dreams was by far more perfect than the 
Rosa of real life. Not only did the Rosa of his dreams speak 
of the tulip, but also brought to him a black one in a china 
vase. 

Cornelius then awoke, trembling with joy, and muttering, -- 

"Rosa, Rosa, I love you." 

And as it was already day, he thought it right not to fall 
asleep again, and he continued following up the line of 
thought in which his mind was engaged when he awoke. 

Ah! if Rosa had only conversed about the tulip, Cornelius 
would have preferred her to Queen Semiramis, to Queen 
Cleopatra, to Queen Elizabeth, to Queen Anne of Austria; 
that is to say, to the greatest or most beautiful queens 
whom the world has seen. 

But Rosa had forbidden it under pain of not returning; Rosa 
had forbidden the least mention of the tulip for three days. 
That meant seventy-two hours given to the lover to be sure; 
but it was seventy-two hours stolen from the horticulturist. 

There was one consolation: of the seventy-two hours during 
which Rosa would not allow the tulip to be mentioned, 
thirty-six had passed already; and the remaining thirty-six 
would pass quickly enough: eighteen with waiting for the 
evening's interview, and eighteen with rejoicing in its 
remembrance. 

Rosa came at the same hour, and Cornelius submitted most 
heroically to the pangs which the compulsory silence 
concerning the tulip gave him. 

His fair visitor, however, was well aware that, to command 
on the one point, people must yield on another; she 
therefore no longer drew back her hands from the grating, 
and even allowed Cornelius tenderly to kiss her beautiful 
golden tresses. 

Poor girl! she had no idea that these playful little lovers' 
tricks were much more dangerous than speaking of the tulip 
was; but she became aware of the fact as she returned with a 
beating heart, with glowing cheeks, dry lips, and moist 
eyes. 

And on the following evening, after the first exchange of 
salutations, she retired a step, looking at him with a 
glance, the expression of which would have rejoiced his 
heart could he but have seen it. 

"Well," she said, "she is up." 

"She is up! Who? What?" asked Cornelius, who did not venture 
on a belief that Rosa would, of her own accord, have 
abridged the term of his probation. 

"She? Well, my daughter, the tulip," said Rosa. 

"What!" cried Cornelius, "you give me permission, then?" 

"I do," said Rosa, with the tone of an affectionate mother 
who grants a pleasure to her child. 

"Ah, Rosa!" said Cornelius, putting his lips to the grating 
with the hope of touching a cheek, a hand, a forehead, -- 
anything, in short. 

He touched something much better, -- two warm and half open 
lips. 

Rosa uttered a slight scream. 

Cornelius understood that he must make haste to continue the 
conversation. He guessed that this unexpected kiss had 
frightened Rosa. 

"Is it growing up straight?" 

"Straight as a rocket," said Rosa. 

"How high?" 

"At least two inches." 

"Oh, Rosa, take good care of it, and we shall soon see it 
grow quickly." 

"Can I take more care of it?" said she. "Indeed, I think of 
nothing else but the tulip." 

"Of nothing else, Rosa? Why, now I shall grow jealous in my 
turn." 

"Oh, you know that to think of the tulip is to think of you; 
I never lose sight of it. I see it from my bed, on awaking 
it is the first object that meets my eyes, and on falling 
asleep the last on which they rest. During the day I sit and 
work by its side, for I have never left my chamber since I 
put it there." 

"You are right Rosa, it is your dowry, you know." 

"Yes, and with it I may marry a young man of twenty-six or 
twenty-eight years, whom I shall be in love with." 

"Don't talk in that way, you naughty girl." 

That evening Cornelius was one of the happiest of men. Rosa 
allowed him to press her hand in his, and to keep it as long 
as he would, besides which he might talk of his tulip as 
much as he liked. 

From that hour every day marked some progress in the growth 
of the tulip and in the affection of the two young people. 

At one time it was that the leaves had expanded, and at 
another that the flower itself had formed. 

Great was the joy of Cornelius at this news, and his 
questions succeeded one another with a rapidity which gave 
proof of their importance. 

"Formed!" exclaimed Cornelius, "is it really formed?" 

"It is," repeated Rosa. 

Cornelius trembled with joy, so much so that he was obliged 
to hold by the grating. 

"Good heavens!" he exclaimed. 

Then, turning again to Rosa, he continued his questions. 

"Is the oval regular? the cylinder full? and are the points 
very green?" 

"The oval is almost one inch long, and tapers like a needle, 
the cylinder swells at the sides, and the points are ready 
to open." 

Two days after Rosa announced that they were open. 

"Open, Rosa!" cried Cornelius. "Is the involucrum open? but 
then one may see and already distinguish ---- " 

Here the prisoner paused, anxiously taking breath. 

"Yes," answered Rosa, "one may already distinguish a thread 
of different colour, as thin as a hair." 

"And its colour?" asked Cornelius, trembling. 

"Oh," answered Rosa, "it is very dark!" 

"Brown?" 

"Darker than that." 

"Darker, my good Rosa, darker? Thank you. Dark as ---- " 

"Dark as the ink with which I wrote to you." 

Cornelius uttered a cry of mad joy. 

Then, suddenly stopping and clasping his hands, he said, -- 

"Oh, there is not an angel in heaven that may be compared to 
you, Rosa!" 

"Indeed!" said Rosa, smiling at his enthusiasm. 

"Rosa, you have worked with such ardour, -- you have done so 
much for me! Rosa, my tulip is about to flower, and it will 
flower black! Rosa, Rosa, you are the most perfect being on 
earth!" 

"After the tulip, though." 

"Ah! be quiet, you malicious little creature, be quiet! For 
shame! Do not spoil my pleasure. But tell me, Rosa, -- as 
the tulip is so far advanced, it will flower in two or three 
days, at the latest?" 

"To-morrow, or the day after." 

"Ah! and I shall not see it," cried Cornelius, starting 
back, "I shall not kiss it, as a wonderful work of the 
Almighty, as I kiss your hand and your cheek, Rosa, when by 
chance they are near the grating." 

Rosa drew near, not by accident, but intentionally, and 
Cornelius kissed her tenderly. 

"Faith, I shall cull it, if you wish it." 

"Oh, no, no, Rosa! when it is open, place it carefully in 
the shade, and immediately send a message to Haarlem, to the 
President of the Horticultural Society, that the grand black 
tulip is in flower. I know well it is far to Haarlem, but 
with money you will find a messenger. Have you any money, 
Rosa?" 

Rosa smiled. 

"Oh, yes!" she said. 

"Enough?" said Cornelius. 

"I have three hundred guilders." 

"Oh, if you have three hundred guilders, you must not send a 
messenger, Rosa, but you must go to Haarlem yourself." 

"But what in the meantime is to become of the flower?" 

"Oh, the flower! you must take it with you. You understand 
that you must not separate from it for an instant." 

"But whilst I am not separating from it, I am separating 
from you, Mynheer Cornelius." 

"Ah! that's true, my sweet Rosa. Oh, my God! how wicked men 
are! What have I done to offend them, and why have they 
deprived me of my liberty? You are right, Rosa, I cannot 
live without you. Well, you will send some one to Haarlem, 
-- that's settled; really, the matter is wonderful enough 
for the President to put himself to some trouble. He will 
come himself to Loewestein to see the tulip." 

Then, suddenly checking himself, he said, with a faltering 
voice, -- 

"Rosa, Rosa, if after all it should not flower black!" 

"Oh, surely, surely, you will know to-morrow, or the day 
after." 

"And to wait until evening to know it, Rosa! I shall die 
with impatience. Could we not agree about a signal?" 

"I shall do better than that." 

"What will you do?" 

"If it opens at night, I shall come and tell you myself. If 
it is day, I shall pass your door, and slip you a note 
either under the door, or through the grating, during the 
time between my father's first and second inspection." 

"Yes, Rosa, let it be so. One word of yours, announcing this 
news to me, will be a double happiness." 

"There, ten o'clock strikes," said Rosa, "I must now leave 
you." 

"Yes, yes," said Cornelius, "go, Rosa, go!" 

Rosa withdrew, almost melancholy, for Cornelius had all but 
sent her away. 

It is true that he did so in order that she might watch over 
his black tulip. 




Chapter 22

The Opening of the Flower


The night passed away very sweetly for Cornelius, although 
in great agitation. Every instant he fancied he heard the 
gentle voice of Rosa calling him. He then started up, went 
to the door, and looked through the grating, but no one was 
behind it, and the lobby was empty. 

Rosa, no doubt, would be watching too, but, happier than he, 
she watched over the tulip; she had before her eyes that 
noble flower, that wonder of wonders. which not only was 
unknown, but was not even thought possible until then. 

What would the world say when it heard that the black tulip 
was found, that it existed and that it was the prisoner Van 
Baerle who had found it? 

How Cornelius would have spurned the offer of his liberty in 
exchange for his tulip! 

Day came, without any news; the tulip was not yet in flower. 

The day passed as the night. Night came, and with it Rosa, 
joyous and cheerful as a bird. 

"Well?" asked Cornelius. 

"Well, all is going on prosperously. This night, without any 
doubt, our tulip will be in flower." 

"And will it flower black?" 

"Black as jet." 

"Without a speck of any other colour." 

"Without one speck." 

"Good Heavens! my dear Rosa, I have been dreaming all night, 
in the first place of you," (Rosa made a sign of 
incredulity,) "and then of what we must do." 

"Well?" 

"Well, and I will tell you now what I have decided on. The 
tulip once being in flower, and it being quite certain that 
it is perfectly black, you must find a messenger." 

"If it is no more than that, I have a messenger quite 
ready." 

"Is he safe?" 

"One for whom I will answer, -- he is one of my lovers." 

"I hope not Jacob." 

"No, be quiet, it is the ferryman of Loewestein, a smart 
young man of twenty-five." 

"By Jove!" 

"Be quiet," said Rosa, smiling, "he is still under age, as 
you have yourself fixed it from twenty-six to twenty-eight." 

"In fine, do you think you may rely on this young man?" 

"As on myself; he would throw himself into the Waal or the 
Meuse if I bade him." 

"Well, Rosa, this lad may be at Haarlem in ten hours; you 
will give me paper and pencil, and, perhaps better still, 
pen and ink, and I will write, or rather, on second 
thoughts, you will, for if I did, being a poor prisoner, 
people might, like your father, see a conspiracy in it. You 
will write to the President of the Horticultural Society, 
and I am sure he will come." 

"But if he tarries?" 

"Well, let us suppose that he tarries one day, or even two; 
but it is impossible. A tulip-fancier like him will not 
tarry one hour, not one minute, not one second, to set out 
to see the eighth wonder of the world. But, as I said, if he 
tarried one or even two days, the tulip will still be in its 
full splendour. The flower once being seen by the President, 
and the protocol being drawn up, all is in order; you will 
only keep a duplicate of the protocol, and intrust the tulip 
to him. Ah! if we had been able to carry it ourselves, Rosa, 
it would never have left my hands but to pass into yours; 
but this is a dream, which we must not entertain," continued 
Cornelius with a sigh, "the eyes of strangers will see it 
flower to the last. And above all, Rosa, before the 
President has seen it, let it not be seen by any one. Alas! 
if any one saw the black tulip, it would be stolen." 

"Oh!" 

"Did you not tell me yourself of what you apprehended from 
your lover Jacob? People will steal one guilder, why not a 
hundred thousand?" 

"I shall watch; be quiet." 

"But if it opened whilst you were here?" 

"The whimsical little thing would indeed be quite capable of 
playing such a trick," said Rosa. 

"And if on your return you find it open?" 

"Well?" 

"Oh, Rosa, whenever it opens, remember that not a moment 
must be lost in apprising the President." 

"And in apprising you. Yes, I understand." 

Rosa sighed, yet without any bitter feeling, but rather like 
a woman who begins to understand a foible, and to accustom 
herself to it. 

"I return to your tulip, Mynheer van Baerle, and as soon as 
it opens I will give you news, which being done the 
messenger will set out immediately." 

"Rosa, Rosa, I don't know to what wonder under the sun I 
shall compare you." 

"Compare me to the black tulip, and I promise you I shall 
feel very much flattered. Good night, then, till we meet 
again, Mynheer Cornelius." 

"Oh, say 'Good night, my friend.'" 

"Good night, my friend," said Rosa, a little consoled. 

"Say, 'My very dear friend.'" 

"Oh, my friend -- " 

"Very dear friend, I entreat you, say 'very dear,' Rosa, 
very dear." 

"Very dear, yes, very dear," said Rosa, with a beating 
heart, beyond herself with happiness. 

"And now that you have said 'very dear,' dear Rosa, say also 
'most happy': say 'happier and more blessed than ever man 
was under the sun.' I only lack one thing, Rosa." 

"And that is?" 

"Your cheek, -- your fresh cheek, your soft, rosy cheek. Oh, 
Rosa, give it me of your own free will, and not by chance. 
Ah!" 

The prisoner's prayer ended in a sigh of ecstasy; his lips 
met those of the maiden, -- not by chance, nor by stratagem, 
but as Saint-Preux's was to meet the lips of Julie a hundred 
years later. 

Rosa made her escape. 

Cornelius stood with his heart upon his lips, and his face 
glued to the wicket in the door. 

He was fairly choking with happiness and joy. He opened his 
window, and gazed long, with swelling heart, at the 
cloudless vault of heaven, and the moon, which shone like 
silver upon the two-fold stream flowing from far beyond the 
hills. He filled his lungs with the pure, sweet air, while 
his brain dwelt upon thoughts of happiness, and his heart 
overflowed with gratitude and religious fervour. 

"Oh Thou art always watching from on high, my God," he 
cried, half prostrate, his glowing eyes fixed upon the 
stars: "forgive me that I almost doubted Thy existence 
during these latter days, for Thou didst hide Thy face 
behind the clouds, and wert for a moment lost to my sight, O 
Thou merciful God, Thou pitying Father everlasting! But 
to-day, this evening, and to-night, again I see Thee in all 
Thy wondrous glory in the mirror of Thy heavenly abode, and 
more clearly still in the mirror of my grateful heart." 

He was well again, the poor invalid; the wretched captive 
was free once more. 

During part of the night Cornelius, with his heart full of 
joy and delight, remained at his window, gazing at the 
stars, and listening for every sound. 

Then casting a glance from time to time towards the lobby, 
-- 

"Down there," he said, "is Rosa, watching like myself, and 
waiting from minute to minute; down there, under Rosa's 
eyes, is the mysterious flower, which lives, which expands, 
which opens, perhaps Rosa holds in this moment the stem of 
the tulip between her delicate fingers. Touch it gently, 
Rosa. Perhaps she touches with her lips its expanding 
chalice. Touch it cautiously, Rosa, your lips are burning. 
Yes, perhaps at this moment the two objects of my dearest 
love caress each other under the eye of Heaven." 

At this moment, a star blazed in the southern sky, and shot 
through the whole horizon, falling down, as it were, on the 
fortress of Loewestein. 

Cornelius felt a thrill run through his frame. 

"Ah!" he said, "here is Heaven sending a soul to my flower." 

And as if he had guessed correctly, nearly at that very 
moment the prisoner heard in the lobby a step light as that 
of a sylph, and the rustling of a gown, and a well-known 
voice, which said to him, -- 

"Cornelius, my friend, my very dear friend, and very happy 
friend, come, come quickly." 

Cornelius darted with one spring from the window to the 
door, his lips met those of Rosa, who told him, with a kiss, 
-- 

"It is open, it is black, here it is." 

"How! here it is?" exclaimed Cornelius. 

"Yes, yes, we ought indeed to run some little risk to give a 
great joy; here it is, take it." 

And with one hand she raised to the level of the grating a 
dark lantern, which she had lit in the meanwhile, whilst 
with the other she held to the same height the miraculous 
tulip. 

Cornelius uttered a cry, and was nearly fainting. 

"Oh!" muttered he, "my God, my God, Thou dost reward me for 
my innocence and my captivity, as Thou hast allowed two such 
flowers to grow at the grated window of my prison!" 

The tulip was beautiful, splendid, magnificent; its stem was 
more than eighteen inches high; it rose from out of four 
green leaves, which were as smooth and straight as iron 
lance-heads; the whole of the flower was as black and 
shining as jet. 

"Rosa," said Cornelius, almost gasping, "Rosa, there is not 
one moment to lose in writing the letter." 

"It is written, my dearest Cornelius," said Rosa. 

"Is it, indeed?" 

"Whilst the tulip opened I wrote it myself, for I did not 
wish to lose a moment. Here is the letter, and tell me 
whether you approve of it." 

Cornelius took the letter, and read, in a handwriting which 
was much improved even since the last little note he had 
received from Rosa, as follows: -- 

"Mynheer President, -- The black tulip is about to open, 
perhaps in ten minutes. As soon as it is open, I shall send 
a messenger to you, with the request that you will come and 
fetch it in person from the fortress at Loewestein. I am the 
daughter of the jailer, Gryphus, almost as much of a captive 
as the prisoners of my father. I cannot, therefore, bring to 
you this wonderful flower. This is the reason why I beg you 
to come and fetch it yourself. 

"It is my wish that it should be called Rosa Barlaensis. 

"It has opened; it is perfectly black; come, Mynheer 
President, come. 

"I have the honour to be your humble servant, 

"Rosa Gryphus. 

"That's it, dear Rosa, that's it. Your letter is admirable! 
I could not have written it with such beautiful simplicity. 
You will give to the committee all the information that will 
be required of you. They will then know how the tulip has 
been grown, how much care and anxiety, and how many 
sleepless nights, it has cost. But for the present not a 
minute must be lost. The messenger! the messenger!" 

"What's the name of the President?" 

"Give me the letter, I will direct it. Oh, he is very well 
known: it is Mynheer van Systens, the burgomaster of 
Haarlem; give it to me, Rosa, give it to me." 

And with a trembling hand Cornelius wrote the address, -- 

"To Mynheer Peter van Systens, Burgomaster, and President of 
the Horticultural Society of Haarlem." 

"And now, Rosa, go, go," said Cornelius, "and let us implore 
the protection of God, who has so kindly watched over us 
until now." 




Chapter 23

The Rival


And in fact the poor young people were in great need of protection. 

They had never been so near the destruction of their hopes 
as at this moment, when they thought themselves certain of 
their fulfilment. 

The reader cannot but have recognized in Jacob our old 
friend, or rather enemy, Isaac Boxtel, and has guessed, no 
doubt, that this worthy had followed from the Buytenhof to 
Loewestein the object of his love and the object of his 
hatred, -- the black tulip and Cornelius van Baerle. 

What no one but a tulip-fancier, and an envious 
tulip-fancier, could have discovered, -- the existence of 
the bulbs and the endeavours of the prisoner, -- jealousy 
had enabled Boxtel, if not to discover, at least to guess. 

We have seen him, more successful under the name of Jacob 
than under that of Isaac, gain the friendship of Gryphus, 
which for several months he cultivated by means of the best 
Genievre ever distilled from the Texel to Antwerp, and he 
lulled the suspicion of the jealous turnkey by holding out 
to him the flattering prospect of his designing to marry 
Rosa. 

Besides thus offering a bait to the ambition of the father, 
he managed, at the same time, to interest his zeal as a 
jailer, picturing to him in the blackest colours the learned 
prisoner whom Gryphus had in his keeping, and who, as the 
sham Jacob had it, was in league with Satan, to the 
detriment of his Highness the Prince of Orange. 

At first he had also made some way with Rosa; not, indeed, 
in her affections, but inasmuch as, by talking to her of 
marriage and of love, he had evaded all the suspicions which 
he might otherwise have excited. 

We have seen how his imprudence in following Rosa into the 
garden had unmasked him in the eyes of the young damsel, and 
how the instinctive fears of Cornelius had put the two 
lovers on their guard against him. 

The reader will remember that the first cause of uneasiness 
was given to the prisoner by the rage of Jacob when Gryphus 
crushed the first bulb. In that moment Boxtel's exasperation 
was the more fierce, as, though suspecting that Cornelius 
possessed a second bulb, he by no means felt sure of it. 

From that moment he began to dodge the steps of Rosa, not 
only following her to the garden, but also to the lobbies. 

Only as this time he followed her in the night, and 
bare-footed, he was neither seen nor heard except once, when 
Rosa thought she saw something like a shadow on the 
staircase. 

Her discovery, however, was made too late, as Boxtel had 
heard from the mouth of the prisoner himself that a second 
bulb existed. 

Taken in by the stratagem of Rosa, who had feigned to put it 
in the ground, and entertaining no doubt that this little 
farce had been played in order to force him to betray 
himself, he redoubled his precaution, and employed every 
means suggested by his crafty nature to watch the others 
without being watched himself. 

He saw Rosa conveying a large flower-pot of white 
earthenware from her father's kitchen to her bedroom. He saw 
Rosa washing in pails of water her pretty little hands, 
begrimed as they were with the mould which she had handled, 
to give her tulip the best soil possible. 

And at last he hired, just opposite Rosa's window, a little 
attic, distant enough not to allow him to be recognized with 
the naked eye, but sufficiently near to enable him, with the 
help of his telescope, to watch everything that was going on 
at the Loewestein in Rosa's room, just as at Dort he had 
watched the dry-room of Cornelius. 

He had not been installed more than three days in his attic 
before all his doubts were removed. 

From morning to sunset the flower-pot was in the window, 
and, like those charming female figures of Mieris and 
Metzys, Rosa appeared at that window as in a frame, formed 
by the first budding sprays of the wild vine and the 
honeysuckle encircling her window. 

Rosa watched the flower-pot with an interest which betrayed 
to Boxtel the real value of the object enclosed in it. 

This object could not be anything else but the second bulb, 
that is to say, the quintessence of all the hopes of the 
prisoner. 

When the nights threatened to be too cold, Rosa took in the 
flower-pot. 

Well, it was then quite evident she was following the 
instructions of Cornelius, who was afraid of the bulb being 
killed by frost. 

When the sun became too hot, Rosa likewise took in the pot 
from eleven in the morning until two in the afternoon. 

Another proof: Cornelius was afraid lest the soil should 
become too dry. 

But when the first leaves peeped out of the earth Boxtel was 
fully convinced; and his telescope left him no longer in any 
uncertainty before they had grown one inch in height. 

Cornelius possessed two bulbs, and the second was intrusted 
to the love and care of Rosa. 

For it may well be imagined that the tender secret of the 
two lovers had not escaped the prying curiosity of Boxtel. 

The question, therefore, was how to wrest the second bulb 
from the care of Rosa. 

Certainly this was no easy task. 

Rosa watched over her tulip as a mother over her child, or a 
dove over her eggs. 

Rosa never left her room during the day, and, more than 
that, strange to say, she never left it in the evening. 

For seven days Boxtel in vain watched Rosa; she was always 
at her post. 

This happened during those seven days which made Cornelius 
so unhappy, depriving him at the same time of all news of 
Rosa and of his tulip. 

Would the coolness between Rosa and Cornelius last for ever? 

This would have made the theft much more difficult than 
Mynheer Isaac had at first expected. 

We say the theft, for Isaac had simply made up his mind to 
steal the tulip; and as it grew in the most profound 
secrecy, and as, moreover, his word, being that of a 
renowned tulip-grower, would any day be taken against that 
of an unknown girl without any knowledge of horticulture, or 
against that of a prisoner convicted of high treason, he 
confidently hoped that, having once got possession of the 
bulb, he would be certain to obtain the prize; and then the 
tulip, instead of being called Tulipa nigra Barlaensis, 
would go down to posterity under the name of Tulipa nigra 
Boxtellensis or Boxtellea. 

Mynheer Isaac had not yet quite decided which of these two 
names he would give to the tulip, but, as both meant the 
same thing, this was, after all, not the important point. 

The point was to steal the tulip. But in order that Boxtel 
might steal the tulip, it was necessary that Rosa should 
leave her room. 

Great therefore was his joy when he saw the usual evening 
meetings of the lovers resumed. 

He first of all took advantage of Rosa's absence to make 
himself fully acquainted with all the peculiarities of the 
door of her chamber. The lock was a double one and in good 
order, but Rosa always took the key with her. 

Boxtel at first entertained an idea of stealing the key, but 
it soon occurred to him, not only that it would be 
exceedingly difficult to abstract it from her pocket, but 
also that, when she perceived her loss, she would not leave 
her room until the lock was changed, and then Boxtel's first 
theft would be useless. 

He thought it, therefore, better to employ a different 
expedient. He collected as many keys as he could, and tried 
all of them during one of those delightful hours which Rosa 
and Cornelius passed together at the grating of the cell. 

Two of the keys entered the lock, and one of them turned 
round once, but not the second time. 

There was, therefore, only a little to be done to this key. 

Boxtel covered it with a slight coat of wax, and when he 
thus renewed the experiment, the obstacle which prevented 
the key from being turned a second time left its impression 
on the wax. 

It cost Boxtel two days more to bring his key to perfection, 
with the aid of a small file. 

Rosa's door thus opened without noise and without 
difficulty, and Boxtel found himself in her room alone with 
the tulip. 

The first guilty act of Boxtel had been to climb over a wall 
in order to dig up the tulip; the second, to introduce 
himself into the dry-room of Cornelius, through an open 
window; and the third, to enter Rosa's room by means of a 
false key. 

Thus envy urged Boxtel on with rapid steps in the career of 
crime. 

Boxtel, as we have said, was alone with the tulip. 

A common thief would have taken the pot under his arm, and 
carried it off. 

But Boxtel was not a common thief, and he reflected. 

It was not yet certain, although very probable, that the 
tulip would flower black; if, therefore, he stole it now, he 
not only might be committing a useless crime, but also the 
theft might be discovered in the time which must elapse 
until the flower should open. 

He therefore -- as being in possession of the key, he might 
enter Rosa's chamber whenever he liked -- thought it better 
to wait and to take it either an hour before or after 
opening, and to start on the instant to Haarlem, where the 
tulip would be before the judges of the committee before any 
one else could put in a reclamation. 

Should any one then reclaim it, Boxtel would in his turn 
charge him or her with theft. 

This was a deep-laid scheme, and quite worthy of its author. 

Thus, every evening during that delightful hour which the 
two lovers passed together at the grated window, Boxtel 
entered Rosa's chamber to watch the progress which the black 
tulip had made towards flowering. 

On the evening at which we have arrived he was going to 
enter according to custom; but the two lovers, as we have 
seen, only exchanged a few words before Cornelius sent Rosa 
back to watch over the tulip. 

Seeing Rosa enter her room ten minutes after she had left 
it, Boxtel guessed that the tulip had opened, or was about 
to open. 

During that night, therefore, the great blow was to be 
struck. Boxtel presented himself before Gryphus with a 
double supply of Genievre, that is to say, with a bottle in 
each pocket. 

Gryphus being once fuddled, Boxtel was very nearly master of 
the house. 

At eleven o'clock Gryphus was dead drunk. At two in the 
morning Boxtel saw Rosa leaving the chamber; but evidently 
she held in her arms something which she carried with great 
care. 

He did not doubt that this was the black tulip which was in 
flower. 

But what was she going to do with it? Would she set out that 
instant to Haarlem with it? 

It was not possible that a young girl should undertake such 
a journey alone during the night. 

Was she only going to show the tulip to Cornelius? This was 
more likely. 

He followed Rosa in his stocking feet, walking on tiptoe. 

He saw her approach the grated window. He heard her calling 
Cornelius. By the light of the dark lantern he saw the tulip 
open, and black as the night in which he was hidden. 

He heard the plan concerted between Cornelius and Rosa to 
send a messenger to Haarlem. He saw the lips of the lovers 
meet, and then heard Cornelius send Rosa away. 

He saw Rosa extinguish the light and return to her chamber. 
Ten minutes after, he saw her leave the room again, and lock 
it twice. 

Boxtel, who saw all this whilst hiding himself on the 
landing-place of the staircase above, descended step by step 
from his story as Rosa descended from hers; so that, when 
she touched with her light foot the lowest step of the 
staircase, Boxtel touched with a still lighter hand the lock 
of Rosa's chamber. 

And in that hand, it must be understood, he held the false 
key which opened Rosa's door as easily as did the real one. 

And this is why, in the beginning of the chapter, we said 
that the poor young people were in great need of the 
protection of God. 





Chapter 24 

The Black Tulip changes Masters


Cornelius remained standing on the spot where Rosa had left him.
He was quite overpowered with the weight of his twofold happiness. 

Half an hour passed away. Already did the first rays of the 
sun enter through the iron grating of the prison, when 
Cornelius was suddenly startled at the noise of steps which 
came up the staircase, and of cries which approached nearer 
and nearer. 

Almost at the same instant he saw before him the pale and 
distracted face of Rosa. 

He started, and turned pale with fright. 

"Cornelius, Cornelius!" she screamed, gasping for breath. 

"Good Heaven! what is it?" asked the prisoner. 

"Cornelius! the tulip ---- " 

"Well?" 

"How shall I tell you?" 

"Speak, speak, Rosa!" 

"Some one has taken -- stolen it from us." 

"Stolen -- taken?" said Cornelius. 

"Yes," said Rosa, leaning against the door to support 
herself; "yes, taken, stolen!" 

And saying this, she felt her limbs failing her, and she 
fell on her knees. 

"But how? Tell me, explain to me." 

"Oh, it is not my fault, my friend." 

Poor Rosa! she no longer dared to call him "My beloved one." 

"You have then left it alone," said Cornelius, ruefully. 

"One minute only, to instruct our messenger, who lives 
scarcely fifty yards off, on the banks of the Waal." 

"And during that time, notwithstanding all my injunctions, 
you left the key behind, unfortunate child!" 

"No, no, no! this is what I cannot understand. The key was 
never out of my hands; I clinched it as if I were afraid it 
would take wings." 

"But how did it happen, then?" 

"That's what I cannot make out. I had given the letter to my 
messenger; he started before I left his house; I came home, 
and my door was locked, everything in my room was as I had 
left it, except the tulip, -- that was gone. Some one must 
have had a key for my room, or have got a false one made on 
purpose." 

She was nearly choking with sobs, and was unable to 
continue. 

Cornelius, immovable and full of consternation, heard almost 
without understanding, and only muttered, -- 

"Stolen, stolen, and I am lost!" 

"O Cornelius, forgive me, forgive me, it will kill me!" 

Seeing Rosa's distress, Cornelius seized the iron bars of 
the grating, and furiously shaking them, called out, -- 

"Rosa, Rosa, we have been robbed, it is true, but shall we 
allow ourselves to be dejected for all that? No, no; the 
misfortune is great, but it may perhaps be remedied. Rosa, 
we know the thief!" 

"Alas! what can I say about it?" 

"But I say that it is no one else but that infamous Jacob. 
Shall we allow him to carry to Haarlem the fruit of our 
labour, the fruit of our sleepless nights, the child of our 
love? Rosa, we must pursue, we must overtake him!" 

"But how can we do all this, my friend, without letting my 
father know we were in communication with each other? How 
should I, a poor girl, with so little knowledge of the world 
and its ways, be able to attain this end, which perhaps you 
could not attain yourself?" 

"Rosa, Rosa, open this door to me, and you will see whether 
I will not find the thief, -- whether I will not make him 
confess his crime and beg for mercy." 

"Alas!" cried Rosa, sobbing, "can I open the door for you? 
have I the keys? If I had had them, would not you have been 
free long ago?" 

"Your father has them, -- your wicked father, who has 
already crushed the first bulb of my tulip. Oh, the wretch! 
he is an accomplice of Jacob!" 

"Don't speak so loud, for Heaven's sake!" 

"Oh, Rosa, if you don't open the door to me," Cornelius 
cried in his rage, "I shall force these bars, and kill 
everything I find in the prison." 

"Be merciful, be merciful, my friend!" 

"I tell you, Rosa, that I shall demolish this prison, stone 
for stone!" and the unfortunate man, whose strength was 
increased tenfold by his rage, began to shake the door with 
a great noise, little heeding that the thunder of his voice 
was re-echoing through the spiral staircase. 

Rosa, in her fright, made vain attempts to check this 
furious outbreak. 

"I tell you that I shall kill that infamous Gryphus?" roared 
Cornelius. "I tell you I shall shed his blood as he did that 
of my black tulip." 

The wretched prisoner began really to rave. 

"Well, then, yes," said Rosa, all in a tremble. "Yes, yes, 
only be quiet. Yes, yes, I will take his keys, I will open 
the door for you! Yes, only be quiet, my own dear 
Cornelius." 

She did not finish her speech, as a growl by her side 
interrupted her. 

"My father!" cried Rosa. 

"Gryphus!" roared Van Baerle. "Oh, you villain!" 

Old Gryphus, in the midst of all the noise, had ascended the 
staircase without being heard. 

He rudely seized his daughter by the wrist. 

"So you will take my keys?" he said, in a voice choked with 
rage. "Ah! this dastardly fellow, this monster, this 
gallows-bird of a conspirator, is your own dear Cornelius, 
is he? Ah! Missy has communications with prisoners of state. 
Ah! won't I teach you -- won't I?" 

Rosa clasped her hands in despair. 

"Ah!" Gryphus continued, passing from the madness of anger 
to the cool irony of a man who has got the better of his 
enemy, -- "Ah, you innocent tulip-fancier, you gentle 
scholar; you will kill me, and drink my blood! Very well! 
very well! And you have my daughter for an accomplice. Am I, 
forsooth, in a den of thieves, -- in a cave of brigands? 
Yes, but the Governor shall know all to-morrow, and his 
Highness the Stadtholder the day after. We know the law, -- 
we shall give a second edition of the Buytenhof, Master 
Scholar, and a good one this time. Yes, yes, just gnaw your 
paws like a bear in his cage, and you, my fine little lady, 
devour your dear Cornelius with your eyes. I tell you, my 
lambkins, you shall not much longer have the felicity of 
conspiring together. Away with you, unnatural daughter! And 
as to you, Master Scholar, we shall see each other again. 
Just be quiet, -- we shall." 

Rosa, beyond herself with terror and despair, kissed her 
hands to her friend; then, suddenly struck with a bright 
thought, she rushed toward the staircase, saying, -- 

"All is not yet lost, Cornelius. Rely on me, my Cornelius." 

Her father followed her, growling. 

As to poor Cornelius, he gradually loosened his hold of the 
bars, which his fingers still grasped convulsively. His head 
was heavy, his eyes almost started from their sockets, and 
he fell heavily on the floor of his cell, muttering, -- 

"Stolen! it has been stolen from me!" 

During this time Boxtel had left the fortress by the door 
which Rosa herself had opened. He carried the black tulip 
wrapped up in a cloak, and, throwing himself into a coach, 
which was waiting for him at Gorcum, he drove off, without, 
as may well be imagined, having informed his friend Gryphus 
of his sudden departure. 

And now, as we have seen him enter his coach, we shall with 
the consent of the reader, follow him to the end of his 
journey. 

He proceeded but slowly, as the black tulip could not bear 
travelling post-haste. 

But Boxtel, fearing that he might not arrive early enough, 
procured at Delft a box, lined all round with fresh moss, in 
which he packed the tulip. The flower was so lightly pressed 
upon all sides, with a supply of air from above, that the 
coach could now travel full speed without any possibility of 
injury to the tulip. 

He arrived next morning at Haarlem, fatigued but triumphant; 
and, to do away with every trace of the theft, he 
transplanted the tulip, and, breaking the original 
flower-pot, threw the pieces into the canal. After which he 
wrote the President of the Horticultural Society a letter, 
in which he announced to him that he had just arrived at 
Haarlem with a perfectly black tulip; and, with his flower 
all safe, took up his quarters at a good hotel in the town, 
and there he waited. 




Chapter 25

The President van Systens


Rosa, on leaving Cornelius, had fixed on her plan, which was 
no other than to restore to Cornelius the stolen tulip, or 
never to see him again. 

She had seen the despair of the prisoner, and she knew that 
it was derived from a double source, and that it was 
incurable. 

On the one hand, separation became inevitable, -- Gryphus 
having at the same time surprised the secret of their love 
and of their secret meetings. 

On the other hand, all the hopes on the fulfilment of which 
Cornelius van Baerle had rested his ambition for the last 
seven years were now crushed. 

Rosa was one of those women who are dejected by trifles, but 
who in great emergencies are supplied by the misfortune 
itself with the energy for combating or with the resources 
for remedying it. 

She went to her room, and cast a last glance about her to 
see whether she had not been mistaken, and whether the tulip 
was not stowed away in some corner where it had escaped her 
notice. But she sought in vain, the tulip was still missing; 
the tulip was indeed stolen. 

Rosa made up a little parcel of things indispensable for a 
journey; took her three hundred guilders, -- that is to say, 
all her fortune, -- fetched the third bulb from among her 
lace, where she had laid it up, and carefully hid it in her 
bosom; after which she locked her door twice to disguise her 
flight as long as possible, and, leaving the prison by the 
same door which an hour before had let out Boxtel, she went 
to a stable-keeper to hire a carriage. 

The man had only a two-wheel chaise, and this was the 
vehicle which Boxtel had hired since last evening, and in 
which he was now driving along the road to Delft; for the 
road from Loewestein to Haarlem, owing to the many canals, 
rivers, and rivulets intersecting the country, is 
exceedingly circuitous. 

Not being able to procure a vehicle, Rosa was obliged to 
take a horse, with which the stable-keeper readily intrusted 
her, knowing her to be the daughter of the jailer of the 
fortress. 

Rosa hoped to overtake her messenger, a kind-hearted and 
honest lad, whom she would take with her, and who might at 
the same time serve her as a guide and a protector. 

And in fact she had not proceeded more than a league before 
she saw him hastening along one of the side paths of a very 
pretty road by the river. Setting her horse off at a canter, 
she soon came up with him. 

The honest lad was not aware of the important character of 
his message; nevertheless, he used as much speed as if he 
had known it; and in less than an hour he had already gone a 
league and a half. 

Rosa took from him the note, which had now become useless, 
and explained to him what she wanted him to do for her. The 
boatman placed himself entirely at her disposal, promising 
to keep pace with the horse if Rosa would allow him to take 
hold of either the croup or the bridle of her horse. The two 
travellers had been on their way for five hours, and made 
more than eight leagues, and yet Gryphus had not the least 
suspicion of his daughter having left the fortress. 

The jailer, who was of a very spiteful and cruel 
disposition, chuckled within himself at the idea of having 
struck such terror into his daughter's heart. 

But whilst he was congratulating himself on having such a 
nice story to tell to his boon companion, Jacob, that worthy 
was on his road to Delft; and, thanks to the swiftness of 
the horse, had already the start of Rosa and her companion 
by four leagues. 

And whilst the affectionate father was rejoicing at the 
thought of his daughter weeping in her room, Rosa was making 
the best of her way towards Haarlem. 

Thus the prisoner alone was where Gryphus thought him to be. 

Rosa was so little with her father since she took care of 
the tulip, that at his dinner hour, that is to say, at 
twelve o'clock, he was reminded for the first time by his 
appetite that his daughter was fretting rather too long. 

He sent one of the under-turnkeys to call her; and, when the 
man came back to tell him that he had called and sought her 
in vain, he resolved to go and call her himself. 

He first went to her room, but, loud as he knocked, Rosa 
answered not. 

The locksmith of the fortress was sent for; he opened the 
door, but Gryphus no more found Rosa than she had found the 
tulip. 

At that very moment she entered Rotterdam. 

Gryphus therefore had just as little chance of finding her 
in the kitchen as in her room, and just as little in the 
garden as in the kitchen. 

The reader may imagine the anger of the jailer when, after 
having made inquiries about the neighbourhood, he heard that 
his daughter had hired a horse, and, like an adventuress, 
set out on a journey without saying where she was going. 

Gryphus again went up in his fury to Van Baerle, abused him, 
threatened him, knocked all the miserable furniture of his 
cell about, and promised him all sorts of misery, even 
starvation and flogging. 

Cornelius, without even hearing what his jailer said, 
allowed himself to be ill-treated, abused, and threatened, 
remaining all the while sullen, immovable, dead to every 
emotion and fear. 

After having sought for Rosa in every direction, Gryphus 
looked out for Jacob, and, as he could not find him either, 
he began to suspect from that moment that Jacob had run away 
with her. 

The damsel, meanwhile, after having stopped for two hours at 
Rotterdam, had started again on her journey. On that evening 
she slept at Delft, and on the following morning she reached 
Haarlem, four hours after Boxtel had arrived there. 

Rosa, first of all, caused herself to be led before Mynheer 
van Systens, the President of the Horticultural Society of 
Haarlem. 

She found that worthy gentleman in a situation which, to do 
justice to our story, we must not pass over in our 
description. 

The President was drawing up a report to the committee of 
the society. 

This report was written on large-sized paper, in the finest 
handwriting of the President. 

Rosa was announced simply as Rosa Gryphus; but as her name, 
well as it might sound, was unknown to the President, she 
was refused admittance. 

Rosa, however, was by no means abashed, having vowed in her 
heart, in pursuing her cause, not to allow herself to be put 
down either by refusal, or abuse, or even brutality. 

"Announce to the President," she said to the servant, "that 
I want to speak to him about the black tulip." 

These words seemed to be an "Open Sesame," for she soon 
found herself in the office of the President, Van Systens, 
who gallantly rose from his chair to meet her. 

He was a spare little man, resembling the stem of a flower, 
his head forming its chalice, and his two limp arms 
representing the double leaf of the tulip; the resemblance 
was rendered complete by his waddling gait which made him 
even more like that flower when it bends under a breeze. 

"Well, miss," he said, "you are coming, I am told, about the 
affair of the black tulip." 

To the President of the Horticultural Society the Tulipa 
nigra was a first-rate power, which, in its character as 
queen of the tulips, might send ambassadors. 

"Yes, sir," answered Rosa; "I come at least to speak of it." 

"Is it doing well, then?" asked Van Systens, with a smile of 
tender veneration. 

"Alas! sir, I don't know," said Rosa. 

"How is that? could any misfortune have happened to it?" 

"A very great one, sir; yet not to it, but to me." 

"What?" 

"It has been stolen from me." 

"Stolen! the black tulip?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"Do you know the thief?" 

"I have my suspicions, but I must not yet accuse any one." 

"But the matter may very easily be ascertained." 

"How is that?" 

"As it has been stolen from you, the thief cannot be far 
off." 

"Why not?" 

"Because I have seen the black tulip only two hours ago." 

"You have seen the black tulip!" cried Rosa, rushing up to 
Mynheer van Systens. 

"As I see you, miss." 

"But where?" 

"Well, with your master, of course." 

"With my master?" 

"Yes, are you not in the service of Master Isaac Boxtel?" 

"I?" 

"Yes, you." 

"But for whom do you take me, sir?" 

"And for whom do you take me?" 

"I hope, sir, I take you for what you are, -- that is to 
say, for the honorable Mynheer van Systens, Burgomaster of 
Haarlem, and President of the Horticultural Society." 

"And what is it you told me just now?" 

"I told you, sir, that my tulip has been stolen." 

"Then your tulip is that of Mynheer Boxtel. Well, my child, 
you express yourself very badly. The tulip has been stolen, 
not from you, but from Mynheer Boxtel." 

"I repeat to you, sir, that I do not know who this Mynheer 
Boxtel is, and that I have now heard his name pronounced for 
the first time." 

"You do not know who Mynheer Boxtel is, and you also had a 
black tulip?" 

"But is there any other besides mine?" asked Rosa, 
trembling. 

"Yes, -- that of Mynheer Boxtel." 

"How is it?" 

"Black, of course." 

"Without speck?" 

"Without a single speck, or even point." 

"And you have this tulip, -- you have it deposited here?" 

"No, but it will be, as it has to be exhibited before the 
committee previous to the prize being awarded." 

"Oh, sir!" cried Rosa, "this Boxtel -- this Isaac Boxtel -- 
who calls himself the owner of the black tulip ---- " 

"And who is its owner?" 

"Is he not a very thin man?" 

"Bald?" 

"Yes." 

"With sunken eyes?" 

"I think he has." 

"Restless, stooping, and bowlegged?" 

"In truth, you draw Master Boxtel's portrait feature by 
feature." 

"And the tulip, sir? Is it not in a pot of white and blue 
earthenware, with yellowish flowers in a basket on three 
sides?" 

"Oh, as to that I am not quite sure; I looked more at the 
flower than at the pot." 

"Oh, sir! that's my tulip, which has been stolen from me. I 
came here to reclaim it before you and from you." 

"Oh! oh!" said Van Systens, looking at Rosa. "What! you are 
here to claim the tulip of Master Boxtel? Well, I must say, 
you are cool enough." 

"Honoured sir," a little put out by this apostrophe, "I do 
not say that I am coming to claim the tulip of Master 
Boxtel, but to reclaim my own." 

"Yours?" 

"Yes, the one which I have myself planted and nursed." 

"Well, then, go and find out Master Boxtel, at the White 
Swan Inn, and you can then settle matters with him; as for 
me, considering that the cause seems to me as difficult to 
judge as that which was brought before King Solomon, and 
that I do not pretend to be as wise as he was, I shall 
content myself with making my report, establishing the 
existence of the black tulip, and ordering the hundred 
thousand guilders to be paid to its grower. Good-bye, my 
child." 

"Oh, sir, sir!" said Rosa, imploringly. 

"Only, my child," continued Van Systens, "as you are young 
and pretty, and as there may be still some good in you, I'll 
give you some good advice. Be prudent in this matter, for we 
have a court of justice and a prison here at Haarlem, and, 
moreover, we are exceedingly ticklish as far as the honour 
of our tulips is concerned. Go, my child, go, remember, 
Master Isaac Boxtel at the White Swan Inn." 

And Mynheer van Systens, taking up his fine pen, resumed his 
report, which had been interrupted by Rosa's visit. 




Chapter 26

A Member of the Horticultural Society


Rosa, beyond herself and nearly mad with joy and fear at the 
idea of the black tulip being found again, started for the 
White Swan, followed by the boatman, a stout lad from 
Frisia, who was strong enough to knock down a dozen Boxtels 
single-handed. 

He had been made acquainted in the course of the journey 
with the state of affairs, and was not afraid of any 
encounter; only he had orders, in such a case, to spare the 
tulip. 

But on arriving in the great market-place Rosa at once 
stopped, a sudden thought had struck her, just as Homer's 
Minerva seizes Achilles by the hair at the moment when he is 
about to be carried away by his anger. 

"Good Heaven!" she muttered to herself, "I have made a 
grievous blunder; it may be I have ruined Cornelius, the 
tulip, and myself. I have given the alarm, and perhaps 
awakened suspicion. I am but a woman; these men may league 
themselves against me, and then I shall be lost. If I am 
lost that matters nothing, -- but Cornelius and the tulip!" 

She reflected for a moment. 

"If I go to that Boxtel, and do not know him; if that Boxtel 
is not my Jacob, but another fancier, who has also 
discovered the black tulip; or if my tulip has been stolen 
by some one else, or has already passed into the hands of a 
third person; -- if I do not recognize the man, only the 
tulip, how shall I prove that it belongs to me? On the other 
hand, if I recognise this Boxtel as Jacob, who knows what 
will come out of it? whilst we are contesting with each 
other, the tulip will die." 

In the meanwhile, a great noise was heard, like the distant 
roar of the sea, at the other extremity of the market-place. 
People were running about, doors opening and shutting, Rosa 
alone was unconscious of all this hubbub among the 
multitude. 

"We must return to the President," she muttered. 

"Well, then, let us return," said the boatman. 

They took a small street, which led them straight to the 
mansion of Mynheer van Systens, who with his best pen in his 
finest hand continued to draw up his report. 

Everywhere on her way Rosa heard people speaking only of the 
black tulip, and the prize of a hundred thousand guilders. 
The news had spread like wildfire through the town. 

Rosa had not a little difficulty is penetrating a second 
time into the office of Mynheer van Systens, who, however, 
was again moved by the magic name of the black tulip. 

But when he recognised Rosa, whom in his own mind he had set 
down as mad, or even worse, he grew angry, and wanted to 
send her away. 

Rosa, however, clasped her hands, and said with that tone of 
honest truth which generally finds its way to the hearts of 
men, -- 

"For Heaven's sake, sir, do not turn me away; listen to what 
I have to tell you, and if it be not possible for you to do 
me justice, at least you will not one day have to reproach 
yourself before God for having made yourself the accomplice 
of a bad action." 

Van Systens stamped his foot with impatience; it was the 
second time that Rosa interrupted him in the midst of a 
composition which stimulated his vanity, both as a 
burgomaster and as President of the Horticultural Society. 

"But my report!" he cried, -- "my report on the black 
tulip!" 

"Mynheer van Systens," Rosa continued, with the firmness of 
innocence and truth, "your report on the black tulip will, 
if you don't hear me, be based on crime or on falsehood. I 
implore you, sir, let this Master Boxtel, whom I assert to 
be Master Jacob, be brought here before you and me, and I 
swear that I will leave him in undisturbed possession of the 
tulip if I do not recognise the flower and its holder." 

"Well, I declare, here is a proposal," said Van Systens. 

"What do you mean?" 

"I ask you what can be proved by your recognising them?" 

"After all," said Rosa, in her despair, "you are an honest 
man, sir; how would you feel if one day you found out that 
you had given the prize to a man for something which he not 
only had not produced, but which he had even stolen?" 

Rosa's speech seemed to have brought a certain conviction 
into the heart of Van Systens, and he was going to answer 
her in a gentler tone, when at once a great noise was heard 
in the street, and loud cheers shook the house. 

"What is this?" cried the burgomaster; "what is this? Is it 
possible? have I heard aright?" 

And he rushed towards his anteroom, without any longer 
heeding Rosa, whom he left in his cabinet. 

Scarcely had he reached his anteroom when he cried out aloud 
on seeing his staircase invaded, up to the very 
landing-place, by the multitude, which was accompanying, or 
rather following, a young man, simply clad in a 
violet-coloured velvet, embroidered with silver; who, with a 
certain aristocratic slowness, ascended the white stone 
steps of the house. 

In his wake followed two officers, one of the navy, and the 
other of the cavalry. 

Van Systens, having found his way through the frightened 
domestics, began to bow, almost to prostrate himself before 
his visitor, who had been the cause of all this stir. 

"Monseigneur," he called out, "Monseigneur! What 
distinguished honour is your Highness bestowing for ever on 
my humble house by your visit?" 

"Dear Mynheer van Systens," said William of Orange, with a 
serenity which, with him, took the place of a smile, "I am a 
true Hollander, I am fond of the water, of beer, and of 
flowers, sometimes even of that cheese the flavour of which 
seems so grateful to the French; the flower which I prefer 
to all others is, of course, the tulip. I heard at Leyden 
that the city of Haarlem at last possessed the black tulip; 
and, after having satisfied myself of the truth of news 
which seemed so incredible, I have come to know all about it 
from the President of the Horticultural Society." 

"Oh, Monseigneur, Monseigneur!" said Van Systens, "what 
glory to the society if its endeavours are pleasing to your 
Highness!" 

"Have you got the flower here?" said the Prince, who, very 
likely, already regretted having made such a long speech. 

"I am sorry to say we have not." 

"And where is it?" 

"With its owner." 

"Who is he?" 

"An honest tulip-grower of Dort." 

"His name?" 

"Boxtel." 

"His quarters?" 

"At the White Swan; I shall send for him, and if in the 
meanwhile your Highness will do me the honour of stepping 
into my drawing-room, he will be sure -- knowing that your 
Highness is here -- to lose no time in bringing his tulip." 

"Very well, send for him." 

"Yes, your Highness, but ---- 

"What is it?" 

"Oh, nothing of any consequence, Monseigneur." 

"Everything is of consequence, Mynheer van Systens." 

"Well, then, Monseigneur, if it must be said, a little 
difficulty has presented itself." 

"What difficulty?" 

"This tulip has already been claimed by usurpers. It's true 
that it is worth a hundred thousand guilders." 

"Indeed!" 

"Yes, Monseigneur, by usurpers, by forgers." 

"This is a crime, Mynheer van Systens." 

"So it is, your Highness." 

"And have you any proofs of their guilt? ' 

"No, Monseigneur, the guilty woman ---- " 

"The guilty woman, Sir?" 

"I ought to say, the woman who claims the tulip, 
Monseigneur, is here in the room close by." 

"And what do you think of her?" 

"I think, Monseigneur, that the bait of a hundred thousand 
guilders may have tempted her." 

"And so she claims the tulip?" 

"Yes Monseigneur." 

"And what proof does she offer?" 

"I was just going to question her when your Highness came 
in." 

"Question her, Mynheer van Systens, question her. I am the 
first magistrate of the country; I will hear the case and 
administer justice." 

"I have found my King Solomon," said Van Systens, bowing, 
and showing the way to the Prince. 

His Highness was just going to walk ahead, but, suddenly 
recollecting himself he said -- 

"Go before me, and call me plain Mynheer." 

The two then entered the cabinet. 

Rosa was still standing at the same place, leaning on the 
window, and looking through the panes into the garden. 

"Ah! a Frisian girl," said the Prince, as he observed Rosa's 
gold brocade headdress and red petticoat. 

At the noise of their footsteps she turned round, but 
scarcely saw the Prince, who seated himself in the darkest 
corner of the apartment. 

All her attention, as may be easily imagined, was fixed on 
that important person who was called Van Systens, so that 
she had no time to notice the humble stranger who was 
following the master of the house, and who, for aught she 
knew, might be somebody or nobody. 

The humble stranger took a book down from the shelf, and 
made Van Systens a sign to commence the examination 
forthwith. 

Van Systens, likewise at the invitation of the young man in 
the violet coat, sat down in his turn, and, quite happy and 
proud of the importance thus cast upon him, began, -- 

"My child, you promise to tell me the truth and the entire 
truth concerning this tulip?" 

"I promise." 

"Well, then, speak before this gentleman; this gentleman is 
one of the members of the Horticultural Society." 

"What am I to tell you, sir," said Rosa, "beside that which 
I have told you already." 

"Well, then, what is it?" 

"I repeat the question I have addressed to you before." 

"Which?" 

"That you will order Mynheer Boxtel to come here with his 
tulip. If I do not recognise it as mine I will frankly tell 
it; but if I do recognise it I will reclaim it, even if I go 
before his Highness the Stadtholder himself, with my proofs 
in my hands." 

"You have, then, some proofs, my child?" 

"God, who knows my good right, will assist me to some." 

Van Systens exchanged a look with the Prince, who, since the 
first words of Rosa, seemed to try to remember her, as if it 
were not for the first time that this sweet voice rang in 
his ears. 

An officer went off to fetch Boxtel, and Van Systens in the 
meanwhile continued his examination. 

"And with what do you support your assertion that you are 
the real owner of the black tulip?" 

"With the very simple fact of my having planted and grown it 
in my own chamber." 

"In your chamber? Where was your chamber?" 

"At Loewestein." 

"You are from Loewestein?" 

"I am the daughter of the jailer of the fortress." 

The Prince made a little movement, as much as to say, "Well, 
that's it, I remember now." 

And, all the while feigning to be engaged with his book, he 
watched Rosa with even more attention than he had before. 

"And you are fond of flowers?" continued Mynheer van 
Systens. 

"Yes, sir." 

"Then you are an experienced florist, I dare say?" 

Rosa hesitated a moment; then with a tone which came from 
the depth of her heart, she said, -- 

"Gentlemen, I am speaking to men of honor." 

There was such an expression of truth in the tone of her 
voice, that Van Systens and the Prince answered 
simultaneously by an affirmative movement of their heads. 

"Well, then, I am not an experienced florist; I am only a 
poor girl, one of the people, who, three months ago, knew 
neither how to read nor how to write. No, the black tulip 
has not been found by myself." 

"But by whom else?" 

"By a poor prisoner of Loewestein." 

"By a prisoner of Loewestein?" repeated the Prince. 

The tone of his voice startled Rosa, who was sure she had 
heard it before. 

"By a prisoner of state, then," continued the Prince, "as 
there are none else there." 

Having said this he began to read again, at least in 
appearance. 

"Yes," said Rosa, with a faltering voice, "yes, by a 
prisoner of state." 

Van Systens trembled as he heard such a confession made in 
the presence of such a witness. 

"Continue," said William dryly, to the President of the 
Horticultural Society. 

"Ah, sir," said Rosa, addressing the person whom she thought 
to be her real judge, "I am going to incriminate myself very 
seriously." 

"Certainly," said Van Systens, "the prisoner of state ought 
to be kept in close confinement at Loewestein." 

"Alas! sir." 

"And from what you tell me you took advantage of your 
position, as daughter of the jailer, to communicate with a 
prisoner of state about the cultivation of flowers." 

"So it is, sir," Rosa murmured in dismay; "yes, I am bound 
to confess, I saw him every day." 

"Unfortunate girl!" exclaimed Van Systens. 

The Prince, observing the fright of Rosa and the pallor of 
the President, raised his head, and said, in his clear and 
decided tone, -- 

"This cannot signify anything to the members of the 
Horticultural Society; they have to judge on the black 
tulip, and have no cognizance to take of political offences. 
Go on, young woman, go on." 

Van Systens, by means of an eloquent glance, offered, in the 
name of the tulip, his thanks to the new member of the 
Horticultural Society. 

Rosa, reassured by this sort of encouragement which the 
stranger was giving her, related all that had happened for 
the last three months, all that she had done, and all that 
she had suffered. She described the cruelty of Gryphus; the 
destruction of the first bulb; the grief of the prisoner; 
the precautions taken to insure the success of the second 
bulb; the patience of the prisoner and his anxiety during 
their separation; how he was about to starve himself because 
he had no longer any news of his tulip; his joy when she 
went to see him again; and, lastly, their despair when they 
found that the tulip which had come into flower was stolen 
just one hour after it had opened. 

All this was detailed with an accent of truth which, 
although producing no change in the impassible mien of the 
Prince, did not fail to take effect on Van Systens. 

"But," said the Prince, "it cannot be long since you knew 
the prisoner." 

Rosa opened her large eyes and looked at the stranger, who 
drew back into the dark corner, as if he wished to escape 
her observation. 

"Why, sir?" she asked him. 

"Because it is not yet four months since the jailer Gryphus 
and his daughter were removed to Loewestein." 

"That is true, sir." 

"Otherwise, you must have solicited the transfer of your 
father, in order to be able to follow some prisoner who may 
have been transported from the Hague to Loewestein." 

"Sir," said Rosa, blushing. 

"Finish what you have to say," said William. 

"I confess I knew the prisoner at the Hague." 

"Happy prisoner!" said William, smiling. 

At this moment the officer who had been sent for Boxtel 
returned, and announced to the Prince that the person whom 
he had been to fetch was following on his heels with his tulip. 




Chapter 27

The Third Bulb


Boxtel's return was scarcely announced, when he entered in 
person the drawing-room of Mynheer van Systens, followed by 
two men, who carried in a box their precious burden and 
deposited it on a table. 

The Prince, on being informed, left the cabinet, passed into 
the drawing-room, admired the flower, and silently resumed 
his seat in the dark corner, where he had himself placed his 
chair. 

Rosa, trembling, pale and terrified, expected to be invited 
in her turn to see the tulip. 

She now heard the voice of Boxtel. 

"It is he!" she exclaimed. 

The Prince made her a sign to go and look through the open 
door into the drawing-room. 

"It is my tulip," cried Rosa, "I recognise it. Oh, my poor 
Cornelius!" 

And saying this she burst into tears. 

The Prince rose from his seat, went to the door, where he 
stood for some time with the full light falling upon his 
figure. 

As Rosa's eyes now rested upon him, she felt more than ever 
convinced that this was not the first time she had seen the 
stranger. 

"Master Boxtel," said the Prince, "come in here, if you 
please." 

Boxtel eagerly approached, and, finding himself face to face 
with William of Orange, started back. 

"His Highness!" he called out. 

"His Highness!" Rosa repeated in dismay. 

Hearing this exclamation on his left, Boxtel turned round, 
and perceived Rosa. 

At this sight the whole frame of the thief shook as if under 
the influence of a galvanic shock. 

"Ah!" muttered the Prince to himself, "he is confused." 

But Boxtel, making a violent effort to control his feelings, 
was already himself again. 

"Master Boxtel," said William, "you seem to have discovered 
the secret of growing the black tulip?" 

"Yes, your Highness," answered Boxtel, in a voice which 
still betrayed some confusion. 

It is true his agitation might have been attributable to the 
emotion which the man must have felt on suddenly recognising 
the Prince. 

"But," continued the Stadtholder, "here is a young damsel 
who also pretends to have found it." 

Boxtel, with a disdainful smile, shrugged his shoulders. 

William watched all his movements with evident interest and 
curiosity. 

"Then you don't know this young girl?" said the Prince. 

"No, your Highness!" 

"And you, child, do you know Master Boxtel?" 

"No, I don't know Master Boxtel, but I know Master Jacob." 

"What do you mean?" 

"I mean to say that at Loewestein the man who here calls 
himself Isaac Boxtel went by the name of Master Jacob." 

"What do you say to that, Master Boxtel?" 

"I say that this damsel lies, your Highness." 

"You deny, therefore, having ever been at Loewestein?" 

Boxtel hesitated; the fixed and searching glance of the 
proud eye of the Prince prevented him from lying. 

"I cannot deny having been at Loewestein, your Highness, but 
I deny having stolen the tulip." 

"You have stolen it, and that from my room," cried Rosa, 
with indignation. 

"I deny it." 

"Now listen to me. Do you deny having followed me into the 
garden, on the day when I prepared the border where I was to 
plant it? Do you deny having followed me into the garden 
when I pretended to plant it? Do you deny that, on that 
evening, you rushed after my departure to the spot where you 
hoped to find the bulb? Do you deny having dug in the ground 
with your hands -- but, thank God! in vain, as it was a 
stratagem to discover your intentions. Say, do you deny all 
this?" 

Boxtel did not deem it fit to answer these several charges, 
but, turning to the Prince, continued, -- 

"I have now for twenty years grown tulips at Dort. I have 
even acquired some reputation in this art; one of my hybrids 
is entered in the catalogue under the name of an illustrious 
personage. I have dedicated it to the King of Portugal. The 
truth in the matter is as I shall now tell your Highness. 
This damsel knew that I had produced the black tulip, and, 
in concert with a lover of hers in the fortress of 
Loewestein, she formed the plan of ruining me by 
appropriating to herself the prize of a hundred thousand 
guilders, which, with the help of your Highness's justice, I 
hope to gain." 

"Yah!" cried Rosa, beyond herself with anger. 

"Silence!" said the Prince. 

Then, turning to Boxtel, he said, -- 

"And who is that prisoner to whom you allude as the lover of 
this young woman?" 

Rosa nearly swooned, for Cornelius was designated as a 
dangerous prisoner, and recommended by the Prince to the 
especial surveillance of the jailer. 

Nothing could have been more agreeable to Boxtel than this 
question. 

"This prisoner," he said, "is a man whose name in itself 
will prove to your Highness what trust you may place in his 
probity. He is a prisoner of state, who was once condemned 
to death." 

"And his name?" 

Rosa hid her face in her hands with a movement of despair. 

"His name is Cornelius van Baerle," said Boxtel, "and he is 
godson of that villain Cornelius de Witt." 

The Prince gave a start, his generally quiet eye flashed, 
and a death-like paleness spread over his impassible 
features. 

He went up to Rosa, and with his finger, gave her a sign to 
remove her hands from her face. 

Rosa obeyed, as if under mesmeric influence, without having 
seen the sign. 

"It was, then to follow this man that you came to me at 
Leyden to solicit for the transfer of your father?" 

Rosa hung down her head, and, nearly choking, said, -- 

"Yes, your Highness." 

"Go on," said the Prince to Boxtel. 

"I have nothing more to say," Isaac continued. "Your 
Highness knows all. But there is one thing which I did not 
intend to say, because I did not wish to make this girl 
blush for her ingratitude. I came to Loewestein because I 
had business there. On this occasion I made the acquaintance 
of old Gryphus, and, falling in love with his daughter, made 
an offer of marriage to her; and, not being rich, I 
committed the imprudence of mentioning to them my prospect 
of gaining a hundred thousand guilders, in proof of which I 
showed to them the black tulip. Her lover having himself 
made a show at Dort of cultivating tulips to hide his 
political intrigues, they now plotted together for my ruin. 
On the eve of the day when the flower was expected to open, 
the tulip was taken away by this young woman. She carried it 
to her room, from which I had the good luck to recover it at 
the very moment when she had the impudence to despatch a 
messenger to announce to the members of the Horticultural 
Society that she had produced the grand black tulip. But she 
did not stop there. There is no doubt that, during the few 
hours which she kept the flower in her room, she showed it 
to some persons whom she may now call as witnesses. But, 
fortunately, your Highness has now been warned against this 
impostor and her witnesses." 

"Oh, my God, my God! what infamous falsehoods!" said Rosa, 
bursting into tears, and throwing herself at the feet of the 
Stadtholder, who, although thinking her guilty, felt pity 
for her dreadful agony. 

"You have done very wrong, my child," he said, "and your 
lover shall be punished for having thus badly advised you. 
For you are so young, and have such an honest look, that I 
am inclined to believe the mischief to have been his doing, 
and not yours." 

"Monseigneur! Monseigneur!" cried Rosa, "Cornelius is not 
guilty." 

William started. 

"Not guilty of having advised you? that's what you want to 
say, is it not?" 

"What I wish to say, your Highness, is that Cornelius is as 
little guilty of the second crime imputed to him as he was 
of the first." 

"Of the first? And do you know what was his first crime? Do 
you know of what he was accused and convicted? Of having, as 
an accomplice of Cornelius de Witt, concealed the 
correspondence of the Grand Pensionary and the Marquis de 
Louvois." 

"Well, sir, he was ignorant of this correspondence being 
deposited with him; completely ignorant. I am as certain as 
of my life, that, if it were not so, he would have told me; 
for how could that pure mind have harboured a secret without 
revealing it to me? No, no, your Highness, I repeat it, and 
even at the risk of incurring your displeasure, Cornelius is 
no more guilty of the first crime than of the second; and of 
the second no more than of the first. Oh, would to Heaven 
that you knew my Cornelius; Monseigneur!" 

"He is a De Witt!" cried Boxtel. "His Highness knows only 
too much of him, having once granted him his life." 

"Silence!" said the Prince; "all these affairs of state, as 
I have already said, are completely out of the province of 
the Horticultural Society of Haarlem." 

Then, knitting his brow, he added, -- 

"As to the tulip, make yourself easy, Master Boxtel, you 
shall have justice done to you." 

Boxtel bowed with a heart full of joy, and received the 
congratulations of the President. 

"You, my child," William of Orange continued, "you were 
going to commit a crime. I will not punish you; but the real 
evil-doer shall pay the penalty for both. A man of his name 
may be a conspirator, and even a traitor, but he ought not 
to be a thief." 

"A thief!" cried Rosa. "Cornelius a thief? Pray, your 
Highness, do not say such a word, it would kill him, if he 
knew it. If theft there has been, I swear to you, Sir, no 
one else but this man has committed it." 

"Prove it," Boxtel coolly remarked. 

"I shall prove it. With God's help I shall." 

Then, turning towards Boxtel, she asked, -- 

"The tulip is yours?" 

"It is." 

"How many bulbs were there of it?" 

Boxtel hesitated for a moment, but after a short 
consideration he came to the conclusion that she would not 
ask this question if there were none besides the two bulbs 
of which he had known already. He therefore answered, -- 

"Three." 

"What has become of these bulbs?" 

"Oh! what has become of them? Well, one has failed; the 
second has produced the black tulip." 

"And the third? 

"The third!" 

"The third, -- where is it?" 

"I have it at home," said Boxtel, quite confused. 

"At home? Where? At Loewestein, or at Dort?" 

"At Dort," said Boxtel. 

"You lie!" cried Rosa. "Monseigneur," she continued, whilst 
turning round to the Prince, "I will tell you the true story 
of these three bulbs. The first was crushed by my father in 
the prisoner's cell, and this man is quite aware of it, for 
he himself wanted to get hold of it, and, being balked in 
his hope, he very nearly fell out with my father, who had 
been the cause of his disappointment. The second bulb, 
planted by me, has produced the black tulip, and the third 
and last" -- saying this, she drew it from her bosom -- 
"here it is, in the very same paper in which it was wrapped 
up together with the two others. When about to be led to the 
scaffold, Cornelius van Baerle gave me all the three. Take 
it, Monseigneur, take it." 

And Rosa, unfolding the paper, offered the bulb to the 
Prince, who took it from her hands and examined it. 

"But, Monseigneur, this young woman may have stolen the 
bulb, as she did the tulip," Boxtel said, with a faltering 
voice, and evidently alarmed at the attention with which the 
Prince examined the bulb; and even more at the movements of 
Rosa, who was reading some lines written on the paper which 
remained in her hands. 

Her eyes suddenly lighted up; she read, with breathless 
anxiety, the mysterious paper over and over again; and at 
last, uttering a cry, held it out to the Prince and said, 
"Read, Monseigneur, for Heaven's sake, read!" 

William handed the third bulb to Van Systens, took the 
paper, and read. 

No sooner had he looked at it than he began to stagger; his 
hand trembled, and very nearly let the paper fall to the 
ground; and the expression of pain and compassion in his 
features was really frightful to see. 

It was that fly-leaf, taken from the Bible, which Cornelius 
de Witt had sent to Dort by Craeke, the servant of his 
brother John, to request Van Baerle to burn the 
correspondence of the Grand Pensionary with the Marquis de 
Louvois. 

This request, as the reader may remember, was couched in the 
following terms: -- 

"My Dear Godson, -- 

"Burn the parcel which I have intrusted to you. Burn it 
without looking at it, and without opening it, so that its 
contents may for ever remain unknown to yourself. Secrets of 
this description are death to those with whom they are 
deposited. Burn it, and you will have saved John and 
Cornelius de Witt. 

"Farewell, and love me. 

Cornelius de Witt. 

"August 20, 1672." 

This slip of paper offered the proofs both of Van Baerle's 
innocence and of his claim to the property of the tulip. 

Rosa and the Stadtholder exchanged one look only. 

That of Rosa was meant to express, "Here, you see yourself." 

That of the Stadtholder signified, "Be quiet, and wait." 

The Prince wiped the cold sweat from his forehead, and 
slowly folded up the paper, whilst his thoughts were 
wandering in that labyrinth without a goal and without a 
guide, which is called remorse and shame for the past. 

Soon, however, raising his head with an effort, he said, in 
his usual voice, -- 

"Go, Mr. Boxtel; justice shall be done, I promise you." 

Then, turning to the President, he added, -- 

"You, my dear Mynheer van Systens, take charge of this young 
woman and of the tulip. Good-bye." 

All bowed, and the Prince left, among the deafening cheers 
of the crowd outside. 

Boxtel returned to his inn, rather puzzled and uneasy, 
tormented by misgivings about that paper which William had 
received from the hand of Rosa, and which his Highness had 
read, folded up, and so carefully put in his pocket. What 
was the meaning of all this? 

Rosa went up to the tulip, tenderly kissed its leaves and, 
with a heart full of happiness and confidence in the ways of 
God, broke out in the words, -- 

"Thou knowest best for what end Thou madest my good 
Cornelius teach me to read." 




Chapter 28

The Hymn of the Flowers


Whilst the events we have described in our last chapter were 
taking place, the unfortunate Van Baerle, forgotten in his 
cell in the fortress of Loewestein, suffered at the hands of 
Gryphus all that a prisoner can suffer when his jailer has 
formed the determination of playing the part of hangman. 

Gryphus, not having received any tidings of Rosa or of 
Jacob, persuaded himself that all that had happened was the 
devil's work, and that Dr. Cornelius van Baerle had been 
sent on earth by Satan. 

The result of it was, that, one fine morning, the third 
after the disappearance of Jacob and Rosa, he went up to the 
cell of Cornelius in even a greater rage than usual. 

The latter, leaning with his elbows on the window-sill and 
supporting his head with his two hands, whilst his eyes 
wandered over the distant hazy horizon where the windmills 
of Dort were turning their sails, was breathing the fresh 
air, in order to be able to keep down his tears and to 
fortify himself in his philosophy. 

The pigeons were still there, but hope was not there; there 
was no future to look forward to. 

Alas! Rosa, being watched, was no longer able to come. Could 
she not write? and if so, could she convey her letters to 
him? 

No, no. He had seen during the two preceding days too much 
fury and malignity in the eyes of old Gryphus to expect that 
his vigilance would relax, even for one moment. Moreover, 
had not she to suffer even worse torments than those of 
seclusion and separation? Did this brutal, blaspheming, 
drunken bully take revenge on his daughter, like the 
ruthless fathers of the Greek drama? And when the Genievre 
had heated his brain, would it not give to his arm, which 
had been only too well set by Cornelius, even double force? 

The idea that Rosa might perhaps be ill-treated nearly drove 
Cornelius mad. 

He then felt his own powerlessness. He asked himself whether 
God was just in inflicting so much tribulation on two 
innocent creatures. And certainly in these moments he began 
to doubt the wisdom of Providence. It is one of the curses 
of misfortune that it thus begets doubt. 

Van Baerle had proposed to write to Rosa, but where was she? 

He also would have wished to write to the Hague to be 
beforehand with Gryphus, who, he had no doubt, would by 
denouncing him do his best to bring new storms on his head. 

But how should he write? Gryphus had taken the paper and 
pencil from him, and even if he had both, he could hardly 
expect Gryphus to despatch his letter. 

Then Cornelius revolved in his mind all those stratagems 
resorted to by unfortunate prisoners. 

He had thought of an attempt to escape, a thing which never 
entered his head whilst he could see Rosa every day; but the 
more he thought of it, the more clearly he saw the 
impracticability of such an attempt. He was one of those 
choice spirits who abhor everything that is common, and who 
often lose a good chance through not taking the way of the 
vulgar, that high road of mediocrity which leads to 
everything. 

"How is it possible," said Cornelius to himself, "that I 
should escape from Loewestein, as Grotius has done the same 
thing before me? Has not every precaution been taken since? 
Are not the windows barred? Are not the doors of double and 
even of treble strength, and the sentinels ten times more 
watchful? And have not I, besides all this, an Argus so much 
the more dangerous as he has the keen eyes of hatred? 
Finally, is there not one fact which takes away all my 
spirit, I mean Rosa's absence? But suppose I should waste 
ten years of my life in making a file to file off my bars, 
or in braiding cords to let myself down from the window, or 
in sticking wings on my shoulders to fly, like Daedalus? But 
luck is against me now. The file would get dull, the rope 
would break, or my wings would melt in the sun; I should 
surely kill myself, I should be picked up maimed and 
crippled; I should be labelled, and put on exhibition in the 
museum at the Hague between the blood-stained doublet of 
William the Taciturn and the female walrus captured at 
Stavesen, and the only result of my enterprise will have 
been to procure me a place among the curiosities of Holland. 

"But no; and it is much better so. Some fine day Gryphus 
will commit some atrocity. I am losing my patience, since I 
have lost the joy and company of Rosa, and especially since 
I have lost my tulip. Undoubtedly, some day or other Gryphus 
will attack me in a manner painful to my self-respect, or to 
my love, or even threaten my personal safety. I don't know 
how it is, but since my imprisonment I feel a strange and 
almost irresistible pugnacity. Well, I shall get at the 
throat of that old villain, and strangle him." 

Cornelius at these words stopped for a moment, biting his 
lips and staring out before him; then, eagerly returning to 
an idea which seemed to possess a strange fascination for 
him, he continued, -- 

"Well, and once having strangled him, why should I not take 
his keys from him, why not go down the stairs as if I had 
done the most virtuous action, why not go and fetch Rosa 
from her room, why not tell her all, and jump from her 
window into the Waal? I am expert enough as a swimmer to 
save both of us. Rosa, -- but, oh Heaven, Gryphus is her 
father! Whatever may be her affection for me, she will never 
approve of my having strangled her father, brutal and 
malicious as he has been. 

"I shall have to enter into an argument with her; and in the 
midst of my speech some wretched turnkey who has found 
Gryphus with the death-rattle in his throat, or perhaps 
actually dead, will come along and put his hand on my 
shoulder. Then I shall see the Buytenhof again, and the 
gleam of that infernal sword, -- which will not stop 
half-way a second time, but will make acquaintance with the 
nape of my neck. 

"It will not do, Cornelius, my fine fellow, -- it is a bad 
plan. But, then, what is to become of me, and how shall I 
find Rosa again?" 

Such were the cogitations of Cornelius three days after the 
sad scene of separation from Rosa, at the moment when we 
find him standing at the window. 

And at that very moment Gryphus entered. 

He held in his hand a huge stick, his eyes glistening with 
spiteful thoughts, a malignant smile played round his lips, 
and the whole of his carriage, and even all his movements, 
betokened bad and malicious intentions. 

Cornelius heard him enter, and guessed that it was he, but 
did not turn round, as he knew well that Rosa was not coming 
after him. 

There is nothing more galling to angry people than the 
coolness of those on whom they wish to vent their spleen. 

The expense being once incurred, one does not like to lose 
it; one's passion is roused, and one's blood boiling, so it 
would be labour lost not to have at least a nice little row. 

Gryphus, therefore, on seeing that Cornelius did not stir, 
tried to attract his attention by a loud -- 

"Umph, umph!" 

Cornelius was humming between his teeth the "Hymn of 
Flowers," -- a sad but very charming song, -- 


"We are the daughters of the secret fire 
Of the fire which runs through the veins of the earth; 
We are the daughters of Aurora and of the dew; 
We are the daughters of the air; 
We are the daughters of the water; 
But we are, above all, the daughters of heaven." 


This song, the placid melancholy of which was still 
heightened by its calm and sweet melody, exasperated Gryphus. 

He struck his stick on the stone pavement of the cell,
and called out, -- 

"Halloa! my warbling gentleman, don't you hear me?" 

Cornelius turned round, merely saying, "Good morning," and 
then began his song again: -- 


"Men defile us and kill us while loving us, 
We hang to the earth by a thread; 
This thread is our root, that is to say, our life, 
But we raise on high our arms towards heaven." 


"Ah, you accursed sorcerer! you are making game of me, I 
believe," roared Gryphus. 

Cornelius continued: -- 


"For heaven is our home, 
Our true home, as from thence comes our soul, 
As thither our soul returns, -- 
Our soul, that is to say, our perfume." 


Gryphus went up to the prisoner and said, -- 

"But you don't see that I have taken means to get you under, 
and to force you to confess your crimes." 

"Are you mad, my dear Master Gryphus?" asked Cornelius. 

And, as he now for the first time observed the frenzied 
features, the flashing eyes, and foaming mouth of the old 
jailer, he said, -- 

"Bless the man, he is more than mad, he is furious." 

Gryphus flourished his stick above his head, but Van Baerle 
moved not, and remained standing with his arms akimbo. 

"It seems your intention to threaten me, Master Gryphus." 

"Yes, indeed, I threaten you," cried the jailer. 

"And with what?" 

"First of all, look at what I have in my hand." 

"I think that's a stick," said Cornelius calmly, "but I 
don't suppose you will threaten me with that." 

"Oh, you don't suppose! why not?" 

"Because any jailer who strikes a prisoner is liable to two 
penalties, -- the first laid down in Article 9 of the 
regulations at Loewestein: -- 

"'Any jailer, inspector, or turnkey who lays hands upon any 
prisoner of State will be dismissed.'" 

"Yes, who lays hands," said Gryphus, mad with rage, "but 
there is not a word about a stick in the regulation." 

"And the second," continued Cornelius, "which is not written 
in the regulation, but which is to be found elsewhere: -- 

"'Whosoever takes up the stick will be thrashed by the 
stick.'" 

Gryphus, growing more and more exasperated by the calm and 
sententious tone of Cornelius, brandished his cudgel, but at 
the moment when he raised it Cornelius rushed at him, 
snatched it from his hands, and put it under his own arm. 

Gryphus fairly bellowed with rage. 

"Hush, hush, my good man," said Cornelius, "don't do 
anything to lose your place." 

"Ah, you sorcerer! I'll pinch you worse," roared Gryphus. 

"I wish you may." 

"Don't you see my hand is empty?" 

"Yes, I see it, and I am glad of it." 

"You know that it is not generally so when I come upstairs 
in the morning." 

"It's true, you generally bring me the worst soup, and the 
most miserable rations one can imagine. But that's not a 
punishment to me; I eat only bread, and the worse the bread 
is to your taste, the better it is to mine." 

"How so?" 

"Oh, it's a very simple thing." 

"Well, tell it me," said Gryphus. 

"Very willingly. I know that in giving me bad bread you 
think you do me harm." 

"Certainly; I don't give it you to please you, you brigand." 

"Well, then, I, who am a sorcerer, as you know, change your 
bad into excellent bread, which I relish more than the best 
cake; and then I have the double pleasure of eating 
something that gratifies my palate, and of doing something 
that puts you in a rage. 

Gryphus answered with a growl. 

"Oh! you confess, then, that you are a sorcerer." 

"Indeed, I am one. I don't say it before all the world, 
because they might burn me for it, but as we are alone, I 
don't mind telling you." 

"Well, well, well," answered Gryphus. "But if a sorcerer can 
change black bread into white, won't he die of hunger if he 
has no bread at all?" 

"What's that?" said Cornelius. 

"Consequently, I shall not bring you any bread at all, and 
we shall see how it will be after eight days." 

Cornelius grew pale. 

"And," continued Gryphus, "we'll begin this very day. As you 
are such a clever sorcerer, why, you had better change the 
furniture of your room into bread; as to myself, I shall 
pocket the eighteen sous which are paid to me for your 
board." 

"But that's murder," cried Cornelius, carried away by the 
first impulse of the very natural terror with which this 
horrible mode of death inspired him. 

"Well," Gryphus went on, in his jeering way, "as you are a 
sorcerer, you will live, notwithstanding." 

Cornelius put on a smiling face again, and said, -- 

"Have you not seen me make the pigeons come here from Dort?" 

"Well?" said Gryphus. 

"Well, a pigeon is a very dainty morsel, and a man who eats 
one every day would not starve, I think." 

"And how about the fire?" said Gryphus. 

"Fire! but you know that I'm in league with the devil. Do 
you think the devil will leave me without fire? Why, fire is 
his proper element." 

"A man, however healthy his appetite may be, would not eat a 
pigeon every day. Wagers have been laid to do so, and those 
who made them gave them up." 

"Well, but when I am tired of pigeons, I shall make the fish 
of the Waal and of the Meuse come up to me." 

Gryphus opened his large eyes, quite bewildered. 

"I am rather fond of fish," continued Cornelius; "you never 
let me have any. Well, I shall turn your starving me to 
advantage, and regale myself with fish." 

Gryphus nearly fainted with anger and with fright, but he 
soon rallied, and said, putting his hand in his pocket, -- 

"Well, as you force me to it," and with these words he drew 
forth a clasp-knife and opened it. 

"Halloa! a knife?" said Cornelius, preparing to defend 
himself with his stick. 




Chapter 29

In which Van Baerle, before leaving Loewestein, 
settles Accounts with Gryphus


The two remained silent for some minutes, Gryphus on the 
offensive, and Van Baerle on the defensive. 

Then, as the situation might be prolonged to an indefinite 
length, Cornelius, anxious to know something more of the 
causes which had so fiercely exasperated his jailer, spoke 
first by putting the question, -- 

"Well, what do you want, after all?" 

"I'll tell you what I want," answered Gryphus; "I want you to 
restore to me my daughter Rosa." 

"Your daughter?" cried Van Baerle. 

"Yes, my daughter Rosa, whom you have taken from me by your 
devilish magic. Now, will you tell me where she is?" 

And the attitude of Gryphus became more and more 
threatening. 

"Rosa is not at Loewestein?" cried Cornelius. 

"You know well she is not. Once more, will you restore her 
to me?" 

"I see," said Cornelius, "this is a trap you are laying for 
me." 

"Now, for the last time, will you tell me where my daughter 
is?" 

"Guess it, you rogue, if you don't know it." 

"Only wait, only wait," growled Gryphus, white with rage, 
and with quivering lips, as his brain began to turn. "Ah, 
you will not tell me anything? Well, I'll unlock your 
teeth!" 

He advanced a step towards Cornelius, and said, showing him 
the weapon which he held in his hands, -- 

"Do you see this knife? Well, I have killed more than fifty 
black cocks with it, and I vow I'll kill their master, the 
devil, as well as them." 

"But, you blockhead," said Cornelius, "will you really kill 
me?" 

"I shall open your heart to see in it the place where you 
hide my daughter." 

Saying this, Gryphus in his frenzy rushed towards Cornelius, 
who had barely time to retreat behind his table to avoid the 
first thrust; but as Gryphus continued, with horrid threats, 
to brandish his huge knife, and as, although out of the 
reach of his weapon, yet, as long as it remained in the 
madman's hand, the ruffian might fling it at him, Cornelius 
lost no time, and availing himself of the stick, which he 
held tight under his arm, dealt the jailer a vigorous blow 
on the wrist of that hand which held the knife. 

The knife fell to the ground, and Cornelius put his foot on 
it. 

Then, as Gryphus seemed bent upon engaging in a struggle 
which the pain in his wrist, and shame for having allowed 
himself to be disarmed, would have made desperate, Cornelius 
took a decisive step, belaboring his jailer with the most 
heroic self-possession, and selecting the exact spot for 
every blow of the terrible cudgel. 

It was not long before Gryphus begged for mercy. But before 
begging for mercy, he had lustily roared for help, and his 
cries had roused all the functionaries of the prison. Two 
turnkeys, an inspector, and three or four guards, made their 
appearance all at once, and found Cornelius still using the 
stick, with the knife under his foot. 

At the sight of these witnesses, who could not know all the 
circumstances which had provoked and might justify his 
offence, Cornelius felt that he was irretrievably lost. 

In fact, appearances were sadly against him. 

In one moment Cornelius was disarmed, and Gryphus raised and 
supported; and, bellowing with rage and pain, he was able to 
count on his back and shoulders the bruises which were 
beginning to swell like the hills dotting the slopes of a 
mountain ridge. 

A protocol of the violence practiced by the prisoner against 
his jailer was immediately drawn up, and as it was made on 
the depositions of Gryphus, it certainly could not be said 
to be too tame; the prisoner being charged with neither more 
nor less than with an attempt to murder, for a long time 
premeditated, with open rebellion. 

Whilst the charge was made out against Cornelius, Gryphus, 
whose presence was no longer necessary after having made his 
depositions, was taken down by his turnkeys to his lodge, 
groaning and covered with bruises. 

During this time, the guards who had seized Cornelius busied 
themselves in charitably informing their prisoner of the 
usages and customs of Loewestein, which however he knew as 
well as they did. The regulations had been read to him at 
the moment of his entering the prison, and certain articles 
in them remained fixed in his memory. 

Among other things they told him that this regulation had 
been carried out to its full extent in the case of a 
prisoner named Mathias, who in 1668, that is to say, five 
years before, had committed a much less violent act of 
rebellion than that of which Cornelius was guilty. He had 
found his soup too hot, and thrown it at the head of the 
chief turnkey, who in consequence of this ablution had been 
put to the inconvenience of having his skin come off as he 
wiped his face. 

Mathias was taken within twelve hours from his cell, then 
led to the jailer's lodge, where he was registered as 
leaving Loewestein, then taken to the Esplanade, from which 
there is a very fine prospect over a wide expanse of 
country. There they fettered his hands, bandaged his eyes, 
and let him say his prayers. 

Hereupon he was invited to go down on his knees, and the 
guards of Loewestein, twelve in number, at a sign from a 
sergeant, very cleverly lodged a musket-ball each in his 
body. 

In consequence of this proceeding, Mathias incontinently did 
then and there die. 

Cornelius listened with the greatest attention to this 
delightful recital, and then said, -- 

"Ah! ah! within twelve hours, you say?" 

"Yes, the twelfth hour had not even struck, if I remember 
right," said the guard who had told him the story. 

"Thank you," said Cornelius. 

The guard still had the smile on his face with which he 
accompanied and as it were accentuated his tale, when 
footsteps and a jingling of spurs were heard ascending the 
stair-case. 

The guards fell back to allow an officer to pass, who 
entered the cell of Cornelius at the moment when the clerk 
of Loewestein was still making out his report. 

"Is this No. 11?" he asked. 

"Yes, Captain," answered a non-commissioned officer. 

"Then this is the cell of the prisoner Cornelius van 
Baerle?" 

"Exactly, Captain." 

"Where is the prisoner?" 

"Here I am, sir," answered Cornelius, growing rather pale, 
notwithstanding all his courage. 

"You are Dr. Cornelius van Baerle?" asked he, this time 
addressing the prisoner himself. 

"Yes, sir." 

"Then follow me." 

"Oh! oh!" said Cornelius, whose heart felt oppressed by the 
first dread of death. "What quick work they make here in the 
fortress of Loewestein. And the rascal talked to me of 
twelve hours!" 

"Ah! what did I tell you?" whispered the communicative guard 
in the ear of the culprit. 

"A lie." 

"How so?" 

"You promised me twelve hours." 

"Ah, yes, but here comes to you an aide-de-camp of his 
Highness, even one of his most intimate companions Van 
Deken. Zounds! they did not grant such an honour to poor 
Mathias." 

"Come, come!" said Cornelius, drawing a long breath. "Come, 
I'll show to these people that an honest burgher, godson of 
Cornelius de Witt, can without flinching receive as many 
musket-balls as that Mathias." 

Saying this, he passed proudly before the clerk, who, being 
interrupted in his work, ventured to say to the officer, -- 

"But, Captain van Deken, the protocol is not yet finished." 

"It is not worth while finishing it," answered the officer. 

"All right," replied the clerk, philosophically putting up 
his paper and pen into a greasy and well-worn writing-case. 

"It was written," thought poor Cornelius, "that I should not 
in this world give my name either to a child to a flower, or 
to a book, -- the three things by which a man's memory is 
perpetuated." 

Repressing his melancholy thoughts, he followed the officer 
with a resolute heart, and carrying his head erect. 

Cornelius counted the steps which led to the Esplanade, 
regretting that he had not asked the guard how many there 
were of them, which the man, in his official complaisance, 
would not have failed to tell him. 

What the poor prisoner was most afraid of during this walk, 
which he considered as leading him to the end of the journey 
of life, was to see Gryphus and not to see Rosa. What savage 
satisfaction would glisten in the eyes of the father, and 
what sorrow dim those of the daughter! 

How Gryphus would glory in his punishment! Punishment? 
Rather savage vengeance for an eminently righteous deed, 
which Cornelius had the satisfaction of having performed as 
a bounden duty. 

But Rosa, poor girl! must he die without a glimpse of her, 
without an opportunity to give her one last kiss, or even to 
say one last word of farewell? 

And, worst of all, must he die without any intelligence of 
the black tulip, and regain his consciousness in heaven with 
no idea in what direction he should look to find it? 

In truth, to restrain his tears at such a crisis the poor 
wretch's heart must have been encased in more of the aes 
triplex -- "the triple brass" -- than Horace bestows upon 
the sailor who first visited the terrifying Acroceraunian 
shoals. 

In vain did Cornelius look to the right and to the left; he 
saw no sign either of Rosa or Gryphus. 

On reaching the Esplanade, he bravely looked about for the 
guards who were to be his executioners, and in reality saw a 
dozen soldiers assembled. But they were not standing in 
line, or carrying muskets, but talking together so gayly 
that Cornelius felt almost shocked. 

All at once, Gryphus, limping, staggering, and supporting 
himself on a crooked stick, came forth from the jailer's 
lodge; his old eyes, gray as those of a cat, were lit up by 
a gleam in which all his hatred was concentrated. He then 
began to pour forth such a torrent of disgusting 
imprecations against Cornelius, that the latter, addressing 
the officer, said, -- 

"I do not think it very becoming sir, that I should be thus 
insulted by this man, especially at a moment like this." 

"Well! hear me," said the officer, laughing, "it is quite 
natural that this worthy fellow should bear you a grudge, -- 
you seem to have given it him very soundly." 

"But, sir, it was only in self-defence." 

"Never mind," said the Captain, shrugging his shoulders like 
a true philosopher, "let him talk; what does it matter to 
you now?" 

The cold sweat stood on the brow of Cornelius at this 
answer, which he looked upon somewhat in the light of brutal 
irony, especially as coming from an officer of whom he had 
heard it said that he was attached to the person of the 
Prince. 

The unfortunate tulip-fancier then felt that he had no more 
resources, and no more friends, and resigned himself to his 
fate. 

"God's will be done," he muttered, bowing his head; then, 
turning towards the officer, who seemed complacently to wait 
until he had finished his meditations he asked, -- 

"Please, sir, tell me now, where am I to go?" 

The officer pointed to a carriage, drawn by four horses, 
which reminded him very strongly of that which, under 
similar circumstances, had before attracted his attention at 
Buytenhof. 

"Enter," said the officer. 

"Ah!" muttered Cornelius to himself, "it seems they are not 
going to treat me to the honours of the Esplanade." 

He uttered these words loud enough for the chatty guard, who 
was at his heels, to overhear him. 

That kind soul very likely thought it his duty to give 
Cornelius some new information; for, approaching the door of 
the carriage, whilst the officer, with one foot on the step, 
was still giving some orders, he whispered to Van Baerle, -- 

"Condemned prisoners have sometimes been taken to their own 
town to be made an example of, and have then been executed 
before the door of their own house. It's all according to 
circumstances." 

Cornelius thanked him by signs, and then said to himself, -- 

"Well, here is a fellow who never misses giving consolation 
whenever an opportunity presents itself. In truth, my 
friend, I'm very much obliged to you. Goodbye." 

The carriage drove away. 

"Ah! you villain, you brigand," roared Gryphus, clinching 
his fists at the victim who was escaping from his clutches, 
"is it not a shame that this fellow gets off without having 
restored my daughter to me?" 

"If they take me to Dort," thought Cornelius, "I shall see, 
in passing my house, whether my poor borders have been much 
spoiled." 




Chapter 30

Wherein the Reader begins to guess the Kind of Execution that
was awaiting Van Baerle


The carriage rolled on during the whole day; it passed on 
the right of Dort, went through Rotterdam, and reached 
Delft. At five o'clock in the evening, at least twenty 
leagues had been travelled. 

Cornelius addressed some questions to the officer, who was 
at the same time his guard and his companion; but, cautious 
as were his inquiries, he had the disappointment of 
receiving no answer. 

Cornelius regretted that he had no longer by his side the 
chatty soldier, who would talk without being questioned. 

That obliging person would undoubtedly have given him as 
pleasant details and exact explanations concerning this 
third strange part of his adventures as he had done 
concerning the first two. 

The travellers passed the night in the carriage. On the 
following morning at dawn Cornelius found himself beyond 
Leyden, having the North Sea on his left, and the Zuyder Zee 
on his right. 

Three hours after, he entered Haarlem. 

Cornelius was not aware of what had passed at Haarlem, and 
we shall leave him in ignorance of it until the course of 
events enlightens him. 

But the reader has a right to know all about it even before 
our hero, and therefore we shall not make him wait. 

We have seen that Rosa and the tulip, like two orphan 
sisters, had been left by Prince William of Orange at the 
house of the President van Systens. 

Rosa did not hear again from the Stadtholder until the 
evening of that day on which she had seen him face to face. 

Toward evening, an officer called at Van Systen's house. He 
came from his Highness, with a request for Rosa to appear at 
the Town Hall. 

There, in the large Council Room into which she was ushered, 
she found the Prince writing. 

He was alone, with a large Frisian greyhound at his feet, 
which looked at him with a steady glance, as if the faithful 
animal were wishing to do what no man could do, -- read the 
thoughts of his master in his face. 

William continued his writing for a moment; then, raising 
his eyes, and seeing Rosa standing near the door, he said, 
without laying down his pen, -- 

"Come here, my child." 

Rosa advanced a few steps towards the table. 

"Sit down," he said. 

Rosa obeyed, for the Prince was fixing his eyes upon her, 
but he had scarcely turned them again to his paper when she 
bashfully retired to the door. 

The Prince finished his letter. 

During this time, the greyhound went up to Rosa, surveyed 
her and began to caress her. 

"Ah, ah!" said William to his dog, "it's easy to see that 
she is a countrywoman of yours, and that you recognise her." 

Then, turning towards Rosa, and fixing on her his 
scrutinising, and at the same time impenetrable glance, he 
said, -- 

"Now, my child." 

The Prince was scarcely twenty-three, and Rosa eighteen or 
twenty. He might therefore perhaps better have said, My 
sister. 

"My child," he said, with that strangely commanding accent 
which chilled all those who approached him, "we are alone; 
let us speak together." 

Rosa began to tremble, and yet there was nothing but 
kindness in the expression of the Prince's face. 

"Monseigneur," she stammered. 

"You have a father at Loewestein?" 

"Yes, your Highness." 

"You do not love him?" 

"I do not; at least, not as a daughter ought to do, 
Monseigneur." 

"It is not right not to love one's father, but it is right 
not to tell a falsehood." 

Rosa cast her eyes to the ground. 

"What is the reason of your not loving your father?" 

"He is wicked." 

"In what way does he show his wickedness?" 

"He ill-treats the prisoners." 

"All of them?" 

"All." 

"But don't you bear him a grudge for ill-treating some one 
in particular?" 

"My father ill-treats in particular Mynheer van Baerle, who 
---- " 

"Who is your lover?" 

Rosa started back a step. 

"Whom I love, Monseigneur," she answered proudly. 

"Since when?" asked the Prince. 

"Since the day when I first saw him." 

"And when was that?" 

"The day after that on which the Grand Pensionary John and 
his brother Cornelius met with such an awful death." 

The Prince compressed his lips, and knit his brow and his 
eyelids dropped so as to hide his eyes for an instant. After 
a momentary silence, he resumed the conversation. 

"But to what can it lead to love a man who is doomed to live 
and die in prison?" 

"It will lead, if he lives and dies in prison, to my aiding 
him in life and in death." 

"And would you accept the lot of being the wife of a 
prisoner?" 

"As the wife of Mynheer van Baerle, I should, under any 
circumstances, be the proudest and happiest woman in the 
world; but ---- " 

"But what?" 

"I dare not say, Monseigneur." 

"There is something like hope in your tone; what do you 
hope?" 

She raised her moist and beautiful eyes, and looked at 
William with a glance full of meaning, which was calculated 
to stir up in the recesses of his heart the clemency which 
was slumbering there. 

"Ah, I understand you," he said. 

Rosa, with a smile, clasped her hands. 

"You hope in me?" said the Prince. 

"Yes, Monseigneur." 

"Umph!" 

The Prince sealed the letter which he had just written, and 
summoned one of his officers, to whom he said, -- 

"Captain van Deken, carry this despatch to Loewestein; you 
will read the orders which I give to the Governor, and 
execute them as far as they regard you." 

The officer bowed, and a few minutes afterwards the gallop 
of a horse was heard resounding in the vaulted archway. 

"My child," continued the Prince, "the feast of the tulip 
will be on Sunday next, that is to say, the day after 
to-morrow. Make yourself smart with these five hundred 
guilders, as I wish that day to be a great day for you." 

"How does your Highness wish me to be dressed?" faltered 
Rosa. 

"Take the costume of a Frisian bride." said William; "it 
will suit you very well indeed." 




Chapter 31

Haarlem


Haarlem, whither, three days ago, we conducted our gentle 
reader, and whither we request him to follow us once more in 
the footsteps of the prisoner, is a pleasant city, which 
justly prides itself on being one of the most shady in all 
the Netherlands. 

While other towns boast of the magnificence of their 
arsenals and dock-yards, and the splendour of their shops 
and markets, Haarlem's claims to fame rest upon her 
superiority to all other provincial cities in the number and 
beauty of her spreading elms, graceful poplars, and, more 
than all, upon her pleasant walks, shaded by the lovely 
arches of magnificent oaks, lindens, and chestnuts. 

Haarlem, -- just as her neighbour, Leyden, became the centre 
of science, and her queen, Amsterdam, that of commerce, -- 
Haarlem preferred to be the agricultural, or, more strictly 
speaking, the horticultural metropolis. 

In fact, girt about as she was, breezy and exposed to the 
sun's hot rays, she seemed to offer to gardeners so many 
more guarantees of success than other places, with their 
heavy sea air, and their scorching heat. 

On this account all the serene souls who loved the earth and 
its fruits had gradually gathered together at Haarlem, just 
as all the nervous, uneasy spirits, whose ambition was for 
travel and commerce, had settled in Rotterdam and Amsterdam, 
and all the politicians and selfish worldlings at the Hague. 

We have observed that Leyden overflowed with scholars. In 
like manner Haarlem was devoted to the gentle pursuits of 
peace, -- to music and painting, orchards and avenues, 
groves and parks. Haarlem went wild about flowers, and 
tulips received their full share of worship. 

Haarlem offered prizes for tulip-growing; and this fact 
brings us in the most natural manner to that celebration 
which the city intended to hold on May 15th, 1673 in honour 
of the great black tulip, immaculate and perfect, which 
should gain for its discoverer one hundred thousand 
guilders! 

Haarlem, having placed on exhibition its favourite, having 
advertised its love of flowers in general and of tulips in 
particular, at a period when the souls of men were filled 
with war and sedition, -- Haarlem, having enjoyed the 
exquisite pleasure of admiring the very purest ideal of 
tulips in full bloom, -- Haarlem, this tiny town, full of 
trees and of sunshine, of light and shade, had determined 
that the ceremony of bestowing the prize should be a fete 
which should live for ever in the memory of men. 

So much the more reason was there, too, in her 
determination, in that Holland is the home of fetes; never 
did sluggish natures manifest more eager energy of the 
singing and dancing sort than those of the good republicans 
of the Seven Provinces when amusement was the order of the 
day. 

Study the pictures of the two Teniers. 

It is certain that sluggish folk are of all men the most 
earnest in tiring themselves, not when they are at work, but 
at play. 

Thus Haarlem was thrice given over to rejoicing, for a 
three-fold celebration was to take place. 

In the first place, the black tulip had been produced; 
secondly, the Prince William of Orange, as a true Hollander, 
had promised to be present at the ceremony of its 
inauguration; and, thirdly, it was a point of honour with 
the States to show to the French, at the conclusion of such 
a disastrous war as that of 1672, that the flooring of the 
Batavian Republic was solid enough for its people to dance 
on it, with the accompaniment of the cannon of their fleets. 

The Horticultural Society of Haarlem had shown itself worthy 
of its fame by giving a hundred thousand guilders for the 
bulb of a tulip. The town, which did not wish to be outdone, 
voted a like sum, which was placed in the hands of that 
notable body to solemnise the auspicious event. 

And indeed on the Sunday fixed for this ceremony there was 
such a stir among the people, and such an enthusiasm among 
the townsfolk, that even a Frenchman, who laughs at 
everything at all times, could not have helped admiring the 
character of those honest Hollanders, who were equally ready 
to spend their money for the construction of a man-of-war -- 
that is to say, for the support of national honour -- as 
they were to reward the growth of a new flower, destined to 
bloom for one day, and to serve during that day to divert 
the ladies, the learned, and the curious. 

At the head of the notables and of the Horticultural 
Committee shone Mynheer van Systens, dressed in his richest 
habiliments. 

The worthy man had done his best to imitate his favourite 
flower in the sombre and stern elegance of his garments; and 
we are bound to record, to his honour, that he had perfectly 
succeeded in his object. 

Dark crimson velvet, dark purple silk, and jet-black cloth, 
with linen of dazzling whiteness, composed the festive dress 
of the President, who marched at the head of his Committee 
carrying an enormous nosegay, like that which a hundred and 
twenty-one years later, Monsieur de Robespierre displayed at 
the festival of "The Supreme Being." 

There was, however, a little difference between the two; 
very different from the French tribune, whose heart was so 
full of hatred and ambitious vindictiveness, was the honest 
President, who carried in his bosom a heart as innocent as 
the flowers which he held in his hand. 

Behind the Committee, who were as gay as a meadow, and as 
fragrant as a garden in spring, marched the learned 
societies of the town, the magistrates, the military, the 
nobles and the boors. 

The people, even among the respected republicans of the 
Seven Provinces, had no place assigned to them in the 
procession; they merely lined the streets. 

This is the place for the multitude, which with true 
philosophic spirit, waits until the triumphal pageants have 
passed, to know what to say of them, and sometimes also to 
know what to do. 

This time, however, there was no question either of the 
triumph of Pompey or of Caesar; neither of the defeat of 
Mithridates, nor of the conquest of Gaul. The procession was 
as placid as the passing of a flock of lambs, and as 
inoffensive as a flight of birds sweeping through the air. 

Haarlem had no other triumphers, except its gardeners. 
Worshipping flowers, Haarlem idolised the florist. 

In the centre of this pacific and fragrant cortege the black 
tulip was seen, carried on a litter, which was covered with 
white velvet and fringed with gold. 

The handles of the litter were supported by four men, who 
were from time to time relieved by fresh relays, -- even as 
the bearers of Mother Cybele used to take turn and turn 
about at Rome in the ancient days, when she was brought from 
Etruria to the Eternal City, amid the blare of trumpets and 
the worship of a whole nation. 

This public exhibition of the tulip was an act of adoration 
rendered by an entire nation, unlettered and unrefined, to 
the refinement and culture of its illustrious and devout 
leaders, whose blood had stained the foul pavement of the 
Buytenhof, reserving the right at a future day to inscribe 
the names of its victims upon the highest stone of the Dutch 
Pantheon. 

It was arranged that the Prince Stadtholder himself should 
give the prize of a hundred thousand guilders, which 
interested the people at large, and it was thought that 
perhaps he would make a speech which interested more 
particularly his friends and enemies. 

For in the most insignificant words of men of political 
importance their friends and their opponents always 
endeavour to detect, and hence think they can interpret, 
something of their true thoughts. 

As if your true politician's hat were not a bushel under 
which he always hides his light! 

At length the great and long-expected day -- May 15, 1673 -- 
arrived; and all Haarlem, swelled by her neighbours, was 
gathered in the beautiful tree-lined streets, determined on 
this occasion not to waste its applause upon military 
heroes, or those who had won notable victories in the field 
of science, but to reserve their applause for those who had 
overcome Nature, and had forced the inexhaustible mother to 
be delivered of what had theretofore been regarded as 
impossible, -- a completely black tulip. 

Nothing however, is more fickle than such a resolution of 
the people. When a crowd is once in the humour to cheer, it 
is just the same as when it begins to hiss. It never knows 
when to stop. 

It therefore, in the first place, cheered Van Systens and 
his nosegay, then the corporation, then followed a cheer for 
the people; and, at last, and for once with great justice, 
there was one for the excellent music with which the 
gentlemen of the town councils generously treated the 
assemblage at every halt. 

Every eye was looking eagerly for the heroine of the 
festival, -- that is to say, the black tulip, -- and for its 
hero in the person of the one who had grown it. 

In case this hero should make his appearance after the 
address we have seen worthy Van Systens at work on so 
conscientiously, he would not fail to make as much of a 
sensation as the Stadtholder himself. 

But the interest of the day's proceedings for us is centred 
neither in the learned discourse of our friend Van Systens, 
however eloquent it might be, nor in the young dandies, 
resplendent in their Sunday clothes, and munching their 
heavy cakes; nor in the poor young peasants, gnawing smoked 
eels as if they were sticks of vanilla sweetmeat; neither is 
our interest in the lovely Dutch girls, with red cheeks and 
ivory bosoms; nor in the fat, round mynheers, who had never 
left their homes before; nor in the sallow, thin travellers 
from Ceylon or Java; nor in the thirsty crowds, who quenched 
their thirst with pickled cucumbers; -- no, so far as we are 
concerned, the real interest of the situation, the 
fascinating, dramatic interest, is not to be found here. 

Our interest is in a smiling, sparkling face to be seen amid 
the members of the Horticultural Committee; in the person 
with a flower in his belt, combed and brushed, and all clad 
in scarlet, -- a colour which makes his black hair and 
yellow skin stand out in violent contrast. 

This hero, radiant with rapturous joy, who had the 
distinguished honour of making the people forget the speech 
of Van Systens, and even the presence of the Stadtholder, 
was Isaac Boxtel, who saw, carried on his right before him, 
the black tulip, his pretended daughter; and on his left, in 
a large purse, the hundred thousand guilders in glittering 
gold pieces, towards which he was constantly squinting, 
fearful of losing sight of them for one moment. 

Now and then Boxtel quickened his step to rub elbows for a 
moment with Van Systens. He borrowed a little importance 
from everybody to make a kind of false importance for 
himself, as he had stolen Rosa's tulip to effect his own 
glory, and thereby make his fortune. 

Another quarter of an hour and the Prince will arrive and 
the procession will halt for the last time; after the tulip 
is placed on its throne, the Prince, yielding precedence to 
this rival for the popular adoration, will take a 
magnificently emblazoned parchment, on which is written the 
name of the grower; and his Highness, in a loud and audible 
tone, will proclaim him to be the discoverer of a wonder; 
that Holland, by the instrumentality of him, Boxtel, has 
forced Nature to produce a black flower, which shall 
henceforth be called Tulipa nigra Boxtellea. 

From time to time, however, Boxtel withdrew his eyes for a 
moment from the tulip and the purse, timidly looking among 
the crowd, for more than anything he dreaded to descry there 
the pale face of the pretty Frisian girl. 

She would have been a spectre spoiling the joy of the 
festival for him, just as Banquo's ghost did that of 
Macbeth. 

And yet, if the truth must be told, this wretch, who had 
stolen what was the boast of man, and the dowry of a woman, 
did not consider himself as a thief. He had so intently 
watched this tulip, followed it so eagerly from the drawer 
in Cornelius's dry-room to the scaffold of the Buytenhof, 
and from the scaffold to the fortress of Loewestein; he had 
seen it bud and grow in Rosa's window, and so often warmed 
the air round it with his breath, that he felt as if no one 
had a better right to call himself its producer than he had; 
and any one who would now take the black tulip from him 
would have appeared to him as a thief. 

Yet he did not perceive Rosa; his joy therefore was not 
spoiled. 

In the centre of a circle of magnificent trees, which were 
decorated with garlands and inscriptions, the procession 
halted, amidst the sounds of lively music, and the young 
damsels of Haarlem made their appearance to escort the tulip 
to the raised seat which it was to occupy on the platform, 
by the side of the gilded chair of his Highness the 
Stadtholder. 

And the proud tulip, raised on its pedestal, soon overlooked 
the assembled crowd of people, who clapped their hands, and 
made the old town of Haarlem re-echo with their tremendous 
cheers. 




Chapter 32

A Last Request


At this solemn moment, and whilst the cheers still 
resounded, a carriage was driving along the road on the 
outskirts of the green on which the scene occurred; it 
pursued its way slowly, on account of the flocks of children 
who were pushed out of the avenue by the crowd of men and 
women. 

This carriage, covered with dust, and creaking on its axles, 
the result of a long journey, enclosed the unfortunate Van 
Baerle, who was just beginning to get a glimpse through the 
open window of the scene which we have tried -- with poor 
success, no doubt -- to present to the eyes of the reader. 

The crowd and the noise and the display of artificial and 
natural magnificence were as dazzling to the prisoner as a 
ray of light flashing suddenly into his dungeon. 

Notwithstanding the little readiness which his companion had 
shown in answering his questions concerning his fate, he 
ventured once more to ask the meaning of all this bustle, 
which at first sight seemed to be utterly disconnected with 
his own affairs. 

"What is all this, pray, Mynheer Lieutenant?" he asked of 
his conductor. 

"As you may see, sir," replied the officer, "it is a feast." 

"Ah, a feast," said Cornelius, in the sad tone of 
indifference of a man to whom no joy remains in this world. 

Then, after some moments, silence, during which the carriage 
had proceeded a few yards, he asked once more, -- 

"The feast of the patron saint of Haarlem? as I see so many 
flowers." 

"It is, indeed, a feast in which flowers play a principal 
part." 

"Oh, the sweet scents! oh, the beautiful colours!" cried 
Cornelius. 

"Stop, that the gentleman may see," said the officer, with 
that frank kindliness which is peculiar to military men, to 
the soldier who was acting as postilion. 

"Oh, thank you, Sir, for your kindness," replied Van Baerle, 
in a melancholy tone; "the joy of others pains me; please 
spare me this pang." 

"Just as you wish. Drive on! I ordered the driver to stop 
because I thought it would please you, as you are said to 
love flowers, and especially that the feast of which is 
celebrated to-day." 

"And what flower is that?" 

"The tulip." 

"The tulip!" cried Van Baerle, "is to-day the feast of 
tulips?" 

"Yes, sir; but as this spectacle displeases you, let us 
drive on." 

The officer was about to give the order to proceed, but 
Cornelius stopped him, a painful thought having struck him. 
He asked, with faltering voice, -- 

"Is the prize given to-day, sir?" 

"Yes, the prize for the black tulip." 

Cornelius's cheek flushed, his whole frame trembled, and the 
cold sweat stood on his brow. 

"Alas! sir," he said, "all these good people will be as 
unfortunate as myself, for they will not see the solemnity 
which they have come to witness, or at least they will see 
it incompletely." 

"What is it you mean to say?" 

"I mean to say." replied Cornelius, throwing himself back in 
the carriage, "that the black tulip will not be found, 
except by one whom I know." 

"In this case," said the officer, "the person whom you know 
has found it, for the thing which the whole of Haarlem is 
looking at at this moment is neither more nor less than the 
black tulip." 

"The black tulip!" replied Van Baerle, thrusting half his 
body out of the carriage window. "Where is it? where is it?" 

"Down there on the throne, -- don't you see?" 

"I do see it." 

"Come along, sir," said the officer. "Now we must drive 
off." 

"Oh, have pity, have mercy, sir!" said Van Baerle, "don't 
take me away! Let me look once more! Is what I see down 
there the black tulip? Quite black? Is it possible? Oh, sir, 
have you seen it? It must have specks, it must be imperfect, 
it must only be dyed black. Ah! if I were there, I should 
see it at once. Let me alight, let me see it close, I beg of 
you." 

"Are you mad, Sir? How could I allow such a thing?" 

"I implore you." 

"But you forget that you are a prisoner." 

"It is true I am a prisoner, but I am a man of honour, and I 
promise you on my word that I will not run away, I will not 
attempt to escape, -- only let me see the flower." 

"But my orders, Sir, my orders." And the officer again made 
the driver a sign to proceed. 

Cornelius stopped him once more. 

"Oh, be forbearing, be generous! my whole life depends upon 
your pity. Alas! perhaps it will not be much longer. You 
don't know, sir, what I suffer. You don't know the struggle 
going on in my heart and mind. For after all," Cornelius 
cried in despair, "if this were my tulip, if it were the one 
which has been stolen from Rosa! Oh, I must alight, sir! I 
must see the flower! You may kill me afterwards if you like, 
but I will see it, I must see it." 

"Be quiet, unfortunate man, and come quickly back into the 
carriage, for here is the escort of his Highness the 
Stadtholder, and if the Prince observed any disturbance, or 
heard any noise, it would be ruin to me, as well as to you." 

Van Baerle, more afraid for his companion than himself, 
threw himself back into the carriage, but he could only keep 
quiet for half a minute, and the first twenty horsemen had 
scarcely passed when he again leaned out of the carriage 
window, gesticulating imploringly towards the Stadtholder at 
the very moment when he passed. 

William, impassible and quiet as usual, was proceeding to 
the green to fulfil his duty as chairman. He held in his 
hand the roll of parchment, which, on this festive day, had 
become his baton. 

Seeing the man gesticulate with imploring mien, and perhaps 
also recognising the officer who accompanied him, his 
Highness ordered his carriage to stop. 

In an instant his snorting steeds stood still, at a distance 
of about six yards from the carriage in which Van Baerle was 
caged. 

"What is this?" the Prince asked the officer, who at the 
first order of the Stadtholder had jumped out of the 
carriage, and was respectfully approaching him. 

"Monseigneur," he cried, "this is the prisoner of state whom 
I have fetched from Loewestein, and whom I have brought to 
Haarlem according to your Highness's command." 

"What does he want?" 

"He entreats for permission to stop here for minute." 

"To see the black tulip, Monseigneur," said Van Baerle, 
clasping his hands, "and when I have seen it, when I have 
seen what I desire to know, I am quite ready to die, if die 
I must; but in dying I shall bless your Highness's mercy for 
having allowed me to witness the glorification of my work." 

It was, indeed, a curious spectacle to see these two men at 
the windows of their several carriages; the one surrounded 
by his guards, and all powerful, the other a prisoner and 
miserable; the one going to mount a throne, the other 
believing himself to be on his way to the scaffold. 

William, looking with his cold glance on Cornelius, listened 
to his anxious and urgent request. 

Then addressing himself to the officer, he said, -- 

"Is this person the mutinous prisoner who has attempted to 
kill his jailer at Loewestein?" 

Cornelius heaved a sigh and hung his head. His good-tempered 
honest face turned pale and red at the same instant. These 
words of the all-powerful Prince, who by some secret 
messenger unavailable to other mortals had already been 
apprised of his crime, seemed to him to forebode not only 
his doom, but also the refusal of his last request. 

He did not try to make a struggle, or to defend himself; and 
he presented to the Prince the affecting spectacle of 
despairing innocence, like that of a child, -- a spectacle 
which was fully understood and felt by the great mind and 
the great heart of him who observed it. 

"Allow the prisoner to alight, and let him see the black 
tulip; it is well worth being seen once." 

"Thank you, Monseigneur, thank you," said Cornelius, nearly 
swooning with joy, and staggering on the steps of his 
carriage; had not the officer supported him, our poor friend 
would have made his thanks to his Highness prostrate on his 
knees with his forehead in the dust. 

After having granted this permission, the Prince proceeded 
on his way over the green amidst the most enthusiastic 
acclamations. 

He soon arrived at the platform, and the thunder of cannon 
shook the air. 




Chapter 33

Conclusion


Van Baerle, led by four guards, who pushed their way through 
the crowd, sidled up to the black tulip, towards which his 
gaze was attracted with increasing interest the nearer he 
approached to it. 

He saw it at last, that unique flower, which he was to see 
once and no more. He saw it at the distance of six paces, 
and was delighted with its perfection and gracefulness; he 
saw it surrounded by young and beautiful girls, who formed, 
as it were, a guard of honour for this queen of excellence 
and purity. And yet, the more he ascertained with his own 
eyes the perfection of the flower, the more wretched and 
miserable he felt. He looked all around for some one to whom 
he might address only one question, but his eyes everywhere 
met strange faces, and the attention of all was directed 
towards the chair of state, on which the Stadtholder had 
seated himself. 

William rose, casting a tranquil glance over the 
enthusiastic crowd, and his keen eyes rested by turns on the 
three extremities of a triangle formed opposite to him by 
three persons of very different interests and feelings. 

At one of the angles, Boxtel, trembling with impatience, and 
quite absorbed in watching the Prince, the guilders, the 
black tulip, and the crowd. 

At the other, Cornelius, panting for breath, silent, and his 
attention, his eyes, his life, his heart, his love, quite 
concentrated on the black tulip. 

And thirdly, standing on a raised step among the maidens of 
Haarlem, a beautiful Frisian girl, dressed in fine scarlet 
woollen cloth, embroidered with silver, and covered with a 
lace veil, which fell in rich folds from her head-dress of 
gold brocade; in one word, Rosa, who, faint and with 
swimming eyes, was leaning on the arm of one of the officers 
of William. 

The Prince then slowly unfolded the parchment, and said, 
with a calm clear voice, which, although low, made itself 
perfectly heard amidst the respectful silence, which all at 
once arrested the breath of fifty thousand spectators. -- 

"You know what has brought us here? 

"A prize of one hundred thousand guilders has been promised 
to whosoever should grow the black tulip. 

"The black tulip has been grown; here it is before your 
eyes, coming up to all the conditions required by the 
programme of the Horticultural Society of Haarlem. 

"The history of its production, and the name of its grower, 
will be inscribed in the book of honour of the city. 

"Let the person approach to whom the black tulip belongs." 

In pronouncing these words, the Prince, to judge of the 
effect they produced, surveyed with his eagle eye the three 
extremities of the triangle. 

He saw Boxtel rushing forward. He saw Cornelius make an 
involuntary movement; and lastly he saw the officer who was 
taking care of Rosa lead, or rather push her forward towards 
him. 

At the sight of Rosa, a double cry arose on the right and 
left of the Prince. 

Boxtel, thunderstruck, and Cornelius, in joyful amazement, 
both exclaimed, -- 

"Rosa! Rosa!" 

"This tulip is yours, is it not, my child?" said the Prince. 

"Yes, Monseigneur," stammered Rosa, whose striking beauty 
excited a general murmur of applause. 

"Oh!" muttered Cornelius, "she has then belied me, when she 
said this flower was stolen from her. Oh! that's why she 
left Loewestein. Alas! am I then forgotten, betrayed by her 
whom I thought my best friend on earth?" 

"Oh!" sighed Boxtel, "I am lost." 

"This tulip," continued the Prince, "will therefore bear the 
name of its producer, and figure in the catalogue under the 
title, Tulipa nigra Rosa Barlaensis, because of the name Van 
Baerle, which will henceforth be the name of this damsel." 

And at the same time William took Rosa's hand, and placed it 
in that of a young man, who rushed forth, pale and beyond 
himself with joy, to the foot of the throne saluting 
alternately the Prince and his bride; and who with a 
grateful look to heaven, returned his thanks to the Giver of 
all this happiness. 

At the same moment there fell at the feet of the President 
van Systens another man, struck down by a very different 
emotion. 

Boxtel, crushed by the failure of his hopes, lay senseless 
on the ground. 

When they raised him, and examined his pulse and his heart, 
he was quite dead. 

This incident did not much disturb the festival, as neither 
the Prince nor the President seemed to mind it much. 

Cornelius started back in dismay, when in the thief, in the 
pretended Jacob, he recognised his neighbour, Isaac Boxtel, 
whom, in the innocence of his heart, he had not for one 
instant suspected of such a wicked action. 

Then, to the sound of trumpets, the procession marched back 
without any change in its order, except that Boxtel was now 
dead, and that Cornelius and Rosa were walking triumphantly 
side by side and hand in hand. 

On their arriving at the Hotel de Ville, the Prince, 
pointing with his finger to the purse with the hundred 
thousand guilders, said to Cornelius, -- 

"It is difficult to say by whom this money is gained, by you 
or by Rosa; for if you have found the black tulip, she has 
nursed it and brought it into flower. It would therefore be 
unjust to consider it as her dowry; it is the gift of the 
town of Haarlem to the tulip." 

Cornelius wondered what the Prince was driving at. The 
latter continued, -- 

"I give to Rosa the sum of a hundred thousand guilders, 
which she has fairly earned, and which she can offer to you. 
They are the reward of her love, her courage, and her 
honesty. As to you, Sir -- thanks to Rosa again, who has 
furnished the proofs of your innocence ---- " 

And, saying these words, the Prince handed to Cornelius that 
fly-leaf of the Bible on which was written the letter of 
Cornelius de Witt, and in which the third bulb had been 
wrapped, -- 

"As to you, it has come to light that you were imprisoned 
for a crime which you had not committed. This means, that 
you are not only free, but that your property will be 
restored to you; as the property of an innocent man cannot 
be confiscated. Cornelius van Baerle, you are the godson of 
Cornelius de Witt and the friend of his brother John. Remain 
worthy of the name you have received from one of them, and 
of the friendship you have enjoyed with the other. The two 
De Witts, wrongly judged and wrongly punished in a moment of 
popular error, were two great citizens, of whom Holland is 
now proud." 

The Prince, after these last words, which contrary to his 
custom, he pronounced with a voice full of emotion, gave his 
hands to the lovers to kiss, whilst they were kneeling 
before him. 

Then heaving a sigh, he said, -- 

"Alas! you are very happy, who, dreaming only of what 
perhaps is the true glory of Holland, and forms especially 
her true happiness, do not attempt to acquire for her 
anything beyond new colours of tulips." 

And, casting a glance towards that point of the compass 
where France lay, as if he saw new clouds gathering there, 
he entered his carriage and drove off. 



Cornelius started on the same day for Dort with Rosa, who 
sent her lover's old housekeeper as a messenger to her 
father, to apprise him of all that had taken place. 

Those who, thanks to our description, have learned the 
character of old Gryphus, will comprehend that it was hard 
for him to become reconciled to his son-in-law. He had not 
yet forgotten the blows which he had received in that famous 
encounter. To judge from the weals which he counted, their 
number, he said, amounted to forty-one; but at last, in 
order, as he declared, not to be less generous than his 
Highness the Stadtholder, he consented to make his peace. 

Appointed to watch over the tulips, the old man made the 
rudest keeper of flowers in the whole of the Seven 
Provinces. 

It was indeed a sight to see him watching the obnoxious 
moths and butterflies, killing slugs, and driving away the 
hungry bees. 

As he had heard Boxtel's story, and was furious at having 
been the dupe of the pretended Jacob, he destroyed the 
sycamore behind which the envious Isaac had spied into the 
garden; for the plot of ground belonging to him had been 
bought by Cornelius, and taken into his own garden. 

Rosa, growing not only in beauty, but in wisdom also, after 
two years of her married life, could read and write so well 
that she was able to undertake by herself the education of 
two beautiful children which she had borne in 1674 and 1675, 
both in May, the month of flowers. 

As a matter of course, one was a boy, the other a girl, the 
former being called Cornelius, the other Rosa. 

Van Baerle remained faithfully attached to Rosa and to his 
tulips. The whole of his life was devoted to the happiness 
of his wife and the culture of flowers, in the latter of 
which occupations he was so successful that a great number 
of his varieties found a place in the catalogue of Holland. 

The two principal ornaments of his drawing-room were those 
two leaves from the Bible of Cornelius de Witt, in large 
golden frames; one of them containing the letter in which 
his godfather enjoined him to burn the correspondence of the 
Marquis de Louvois, and the other his own will, in which he 
bequeathed to Rosa his bulbs under condition that she should 
marry a young man of from twenty-six to twenty-eight years, 
who loved her and whom she loved, a condition which was 
scrupulously fulfilled, although, or rather because, 
Cornelius did not die. 

And to ward off any envious attempts of another Isaac 
Boxtel, he wrote over his door the lines which Grotius had, 
on the day of his flight, scratched on the walls of his 
prison: -- 

"Sometimes one has suffered so much that he has the right 
never to be able to say, 'I am too happy.'" 





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext of The Black Tulip by Alexandre Dumas

