******The Project Gutenberg Etext of Andrew Steinmetz's********
*********The Gaming Table:  Its Votaries and Victims***********
Volume #2  #2 in our series by Andrew Steinmetz


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Gaming Table, Its Votaries and Victims  Volume #2

by Andrew Steinmetz

May, 1996  [Etext #531]


******The Project Gutenberg Etext of Andrew Steinmetz's********
*********The Gaming Table:  Its Votaries and Victims***********
*****This file should be named tgamt210.txt or tgamt210.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, tgamt211.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, tgamt210a.txt


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois
     Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*




Scanned with OmniPage Professional OCR software 
donated by Caere Corporation, 1-800-535-7226. 
Contact Mike Lough <Mikel@caere.com>





THE GAMING TABLE: ITS VOTARIES AND VICTIMS,

In all Times and Countries, especially in England and in France.

BY ANDREW STEINMETZ, ESQ.,





OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BARRISTER-AT-LAW; FIRST-CLASS EXTRA
CERTIFICATE SCHOOL OF MUSKETRY, HYTHE; late OFFICER INSTRUCTOR
MUSKETRY, THE QUEENS OWN LIGHT INFANTRY MILITIA. AUTHOR OF 'THE
HISTORY OF THE JESUITS,' 'JAPAN AND HER PEOPLE,' 'THE ROMANCE OF
DUELLING,' &c., &c.

'The sharp, the blackleg, and the knowing one,      
Livery or lace, the self-same circle, run;      
The same the passion, end and means the same--      
Dick and his Lordship differ but in name.'




IN TWO VOLUMES.--VOL. II.


CONTENTS OF VOL. II.                                             

                         
I.    CHEVALIERS D'INDUSTRIE, OR POLITE SHARPERS      
II.   PROFESSIONAL GAMESTERS AND THEIR FRAUDS     
III.  ANECDOTES OF THE PASSIONS AND VICISSITUDES OF GAMESTERS
IV.   ACTROCITIES, DUELS. SUICIDES, AND EXECUTION OF GAMBLERS
V.    ODDITIES AND WITTICISMS OF GAMBLERS     
VI.   THE GAMING CLUBS      
VII.  DOINGS IN GAMING HOUSES     
VIII. THE DOCTRINE OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO GAMBLING    
IX.   THE HISTORY OF DICE AND CARDS     
X.    PIQUET, BASSET, FARO, HAZARD, PASSE-DIX, PUT,              
      CROSS AND PILE, THIMBLE-RIG     
XI.   COCK-FIGHTING     
XII.  THE TURF, HISTORICAL, SOCIAL, MORAL     
XIII. FORTUNE-TELLING BY CARDS (FOR LADIES)     
XIV.  AMUSING CARD TRICKS





THE GAMING TABLE.


CHAPTER I.

CHEVALIERS D'INDUSTRIE, OR POLITE SHARPERS.

Chevaliers d'industrie, or polite and accomplished sharpers, have
always existed in every city, from the earliest times to the
present.  The ordinary progress of these interesting gentlemen is
as follows.  Their debut is often difficult, and many of them are
stopped short in their career.  They only succeed by means of
great exertion and severe trials; but they endure everything in
order to be tolerated or permitted to exercise their calling.  To
secure credit they ally themselves with men of respectability, or
those who pass for such.  When they have no titles they fabricate
them; and few persons dispute their claims.  They are found
useful for the pleasures of society, the expenses of which they
often pay--at the cost of the dupes they make in the world.  The
income of chevaliers d'industrie is at first derived from those
inexperienced persons whom they get in their clutches by means of
every kind of enticement, in order to ruin them some day--if they
have any 'expectations' or are likely to be rich; or in order to
make accomplices of them if they have only aptitudes for the
purpose.  After having led them from error to error, after
suggesting to them all sorts of wants and vices, they make them
gamble, if they are of age; they hold up play to them as an
inexhaustible source of wealth.

The 'protector' next hands over his 'young friends' to
'executioners,' who fleece them for the common benefit of the
confederates.  They do not always wait for the coming of age of
their young dupes in order to strike the grand 'stroke.'  When
they find that the father of a family shudders at the idea of a
public scandal, they immolate their victim at once--for fear lest
he should escape from their hands.  Of course they are always
open to 'capitulate'--to come to terms; and if the aid of the law
is invoked they give in discreetly.

About a century ago there flourished at Paris one of these
adventurers, who made a great noise and did a vast amount of
evil.  This man of a thousand faces, this Proteus, as great a
corrupter as he was corrupted, changed his name, his quarters,
and field of operations, according to the exigences of business. 
Although a man of ardent temperament and inconceivable activity,
his cold-blooded rascality was never in a hurry.  He could wait;
he could bide his time.  Taking in, at a glance, all the
requirements of a case, and seeing through all its difficulties,
he worked out his scheme with the utmost patience and consummated
his crime with absolute security.

Sometimes he gave a concert for amateurs, elegant suppers for gay
ladies, and special soirees for the learned and the witty.  He
was not particular as to the means of doing business; thus he
trafficked in everything,--for the sale of a living, or the
procuration of a mistress--for he had associates in all ranks,
among all professions of men.

He had twenty Faro tables in operation every night, whilst his
emissaries were on the watch for new arrivals, and for those who
had recently come into property.

In general, rogues soon betray themselves by some stupid bungle;
but such was not the case with this man; he defended himself, as
it were, on all sides, and always kept himself in position so as
to oppose to each of his vices the proof positive of the contrary
virtues.  Thus, if accused of usury, he could prove that he had
lent, without interest, considerable sums of money.  Cowardly and
base in a tete-a-tete, he was bold and redoubtable in public;
those who had made him tremble in secret were then compelled to
acknowledge him a man of courage.  Even his more than suspected
probity was defended by such as believed themselves his
depositaries, whereas they were, in point of fact, only receivers
of stolen property.

Affable, insinuating to a degree, he might be compared to those
brigands of Egypt who embraced their victims in order to strangle
them.[1]  He never showed more devotedness than when he meditated
some perfidy, nor more assurance than when convicted of the
rascality.  Playing fast and loose with honour and the laws, he
was sure to find, when threatened by the arm of justice, the
female relatives of the judges themselves taking his part and
doing their best to 'get him off.'  Such was this extraordinary
chevalier d'industrie, who might have gone on with his diabolical
perpetrations had he not, at last, attempted too much, failing in
the grandest stroke he had ever meditated--and yet a vulgar
fraud--when he was convicted, branded, and sent to the
galleys.[2]

[1] Senec., Epist.  Ii. 
[2] Dusaulx, De la Passion du Jeu.

The following narrative elucidates a still more modern phase of
this elegant 'industry.'  My authority is M. Robert-Houdin.

CAUGHT IN A TRAP.

M. Olivier de ---- was a dissipated young gentleman.  His family
was one of the oldest and most respectable of the country, and
deservedly enjoyed the highest consideration.  M. Olivier de
----, his father, was not rich, and therefore could not do much
for his son; the consequence was that owing to his outrageous
prodigality the son was sorely pinched for means to keep up his
position; he exhausted his credit, and was soon overwhelmed with
debt.  Among the companions of his dissipation was a young man
whose abundant means filled him with admiration and envy; he
lived like a prince and had not a single creditor.  One day he
asked his friend to explain the mystery of the fact that, without
possessing any fortune, he could gratify all his tastes and
fancies, whilst he himself, with certain resources, was compelled
to submit to privations, still getting into debt.

Chauvignac--such was the name of the friend thus addressed--was a
card-sharper, and he instantly seized the opportunity to make
something out of the happy disposition of this modern prodigal
son, this scion of gentility.  With the utmost frankness he
explained to the young man his wonderful method of keeping his
pockets full of money, and showed that nothing could be easier
than for Olivier to go and do likewise in his terrible
condition;--in short, on one hand there were within his grasp,
riches, pleasure, all manner of enjoyment; on the other, pitiless
creditors, ruin, misery, and contempt.  The tempter, moreover,
offered to initiate his listener in his infallible method of
getting rich.  In his frame of mind Olivier yielded to the
temptation, with the full determination, if not to get money by
cheating at cards, at any rate to learn the method which might
serve as a means of self-defence should he not think proper to
use it for attack--such was the final argument suggested by the
human Mephistopheles to his pupil.

Taking Olivier to his house, he showed him a pack of cards.  'Now
here is a pack of cards,' he said; 'there seems to be nothing
remarkable about it, does there?'  Olivier examined the pack and
declared that the cards did not appear to differ in the least
from all others.  'Well,' said Chauvignac, 'nevertheless they
have been subjected to a preparation called biseautage, or having
one end of the cards made narrower than the other.  This
disposition enables us to remove from the pack such and such
cards and then to class them in the necessary order so that they
may get into the hand of the operator.'  Chauvignac then
proceeded to apply his precepts by an example, and although the
young man had no particular qualification for the art of
legerdemain, he succeeded at once to admiration in a game at
Ecarte, for he had already mastered the first process of
cheating.  Having thus, as he thought, sufficiently compromised
his victim, Chauvignac left him to his temptations, and took
leave of him.

Two days afterwards the professor returned to his pupil and
invited him to accompany him on a pleasure trip.  Olivier excused
himself on account of his desperate condition--one of his
creditors being in pursuit of him for a debt of one thousand
francs.  'Is that all?' said Chauvignac; and pulling out his
pocket-book he added,--'Here's a bank-note; you can repay me to-
morrow.'  'Why, man, you are mad!' exclaimed Olivier.  'Be it
so,' said Chauvignac; 'and in my madness I give you credit for
another thousand-franc bank-note to go and get thirty thousand
francs which are waiting for you.'  'Now, do explain yourself,
for you are driving ME mad.'  'Nothing more easy.  Here is the
fact,' said Chauvignac.  'M. le Comte de Vandermool, a wealthy
Belgian capitalist, a desperate gamester if ever there was one,
and who can lose a hundred thousand francs without much
inconvenience, is now at Boulogne, where he will remain a week. 
This millionnaire must be thinned a little.  Nothing is easier. 
One of my friends and confreres, named Chaffard, is already with
the count to prepare the way.  We have only now to set to work. 
You are one of us--that's agreed--and in a few days you will
return, to satisfy your creditors and buy your mistress a shawl.'

'Stop a bit.  You are going too fast.  Wait a little.  I haven't
as yet said Yes,' replied Olivier.  'I don't want your Yes now;
you will say it at Boulogne.  For the present go and pay your
bill.  We set out in two hours; the post-horses are already
ordered; we shall start from my house: be punctual.'

The party reached Boulogne and put up at the Hotel de l'Univers. 
On their arrival they were informed that no time was to be lost,
as the count talked of leaving next day.  The two travellers took
a hasty dinner, and at once proceeded to the apartment of the
Belgian millionnaire.  Chaffard, who had preceded them,
introduced them as two of his friends, whose property was
situated in the vicinity of Boulogne.

M. le Comte de Vandermool was a man about fifty years of age,
with an open, candid countenance.  He wore several foreign
decorations.  He received the two gentlemen with charming
affability; he did more; he invited them to spend the evening
with him.  Of course the invitation was accepted.  When the
conversation began to flag, the count proposed a game--which was
also, of course, very readily agreed to by the three comperes.

While the table was prepared, Chauvignac gave his young friend
two packs of cards, to be substituted for those which should be
furnished by the count.  Ecarte was to be the game, and Olivier
was to play, the two other associates having pretended to know
nothing about the game, and saying that they would content
themselves by betting with each other.  Of course Olivier was
rather surprised at this declaration, but he soon understood by
certain signs from Chauvignac that this reservation was intended
to do away with the count's suspicions, in case of their success.

The count, enormously rich as he was, would only play for
bank-notes.  'Metal smells bad in a room,' he said.  The novice,
at first confused at being a party to the intended roguery,
followed the dictates of his conscience and, neglecting the
advantages of his hands, trusted merely to chance.  The result
was that the only thousand-franc bank-note he had was speedily
transferred to the count.  At that moment Chauvignac gave him a
significant look, and this, together with the desire to retrieve
his loss, induced him to put into execution the culpable
manoeuvres which his friend had taught him.  His work was of the
easiest; the count was so short-sighted that he had to keep his
nose almost upon the cards to see them.  Chance now turned, as
might be expected, and thousand-franc bank-notes soon accumulated
in the hands of Olivier, who, intoxicated by this possession,
worked away with incredible ardour.  Moreover, the count was not
in the least out of humour at losing so immensely; on the
contrary, he was quite jovial; indeed, from his looks he might
have been supposed to be the winner.  At length, however, he said
with a smile, taking a pinch from his golden snuff-box--'I am
evidently not in vein.  I have lost eighty thousand francs.  I
see that I shall soon be in for one hundred thousand.  But it is
proper, my dear sir, that I should say I don't make a habit of
losing more than this sum at a sitting; and if it must be so, I
propose to sup before losing my last twenty thousand francs. 
Perhaps this will change my vein.  I think you will grant me this
indulgence.'  The proposal was agreed to.

Olivier, almost out of his senses at the possession of eighty
thousand francs, could not resist the desire of expressing his
gratitude to Chauvignac, which he did, grasping his hand with
emotion and leading him into a corner of the room.

Alas! the whole thing was only an infamous conspiracy to ruin the
young man.  The Belgian capitalist, this count apparently so
respectable, was only an expert card-sharper whom Chauvignac had
brought from Paris to play out the vile tragi-comedy, the
denouement of which would be the ruin of the unfortunate Olivier.

At the moment when the latter left the card-table to go to
Chauvignac, the pretended millionnaire changed the pack of cards
they had been using for two other packs.

Supper went off very pleasantly.  They drank very moderately, for
the head had to be kept cool for what had to follow.  They soon
sat down again at the card-table.  'Now,' said the Parisian card-
shaper, on resuming his seat, 'I should like to end the matter
quickly:  I will stake the twenty thousand francs in a lump.'

Olivier, confident of success after his previous achievement,
readily assented; but, alas, the twenty thousand francs of which
he made sure was won by his adversary.

Forty thousand francs went in like manner.  Olivier, breathless,
utterly prostrate, knew not what to do.  All his manoeuvres were
practised in vain; he could give himself none but small cards. 
His opponent had his hands full of trumps, and HE dealt them to
him!  In his despair he consulted Chauvignac by a look, and the
latter made a sign to him to go on.  The wretched young man went
on, and lost again.  Bewildered, beside himself, he staked
fabulous sums to try and make up for his losses, and very soon
found, in his turn, that he owed his adversary one hundred
thousand francs(L4166)!

At this point the horrible denouement commenced.  The pretended
count stopped, and crossing his arms on his breast, said
sternly--'Monsieur Olivier de ----, you must be very rich to
stake so glibly such enormous sums.  Of course you know your
fortune and can square yourself with it; but, however rich you
may be, you ought to know that it is not sufficient to lose a
hundred thousand francs, but that you must pay it.  Besides, I
have given you the example.  Begin, therefore, by putting down
the sum I have won from you; after which we can go on.' . . .

'Nothing can be more proper, sir,' stammered out young Olivier,
'I am ready to satisfy you; but, after all, you know that . . . .

gaming debts . . . . my word . . . .'

'The d--l! sir,' said the pretended count, giving the table a
violent blow with his fist--'Why do you talk to me about your
WORD.  Gad!  You are well entitled to appeal to the engagements
of honour!  Well!  We have now to play another game on this
table, and we must speak out plainly.  Monsieur Olivier de ----,
you are a rogue . . .  Yes, a rogue!  The cards we have been
using are biseautees and YOU brought them hither.'

'Sir! . .  You insult me!' said Olivier.

'Indeed?  Well, sir, that astonishes me!' replied the false
Belgian ironically.

'That is too much, sir.  I demand satisfaction, and that on the
very instant.  Do you understand me?  Let us go out at once.'

'No! no!  We must end this quarrel here, sir.  Look here--your
two friends shall be your "seconds;" I am now going to send for
MINE.'

The card-sharper, who had risen at these words, rang the bell
violently.  His own servant entered.  'Go,' said he, 'to the
Procureur de Roi, and request him to come here on a very
important matter.  Be as quick as you can.'

'Oh, sir, be merciful!  Don't ruin me!' exclaimed the wretched
Olivier; 'I will do what you like.'  At these words, the sharper
told his servant to wait behind the door, and to execute his
order if he should hear nothing to the contrary in ten minutes.

'And now, sir,' continued the sharper, turning to Olivier, 'and
now, sir, for the business between you and me.  These cards have
been substituted by you in the place of those which I supplied .
. .  You must do them up, write your name upon the cover, and
seal it with the coat of arms on your ring.'

Olivier looked first at Chauvignac and then at Chaffard, but both
the fellows only made signs to him to resign himself to the
circumstances.  He did what was ordered.

'That is not all, sir,' added the false Belgian; 'I have fairly
won money from you and have a right to demand a guarantee for
payment.  You must draw me short bills for the sum of one hundred
thousand francs.'

As the wretched young man hesitated to comply with this demand,
his pitiless creditor rose to ring the bell.

'Don't ring, sir, don't ring,' said Olivier, 'I'll sign.'

He signed, and the villany was consummated.  Olivier returned to
his family and made an humble avowal of his fault and his
engagements.  His venerable father received the terrible blow
with resignation, and paid the 100,000 francs, estimating his
honour far above that amount of money.[3]

[3] This narrative is condensed from the account of the affair by
Robert-Hondin, Tricherics des Grecs devoilees.


AN ATTORNEY 'DONE' BY A GAMBLER.

A turfite and gambler, represented under the letters of Mr H--e,
having lost all his money at Doncaster and the following York
Meeting, devised a plan, with his coadjutor, to obtain the means
for their departure from York, which, no doubt, will be
considered exceedingly ingenious.

He had heard of an attorney in the town who was very fond of
Backgammon; and on this simple piece of information an elaborate
plan was concocted.  Mr H--e feigned illness, went to bed, and
sent for a large quantity of tartar emetic, which he took.  After
he had suffered the operation of the first dose he sent for a
doctor, who pronounced him, of course, very languid and ill; and
not knowing the cause, ordered him more medicine, which the
patient took good care not to allow to stay on his stomach.

On the second day he asked the doctor, with great gravity, if he
considered him in danger, adding, 'because he had never made a
WILL to bequeath his property.'  The doctor replied, 'No, not in
absolute danger, but there was no harm in making a WILL.'

The attorney, accordingly, was sent for--of course the very man
wished for--the lover of Backgammon before mentioned.  The good
man came; he took the 'instructions,' and drew up the last will
and testament of the ruined turfite, who left (in the will) about
L50,000, which no man ever heard of, living or dead.

The BUSINESS being done, the patient said that if he had a
moment's relaxation he thought he should rally and overcome the
malady.  The poor lawyer said if he could in any way contribute
to his comfort he should be happy.  The offer was embraced by
observing that if he could sit up in bed--but he was afraid he
was not able--a hit at Backgammon would be a great source of
amusement.

The lawyer, like all adepts in such matters, was only too willing
to catch at the idea; the board was brought.

Of course the man who had L50,000 to leave behind could not be
expected to play 'for love;' and so when Mr H--e proposed 'a
pound a hit or treble a gammon,' the lawyer not only thought it
reasonable, but, conscious of his power in the game, eagerly
accepted the terms of playing.  They played; but the lawyer was
gammoned almost incessantly, till he lost L50.  Then H--e
proposed 'double or quits to L1000,'--thereupon the poor lawyer,
believing that fortune could not always forsake him, said he had
but L2000 in the world, but that he would set the L1000.  He
lost; and became almost frantic.  In the midst of his excessive
grief, H--e said, 'You have a HORSE, what is it worth?' L50 was
the answer.  'Well, well, you may win all back now, and I'll set
L50 on your horse.'

They began again.  Lost!  'You have a COW in your paddock,
haven't you?  What's that worth?' asked Mr H--e.  The attorney
said L12.  'Well, I'll set that sum by way of giving you a
chance.'  The game proceeded, and the poor lawyer, equally
unfortunate, raved and swore he had lost his last shilling.  'No,
no!' said H--e,' you have not: I saw a HAY-RICK in your ground. 
It is of no use now that the horse and cow are gone-- what is
that worth?' L15, replied the attorney, with a sigh.  'I set L15
then,' said H--e.

This seemed to be 'rather too much' for the lawyer.  The loss of
the hay-rick--like the last straw laid on the overladen camel's
back--staggered him.  Besides, he thought he saw--as doubtless he
did see--H--e twisting his fingers round one of the dice.  Up he
started at once, and declared that he was cheated!

Thereupon the sick man forgot his sickness, jumped out of bed,
and gave the lawyer a regular drubbing, got the cheque for the
L2000,--but the horse, cow, and hay he said he would leave 'until
further orders.'


A VERY CURIOUS STORY.

An Archbishop of Canterbury was once on a tour, when a genteel
man, apparently in earnest conversation, though alone in a wood,
attracted his notice.  His Grace made up to him, and, after a
little previous conversation, asked him what he was about.    
Stranger.  'I am at play.'     
Archbishop.  'At play?  With whom?  I see nobody.'     
Sir.  'I own, sir, my antagonist is not visible: I am playing 
with God.'     
Abp.  'At what game, pray, sir?'     
Str.  'At Chess.'      
Abp.  'Do you play for anything?'     
Str.  'Certainly.'     
Abp.  'You cannot have any chance, as your adversary must be so
superior to you.'     
Str.  'He takes no advantage, but plays merely as a man.'    
Abp.  'When you win or lose, how do you settle accounts?'    
Str.  'Very exactly and punctually.'     
Abp.  'Indeed!  Pray, how stands your game now?'     
Str.  'There!  I have just lost!'     
Abp.  'How much have you lost?'     
Str.  'Fifty guineas.'     
Abp.  'How do you manage to pay it?  Does God take your money?'
Str.  'No!  The poor are his treasurers.  He always sends some
worthy person to receive it, and you are at present his
purse-bearer.'

Saying this, the stranger put fifty guineas into his Grace's
hand, and retired, adding--'I shall play no more to-day.'

The prelate was delighted; though he could not tell what to make
of this extraordinary man.  The guineas were all good; and the
archbishop applied them to the use of the poor, as he had been
directed.

The archbishop, on his return, stopped at the same town, and
could not help going in search of the chess-player, whom he found
engaged as before, when the following dialogue ensued:--     
Abp.  'How has the chance stood since we met before?'     
Str.  'Sometimes for me--sometimes against me.  I have lost and
won.'     
Abp.  'Are you at play now?'     
Str.  'Yes, sir.  We have played several games to-day.'     
Abp.  'Who wins?'     
Str.  'The advantage is on my side.  The game is just over.  I
have a fine stroke--check-mate-- there it is.'     
Abp.  'How much have you won?'     
Str.  'Five hundred guineas.'     
Abp.  'That is a large sum.  How are you to he paid?'     
Str.  'God always sends some good rich man when I win, and YOU
are the person.  He is remarkably punctual on these occasions.'

The archbishop had received a considerable sum on that day, as
the stranger knew; and so, producing a pistol by way of receipt,
he compelled the delivery of it.  His Grace now discovered that
he had been the dupe of a thief; and though he had greatly
bruited his first adventure, he prudently kept his own counsel in
regard to the last.

Such is the tale.  Se non e vero e ben trovato.


SKITTLE SHARPERS.

'I know a respectable tradesman,' says a writer in Cassell's
Magazine--'I know him now, for he lives in the house he occupied
at the time of my tale--who was sent for to see a French
gentleman at a tavern, on business connected with the removal of
this gentleman's property from one of the London docks.  The
business, as explained by the messenger, promising to be
profitable, he of course promptly obeyed the summons, and during
his walk found that his conductor had once been in service in
France.  This delighted Mr Chase--the name by which I signify the
tradesman--for he, too, had once so lived in France; and by the
time he reached the tavern he had talked himself into a very good
opinion of his new patron.  The French gentleman was very urbane,
gave Mr Chase his instructions, let him understand expense was
not to be studied, and, as he was at lunch, would not be
satisfied unless the tradesman sat down with him.  This was a
great honour for the latter, as he found his employer was a
baron.  Well, the foreigner was disposed to praise everything
English; he was glad he had come to live in London--Paris was
nothing to it; they had nothing in France like the English beer,
with which, in the exuberance of his hospitality, he filled and
refilled Mr Chase's glass; but that which delighted him above all
that he had seen "vos de leetle game vid de ball--vot you call--
de--de--aha! de skittel."  Mr Chase assented that it was a very
nice game certainly; and the French gentleman seeming by this
time to have had quite enough beer, insisted, before they went to
the docks--which was essential--that they should see just one
game played.

'As he insisted on paying Mr Chase for all the time consumed with
him, and as his servant, of course, could not object, the party
adjourned to the "Select Subscription Ground" at once.  In the
ground there was a quiet, insignificant-looking little man,
smoking a cigar; and as they were so few, he was asked to assist,
which, after considerable hesitation and many apologies for his
bad play, he did.  The end is of course guessed.  The French
gentleman was a foolish victim, with more money than wits, who
backed himself to do almost impossible feats, when it was evident
he could not play at all, and laid sovereigns against the best
player, who was the little stranger, doing the easiest.  What
with the excitement, and what with the beer, which was probably
spiced with some unknown relish a little stronger than nutmeg, Mr
Chase could not help joining in winning the foreign gentleman's
money; it seemed no harm, he had so much of it.

'By a strange concurrence of events, it so happened that by
random throws the Frenchman sometimes knocked all the pins down
at a single swoop, though he clearly could not play--Mr Chase was
sure of that--while the skilful player made every now and then
one of the blunders to which the best players are liable.  That
the tradesman lost forty sovereigns will be easily understood;
and did his tale end here it would have differed so little from a
hundred others as scarcely to deserve telling; but it will
surprise many, as it did me, to learn that he then walked to and
from his own house--a distance of precisely a mile each
way--fetched a bill for thirty pounds, which a customer had
recently paid him, got it discounted, went back to the skittle-
ground, and, under the same malignant star, lost the whole.

'It was the only case in my experience of the work going on
smoothly after such a break.  I never could account for it, nor
could Mr Chase.  Great was the latter's disgust, on setting the
police to work, to find that the French nobleman, his servant,
and the quiet stranger, were all dwellers within half a mile or
so of his own house, and slightly known to him--men who had
trusted, and very successfully, to great audacity and well-
arranged disguise.'

A vast deal of gambling still goes on with skittles all over the
country.  At a place not ten miles from London, I am told that as
much as two thousand pounds has been seen upon the table in a
single 'alley,' or place of play.  The bets were, accordingly,
very high.  The instances revealed by exposure at the police-
courts give but a faint idea of the extent of skittle sharping.

Amidst such abuses of the game, it can scarcely surprise us that
the police have been recently directed to prohibit all playing at
skittles and bowls.  However much we may regret the interference
with popular pastimes, in themselves unobjectionable, it is
evident that their flagrant abuse warrants the most stringent
measures in order to prevent their constantly repeated and dismal
consequences.  Even where money was not played for, pots of beer
were the wager--leading, in many instances, to intoxication, or
promoting this habit, which is the cause of so much misery among
the lower orders.


CHAPTER II.

PROFESSIONAL GAMESTERS AND THEIR FRAUDS.

A gambling house at the end of the last century was conducted by
the following officials:--

1.  A Commissioner,--who was always a proprietor; who looked in
of a night, and audited the week's account with two other
proprietors.

2.  A Director,--who superintended the room.

3.  An Operator,--who dealt the cards at the cheating game called
Faro.

4.  Two Croupiers, or crow-pees, as they were vulgarly called,
whose duty it was to watch the cards and gather or rake in the
money for the bank.

5.  Two Puffs,--who had money given to them to decoy others to
play.

6.  A Clerk,--who was a check on the Puffs, to see that they sank
none of the money given to them to play with.

7.  A Squib,--who was a puff of a lower rank, serving at half
salary, whilst learning to deal.

8.  A Flasher,--to swear how often the bank had been stripped by
lucky players.

9.  A Dunner,--who went about to recover money lost at play.

10.  A Waiter,--to fill out wine, snuff candles, and attend the
room.

11.  An Attorney,--who was generally a Newgate solicitor.

12.  A Captain,--who was to fight any gentleman who might be
peevish at losing his money.

13.  An Usher,--who lighted the gentlemen up and down stairs, and
gave the word to the porter.

14.  A Porter,--who was generally a soldier of the Foot Guards.

15.  An Orderly-man,--who walked up and down the outside of the
door, to give notice to the porter, and alarm the house at the
approach of the constables.

16.  A Runner,--who was to get intelligence of the Justices'
meetings.

17.  Link Boys, Coachmen, Chairmen, Drawers, and others, who
brought the first intelligence of Justices' meetings, of
constables going out, at half a guinea reward.

18.  Common Bail, Affidavit Men, Ruffians, Bravos, Assassins, &c.
&c.

It may be proper to remark that the above list of officials was
only calculated for gambling houses of an inferior order.  In
these it is evident that the fear of interruption and the
necessity for precaution presided over the arrangements.  There
were others, however, which seemed to defy law, to spurn at
justice, and to remain secure, in every way, by the
'respectability' of their frequenters.  These were houses
supported at an amazing expense--within sight of the palace--
which were open every night and all night--where men of the first
rank were to be found gambling away immense sums of money, such
as no man, whatever his fortune might be, could sustain.  'What,
then,' says a writer at the time, 'are the consequences?  Why,
that the UNDONE part of them sell their VOTES for bread, and the
successful give them for honours.

'He who has never seen the gamblers' apartments in some of the
magnificent houses in the neighbourhood of St James's, has never
seen the most horrid sight that the imagination of a thinking man
can conceive.

'A new pack of cards is called for at every deal, and the "old"
ones are then thrown upon the floor, and in such an immense
quantity, that the writer of this letter has seen a very large
room nearly ANKLE-DEEP, in the greatest part of it, by four
o'clock in the morning!  Judge, then, to what height they must
have risen by daylight.'

It is a melancholy truth, but confirmed by the history of all
nations, that the most polite and refined age of a kingdom is
never the most virtuous; not, indeed, that any such compliment
can be paid to that gross age, but still it was refined compared
with the past.  The distinctions of personal merit being but
little regarded--in the low moral tone that prevailed--there
needed but to support a certain 'figure' in life (managed by the
fashionable tailor)[4], to be conversant with a few etiquettes of
good breeding and sentiments of modern or current honour, in
order to be received with affability and courteous attention in
the highest circles.  The vilest sharper, having once gained
admission, was sure of constant entertainment, for nothing formed
a greater cement of union than the spirit of HIGH GAMING.  There
being so little cognizance taken of the good qualities of the
heart in fashionable assemblies, no wonder that amid the medley
of characters to be found in these places the 'sharper' of polite
address should gain too easy an admission.

[4]  'How shalt THOU to Caesar's hall repair?       
     For, ah! no DAMAGED coat can enter there!'                  

     BEATTIE'S Minstrel.

This fraternity of artists--whether they were to be denominated
rooks,[5] sharps, sharpers, black-legs, Greeks, or gripes--were
exceedingly numerous, and were dispersed among all ranks of
society.

[5] So called because rooks are famous for stealing materials out
of other birds' nests to build their own.


The follies and vices of others--of open-hearted youth in
particular--were the great game or pursuit of this odious crew. 
Though cool and dispassionate themselves, they did all in their
power to throw others off their guard, that they might make their
advantage of them.

In others they promoted excess of all kinds, whilst they
themselves took care to maintain the utmost sobriety and
temperance.  'Gamesters,' says Falconer, 'whose minds must be
always on the watch to take advantages, and prepared to form
calculations, and to employ the memory, constantly avoid a full
meal of animal food, which they find incapacitates them for play
nearly as much as a quantity of strong liquor would have done,
for which reason they feed chiefly on milk and vegetables.'

As profit, not pleasure, was the aim of these knights of
darkness, they lay concealed under all shapes and disguises, and
followed up their game with all wariness and discretion.  Like
wise traders, they made it the business of their lives to excel
in their calling.

For this end they studied the secret mysteries of their art by
night and by day; they improved on the scientific schemes of
their profound master, Hoyle, and on his deep doctrines and
calculations of chances.  They became skilful without a rival
where skill was necessary, and fraudulent without conscience
where fraud was safe and advantageous; and while fortune or
chance appeared to direct everything, they practised numberless
devices by which they insured her ultimate favours to themselves.

Of these none were more efficacious, because none are more
ensnaring, than bribing their young and artless dupes to future
play by suffering them to win at their first onsets.  By rising a
winner the dupe imbibed a confidence in his own gambling
abilities, or deemed himself a favourite of fortune.  He engaged
again, and was again successful--which increased his exultation
and confirmed his future confidence; and thus did the simple
gudgeon swallow their bait, till it became at last fast hooked.

When rendered thus secure of their prey, they began to level
their whole train of artillery against the boasted honours of his
short-lived triumph.  Then the extensive manors, the ancient
forests, the paternal mansions, began to tremble for their future
destiny.  The pigeon was marked down, and the infernal crew began
in good earnest to pluck his rich plumage.  The wink was given on
his appearance in the room, as a signal of commencing their
covert attacks.  The shrug, the nod, the hem--every motion of the
eyes, hands, feet--every air and gesture, look and word--became
an expressive, though disguised, language of fraud and cozenage,
big with deceit and swollen with ruin.  Besides this, the card
was marked, or 'slipped,' or COVERED.  The story is told of a
noted sharper of distinction, a foreigner, whose hand was thrust
through with a fork by his adversary, Captain Roche, and thus
nailed to the table, with this cool expression of concern-- 'I
ask your pardon, sir, if you have not the knave of clubs under
your hand.'  The cards were packed, or cut, or even SWALLOWED.  A
card has been eaten between two slices of bread and butter, for
the purpose of concealment.

With wily craft the sharpers substituted their deceitful
'doctors' or false dice; and thus 'crabs,' or 'a losing game,'
became the portion of the 'flats,' or dupes.

There were different ways of throwing dice.  There was the
'Stamp'--when the caster with an elastic spring of the wrist
rapped the cornet or box with vehemence on the table, the dice as
yet not appearing from under the box.  The 'Dribble' was, when
with an air of easy but ingenious motion, the caster poured, as
it were, the dice on the board--when, if he happened to be an old
practitioner, he might suddenly cog with his fore-finger one of
the cubes.  The 'Long Gallery' was when the dice were flung or
hurled the whole length of the board.  Sometimes the dice were
thrown off the table, near a confederate, who, in picking them
up, changed one of the fair for a false die with two sixes.  This
was generally done at the first throw, and at the last, when the
fair die was replaced.  The sixes were on the opposite squares,
so that the fraud could only be detected by examination.  Of
course this trick could only be practised at raffles, where only
three throws are required.

A pair of false dice was arranged as follows:--                  

               {Two fours                 
On one die,    {Two fives     
               {Two sixes
   
               {Two fives                 
On the other,  {Two threes                     
               {Two aces

With these dice it was impossible to throw what is at Hazard
denominated Crabs, or a losing game--that is, aces, or ace and
deuce, twelve, or seven.  Hence, the caster always called for his
main; consequently, as he could neither throw one nor seven, let
his chance be what it might, he was sure to win, and he and those
who were in the secret of course always took the odds.  The false
dice being concealed in the left hand, the caster took the box
with the fair dice in it in his right hand, and in the act of
shaking it caught the fair dice in his hand, and unperceived
shifted the box empty to his left, from which he dropped the
false dice into the box, which he began to rattle, called his
main seven, and threw.  Having won his stake he repeated it as
often as he thought proper.  He then caught the false dice in the
same way, shifted the empty box again, and threw till he threw
out, still calling the same main, by which artifice he escaped
suspicion.

Two gambling adventurers would set out with a certain number of
signs and signals.  The use of the handkerchief during the game
was the certain evidence of a good hand.  The use of the snuff-
box a sign equally indicative of a bad one.  An affected cough,
apparently as a natural one, once, twice, three, or four times
repeated, was an assurance of so many honours in hand.  Rubbing
the left eye was an invitation to lead trumps,--the right eye the
reverse,--the cards thrown down with one finger and the thumb was
a sign of one trump; two fingers and the thumb, two trumps, and
so on progressively, and in exact explanation of the whole hand,
with a variety of manoeuvres by which chance was reduced to
certainty, and certainty followed by ruin.[6]

[6] Bon Ton Magazine, 1791.


 CHEATING AT WHIST.

In an old work on cards the following curious disclosures are
made respecting cheating at whist:--

'He that can by craft overlook his adversary's game hath a great
advantage; for by that means he may partly know what to play
securely; or if he can have some petty glimpse of his partner's
hand.  There is a way by making some sign by the fingers, to
discover to their partners what honours they have, or by the wink
of one eye it signifies one honour, shutting both eyes two,
placing three fingers or four on the table, three or four
honours.  FOR WHICH REASON ALL NICE GAMSTERS PLAY BEHIND
CURTAINS.

'Dealing the cards out by one and one to each person is the best
method of putting it out of the dealer's power to impose on you. 
But I shall demonstrate that, deal the cards which way you will,
a confederacy of two sharpers will beat any two persons in the
world, though ever so good players, that are not of the gang, or
in the secret, and "THREE poll ONE" is as safe and secure as if
the money was in their pockets.  All which will appear presently.

The first necessary instructions to be observed at Whist, as
principals of the secret, which may be likewise transferred to
most other games at cards, are:--

Brief or short cards,

Corner-bend,

Middle-bend (or Kingston-bridge).

'Of brief cards there are two sorts: one is a card longer than
the rest,--the other is a card broader than the rest.  The long
sort are such as three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and nine;
the broad sort are such as aces, kings, queens, and knaves.  The
use and advantage of each are as follows:--

'Example:--When you cut the cards to your adversary, cut them
long, or endways, and he will have a three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, or nine at bottom.  When your adversary cuts the
cards to you, put them broadside to him, and he will naturally
cut (without ever suspecting what you do) ace, king, queen, or
knave, &c., which is sufficient advantage to secure any game.

'And in case you cannot get cards of proper sizes ready-made to
mix with others, you may shave them with a razor or penknife from
the threes to the nines each side, and from the aces to the
knaves each end; then put them up in the same case or cover, and
if they are done as they ought to be, they will pass upon
anybody.

'As Whist is a tavern-game, the sharpers generally take care to
put about the bottle before the game begins, so quick, that a
BUBBLE cannot be said to see clearly even when he begins to play.

'The next is the corner-bend, which is four cards turned down
finely at one corner--a signal to cut by.

'The other is vulgarly called Kingston-bridge, or the middle-
bend.  It is done by bending your own or adversary's TRICKS two
different ways, which will cause an opening, or arch, in the
middle, which is of the same use and service as the other two
ways, and only practised in its turn to amuse you.

'The next thing to be considered is, who deals the cards, you or
your adversary; because that is a main point, and from whence
your advantage must arise.  Suppose, for example,
          {Sharpers,          
A and B   {
          {Partners,
 
          {Bubbles, or Flats, 
C and D   {
          { Partners.

After a deal or two is formally played, A and B will begin to
operate in the following manner:--

'When A or B is to deal, they observe the PRECEDING DEAL to take
up the tricks thus:--         
1.  A bad card.  2.  A good card.         
3.  A bad card.  4.  A good card.

(Meaning the best and worst that fall in that list).

'When C or D deals, they must be taken up thus:--         
1.  A good card.  2.  A bad card.         
3.  A good card.  4.  A bad card.

'By this rule it is plain that the best cards fall to A and B
every deal.  How is it possible, therefore, that C and D should
ever win a game without permission?  But it would be deemed ill
policy, and contrary to the true interest of A and B, to act thus
every deal.  I will, therefore, suppose it is practised just when
they please, according as bets happen in company; though the rule
with gamesters, in low life, is at the first setting out to
stupify you with wine and the loss of your money, that you may
never come to a perfect understanding of what you are doing.  It
may be truly said that many an honest gentleman has been kept a
month in such a condition by the management and contrivance of a
set of sharpers.

'Now you may imagine it not in the power of A and B to cause the
tricks to be taken up after the manner aforesaid: there is
nothing so easy nor so frequently practised, especially at Three
poll One; for in playing the cards the confederates will not only
take care of their own tricks, but also of yours, for the cards
may be so played, and shoved together in such a manner, as will
even cause you to take them right yourself; and if a trick should
lie untowardly on the table, A or B will pay you the compliment
of taking it up for you, and say--"Sir, that's yours."  This
operation will the more readily be apprehended by seeing it
practised half a score times; when once you are aware of it, it
will otherwise (I may say fairly) pass upon any person that has
not been let into the secret.  This being allowed, the next point
and difficulty is to shuffle and cut.

'I say, that either A or B are such curious workmen, and can make
a sham shuffle with a pack of cards so artfully, that you would
believe they were splitting them, when at the time they will not
displace a single card from its order!  Such is the SHARPER'S
shuffling.

'Now, to cut the cards, a BEND is prepared for you to cut to--
the middle is the best; and it is odds but you unwarily cut to
it; if not, SLIP is the word; but if you have no opportunity to
do that neither, then deal away at all hazards, it is but an
equal bet that they come in your favour; if right, proceed; if
otherwise, miss a card in its course, and it brings the cards
according to your first design; it is but giving two at last
where you missed; and if that cannot be conveniently done, you
only lose the deal, and there is an end of it.

'But when A or B is to cut, they make it all safe; for then they
make the CORNER-BEND, which any one that knows may cut to, a
hundred times together.

'Piping at Whist.  By piping I mean, when one of the company that
does not play, which frequently happens, sits down in a
convenient place to smoke a pipe, and so look on, pretending to
amuse himself that way.  Now, the disposing of his fingers on the
pipe whilst smoking discovers the principal cards that are in the
person's hand he overlooks; which was always esteemed a
sufficient advantage whereby to win a game.  There is another
method, namely, by uttering words.  "Indeed" signifies diamonds;
"truly," hearts; "upon my word," clubs; "I assure you," spades. 
But as soon as these methods become known, new ones are invented;
and it is most curious that two persons may discover to each
other what sort of cards they have in hand, and which ought first
to be played, many different ways, without speaking a word.'

There can be no doubt that the act of sorting the cards is
capable of giving an acute observer a tolerably accurate idea of
his partner's or either of his opponents' hands; so that where
cheating is suspected it would be better to play the cards
without sorting them.  The number of times a sorter carries a
card to a particular part indicates so many of a suit; your own
hand and his play will readily indicate the nature of the cards
in which he is either strong or weak.

I now quote Robert-Houdin's account of

CARD TELEGRAPHY.

Although there are 32 cards in the game of Piquet, all of them
may be designated by twelve different signs, namely, eight for
the nature of the cards, and four for the colours.

At Ecarte, the number of the signals is still less, as it is only
the figures that require indication: but to make these
indications it is necessary to execute a sort of pantomime,
according to certain authors, such as blowing the nose, coughing,
drumming on the table, sneezing, &c.  Such evolutions, however,
are totally unworthy of your modern Greek, and would soon be
denounced as gross fraud.  The signals which he employs are only
appreciable by his confederate,--as follows:--

If he looks

1.  At his confederate, he designates   A king.

2.  At the play of his adversary . . .  A queen.

3.  At the stake . . . . . . . . . . .  A knave.

4.  At the opposite side . . . . . . .  An ace.

And whilst he indicates the nature of the cards he at the same
time makes known the colour by the following signs:--

1.  The mouth slightly open  . . . . .  Hearts.

2.  The mouth shut . . . . . . . . . .  Diamonds.

3.  The upper-lip slightly pouting
          over the lower . . . . . . .  Clubs.

4.  The lower-lip drawn over the               
          upper  . . . . . . . . . . .  Spades.

Thus, if the Greek wishes to announce, for instance, the knave
and ace of hearts, he successively directs his looks upon the
play of his adversary, upon the stake, and to the opposite side,
whilst keeping his mouth slightly open.

It is evident that this telegraphy may be employed at all games
where there is a gallery.  In effect, nothing is easier at Piquet
than to indicate, by the aid of these signals, the colour in
which the player should discard and that in which he should keep
what cards he has.

These are the simplest signs; but some of the Greeks have a great
number of them, to designate everything; and even sometimes to
communicate and receive intelligence, when necessary.  This
telegraphy is so imperceptible that it is difficult to describe
it, and altogether impossible to detect it.[7]

[7] Tricheries des Grecs devoilees.  


Robert-Houdin has exhausted the subject of card-trickery, in
connection with that prestidigitation which, it seems, all card-
sharpers cultivate, the description of which, however, is by no
means so entertaining as the visible performance.  I find,
nevertheless, in his book, under the title of 'Small Trickeries
made innocent by Custom,' certain things alluded to which I can
attest by experience.

I.  At Whist, no communication whatever must be made by a player
to his partner, excepting those authorized by the laws of the
game; but some persons go further, and by the play of their
features 'telegraph' to their partners the value of their hands.

II.  Any one with a good memory and endowed with quick perception
may form a very accurate estimate of the hands held by all the
players by remembering THE TRICKS AS THEY ARE PLAYED AND TURNED
DOWN--all of a suit, or trumped.  Cards 'stick together' most
lovingly, and the ordinary shuffling scarcely alters their
sequence; and so, if a trick has been taken by an ace over a
king, for instance, and in the next deal you get the same king,
you may be sure that the ace is either on your right or your
left, according to the deal; of course, if you get the ace, then
the same probability, or rather necessity, exists as to the king;
and so on.  Knave, queen, king, ace, of the same name, are almost
sure to be separated in the deal between the four players, or one
player will have two of them.  The observation is a tax upon the
faculties; but I am sure, quite sure, that the thing can be done,
and is, when done, of material service; although, of course, the
knowledge can be turned to account only by an expert player, with
a partner who can understand the game which he wishes to play.

Whist is, decidedly, one of the fairest of games; but for that
very reason, it is open to the greatest over-reaching, or, if you
like, cheating.

With regard to dice, of course, they were and, doubtless, are
still loaded.  Such were formerly called 'dispatches,' because
they would 'in five minutes dispatch L500 out of the pocket of
any young man when intoxicated with champagne.'

Roulette and Rouge et Noir tables were and are so arranged as
always to make the bank win at the will of the attendant,
regulating them with a touch.

At Hazard, they used 'low or high dice,' that is, with only
certain numbers on them, high or low,--a pair of which every
sharper always had in his possession, changing them with great
dexterity.  They also used 'cramped' boxes, by which they
'cogged' or fastened the dice in the box as they dropped them IN,
and so could drop them OUT with the required face upwards.


CHAPTER III.

ANECDOTES OF THE PASSIONS AND VICISSITUDES OF GAMESTERS.

Although all the motives of human action have long been known--
although psychology, or the science of soul and sentiment, has
ceased to present us with any new facts--it is quite certain that
our edifice of Morals is not quite built up.  We may rest assured
that as long as intellectual man exists the problem will be
considered unsolved, and the question will be agitated.  Future
generations will destroy what we establish, and will fashion a
something according to their advancement, and so on; for if there
be a term which, of all others, should be expunged from the
dictionaries of all human beings, it seems to be Lord Russell's
word FINALITY.  Something NEW will always be wanted.  'Sensation'
is the very life of humanity; it is motion--the reverse of
'death'--which we all abhor.

The gamester lives only for the 'sensation' of gaming.  Menage
tells us of a gamester who declared that he had never seen any
luminary above the horizon but the moon.  Saint Evremond, writing
to the Count de Grammont, says--'You play from morning to night,
or rather from night to morning.  All the rays of the gamester's
existence terminate in play; it is on this centre that his very
existence depends.  He enjoys not an hour of calm or serenity. 
During the day he longs for night, and during the night he dreads
the return of day.'

Being always pre-occupied, gamesters are subject to a ridiculous
absence of mind.  Tacitus tells us that the Emperor Vitellius was
so torpid that he would have forgotten he was a prince unless
people had reminded him of it from time to time.[8]  Many
gamesters have forgotten that they were husbands and fathers. 
During play some one said that the government were about to levy
a tax on bachelors.  'Then I shall be ruined!' exclaimed one of
the players absorbed in the game.  'Why, man, you have a wife and
five children,' said the speaker.

[8] Tanta torpedo invaserat animum Vitellii, ut si principem eum
fuisse non meminissent, ipse oblivisceretur.  Hist., lib. iii.


This infatuation may be simply ridiculous; but it has also a
horrible aspect.  A distracted wife has rushed to the gaming
table, imploring her husband, who had for two entire days been
engaged at play, to return to his home.

'Only let me stay one moment longer--only one moment. . . . . I
shall return perhaps the day after to-morrow,' he stammered out
to the wretched woman, who retired.  Alas! he returned sooner
than he had promised.  His wife was in bed, holding the last of
her children to her breast.

'Get up, madam,' said the ruined gambler, 'the bed on which you
lie belongs to us no longer!' . . .

When the gamester is fortunate, he enjoys his success elsewhere;
to his home he brings only consternation.

A wife had received the most solemn promise from her husband that
he would gamble no more.  One night, however, he slunk out of
bed, rushed to the gaming table, and lost all the money he had
with him.  He tried to borrow more, but was refused.  He went
home.  His wife had taken the precaution to lock the drawer that
contained their last money.  Vain obstacle!  The madman broke it
open, carried off two thousand crowns--to take his revenge, as he
said, but in reality to lose the whole as before.

But it is to the gaming room that we must go to behold the
progress of the terrible drama--the ebb and flow of opposite
movements--the shocks of alternate hope and fear, infinitely
varied in the countenance, not only of the actors, but also of
the spectators.  What is visible, however, is nothing in
comparison to the secret agony.  It is in his heart that the
tempest roars most fiercely.

Two players once exhibited their rage, the one by a mournful
silence, the other by repeated imprecations.  The latter, shocked
at the sang-froid of his neighbour, reproached him for enduring,
without complaint, such losses one after the other.  'Look here!'
said the other, uncovering his breast and displaying it all
bloody with lacerations.

It is only at play that we can observe, from moment to moment,
all the phases of despair; from time to time there occur new
ones--strange, eccentric, or terrible.  After having lost
quietly, and even with serenity, half his fortune, the father of
a family staked the remainder, and lost it without a murmur. 
Facere solent extrema securos mala.[9]  The bystanders looked at
him; his features changed not; only it was perceived that they
were fixed.  It seemed that he was unconscious of life.  Two
streams of tears trickled from his eyes, and yet his features
remained the same.  He was literally a weeping statue.  The
spectators were seized with fright, and, although gamesters, they
melted into pity.

[9] 'Great calamities render us CARELESS.'


At Bayonne, in 1725, a French officer, in a rage at billiards,
jammed a billiard-ball in his mouth, where it stuck fast,
arresting respiration, until it was, with difficulty, extracted
by a surgeon.  Dusaulx states that he was told the fact by a
lieutenant-general, who was an eye-witness.

It is well known that gamblers, like dogs that bite a stone flung
at them, have eaten up the cards, crushed up the dice, broken the
tables, damaged the furniture, and finally 'pitched into' each
other--as described by Lucian in his Saturnalia.  Dusaulx assures
us that he saw an enraged gambler put a burning candle into his
mouth, chew it, and swallow it.  A mad player at Naples bit the
table with such violence that his teeth went deep into the wood;
thus he remained, as it were, nailed to it, and suddenly expired.

The other players took to flight; the officers of justice visited
the place; and the corpse was deprived of the usual ceremony of
burial.[10]

[10] Gazette de Deux-Ponts, du 26 Novembre, 1772.


The following strange but apparently authentic fact, is related
in the Mercure Francois (Tome I.  Annee 1610).

'A man named Pennichon, being a prisoner in the Conciergerie
during the month of September, 1610, died there of a wonderfully
sudden death.  He could not refrain from play.  Having one day
lost his money, he uttered frightful imprecations against his
body and against his soul, swearing that he would never play at
cards again.  Nevertheless, a few days after, he began to play
again with those in his apartment, and on a dispute respecting
discarding, he repeated his execrable oaths.  And when one of the
company told him he should fear the Divine justice, he only swore
the more, and made such confusion that there had to be another
deal.  But as soon as three other cards were given him, he placed
them in his hat, which he held before him, and whilst looking at
them, with his elbows on the table and his face in the hat, he so
suddenly expired that one of the party said--"Come, now play,"
and pushed him with his elbow, thinking he was asleep, when he
fell down dead upon the floor.'

In some cases the effect of losses at play is simply
stupefaction.  Some players, at the end of the sitting, neither
know what they do nor what they say.  M. de Crequi, afterwards
Duc de Lesdiguieres, leaving a gambling party with Henry IV.,
after losing a large sum, met M. de Guise in the court-yard of
the castle.  'My friend,' said he to the latter, 'where are the
quarters of the Guards now-a-days?'  M. de Guise stepped back,
saying, 'Excuse me, sir, I don't belong to this country,' and
immediately went to the king, whom he greatly amused with the
anecdote.

A dissipated buck, who had been sitting all night at Hazard, went
to a church, not far from St James's, just before the second
reading of the Lord's Prayer, on Sunday.  He was scarcely seated
before he dozed, and the clerk in a short time bawled out AMEN,
which he pronounced A--main.  The buck jumped up half asleep and
roared out, 'I'll bet the caster 20 guineas!'  The congregation
was thrown into a titter, and the buck ran out, overwhelmed with
shame.  A similar anecdote is told of another 'dissipated buck'
in a church.  The grand masquerade given on the opening of the
Union Club House, in Pall Mall, was not entirely over till a late
hour on the following Sunday.  A young man nearly
intoxicated--certainly not knowing what he was about-- reeled
into St. James's church, in his masquerade dress, with his hat
on.  The late Rev. Thomas Bracken, attracted by the noise of his
entrance, looked directly at him as he chanced to deliver the
following words:--'Friend! how camest thou in hither, not having
on a wedding garment?'  It seemed so to strike the culprit that
he instantly took off his hat and withdrew in confusion.

At play, a winner redoubles his caution and sang-froid just in
proportion as his adversary gets bewildered by his losses,
becoming desperate; he takes advantage of the weakness of the
latter, giving him the law, and striving for greater success. 
When the luck changes, however, the case is reversed, and the
former loser becomes, in his turn, ten times more pitiless--like
that Roman prefect, mentioned by Tacitus, who was the more
inexorable because he had been harshly treated in his youth, co
immmitior quia toleraverat.  The joy at winning back his money
only makes a gamester the more covetous of winning that of his
adversary.  A wealthy man once lost 100,000 crowns, and begged to
be allowed to go and sell his property, which was worth double
the amount he had lost.  'Why sell it?' said his adversary; 'let
us play for the remainder.'  They played; luck changed; and the
late LOSER ruined the other.

Sometimes avidity makes terrible mistakes; many, in order to win
more, have lost their all to persons who had not a shilling to
lose.  During the depth of a severe winter, a gamester beheld
with terror the bottom of his purse.  Unable to resolve on
quitting the gaming table--for players in that condition are
always the most stubborn--he shouted to his valet--'Go and fetch
my great sack.'  These words, uttered without design, stimulated
the cupidity of those who no longer cared to play with him, and
now they were eager for it.  His luck changed, and he won thrice
as much as he had lost.  Then his 'great sack' was brought to
him: it was a BEAR-SKIN SACK he used as a cloak!

In the madness of gaming the player stakes everything after
losing his money--his watch, his rings, his clothing; and some
have staked their EARS, and others their very LIVES-- instances
of all which will be related in the sequel.

Not very long ago a publican, who lost all his money, staked his
public-house, lost it, and had to 'clear out.'  The man who won
it is alive and flourishing.

'The debt of honour must be paid: 'these are the terrible words
that haunt the gamester as he wakes (if he has slept) on the
morning after the night of horrors: these are the furies that
take him in hand, and drag him to torture, laughing the while. .
. .

What a 'sensation' it must be to lose one's ALL!  A man,
intoxicated with his gains, left one gaming house and entered
another.  As soon as he entered he exclaimed, 'Well, I am filled,
my pockets are full of gold, and here goes, ODDS OR EVEN?' 
'Odds,' cried a player.  It was ODDS, and the fortunate winner
pocketed the enormous sum just boasted of by the other.

On the other hand, sudden prosperity has deranged more heads and
killed more people than reverses and grief; either because it
takes a longer time to get convinced of utter ruin than great
good fortune, or because the instinct of self- preservation
compels us to seek, in adversity, for resources to mitigate
despair; whereas, in the assault of excessive joy, the soul's
spring is distended and broken when it is suddenly compressed by
too many thoughts and too many sensations.  Sophocles, Diagoras,
Philippides, died of joy.  Another Greek expired at the sight of
the three crowns won by his three sons at the Olympic games.

Many fine intellects among players have been brutified by loses;
others, in greater number, have been so by their winnings.  Some
in the course of their prosperity perish from idleness, get
deranged, and ruin themselves after ruining others.  An instance
is mentioned of an officer who won so enormously that he actually
lost his senses in counting his gains.  Astonished at himself, he
thought he was no longer an ordinary mortal; and required his
valets to do him extraordinary honours, flinging handfuls of gold
to them.  The same night, however, he returned to the gaming
house, and recovered from his madness when he had lost not only
all his gains, but even the value of an appointment which he
held.

UNFORTUNATE WINNING.

M. G--me was a most estimable man, combining in himself the best
qualities of both heart and head.  He was good-humoured, witty,
and benevolent.  With these qualifications, and one other which
seldom operates to a man's disadvantage--a clear income of three
thousand a year--the best society in Paris was open to him.  He
had been a visitor in that capital about a month, when he
received an invitation to one of the splendid dinners given
weekly at the salon.  As he never played, he hesitated about the
propriety of accepting it, but on the assurance that it would not
be expected of him to play; and, moreover, as he might not again
have so good an opportunity of visiting an establishment of the
kind, he resolved to go--merely for the satisfaction of his
curiosity.  He had a few stray napoleons in his purse, to throw
them--'just for the good of the house,' as he considered it--
could hardly be called PLAY, so he threw them.  Poor fellow!  He
left off a winner of fourteen hundred napoleons, or about as many
pounds sterling--and so easily won!  He went again, again, and
again; but he was not always a winner; and within fifteen months
of the moment when his hand first grasped the dice-box he was
lying dead in a jail!

LORD WORTHALL'S DESPERATE WAGER.

At a gambling party Lord Worthall had lost all his money, and in
a fit of excitement staked his whole estate against L1000, at
cutting low with cards, and in cutting exclaimed,--

        'Up now Deuce, or else a Trey,          
     Or Worthall's gone for ever and aye.'

He had the luck to cut the deuce of diamonds; and to commemorate
the serious event, he got the deuce of diamonds cut in marble and
had it fixed on the parapet of his mansion.

THE CELEBRATED THADDEUS STEVENS.

He was an inveterate gamester on a small scale, and almost
invariably, after a day's duty in the House, would drop in at a
favourite casino, and win or lose fifty dollars--that being the
average limit of his betting.

A PROVIDENT GAMBLER.

A Monsieur B--, well known in Parisian life, having recently lost
every shilling at a certain sporting club where play is carried
on in Paris, went to the country, where his sister lent him L150.

He won all back again, and got a considerable sum of money in
hand.  He then went to his hotel, to his bootmaker, and tailor,
paid them, and made arrangements to be fed, clothed, and shod for
ten years.

A MAGNIFICENT FORTUNE WASTED.

Lord Foley, who died in 1793, entered upon the turf with an
estate of L18,000 per annum, and L100,000 ready money.  He left
with a ruined constitution, an encumbered estate, and not a
shilling of ready money!

AN ENTERPRISING CLERK.

Lord Kenyon, in 1795, tried a clerk 'for misapplying his master's
confidence,' and the facts were as follows.  He went with a bank
note of L1000 to a gaming house in Osendon Street, where he won a
little.  He also won two hundred guineas at another in Suffolk
Street.  He next accompanied some keepers of a third house to
their tables, where he lost above nine hundred pounds.  He played
there almost every night; and finally lost about L2500!

GAMBLING FOR RECRUITS FOR THE ARMY.

An Irish officer struck out a mode of gambling, for recruits.  He
gave five guineas bounty, and one hundred to be raffled for by
young recruits,--the winner to be paid immediately, and to
purchase his discharge, if he pleased, for L20.  The dice-box was
constantly going at his recruiting office in Dublin.

DOUBLING THE STAKES.

A dashing young man of large fortune, about the year 1820, lost
at a subscription house at the West End, L80,000.  The winner was
a person of high rank.  The young man, however, by doubling the
stakes, not only recovered his losses, but in his turn gained
considerably of his antagonist.

AN ANNUITY FOR A GAMBLING DEBT.

A fashionable nobleman had won from a young and noble relative
the sum of L40,000.  The cash not being forthcoming, he accepted
an annuity of L4000.

SIR WILLIAM COLEPEPPER.

It is told of Sir William Colepepper that, after he had been
ruined himself at the gaming table, his whole delight was to sit
there and see others ruined.  Hardened wretch--'Who though he
plays no more, overlooks the cards'--with this diabolical
disposition!

THE BITER BITTEN.

A certain duchess, of a ci-devant lord-lieutenant, who expected
to make a pigeon of Marshal Blucher, was fleeced of L200,000; to
pay which her lord was obliged to sell a great part of his
property, and reside on the continent.

HUNTED DOWN.

A stout-hearted and gallant military baronet lost an immense sum
at a celebrated gaming house; but was so fortunate as to recover
it, with L1200 more.  This last sum HE PRESENTED TO THE WAITERS. 
He was pursued by two of the 'play-wrights' to a northern
watering-place, where he was so plucked that all his possessions
were brought to the hammer.  A competency was, however, saved
from the magnificent wreck.

COMING OF AGE.

When Sir C-- T--, a weak young man, with a large fortune, came of
age, the Greeks, thinking him an excellent quarry, went to York
Races, made him drunk and plundered him of a large sum.  The next
morning one of the party waited upon him to acquaint him of his
loss--(L20,000 or L30,000), and brought bonds for his signature
to that amount!

HEAVY LIABILITIES TO BEGIN WITH.

In the year 1799, when the Marquis of Donegal succeeded to the
title on his father's death, his debts, principally to gamblers
and money-lenders, amounted to two hundred and fifty thousand
pounds sterling!

A GENTLEMAN TURNED BARBER.

In an old magazine I find the following curious statement:--

'There is now living in Barnaby Street, Carnaby Market, a man
who, although exercising the menial office of penny barber, was
in his younger days in possession of estates and personal
property to a large amount, and is the only lineal descendant
remaining of the very ancient family of the H--s of Bristol.

'His relations dying when he was young, he was placed under
proper guardians, and received a liberal education, first at
Westminster, and afterwards at Cambridge, suitable to his rank
and fortune.  When of age he converted his estates into money,
and retired to Dublin, where he remained some time.  He then made
the tour of Europe, and returned to Ireland, where he went
through all the scenes of dissipation to which young men are so
much addicted, till at last he was beset by those harpies the
gamblers, and stripped of his immense fortune in one single
night!

'He then subsisted for some little time on the bounty of his
undoers, who intended to make him one of them; but, not having
sufficient address for the profession, he was dismissed and "left
in the lurch;" and most of his friends discarding him, he
embarked with his last guinea for England.  Here he has
encountered many difficulties, often been in gaol for debt, and
passed through various scenes of life, as valet, footman, thief-
taker, and at length, a penny-barber!  He has a wife and large
family and lives in a very penurious manner, often lamenting his
early folly.'[11]

[11] 'The Western County Magazine, 1791.  By a Society of
Gentlemen.'  This well-conducted old magazine was printed and
published at Salisbury, and was decidedly a credit to the town
and county.

PENSIONED OFF BY A GAMING HOUSE.

A visitor at Frascati's gaming house in Paris tells us:--

'I saw the Chevalier de la C--(a descendant of the once
celebrated romance-writer) when he was nearly ninety.  The mode
of life of this old man was singular.  He had lost a princely
property at the play-table, and by a piece of good fortune of
rare occurrence to gamesters, and unparalleled generosity, the
proprietors of the salon allowed him a pension to support him in
his miserable senility, just sufficient to supply him with a
wretched lodging--bread, and a change of raiment once in every
three or four years!  In addition to this he was allowed a
supper--which was, in fact, his dinner--at the gaming house,
whither he went every night at about eleven o'clock.  Till
supper-time (two o'clock in the morning) he amused himself in
watching the games and calculating the various chances, although
incapable of playing a single coup.  At four o'clock he returned
to his lodging, retired to bed, and lay till between nine and ten
o'clock on the following night.  A cup of coffee was then brought
to him, and, having dressed himself, at the usual hour he again
proceeded to the salon.  This had been his round of life for
several years; and he told me that during all that time
(excepting on a few mornings about Midsummer) he had never beheld
the sun!'

A Mr R--y, son of a baronet, left Wattier's club one night with
only L4 in his pocket, saying that he would look in at the hells.

He did so, and, returning after three o'clock in the morning,
offered to bet L500 that he had above L4000.  The result proved
that he had L4300, all won at gaming tables, from the small
beginning of L4.  He then sat down to play games of skill at
Wattier's, and went home at six o'clock without a single pound! 
The same man subsequently won L30,000, and afterwards lost it
all, with L15,000 more, and then 'went to the Continent.'

A major of the Rifle Brigade, in consequence of gambling in
London, by which he lost vast sums of money, went out of his
senses and died a few years ago in an asylum.  This occurred
within the last ten or twelve years.

Says Mr Seymour Harcourt, in his 'Gaming Calendar,' 'I have
myself seen hanging in chains a man whom, a short time before, I
saw at a Hazard table!'

Hogarth lent his tremendous power to the portrayal of the ruined
gamester, and shows it to the life in his print of the gaming
house in the 'Rake's Progress.'

Three stages of that species of madness which attends gaming are
there described.  On the first shock all is inward dismay.  The
ruined gamester is represented leaning against a wall with his
arms across, lost in an agony of horror.  Shortly after this
horrible gloom bursts into a storm and fury.  He tears in pieces
whatever comes near him, and, kneeling down, invokes curses on
himself.  His next attack is on others--on every one whom he
imagines to have been instrumental in his ruin.  The eager joy of
the winning gamester, the attention of the usurer, and the
profound reverie of the highwayman, are all strongly marked in
this wonderful picture.

HOW MANY GAMESTERS LIVE BY PLAY?

It is an observation made by those who calculate on the gaming
world, that above nine-tenths of the persons who play LIVE by it.

Now, as the ordinary establishment of a GENTEEL gamester, as he
is commonly called, cannot be less than L1000 per annum, luck,
which turns out EQUAL in the long run, will not support him; he
must therefore LIVE by what they call among themselves the BEST
OF THE GAME--or, in plain English, cheating.

So much for the inner and outer life of gamblers.  And now I
shall introduce Mr Ben. Disraeli, recounting, in the happiest
vein of his younger days, a magnificent gambling scene, quite on
a par with the legend of the Hindoo epic before quoted,[12] and
which, I doubt not, will (to use the young Disraeli's own words)
make the reader 'scud along and warm up into friskiness.'

[12] Chapter II.


A curious phrase occurs in the 9th chapter of 'The Young Duke,'
in the paragraph at the beginning, after the words--'O ye
immortal gods!'

Although the scene of the drama is part of a novel, yet there can
be no doubt of its being 'founded on fact'--at any rate, I think
there never was a narrative of greater verisimilitude.

'After dinner, with the exception of Cogit, who was busied in
compounding some wonderful liquid for the future refreshment,
they sat down to Ecarte.  Without having exchanged a word upon
the subject, there seemed a general understanding among all the
parties, that to-night was to be a pitched battle--and they began
at once, very briskly.  Yet, in spite of their universal
determination, midnight arrived without anything very decisive. 
Another hour passed over, and then Tom Cogit kept touching the
baron's elbow, and whispering in a voice which everybody could
understand.  All this meant that supper was ready.  It was
brought into the room.

'Gaming has one advantage--it gives you an appetite; that is to
say, so long as you have a chance remaining.  The duke had
thousands,--for at present his resources were unimpaired, and he
was exhausted by the constant attention and anxiety of five
hours.  He passed over the delicacies, and went to the side-
table, and began cutting himself some cold roast beef.  Tom Cogit
ran up, not to his Grace, but to the baron, to announce the
shocking fact, that the Duke of St James was enduring great
trouble; and then the baron asked his Grace to permit Mr Cogit to
serve him.

'Our hero devoured--we use the word advisedly, as fools say in
the House of Commons--he devoured the roast beef, and rejecting
the hermitage with disgust, asked for porter.

'They set to again, fresh as eagles.  At six o'clock, accounts
were so complicated, that they stopped to make up their books. 
Each played with his memorandums and pencil at his side.  Nothing
fatal had yet happened.  The duke owed Lord Dice about L5000, and
Temple Grace owed him as many hundreds.  Lord Castlefort also was
his debtor to the tune of 750, and the baron was in his books,
but slightly.

'Every half-hour they had a new pack of cards, and threw the used
ones on the floor.  All this time Tom Cogit did nothing but snuff
the candles, stir the fire, bring them a new pack, and
occasionally made a tumbler for them.

'At eight o'clock the duke's situation was worsened.  The run was
greatly against him, and perhaps his losses were doubled.  He
pulled up again the next hour or two; but, nevertheless, at ten
o'clock owed every one something.  No one offered to give over;
and every one, perhaps, felt that his object was not obtained. 
They made their toilets, and went down-stairs to breakfast.  In
the mean time the shutters were opened, the room aired; and in
less than an hour they were at it again.

'They played till dinner-time without intermission; and though
the duke made some desperate efforts, and some successful ones,
his losses were, nevertheless, trebled.  Yet he ate an excellent
dinner, and was not at all depressed; because the more he lost
the more his courage and his resources seemed to expand.  At
first, he had limited himself to 10,000; after breakfast, it was
to have been 20,000; then 30,000 was the ultimatum; and now he
dismissed all thoughts of limits from his mind, and was
determined to risk or gain everything.

'At midnight he had lost L48,000.

'Affairs now began to be serious.  His supper was not so hearty. 
While the rest were eating, he walked about the room, and began
to limit his ambition to recovery, and not to gain.

'When you play to win back, the fun is over: there is nothing to
recompense you for your bodily tortures and your degraded
feelings; and the very best result that can happen, while it has
no charms, seems to your cowed mind impossible.

'On they played, and the duke lost more.  His mind was jaded.  He
floundered--he made desperate efforts, but plunged deeper in the
slough.  Feeling that, to regain his ground, each card must tell,
he acted on each as if it must win, and the consequences of this
insanity (for a gamester at such a crisis is really insane) were,
that his losses were prodigious.

'Another morning came, and there they sat, ankle-deep in cards. 
No attempt at breakfast now--no affectation of making a toilet,
or airing the room.  The atmosphere was hot, to be sure, but it
well became such a hell.  There they sat, in total, in positive
forgetfulness of everything but the hot game they were hunting
down.  There was not a man in the room, except Tom Cogit, who
could have told you the name of the town in which they were
living.  There they sat, almost breathless, watching every turn
with the fell look in their cannibal eyes, which showed their
total inability to sympathize with their fellow-beings.  All the
forms of society had been forgotten.  There was no snuff-box
handed about now, for courtesy, admiration, or a pinch; no
affectation of occasionally making a remark upon any other topic
but the all-engrossing one.

'Lord Castlefort rested with his arms on the table:--a false
tooth had got unhinged.  His Lordship, who, at any other time,
would have been most annoyed, coolly put it in his pocket.  His
cheeks had fallen, and he looked twenty years older.

'Lord Dice had torn off his cravat, and his hair flung down over
his callous, bloodless checks, straight as silk.

'Temple Grace looked as if he were blighted by lightning; and his
deep-blue eyes gleamed like a hyaena.

'The baron was least changed.

'Tom Cogit, who smelt that the crisis was at hand, was as quiet
as a bribed rat.

'On they played till six o'clock in the evening, and then they
agreed to desist till after dinner.  Lord Dice threw himself on a
sofa.  Lord Castlefort breathed with difficulty.  The rest walked
about.  While they were resting on their oars, the young duke
roughly made up his accounts.  He found that he was minus about
L100,000.

'Immense as this loss was, he was more struck--more appalled, let
us say--at the strangeness of the surrounding scene, than even by
his own ruin.  As he looked upon his fellow-gamesters, he seemed,
for the first time in his life, to gaze upon some of those
hideous demons of whom he had read.  He looked in the mirror at
himself.  A blight seemed to have fallen over his beauty, and his
presence seemed accursed.  He had pursued a dissipated, even more
than a dissipated, career.  Many were the nights that had been
spent by him not on his couch; great had been the exhaustion that
he had often experienced; haggard had sometimes even been the
lustre of his youth.  But when had been marked upon his brow this
harrowing care?  When had his features before been stamped with
this anxiety, this anguish, this baffled desire, this strange,
unearthly scowl, which made him even tremble?  What! was it
possible?--it could not be--that in time he was to be like those
awful, those unearthly, those unhallowed things that were around
him.  He felt as if he had fallen from his state, as if he had
dishonoured his ancestry, as if he had betrayed his trust.  He
felt a criminal.

'In the darkness of his meditations a flash burst from his lurid
mind, a celestial light appeared to dissipate this thickening
gloom, and his soul felt, as it were, bathed with the softening
radiancy.  He thought of May Dacre, he thought of everything that
was pure, and holy, and beautiful, and luminous, and calm.  It
was the innate virtue of the man that made this appeal to his
corrupted nature.  His losses seemed nothing; his dukedom would
be too slight a ransom for freedom from these ghouls, and for the
breath of the sweet air.

'He advanced to the baron, and expressed his desire to play no
more.  There was an immediate stir.  All jumped up, and now the
deed was done.  Cant, in spite of their exhaustion, assumed her
reign.  They begged him to have his revenge,--were quite annoyed
at the result,--had no doubt he would recover if he proceeded.

'Without noticing their remarks, he seated himself at the table,
and wrote cheques for their respective amounts, Tom Cogit jumping
up and bringing him the inkstand.  Lord Castlefort, in the most
affectionate manner, pocketed the draft; at the same time
recommending the duke not to be in a hurry, but to send it when
he was cool.  Lord Dice received his with a bow, Temple Grace
with a sigh, the baron with an avowal of his readiness always to
give him his revenge.

'The duke, though sick at heart, would not leave the room with
any evidence of a broken spirit; and when Lord Castlefort again
repeated--"Pay us when we meet again," he said, "I think it very
improbable that we shall meet again, my Lord.  I wished to know
what gaming was.  I had heard a great deal about it.  It is not
so very disgusting; but I am a young man, and cannot play tricks
with my complexion."

'He reached his house.  The Bird was out.  He gave orders for
himself not to be disturbed, and he went to bed; but in vain he
tried to sleep.  What rack exceeds the torture of an excited
brain and an exhausted body?  His hands and feet were like ice,
his brow like fire; his ears rung with supernatural roaring; a
nausea had seized upon him, and death he would have welcomed.  In
vain, in vain he courted repose; in vain he had recourse to every
expedient to wile himself to slumber.  Each minute he started
from his pillow with some phrase which reminded him of his late
fearful society.  Hour after hour moved on with its leaden pace;
each hour he heard strike, and each hour seemed an age.  Each
hour was only a signal to cast off some covering, or shift his
position.  It was, at length, morning.  With a feeling that he
should go mad if he remained any longer in bed, he rose, and
paced his chamber.  The air refreshed him.  He threw himself on
the floor, the cold crept over his senses, and he slept.'[13]

[13] 'The Young Duke,' by B. Disraeli, chapter VIII.  This
gambling is the turning-point in the young duke's career; he
proves himself at length not unworthy of his noble ancestry arm
his high hereditary position,--takes his place in the Senate, and
weds the maiden of his love.


CHAPTER IV.

ATROCITIES, DUELS, SUICIDES, AND EXECUTION OF GAMBLERS.

The history of all nations is but the record of their cupidity;
and when the fury of gaming appears on the scene, it has never
failed to double the insolence and atrocities of tyranny.

The atrocious gambling of the Hindoo Rajas has been related;[14]
and I have incidentally adverted to similar concomitants of the
vice among all nations.  I now propose to bring together a series
of facts specially elucidative of the harrowing theme.

[14] Chapter II.


One of the Ptolemys, kings of Egypt, required all causes to be
submitted to him whilst at play, and pronounced even sentence of
death according to chance.  On one occasion his wife, Berenice,
pronounced thereanent those memorable words:--'There cannot be
too much deliberation when the death of a man is concerned'--
afterwards adopted by Juvenal--Nulla unquam de morte hominis
cunctatio longa est.[15]

[15] Aelian, Var. Hist. lib. XLIV. c. xiii.; Juvenal, Sat. vi.


Tolomnius, King of the Veii, happened to be playing at dice when
the arrival of Roman ambassadors was announced.  At the very
instant he uttered the word KILL, a term of the game; the word
was misinterpreted by the hearers, and they went forthwith and
massacred the ambassadors.  Livy suggests that this was an excuse
alleged AFTER the commission of the deed; but gamesters are
subject to such absence of mind that there is really nothing
incredible or astonishing in the act.  'Sire,' exclaimed a
messenger to the Caliph Alamin, 'it is no longer time for play--
Babylon is besieged!'  'Silence!' said the caliph, 'don't you see
I am on the point of giving checkmate?'  The same story is told
of a Duke of Normandy.

Wars have arisen from very trivial causes--among the rest
gambling.  Henry, the son of William the Conqueror, was playing
at chess with Louis, the son of Philip, King of France.  The
latter, perceiving that he was losing the game got into a
passion, and calling Henry the son of a bastard, flung the chess-
board into his face.  Henry took the chess-board and struck Louis
with it so violently that he drew blood, and would have killed
him if his brother, who happened to come in, had not prevented
him.  The two brothers took to flight, but a great and lasting
war was the consequence of the gambling fracas.

A gaming quarrel was the cause of the slap in the face given by
the Duc Rene to Louis XII., then only Duc d'Orleans.  This slap
was the origin of a ligue which was termed 'the mad war.'  The
resentment of the outraged prince was not appeased until he
mounted the throne, when he uttered these memorable words:--'A
King of France does not avenge insults offered to a Duke of
Orleans.'

Many narratives of suicide committed by desperate gamblers are on
record, some of which I now adduce.

SIR JOHN BLAND, OF KIPPAX PARK.

Sir John Bland, of Kippax Park, flirted away his whole fortune at
Hazard.  'He, t'other night,' says Walpole, 'exceeded what was
lost by the late Duke of Bedford, having at one period of the
night (though he recovered the greater part of it) lost two and
thirty thousand pounds.'  Sir John Kippax shot himself in 1705.

LORD MOUNTFORD.

Lord Mountford came to a tragic end through his gambling.  He had
lost money; feared to be reduced to distress; asked for a
government appointment, and determined to throw the die of life
or death on the answer received from court.  The answer was
unfavourable.  He consulted several persons, indirectly at first,
afterwards pretty directly, on the easiest mode of finishing
life; invited a dinner-party for the day after; supped at
White's, and played at Whist till one o'clock of the New Year's
morning.  Lord Robert Bertie drank to him 'a happy new year;' he
clapped his hand strangely to his eyes.  In the morning, he sent
for a lawyer and three witnesses, executed his will, made them
read it over twice, paragraph by paragraph, asked the lawyer if
that will would stand good though a man were to shoot himself. 
Being assured it would, he said--'Pray stay, while I step into
the next room;' went into the next room and shot himself, placing
the muzzle of the pistol so close to his head that the report was
not heard.

A SUICIDE ROBBING PETER TO PAY PAUL.

Gamblers have been known to set as coolly and deliberately about
blowing out their brains as if they had only been going to light
their cigars.  Lord Orford, in his correspondence with Horace
Walpole, mentions two curious instances.

One of the fashionable young men of Lord Orford's day had been
unhappily decoyed into a gambling house, where his passion for
play became so great that he spent nearly the whole of his time
in throwing the dice.  He continued to gamble until he had not
only lost a princely fortune, but had incurred a large amount of
debt among his tradesmen.  With the loss of his money, and the
utter beggary which stared him in the face, the unfortunate
victim of play lost all relish for life; and sought in death the
only refuge he could fancy from the infamy and misery which he
had brought upon himself.  But whilst fully resolved on self-
destruction, he thought, before carrying his fatal purpose into
execution, he might as well do his tradesmen an act of justice,
even if in so doing he should do injustice to others.  He insured
his life to the extent of his debts, amounting to several
thousand pounds.  Being acquainted with several of the directors
of the company (he called them his life-and-death brokers) in
which he insured, he invited them to dinner the following day,
with the ostensible view of celebrating the completion of the
insurance.  The tradesmen also received strict orders to be
present; and as the non-payment of their accounts for a long
period to come was the penalty of not acceding to his wishes in
this respect, it can scarcely be necessary to say that they were
all 'punctual as lovers to the moment sworn.'  The dinner over,
and a liberal allowance of wine having been quaffed, the ruined
gambler desired the servant to call up all who were in the hall
below.  In a few seconds the dining-room was filled with
tradesmen, all eager to receive payment of their accounts.  'Now,
gentlemen,' said the gambler, addressing his guests, and pointing
to the little crowd of tradesmen,--'now, gentlemen, these are all
my tradesmen; they are honest industrious men, to whom I am
indebted, and as I see no other earthly means of being ever able
to meet their just claims, you will be so kind as to pay them out
of the sum for which I insured my life yesterday.  Allow me,
gentlemen, to bid you farewell.'  And so saying, he pulled a
pistol from his pocket, and placing it to his head, that instant
blew out his brains.  Of course his insurance office must have
been one that undertook to pay insurances whatever might be the
cause of death, not excepting suicide--which, like duelling, has
usually been a bar to such claims.

REVELATIONS OF A GAMBLER ON THE POINT OF COMMITTING SELF-MURDER.

The following is 'A full and particular account of a person who
threw himself into the Thames, from Blackfriars Bridge, on
Wednesday, July 10, 1782; with the melancholy paper he left
behind him, accounting to his wife and children for so rash an
action.'  It is said that several thousands of the papers were
dispersed through London, and it is to be hoped that some of them
might produce that good effect which seems to have been so
anxiously desired by the person who wished them to be
distributed.

                    'Midnight, July 10, 1782.

'Whoever thou art that readest this paper, listen to the voice of
one from the DEAD.  While thine eyes peruse the lines their
writer may be suffering the most horrid punishments which an
incensed Creator can inflict upon the greatest sinner.

'Reader, art thou of my own sex?  Art thou a man?  Oh, in
whatever rank of life, whether high or low,--beware of gambling! 
Beware of so much as approaching an E O table!  Had I ever met
with such a dreadful warning as I now offer thee, I might perhaps
have been saved from death--have been snatched from damnation. 
Reader, art thou a woman?  Oh, whether rich or poor, whether
wife, mother, sister, or daughter,--if thou suspect that the late
hours, the feverish body, the disturbed mind, the ruffled temper,
the sudden extravagance of him whom thou lovest, are caused by
frequenting the gaming table, oh, fail not to discover thy
suspicions--fail not to remonstrate!  Had but my dear wife
remonstrated with me, when she saw me, in consequence of my
winnings, indulge in expense, which she must have known I could
not honestly afford, she would not now, within the next hour, be
deprived of her husband--of the only support of herself and her
three poor children in this world,--and deprived of him in a
manner which effectually cuts off all hopes of our ever meeting
in the happiness of another. * * * * 

'Yes, in less than an hour, coward as I am, I shall have deserted
my duty and my family in this world; and, wretch as I am, shall
have rushed into all the horrors of hell in another world, by
drowning myself.

'By curiosity I was first led to the E O table.  Ashamed to stand
idle I put upon E, it came E; upon O, it came O.  Fortune
favoured me (as I foolishly called it), and I came away a winner.

Something worse than curiosity, though hardly more dangerous,
carried me to another table another night.  My view in going was
answered.  My view was to WIN, and again I WON in the course of
the evening.  Again I went, and again I won.  For some weeks this
was the constant story.  Oh, happy had I lost at first!  Now I
went every night.  Everything I ought to have done, neglected. 
Up all night, I was forced to lie in bed all day.  The strength
of my mind, which at THIS moment might save me, was hourly
wasting away.  My wife was deceived with continual falsehoods, to
which nothing but her fondness for me blinded her.  Even my
winnings, with the expense and extravagance in which I indulged
myself and family, were every day more than half exhausted.  But
I felt that I was always to win.  Fortune favoured me.  Fortune
was now my deity. * * * *   

'But fortune, my new, my false deity, deserted me.  My luck 
TURNED.  I am undone!  Ruined!  A beggar!  My wife and children
will want a morsel of bread to eat. * * * *  To destroy myself is
the only way to preserve my family from want, and to keep myself
from the GALLOWS.  This morning I absolutely hesitated whether I
should not procure a sum of money with which to try my luck by
FORGERY.  Gamesters, think of that-- FORGERY!  O my dear wife, is
not anything better than seeing me conveyed to Tyburn?  Yes, it
is better that before many hours you and your three helpless
daughters should be hanging in tears (I little merit) over my
lifeless, cold, and swollen body.

'Readers, farewell!  From my sad and voluntary death, learn
wisdom.  In consequence of gaming I go to seek my destruction in
the Thames.  Oh, think in what manner he deserves to be punished
who commits a crime which he is fully persuaded merits, and will
not fail to meet, the severest punishment.'

 The narrative proceeds to state that, 'between one and two
o'clock in the morning he took a sad farewell of this world, and
leaped over Blackfriars Bridge.  It pleased Providence, however,
that he should be seen committing this desperate action by two
watermen, who found his body after it had been a considerable
time under water.  In consequence of the methods used by the men
of the Humane Society, he was at length almost miraculously
restored to life and to his family.  It is further stated that--
'In consequence of the advice of a worthy clergyman he was
restored to reason and to religion.  He now wonders how he could
think of committing so horrid a crime; and is not without hope
that by a life of continual repentance and exemplary religion, he
may obtain pardon hereafter.  The paper which he wrote before he
set forth to drown himself he still desires should be made as
public as possible, and that this narrative should be added to
it.

INCORRIGIBLE.

In the year 1799, Sir W. L--, Bart., finding his eldest son
extremely distressed and embarrassed, told him that he would
relieve him from all his difficulties, on condition that he would
state to him, without reserve, their utmost extent, and give him
his honour never to play again for any considerable sum.  The
debts--amounting to L22,000--were instantly discharged.  Before a
week had elapsed he fell into his old habits again, and lost
L5000 more at a sitting; upon which he next morning shot himself!

SUICIDE IN 1816.

In 1816 a gentleman, the head of a first-rate concern in the
city, put a period to his existence by blowing out his brains. 
He had gone to the Argyle Rooms a few nights before the act, and
accompanied a female home in a coach, with two men, friends of
the woman.  When they got to her residence the two men proposed
to the gentleman to play for a dozen champagne to treat the lady
with, which the gentleman declined.  They, however, after a great
deal of persuasion, prevailed on him to play for small sums, and,
according to the usual trick of gamblers, allowed him to win at
first, till they began to play for double, when there is no doubt
the fellows produced loaded dice, and the gentleman lost to the
amount of L1800!  This brought him to his senses--as well it
might.  He then invented an excuse for not paying that sum, by
saying that he was under an agreement with his partner not to
draw for a larger amount than L300 for his private account--and
gave them a draft for that amount, promising the remainder at a
future day.  This promise, however, he did not attend to, not
feeling himself bound by such a villainous transaction,
especially after giving them so much.  But the robbers found out
who he was and his residence, and had the audacity to go, armed
with bludgeons, and attack him publicly on his own premises, in
the presence of those employed there, demanding payment of their
nefarious 'debt of honour,' and threatening him, if he did not
pay, that he should fight!

This exposure had such an effect on his feelings that he made an
excuse to retire--did so--and blew out his brains with a pistol!

This rash act was the more to be lamented because it prevented
the bringing to condign punishment, the plundering villains who
were the cause of it.[16]

[16] Annual Register, vol. lviii.


OTHER INSTANCES.

A gallant Dutch officer, after having lost a splendid fortune not
long since (1823) in a gambling house at Aix-la-Chapelle, shot
himself.  A Russian general, also, of immense wealth, terminated
his existence in the same manner and for the same cause.  More
recently, a young Englishman, who lost the whole of an immense
fortune by gambling at Paris, quitted this world by stabbing
himself in the neck with a fork.  A short time previously another
Englishman, whose birth was as high as his wealth had been
considerable, blew his brains out in the Palais Royal, after
having literally lost his last shilling.  Finally, an unfortunate
printer at Paris, who had a wife and five children, finished his
earthly career for the same cause, by suffocating himself with
the fumes of charcoal; he said, in his farewell note to his
unhappy wife--'Behold the effect of gaming!'[17]

[17] Ubi supra.


'IF I LOSE I SHALL COMMIT SUICIDE.'

A young man having gambled away his last shilling, solicited the
loan of a few pounds from one of the proprietors of the hell in
which he had been plundered.  'What security will you give me?'
asked the fellow.  'My word of honour,' was the reply.  'Your
word of honour!  That's poor security, and won't do,' rejoined
the hellite; 'if you can pawn nothing better than that, you'll
get no money out of me.'  'Then you won't lend me a couple of
pounds?'  'Not without security,' was the reply.  'Why, surely,
you won't refuse me a couple of sovereigns, after having lost so
much?'  'I won't advance you a couple of shillings without
security.'

Still bent upon play, and greedy for the means to gratify his
passion, the unhappy man, as if struck by a sudden thought,
exclaimed--'I'll give you security--the clothes on my back are
quite new, and worth eight guineas; you shall have them as
security.  Lend me two sovereigns on them.'

'Suppose you lose,' doggedly rejoined the other, 'I cannot strip
them off your back.'  'Don't trouble yourself on that head,'
replied the desperate wretch; 'if I lose I shall commit suicide,
which I have been meditating for some time, and you shall surely
have my clothes.  I shall return to my lodgings before daylight,
in the most worn-out and worthless dressing-gown or great-coat
you can procure for me, leaving my clothes with you.'

The two sovereigns were advanced, and in ten or twelve minutes
were lost.  The keeper of the table demanded the clothes, and the
unfortunate man stripped himself with the utmost coolness of
manner, and wrapping his body in a worn-out greatcoat, quitted
the place with the full purpose of committing self-murder.  He
did not direct his steps homeward, however, but resolved to
accomplish the horrid deed by suspending himself from a lamp-post
in a dark lane near the place.  While making the necessary
preparations he was observed by a constable, who at once took him
into custody, and on the following morning he was carried before
the magistrate, where all the circumstances of the affair came
out.

SUICIDE AT VERDUN.

During the great French War, among other means resorted to in
order to ease the English prisoners at Verdun of their loose
cash, a gaming table was set up for their sole accommodation,
and, as usual, led to scenes of great depravity and horror.  For
instance, a young man was enticed into this sink of iniquity,
when he was tempted to throw on the table a five-franc piece; he
won, and repeated the experiment several times successfully,
until luck turned against him, and he lost everything he had. 
The manager immediately offered a rouleau of a thousand francs,
which, in the heat of play, he thoughtlessly accepted, and also
lost.  He then drew a bill on his agent, which his captain (he
was an officer in the English army) endorsed.  The proceeds of
this went the way of the rouleau.  He drew two more bills, and
lost again.  The next morning he was found dead in his bed, with
his limbs much distorted and his fingers dug into his sides.  On
his table was found an empty laudanum bottle, and some scraps of
paper on which he had been practising the signature of Captain
B----.  On inquiry it was found that he had forged that officer's
name to the two last bills.

'IN AT THE DEATH.'

In 1819 an inquest was held on the body of a gentleman found
hanging from one of the trees in St James's Park.  The evidence
established the melancholy fact that the deceased was in the
habit of frequenting gambling houses, and had sunk into a state
of dejection on account of his losses; and it seemed probable
that it was immediately after his departure from one of these
receptacles of rogues and their dupes that he committed suicide. 
The son of the gate-keeper at St James's saw several persons
round the body at four o'clock in the morning, one of whom, a
noted gambler, said:  'Look at his face; why, have you forgotten
last night?  Don't you recollect him now?'  They were, no doubt,
all gamblers--in at the death.'

The three following stories, if not of actual suicide, relate
crimes which bear a close resemblance to self-murder.

A GAMBLER PAWNING HIS EARS.

A clerk named Chambers, losing his monthly pay, which was his
all, at a gaming table, begged to borrow of the manager's; but
they knew his history too well to lend without security, and
therefore demanded something in pawn.  'I have nothing to give
but my ears,' he replied.  'Well,' said one of the witty demons,
'let us have them.'  The youth immediately took a knife out of
his pocket and actually cut off all the fleshy part of one of his
cars and threw it on the table, to the astonishment of the
admiring gamesters.  He received his two dollars, and gambled on.

A GAMBLER SUBMITTING TO BE HANGED.

The following incident is said to have occurred in London:--Two
fellows were observed by a patrol sitting at a lamp-post in the
New Road; and, on closely watching them, the latter discovered
that one was tying up the other, who offered no resistance, by
the neck.  The patrol interfered to prevent such a strange kind
of murder, and was assailed by both, and very considerably beaten
for his good offices; the watchmen, however, poured in, and the
parties were secured.  On examination next morning, it appeared
that the men had been gambling; that one had lost all his money
to the other, and had at last proposed to stake his clothes.  The
winner demurred--observing that he could not strip his adversary
naked in the event of his losing.  'Oh,' replied the other, 'do
not give yourself any uneasiness about that; if I lose I shall be
unable to live, and you shall hang me, and take my clothes after
I am dead, for I shall then, you know, have no occasion for
them.'  The proposed arrangement was assented to; and the fellow
having lost, was quietly submitting to the terms of the treaty
when he was interrupted by the patrol, whose impertinent
interference he so angrily resented.

TWO GAMBLERS TOSSING WHO SHOULD HANG THE OTHER.

In the year 1812 an extraordinary investigation took place at Bow
Street.  Croker, the officer, was passing along Hampstead Road;
he observed at a short distance before him two men on a wall, and
directly after saw the tallest of them, a stout man, about six
feet high, hanging by his neck from a lamp-post attached to the
wall, being that instant tied up and turned off by the short man.

This unexpected and extraordinary sight astonished the officer;
he made up to the spot with all speed, and just after he arrived
there the tall man, who had been hanged, fell to the ground, the
handkerchief with which he had been suspended having given way. 
Croker produced his staff, said he was an officer, and demanded
to know of the other man the cause of such conduct; in the mean
time the man who had been hanged recovered, got up, and on
Croker's interfering, gave him a violent blow on his nose, which
nearly knocked him backward.  The short man was endeavouring to
make off; however, the officer procured assistance, and both were
brought to the office, where the account they gave was that they
worked on canals.  They had been together on Wednesday afternoon,
tossed for money, and afterwards for their CLOTHES; the tall man
who was hanged won the other's jacket, trousers, and shoes; they
then tossed up which should HANG THE OTHER, and the short one won
the toss.  They got upon the wall, the one to submit, and the
other to hang him on the lamp-iron.  They both agreed in this
statement.  The tall one, who had been hanged, said if he had won
the toss he would have hanged the other.  He said he then felt
the effects upon his neck of his hanging, and his eyes were so
much swelled that he saw DOUBLE.

The magistrates, continues the report in the 'Annual Register,'
expressed their horror and disgust; and ordered the man who had
been hanged to find bail for the violent and unjustifiable
assault upon the officer; and the short one, for hanging the
other--a very odd decision in the latter case--since the act was
murder 'to all intents and purposes' designed and intended.  The
report says, however, that, not having bail, they were committed
to Bridewell for trial.[20]  The result I have not discovered.

[20] Annual Register, 1812, vol. liv.


Innumerable duels have resulted from quarrels over the gaming
table, although nothing could be more Draconic than the law
especially directed against such duels.  By the Act of Queen Anne
against gaming, all persons sending a challenge on account of
gaming disputes were liable to forfeit all their goods and to be
committed to prison for two years.  No case of the kind, however,
was ever prosecuted on that clause of the Act, which was, in
other respects, very nearly inoperative.

GAMBLING DUELS IN THE YEAR 1818.

It so happened that almost every month of the year 1818 was
'distinguished' by a duel or two, resulting from quarrels at
gambling or in gambling houses.

January.  'A meeting took place yesterday at an early hour,
between Captain B--r--y and Lieutenant T--n--n, in consequence of
a dispute at play.  Wimbledon Common was the ground, and the
parties fired twice, when the lieutenant was slightly wounded in
the pistol hand, the ball grazing the right side; and here the
affair ended.'

January.  'A meeting took place on the 9th instant, at Calais,
between Lieut. Finch, 20th regiment of Dragoons, and Lieut.
Boileau, on half-pay of the 41st regiment.  Lieut. Finch was
bound over, some days back, to keep the peace in England; in
consequence of which he proceeded to Calais, accompanied by his
friend, Captain Butler, where they were followed by Lieut.
Boileau and his friend Lieut. Hartley.  It was settled by Captain
Butler, previous to Lieut. Finch taking his ground, that HE WAS
BOUND IN HONOUR to receive LIEUT. BOILEAU'S FIRE as he had given
so serious a provocation as a blow.  This arrangement was,
however, defeated, by Lieut. Finch's pistol "accidentally" going
off, apparently in the direction of his opponent, which would
probably have led to fatal consequences had it not been for the
IMPLICIT RELIANCE placed by Lieut. Boileau's friend on the STRICT
HONOUR of Capt. Butler, whose anxiety, steadiness, and
gentlemanly conduct on this and every other occasion, were too
well known to leave a doubt on the minds of the opposite party,
that Lieut. Finch's pistol going off was ENTIRELY ACCIDENTAL.  A
reconciliation, therefore, immediately took place.'

February 17.  'Information was received at the public office,
Marlborough Street, on Saturday last, that a duel was about to
take place yesterday, in the fields contiguous to Chalk Farm,
between Colonel Tucker and Lieut. Nixon, the latter having
challenged the former in public company, for which and previous
abuse the colonel inflicted severe chastisement with a thick
stick.  Subsequent information was received that the colonel's
friends deemed it unnecessary for him to meet the challenger, but
that his remedy was to repeat the former chastisement when
insulted.  It was further stated that a few half-pay officers, of
inferior rank, had leagued together for the purpose of procuring
others to give a challenge, and which it was the determination to
put down by adopting the colonel's plan.'

February.  'A captain in the army shook hands with a gallant
lieut.-colonel (who had distinguished himself in the Peninsula)
at one of the West End gaming houses, and Lieut. N--, who was
present, upbraided the colonel with the epithet of "poltroon." 
On a fit opportunity the colonel inflicted summary justice upon
the lieutenant with a cane or horse-whip.  This produced a
challenge; but the colonel was advised that he would degrade
himself by combat with the challenger, and he therefore declined
it, but promised similar chastisement to that inflicted.  It was
then stated that the colonel was bound to fight any other person
who would stand forth as the champion of Lieut. N--, to which the
colonel consented,--when a Lieut. J--n--e appeared as the
champion, and the meeting was appointed for Tuesday morning at
Turnham Green.  The information of the police was renewed, and
Thomas Foy apprehended the parties at an inn near the spot, early
in the morning.  They were consequently bound over to keep the
peace.  It appears, however, that the lieutenant in this instance
was not the champion of the former, but had been challenged by
the colonel.'

April.  'A meeting was to have taken place yesterday in
consequence of a dispute at play, between Captain R--n--s and Mr
B--e--r, a gentleman of fortune; but it was prevented by the
interference of the police, and the parties escaped.  It took
place, however, on the following day, on Wimbledon Common, and
after exchanging a single shot the matter was adjusted.'

May.  'In consequence of a dispute at a gaming table, on Monday
night, in the vicinity of Piccadilly, Mr M--, who was an officer
in the British service at Brussels, and Mr B--n, a medical man,
met, at three in the morning, on Tuesday, in the King's Road. 
They fought at twelve paces.  Mr B--n was wounded on the back
part of the hand, and the affair was adjusted.'

July.  'A duel was fought yesterday morning, on Wimbledon Common,
between a Mr Arrowsmith and Lieut. Flynn, which ended in the
former being wounded in the thigh.  The dispute which occasioned
the meeting originated in a gaming transaction.'

September.  'A duel was fought this morning on Hounslow Heath,
between Messrs Hillson and Marsden.  The dispute arose in one of
the stands at Egham races.  The latter was seriously wounded in
the left side, and conveyed away in a gig.'

November.  'A duel originating, over a dispute at play was fixed
to take place on Wimbledon Common, at daybreak, yesterday
morning, but information having been received that police
officers were waiting, the parties withdrew.'

GAMING DUEL AT PARIS, 1827.

A medical student, named Goulard, quarrelled at billiards with a
fellow-student named Caire.  Their mutual friends, having in vain
tried every means of persuasion to prevent the consequences of
the dispute, accompanied the young men without the walls of
Paris.  Goulard seemed disposed to submit to an arrangement, but
Cairo obstinately refused.  The seconds measured the ground, and
the first shot having been won by Goulard, he fired, and Caire
fell dead.  Goulard did not appear during the prosecution that
followed; he continued absent on the day fixed for judgment, and
the court, conformably to the code of criminal proceedings,
pronounced on the charge without the intervention of a jury.  It
acquitted Goulard of premeditation, but condemned him for
contumacy, to perpetual hard labour, and to be branded; and this
in spite of the fact that the advocate-general had demanded
Goulard's acquittal of the charge.

THE END OF A GAMESTER.

In 1788, a Scotch gentleman, named William Brodie, was tried and
convicted at Edinburgh, for stealing bank-notes and money, with
violence.  This man, at the death of his father, twelve years
before, inherited a considerable estate in houses, in the city of
Edinburgh, together with L10,000 in money; but, by an unhappy
connection and a too great propensity to gaming, he was reduced
to the desperation which brought him at last to the scaffold.  It
is stated that his demeanour on receiving the dreadful sentence
was equally cool and determined; moreover, that he was dressed in
a blue coat, fancy vest, satin breeches, and white silk
stockings; a cocked hat; his hair full dressed and powdered; and,
lastly, that he was carried back to prison in a chair.  Such was
the respectful treatment of 'gentlemen' prisoners in Scotland
towards the end of the last century.

DUEL WITH A SHARPER.

A Monsieur de Boisseuil, one of the Kings equerries, being at a
card-party, detected one of the players cheating, and exposed his
conduct.

The insulted 'gentleman' demanded satisfaction, when Boisseuil
replied that he did not fight with a person who was a rogue.

'That MAY be,' said the other, 'but I do not like to be CALLED
one.'

They met on the ground, and Boisseuil received two desperate
wounds from the sharper.

This man's plea against Boisseuil is a remarkable trait.  Madame
de Stael has alluded to it in her best style.  'In France,' she
says, 'we constantly see persons of distinguished rank, who, when
accused of an improper action, will say--"It may have been wrong,
but no one will dare assert it to my face!"  Such an expression
is an evident proof of confirmed depravity; for, what would be
the condition of society if it was only requisite to kill one
another, to commit with impunity every evil action,--to break
one's word and assert falsehood--provided no one dared tell you
that you lied?'

In countries where public opinion is more severe on the want of
probity and fair-dealing, should a man transgress the laws of
these principles of human conduct, ten duels a day would not
enable him to recover the esteem he has forfeited.

MAJOR ONEBY AND MR GOWER.

This duel originated as follows:--It appears that a Major Oneby,
being in company with a Mr Gower and three other persons, at a
tavern, in a friendly manner, after some time began playing at
Hazard; when one of the company, named Rich, asked if any one
would set him three half-crowns; whereupon Mr Gower, in a jocular
manner, laid down three half-pence, telling Rich he had set him
three pieces, and Major Oneby at the same time set Rich three
half-crowns, and lost them to him.

Immediately after this, Major Oneby, in a angry manner, turned
about to Mr Gower and said--'It was an impertinent thing to set
down half-pence,' and called him 'an impertinent puppy' for so
doing.  To this Mr Gower answered--'Whoever calls me so is a
rascal.  'Thereupon Major Oneby took up a bottle, and with great
force threw it at Mr Gower's head, but did not hit him, the
bottle only brushing some of the powder out of his hair.  Mr
Gower, in return, immediately tossed a candlestick or a bottle at
Major Oneby, which missed him; upon which they both rose to fetch
their swords, which were then hung in the room, and Mr Gower drew
his sword, but the Major was prevented from drawing his by the
company.  Thereupon Mr Gower threw away his sword, and the
company interposing, they sat down again for the space of an
hour.

At the expiration of that time, Mr Gower said to Major Oneby--'We
have had hot words, and you were the aggressor, but I think we
may pass it over'--at the same time offering him his hand; but
the Major replied--'No, d--n you, I WILL HAVE YOUR BLOOD.'

After this, the reckoning being paid, all the company, excepting
Major Oneby, went out to go home, and he called to Mr Gower,
saying--'Young man, come back, I have something to say to you.' 
Whereupon Mr Gower returned to the room, and immediately the door
was closed, and the rest of the company excluded--when a clashing
of swords was heard, and Major Oneby gave Mr Gower a mortal
wound.  It was found, on the breaking up of the company, that
Major Oneby had his great coat over his shoulders, and that he
had received three slight wounds in the fight.  Mr Gower, being
asked on his death-bed whether he had received his wounds in a
manner among swordsmen called fair, answered--'I think I did.' 
Major Oneby was tried for the offence, and found guilty of
murder, 'having acted upon malice and deliberation, and not from
sudden passion.'

THE NEPHEW OF A BRITISH PEER.

In 1813, the nephew of a British peer was executed at Lisbon.  He
had involved himself by gambling, and being detected in robbing
the house of an English friend, by a Portuguese servant, he shot
the latter dead to prevent discovery.  This desperate act,
however, did not enable him to escape the hands of justice. 
After execution, his head was severed from his body and fixed on
a pole opposite the house in which the murder and robbery were
committed.

The following facts will show the intimate connection between
gambling and Robbery or Forgery.

EDWARD WORTLEY MONTAGU AND THE JEW ABRAHAM PAYBA.

Edward Wortley Montagu was the only son of the celebrated Lady
Mary Wortley Montagu, whose eccentricities he inherited without
her genius.  Montagu, together with Lords Taffe and Southwell,
was accused of having invited one Abraham Payba, alias James
Roberts, a Jew, to dine with them at Paris, in the year 1751; and
of having plied him with wine till he became intoxicated, and so
lost at play the sum of 800 louis d'ors.  It was affirmed that
they subsequently called at his house, and that on his exhibiting
an evident disinclination to satisfy their demands, they
threatened to cut him across the face with their swords unless he
instantly paid them.  Terrified by their violence, and, at the
same time, unwilling to part with his gold, the Jew had cunning
enough to give them drafts on a Paris banker, by whom, as he had
no dealings with him, he well knew that his bills would be
dishonoured; and, to escape the vengeance of those whom he had
outwitted, quitted Paris.  On ascertaining how completely they
had been duped, Montagu, with his associates Lords Taffe and
Southwell, repaired to the house of the Jew, and after ransacking
his drawers and strong boxes, are said to have possessed
themselves of a very considerable sum of money, in addition to
diamonds, jewels, and other valuable articles.  The Jew had it
now in his power to turn on his persecutors, and accordingly he
appealed to the legislature for redress.  Lord Southwell
contrived to effect his escape, but Lord Taffe and Montagu were
arrested, and were kept in separate dungeons in the Grand
Chatelet, for nearly three months.  The case was subsequently
tried in a court of law, and decided in favour of the
accused,--the Jew being adjudged to make reparation and defray
the costs!  Against the injustice of this sentence he appealed to
the high court of La Tournelle at Paris, which reversed it.  Lord
Taffe and Montagu afterwards appealed, in their turn, but of the
definitive result there is no record.

DR WILLIAM DODD.

Le Sage, in his 'Gil Blas,' says that 'the devil has a particular
spite against private tutors;' and he might have added, against
popular preachers.  By popular preachers I do not mean such grand
old things as Bossuet, Massillon, and Bourdaloue.  All such men
were proof against the fiery darts of the infernal tempter.  From
their earliest days they had been trained to live up to the Non
nobis Domine, 'Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name, give
glory.'  All of them had only at heart the glory of their church-
cause; though, of course, the Jesuit Bourdaloue worked also for
his great Order, then culminating in glory.

The last-named, too, was another La Fontaine in simplicity,
preparing for his grandest predications by sorrily rasping on an
execrable fiddle.  So, if the devil had lifted him up to a high
mountain, showing him all he would give him, he would have simply
invited him to his lonely cell, to have a jig to the tune of his
catguts.

Your popular preachers in England have been, and are, a different
sort of spiritual workers.  They have been, and are,
individualities, perpetually reminded of the fact, withal; and
fiercely tempted accordingly.  The world, the flesh, and the
devil, incessantly knock at their door.  If they fall into the
snare it is but natural, and much to be lamented.

Dr Dodd had many amiable qualities; but his reputation as a
scholar, and his notoriety as a preacher, appear to have entirely
turned his head.

He had presented to him a good living in Bedfordshire; but the
income thereof was of no avail in supplying his wants: he was
vain, pompous, in debt, a gambler.  Temptation came upon him.  To
relieve himself he tried by indirect means to obtain the rectory
of St George's, Hanover Square, by sending an anonymous letter to
Lady Apsley, offering the sum of L3000 if by her means he could
be presented to the living; the letter was immediately sent to
the chancellor, and, after being traced to the sender, laid
before the king.  His name was ordered to be struck out of the
list of chaplains; the press abounded with satire and invective;
Dodd was abused and ridiculed, and even Foote, in one of his
performances at the Haymarket, made him a subject of
entertainment.  Dodd then decamped, and went to his former pupil,
Lord Chesterfield, in Switzerland, who gave him another living;
but his extravagance being undiminished, he was driven to schemes
which covered him with infamy.  After the most extravagant and
unseemly conduct in France, he returned to England, and forged a
bond as from his pupil, Lord Chesterfield, for the sum of L4200,
and, upon the credit of it, obtained a large sum of money; but
detection instantly following, he was committed to prison, tried
and convicted at the Old Bailey, Feb.  24, and executed at
Tyburn, June 27 (after a delay of four months), exhibiting every
appearance of penitence.  The great delay between the sentence
and execution was owing to a doubt for some time respecting the
admissibility of an evidence which had been made use of to
convict him.

Lord Chesterfield has been accused of a cold and relentless
disposition in having deserted his old tutor in his extremity. 
But Mr Jesse says that he heard it related by a person who lived
at the period, that at a preliminary examination of the
unfortunate divine, Lord Chesterfield, on some pretence, placed
the forged document in Dodd's hands, with the kind intention that
he should take the opportunity of destroying it, but the latter
wanted either the courage or the presence of mind enough to avail
himself of the occasion.  This, however, is scarcely an excuse,
for, certainly, it was not for Dr Dodd to destroy the fatal
document.  If Lord Chesterfield had wished to suppress that vital
evidence he could have done so.

Dr Johnson exerted himself to the utmost to try and save poor
Dodd; but George III. was inexorable.  Respecting this benevolent
attempt of the Doctor, Chalmers writes as follows:--

Dr Johnson appears indeed in this instance to have been more
swayed by popular judgment than he would perhaps have been
willing to allow.  The cry was--"the honour of the clergy;" but
if the honour of the clergy was tarnished, it was by Dodd's
crime, and not his punishment; for his life had been so long a
disgrace to his cloth that he had deprived himself of the
sympathy which attaches to the first deviation from rectitude,
and few criminals could have had less claim to such a display of
popular feeling.'

All applications for the Royal mercy having failed, Dr Dodd
prepared himself for death, and with a warmth of gratitude wrote
to Dr Johnson as follows:--

                                'June 25, Midnight.

'Accept, thou GREAT and GOOD heart, my earnest and fervent thanks
and prayers for all thy benevolent and kind efforts in my
behalf.--Oh!  Dr Johnson! as I sought your knowledge at an early
hour in my life, would to Heaven I had cultivated the love and
acquaintance of so excellent a man!--I pray God most sincerely to
bless you with the highest transports--the infelt satisfaction of
HUMANE and benevolent exertions!--And admitted, as I trust I
shall be, to the realms of bliss before you, I shall hail YOUR
arrival there with transport, and rejoice to acknowledge that you
were my comforter, my advocate, and my FRIEND.  God be EVER with
YOU!'

Dr Johnson's reply.

'To the Reverend Dr Dodd.

'Dear Sir,--That which is appointed to all men is now coming upon
you.  Outward circumstances, the eyes and thoughts of men, are
below the notice of an immortal being about to stand the trial
for eternity, before the Supreme Judge of heaven and earth.  Be
comforted: your crime, morally or religiously considered, has no
very deep dye of turpitude.  It corrupted no man's principles. 
It attacked no man's life.  It involved only a temporary and
reparable injury.  Of this, and of all other sins, you are
earnestly to repent; and may God, who knoweth our frailty, and
desireth not our death, accept your repentance, for the sake of
His Son Jesus Christ our Lord!

'In requital of those well-intended offices which you are pleased
so emphatically to acknowledge, let me beg that you make in your
devotions one petition for my eternal welfare.             
'I am, dear Sir,                     
          'Your affectionate servant,                            

                              'SAM. JOHNSON.

Next day, 27th June, Dr Dodd was executed.

CAPTAIN DAVIS.

Captain Davis was some time in the Life Guards, and a lieutenant
in the Yeomen of the Household--a situation which placed him
often about the persons of the Royal family.  He was seldom known
to play for less stakes than L50, often won or lost large sums,
and was represented as a gentleman of extensive and independent
fortune, although some of his enemies declared otherwise, and
repeated anecdotes to confirm the assertion.  He was at length
committed for forgeries to an immense amount.  To the fidelity of
a servant he owed his escape from Giltspur Street prison--another
fatal example of the sure result of gambling.  Heir to a
title--moving in the first society--having held a commission in
the most distinguished of the Royal regiments--he was reduced to
the alternative of an ignominious flight with outlawry, or
risking the forfeiture of his wretched life, to the outraged laws
of his country.  When in Paris, he at one time had won L30,000,
and on his way home he dropped into another gambling house, where
he lost it all but L3000.  He set out in life with L20,000 in
money!

DESPERATE CAREER OF HENRY WESTON.

Henry Weston was nephew to the distinguished Admiral Sir Hugh
Palliser.

Having unlimited control of the large property of his employer, a
Mr Cowan, during the absence of the latter from town, he was
tempted first to gamble in the funds, wherein being unfortunate,
he next went to a gambling house in Pall Mall, and lost a very
large sum; and at length, gamed away nearly all his master's
property.

In this tremendous result--lost to all intents and purposes--he
made a supreme effort to 'patch up' the ruin he had made.  He
forged the name of General Tonyn; and so dexterously, that he
obtained from the Bank of England the sum of L10,000.

This huge robbery from Peter was not to pay Paul.  Not a bit of
it.  It was to try the fickle goddess of gaming once more--a
Napoleonic stroke for an Austerlitz of fortune.

He lost this L10,000 in two nights.

Did he despair at this hideous catastrophe?  Did he tear his
hair--rush out of the room--blow his brains out or drown himself?

Not a bit of it.  He 'set his wits to work' once more.  He
procured a woman to personate General Tonyn's sister--forged
again--and again obtained from the Bank of England another large
supply of ready cash--with which, however, he 'went off' this
time.

He was caught; and then only he thought of self-murder, and cut
his throat--but not effectually.  He recovered, was tried at the
Old Bailey, and hanged on the 6th of July, 1796.

No doubt the reader imagines that the man of such a career was an
OLD stager--some long-visaged, parchment-faced fellow the OTHER
side of forty at least.  Well, this hero of the gaming table,
Henry Weston, was aged only TWENTY-THREE years!  What terrible
times those must have been to produce such a prodigy!

To the judge who tried him Henry Weston sent a list of a number
of PROFESSIONAL GAMBLERS, among them was a person of high rank. 
Weston, at different times, lost above L46,000 at play; and at a
house in Pall Mall, where he lost a considerable part of it,
three young officers also lost no less than L35,000.

ARTHUR THISTLEWOOD.

It seems that the wretched traitor Arthur Thistlewood, who paid
the forfeit of his life for his crimes, had dissipated by gaming
the property he had acquired by a matrimonial connection--
L12,000.  An unfortunate transaction at cards, during the Lincoln
races, involved him in difficulties, which he found it impossible
to meet; and he fled to avoid the importunities of his more
fortunate associates.  He was afterwards known only as the
factious demagogue and the professed gambler!

FOUNTLEROY, THE FORGER.

Henry Fountleroy was a gentleman of rank, a partner in the
banking house of Marsh, Sibbold, and Co., of Berners Street.  He
was convicted of having forged a deed for the transfer of L5450
long annuities, in fraud of a certain Frances Young.  Like
Thurtell, Fountleroy defended himself, and battled with the
prejudicial reports circulated against him--among the rest his
addiction to gambling.  'I am accused,' he said, 'of being an
habitual gambler, an accusation which, if true, might easily
account for the diffusion of the property.  I am, indeed, a
member of two clubs, the Albion and the Stratford, but never in
my life did I play in either at cards, or dice, or any game of
chance; this is well known to the gentlemen of these clubs; and
my private friends, with whom I more intimately associated, can
equally assert my freedom from all habit or disposition to
play.'[21]

[21] See the case in 'Celebrated Trials,' vol. vi

I close this record of crime and misery by a few narratives of a
more miscellaneous character.

GAMBLING FOR LIFE.

Marshal Grammont used to tell a story of three soldiers, who,
having committed offences punishable by death, it was ordered
that one of them should be hanged as an example, and the three
were directed to decide which of them should suffer by throwing
dice.  The first threw fourteen, the second seventeen, and the
last, taking up the dice as coolly as though he were engaged in a
trivial game, threw eighteen!  Thereupon he exclaimed, with an
expression of vexation, 'Ah, now! if I had been playing for money
I should not have been so lucky!'

This may appear 'taking it very cool;' but I think the following
cases of Englishmen' rather stronger.'

ONE OF MANY INSTANCES.

In the Times of February 11th, 1819, mention is made of a gang of
nearly thirty persons, male and female, and all presenting the
most shocking appearance of both want and depravity, who were
brought to the Marlborough Street Office.  Among these wretched
beings was a woman named Hewitt, said to be the wife of one
Captain Hewitt, a leader of the ton, who, after ruining himself
and family at the gambling table, ran away from them, and was not
since heard of.  His wife being left to herself, and having
probably been tainted by his evil example, by an easy gradation
became first embarrassed, then a prostitute, then a thief, and on
the occasion above mentioned exhibited one of the most
distressing spectacles of vice and misery that could be
conceived.

TRURTELL THE MURDERER.

This man, it is well known, was executed for the murder of Weare.

Thurtell was evidently no common man.  His spoken defence, as
reported, is one of the finest specimens of impassioned
eloquence--perfectly Demosthenic.  His indignation at the reports
circulated in prejudice of his case was overwhelming.  Nothing
can be finer than the turn of the following sentence:--'I have
been represented by the Press--WHICH CARRIES ITS BENEFITS OR
CURSES ON RAPID WINGS from one extremity of the kingdom to the
other--as a man more depraved, more gratuitously and habitually
profligate and cruel, than has ever appeared in modern times.'

Touching his gambling pursuits, he said:--'I have been
represented to you as a man who was given to gambling, and the
constant companion of gamblers.  To this accusation in some part
my heart, with feeling penitence, pleads guilty.  I have gambled;
I have been a gambler, but not for the last three years.  During
that time I have not attended or betted upon a horse-race, or a
fight, or any public exhibition of that nature.  If I have erred
in these things, half of the nobility of the land have been my
examples; some of the most enlightened statesmen of the country
have been my companions in them.  I have, indeed, been a gambler;
I have been an unfortunate one.  But whose fortune have I
ruined?--whom undone?  My own family have I ruined; I have undone
myself!'[22]

[22] See the entire speech in 'Celebrated Trials,' vol. vi. 547.


A MOST WONDERFUL END OF A GAMBLER.

In the Annual Register for the year 1766 occurs the following
'circumstantial and authentic account of the memorable case of
Richard Parsons,' transmitted by the high sheriff of
Gloucestershire to his friend in London.

On the 20th of February, 1766, Richard Parsons and three more met
at a private house in Chalfold, in order to play at cards, about
six o'clock in the evening.  They played at Loo till about eleven
or twelve that night, when they changed their game for Whist. 
After a few deals a dispute arose about the state of the game. 
Parsons asserted with oaths that they were six, which the others
denied; upon which he wished 'that he might never enter the
kingdom of heaven, and that his flesh might rot upon his bones,
if there were not six in the game.'  These wishes were several
times repeated both then and afterwards.  Upon this the candle
was put out by a party present, who said he was shocked with the
oaths and expressions he heard, and that he put out the candle
with a design to put an end to the game.  Presently upon this
they adjourned to another house, and there began a fresh game,
when Parsons and his partner had great success.  They then played
at Loo again till four in the morning.  During the second playing
Parsons complained to one Rolles, his partner, of a bad pain in
his leg, which from that time increased.  There was an appearance
of a swelling, and afterwards the colour changing to that of a
mortified state.  On the following Sunday he took advice of a
surgeon, who attended him until his death.  Notwithstanding all
the applications that were made the mortification increased, and
showed itself in different parts of the body.  He was visited by
a clergyman, who administered the sacrament to him, without any
knowledge of what had happened before--the man appearing to be
extremely ignorant of religion, having been accustomed to swear,
to drink, to game, and to profane the Sabbath.  After receiving
the sacrament he said--'Now, I must never sin again.'  He hoped
God would forgive him, having been wicked not above six years,
and that whatever should happen he would not play at cards again.

After this he was in great agony--chiefly delirious; spoke of his
companions by name, and seemed as if his imagination was engaged
at cards.  He started, had distracted looks and gestures, and in
a dreadful fit of shaking and trembling died on the 4th of March,
just about a fortnight after the utterance of his terrible
imprecation.

The worthy sheriff of Gloucestershire goes on to say that the
man's eyes were open when he died, and could not be closed by the
common method, so that they remained open when he was put into
the coffin.  From this circumstance arose a report that he WISHED
HIS EYES MIGHT NEVER CLOSE; 'but,' says the sheriff, 'this is a
mistake; for, from the most creditable witnesses, I am fully
convinced no such wish was uttered; and the fact is, that he did
close his eyes after he was taken with the mortification, and
either dozed or slept several times.

'When the body came to be laid out, it appeared all over
discoloured or spotted; and it might, in the most literal sense,
be said, that his flesh rotted on his bones before he died.'

At the request of the sheriff, the surgeon (a Mr Pegler) who
attended the unfortunate man, sent in the following report:--
'Sir,--You desire me to acquaint you, in writing, with what I
know relating to the melancholy case of the late Richard Parsons;
a request I readily comply with, hoping that his sad catastrophe
will serve to admonish all those who profane the sacred name of
God.

'February 27th last I visited Richard Parsons, who, I found, had
an inflamed leg, stretching from the foot almost to the knee,
tending to a gangrene.  The tenseness and redness of the skin was
almost gone off, and became of a duskish and livid colour, and
felt very lax and flabby.  Symptoms being so dangerous, some
incisions were made down to the quick, some spirituous
fomentations made use of, and the whole limb dressed up with such
applications as are most approved in such desperate
circumstances, joined with proper internal medicines.  The next
day he seemed much the same; but on March the 1st he was worse,
the incisions discharged a sharp fetid odor (which is generally
of the worst consequence).  On the next day, which was Sunday,
the symptoms seemed to be a little more favourable; but, to my
great surprise, the very next day I found his leg not only
mortified up to the knee, but the same began anew in four
different parts, viz., under each eye, on the top of his
shoulder, and on one hand; and in about twelve hours after he
died.  I shall not presume to say there was anything supernatural
in the case; but, however, it must be confessed, that such cases
are rather uncommon in subjects so young, and of so good a habit
as he had always been previous to his illness.'

On one occasion Justice Maule was about to pass sentence on a
prisoner, who upon being asked to say why judgment should not be
pronounced, 'wished that God might strike him dead if he was not
innocent of the crime.'  After a pause, the judge said:--'As the
Almighty has not thought proper to comply with your request, the
sentence of the court is,' &c.

A SAD REMINDER.

Every Englishman recollects the fate of that unhappy heiress, the
richest of all Europe, married to a man of rank and family, who
was plundered in the course of a few years of the whole of his
wealth, in one of those club houses, and was obliged to surrender
himself to a common prison, and ultimately fly from his country,
leaving his wife with her relations in the greatest despair and
despondency.'[23]

[23] Rouge et Noir: the Academicians of 1823.


GEORGE IV.

There are few departments of human distinction in which Great
Britain cannot boast a 'celebrity'--genteel or ungenteel.  In the
matter of gambling we have been unapproachable--not only in the
'thorough' determination with which we have exhausted the
pursuit--but in the vast, the fabulous millions which make up the
sum total that Englishmen have 'turned over' at the gaming table.

I think that many thousands of millions would be 'within the
mark' as the contribution of England to the insatiate god of
gambling.

I have presented to the reader the record of gambling all the
world over--the gambling of savages--the gambling of the ancient
Persians, Greeks, and Romans--the gambling of the gorgeous
monarchs of France and their impassioned subjects; but I have now
to introduce upon the horrible stage a Prince Royal, who
surpassed all his predecessors in the gaming art, having right
royally lost at play not much less than a million sterling, or,
as stated, L800,000--before he was twenty-one years of age!

If the following be facts, vouched for by a writer of
authority,[24] the results were most atrocious.

[24] James Grant (Editor of the Morning Advertiser), Sketches in
London.


'Every one is aware that George IV., when Prince of Wales, was,
as the common phrase is, over-head-and-ears in debt; and that it
was because he would thereby be enabled to meet the claims of his
creditors, that he consented to marry the Princess Caroline of
Brunswick.  But although this is known to every one,
comparatively few people are acquainted with the circumstances
under which his debts were contracted.  Those debts, then, were
the result of losses at the gaming table.  He was an inveterate
gambler--a habit which he most probably contracted through his
intimacy with Fox.  It is a well-ascertained fact that in two
short years, after he attained his majority, he lost L800,000 at
play.

'It was with the view and in the hope that marriage would cure
his propensity for the gaming table, that his father was so
anxious to see him united to Caroline; and it was solely on
account of his marriage with that princess constituting the only
condition of his debts being paid by the country, that he agreed
to lead her to the hymeneal altar.

'The unfortunate results of this union are but too well known,
not only as regarded the parties themselves, but as regarded
society generally.  To the gambling habits, then, of the Prince
of Wales are to be ascribed all the unhappiness which he entailed
on the unfortunate Caroline, and the vast amount of injury which
the separation from her, and the subsequent trial, produced on
the morals of the nation generally.'


CHAPTER V.

ODDITIES AND WITTICISMS OF GAMBLERS.

OSTENTATIOUS GAMESTERS.

Certain grandees and wealthy persons, more through vanity or
weakness than generosity, have sacrificed their avidity to
ostentation--some by renouncing their winnings, others by
purposely losing.  The greater number of such eccentrics,
however, seem to have allowed themselves to be pillaged merely
because they had not the generosity or the courage to give away
what was wanted.

The Cardinal d'Este, playing one day with the Cardinal de
Medicis, his guest, thought that his magnificence required him to
allow the latter to win a stake of 10,000 crowns--'not wishing,'
he said, 'to make him pay his reckoning or allow him to depart
unsatisfied.'  Brantome calls this 'greatness;' the following is
an instance of what he calls 'kindness.'

'Guilty or innocent,' he says, 'everybody was well received at
the house of this cardinal, who kept an open table at Rome for
the French chevaliers.  These gentlemen having appropriated a
portion of his plate, it was proposed to search them:  'No, no!'
said the cardinal, 'they are poor companions who have only their
sword, cloak, and crucifixes; they are brave fellows; the plate
will be a great benefit to them, and the loss of it will not make
me poorer.'

Vigneul de Marville tells us of certain extravagant abbes, named
Ruccellai and Frangipani, who carried their ostentation to such a
pitch as to set gold in dishes on their tables when entertaining
their gaming companions!  Were any of these base enough to put
their hands in and help themselves?  This is not stated by the
historian.  These two Italian abbes were ne plus ultras in luxury
and effeminacy.  In the reign of Henry IV., they laid before
their guests vermilion dishes filled with gloves, fans, coins to
play with after the repast, essences and perfumes.[25]  I wonder
if the delightful scent called Frangipani, vouchsafed to us by
Rimmel and Piesse and Lubin, was named after this exquisite
ecclesiastic of old?

[25] Melanges d' Hist. et de Lit.


One day when Henry IV. was dining at the Duc de Sully's, the
latter, as soon as the cloth was raised, brought in cards and
dice, and placed upon the table two purses of 4000 pistoles each,
one for the King, the other to lend to the lords of his suite. 
Thereupon the king exclaimed:--'Great master, come and let me
embrace you, for I love you as you deserve: I feel so comfortable
here that I shall sup and stay the night.'  Evidently Sully was
more a courtier than usual on this occasion--as no doubt the
whole affair was by the king's order, with which he complied
reluctantly; but he made the king play with his own money only. 
The Duc de Lerme, when entertaining Monsieur the brother of Louis
XIII. at his quarters near Maestricht, had the boldness to bring
in, at the end of the repast, two bags of 1000 pistoles each,
declaring that he gave them up to the players without any
condition except to return them when they pleased.[26]

[26] Mem. de Jeu M. le Duc d'Orleans.


This Duc de Lerme was at least a great lord, and the army which
he commanded may have warranted his extravagance; but what are we
to think when we find the base and mean-spirited Fouquet giving
himself the same princely airs?  During certain festivities
prepared for Louis XIV., Fouquet placed in the room of every
courtier of the king's suite, a purse of gold for gambling, in
case any of them should be short of money.  Well might Duclos
remark that 'Nobody was shocked at this MAGNIFICENT SCANDAL![27]

[27] Consideration sur les Moeeurs,


They tell of a certain lordly gamester who looked upon any money
that fell from his hands as lost, and would never stoop to pick
it up!  This reminds us of the freedman Pallas mentioned by
Tacitus, who wrote down what he had to say to his slaves, lest he
should degrade his voice to their level--ne vocem
consociaret![28] 

[28] Ann. l. xiii


AN INSINUATING, ELEGANT GAMESTER.

Osterman, Grand Chancellor of Russia, during the reign of the
Empress Anne, obtained information that the court of Versailles
had formed a scheme to send an insinuating, elegant gamester, to
attack the Duke of Biran on his weak side--a rage for play--and
thereby probably gain some political advantage over him.

The chancellor called on the duke to make the necessary
communication, but the minister did not choose to be at home. 
The chancellor, then pretending to be suffering from a severe fit
of gout, wrote to his sovereign, stating that he had important
matter to reveal, but was unable to move, and the Duke of Biran
was consequently ordered to wait on him by the empress. 
Osterman, affecting great pain, articulated with apparent
difficulty these words--'The French are sending a gamester!' 
Thereupon the duke withdrew in a pet, and represented to the
empress that the chancellor was delirious from the gout, and had
really nothing to communicate.

The subject had long been forgotten by the duke, when an elegant,
easy, dissipated marquis actually arrived.  He had extensive
credit on a house of the English Factory, and presently
insinuated himself into the good graces of the duke, whom he soon
eased of all his superfluous cash.

The chancellor became alarmed for the consequences, and resolved
to try and play off the French for their clever finesse.  He
looked about for a match for the redoubtable French gamester, and
soon got information of a party who might serve his turn.  This
was a midshipman at Moscow, named Cruckoff, who, he was assured,
was without an equal in the MANAGEMENT of cards, and the
knowledge of Quizze--then the fashionable court game--and that at
which the Duke of Biran had lost his money.  The chancellor
immediately despatched a courier to Moscow to fetch the Russian
gamester.

The midshipman was forthwith made an ensign of the Guards, in
order to entitle him to play at court.  He set to work at once in
accordance with his instructions, but after his own plan in the
execution.  He began with losing freely; and was, of course, soon
noticed by the marquis, and marked as a pigeon worth plucking. 
The young Russian, however, forced him into high play, and he
lost the greater part of his former gain.  The marquis got
nettled, lost his self-command, and proposed a monstrous stake,
to the extent of his credit and gains, of which he thought he
might make himself sure by some master-stroke of art. 
Accordingly, by means of a sleight, he managed to hold fifteen in
hand, but his wily antagonist was equal to the occasion: by the
aid of some sweetmeats from an adjoining table he SWALLOWED a
card, and, being first in hand, the chance was determined in his
favour, and he ruined the marquis.

Once more the chancellor waited on the duke, and plainly told him
that he had been anxious to guard him against the French
gamester, purposely sent to fleece him, if he had had the
patience to hear him.  The duke then became outrageous, and
wished to arrest the Frenchman as a cheat; but Osterman coolly
said he had punished him in kind; and, producing a large bag,
returned the duke's money, bidding him in future not to be so
impatient when information was to be communicated by gouty
persons.

The clever ensign was allowed to retain the rest of the spoil,
with an injunction, however, never to touch a card again, unless
he wished to end his days among the exiles of Siberia.

A PENITENT SONNET,

written by the Lord Fitz-Gerald[29] (a great gamester) a little
before his death, which was in the year 1580.

[29] This Lord Fitzgerald was eldest son to the Earl of Kildare,
and died at the age of twenty-one.

'By loss in play, men oft forget     
The duty they do owe   
To Him that did bestow the same,     
And thousand millions moe.

'I loath to hear them swear and stare,     
When they the Main have lost,   
Forgetting all the Byes that wear     
With God and Holy Ghost.

'By wounds and nails they think to win,     
But truly 'tis not so;   
For all their frets and fumes in sin     
They moneyless must go.

'There is no wight that used it more     
Than he that wrote this verse,   
Who cries Peccavi now, therefore;    
His oaths his heart do pierce.

'Therefore example take by me,     
That curse the luckless time   
That ever dice mine eyes did see,     
Which bred in me this crime.

'Pardon me for that is past,     
I will offend no more,   
In this most vile and sinful cast,     
Which I will still abhor.'[30]

[30] Harl. Miscel.


LOVE AND GAMBLING.

Horace Walpole, writing to Mann, says:-- 'The event that has made
most noise since my last is the extempore wedding of the youngest
of the two Gunnings, two ladies of surpassing loveliness, named
respectively Mary and Elizabeth, the daughters of John Gunning,
Esq., of Castle Coote, in Ireland, whom Mrs Montague calls "those
goddesses the Gunnings."  Lord Coventry, a grave young lord, of
the remains of the patriot breed, has long dangled after the
eldest, virtuously, with regard to her honour, not very
honourably with regard to his own credit.  About six weeks ago
Duke Hamilton, the very reverse of the earl, hot, debauched,
extravagant, and equally damaged in his fortune and person, fell
in love with the youngest at the masquerade, and determined to
marry her in the spring.  About a fortnight since, at an immense
assembly at my Lord Chesterfield's, made to show the house, which
is really most magnificent, Duke Hamilton made violent love at
one end of the room, while he was playing at Faro at the other
end; that is, he saw neither the bank nor his own cards, which
were of three hundred pounds each: he soon lost a thousand.  I
own I was so little a professor in love that I thought all this
parade looked ill for the poor girl; and could not conceive, if
he was so much engaged with his mistress as to disregard such
sums, why he played at all.  However, two nights afterwards,
being left alone with her, while her mother and sister were at
Bedford House, he found himself so impatient that he sent for a
parson.  The Doctor refused to perform the ceremony without
license or ring; the duke swore he would send for the archbishop;
at last they were married with a ring of the BED-CURTAIN, at
half-an-hour after twelve at night, at May-fair Chapel.'

This incident occurred in 1752, and reminds us of the marriage-
scene described by Dryden in one of his tales, which was quoted
by Lord Lyndhurst on that memorable occasion when he opposed Lord
Campbell's Bill for the suppression of indecent publications, and
made a speech which was more creditable to his wit than his
taste, and perfectly horrifying to Lord Campbell, who inflicted a
most damaging verbal castigation on his very sprightly but
imprudent opponent.

'MANNERS MAKE THE MAN.

Mr Manners, a relation of the Duke of Rutland, many years ago,
lost a considerable sum to a well-known gamester, who set up his
carriage in consequence.  Being at a loss for a motto, Mr Manners
suggested the following:--

MANNERS MAKE(S) THE MAN.'

SHARP PRACTICE--NOT BY AN ATTORNEY.

The commanding officer of a Militia regiment having passed an
evening with several of his officers, carried one of them, who
was much intoxicated, to town with him.  How the rest of the
night was passed was not known--at least to the young man; but in
the morning the colonel slipped into his hand a memorandum of his
having lost to him at play L700--for which sum he was actually
arrested ON THE PARADE the same day, and was compelled to grant
an annuity to a nominee of the colonel for L100 per annum!

A GAMESTER TO THE BACK-BONE.

Archdeacon Bruges mentions a gentleman who was so thorough a
gamester, that he left in his will an injunction that his bones
should be made into dice, and his skin prepared so as to be a
covering for dice-boxes![31]

[31]  A similar anecdote is related of a Frenchman.


FOOTE'S WITTICISMS.

A blackleg, famous for 'cogging a die,' said that there had been
great sport at Newmarket.  'What!' said Foote, 'I suppose you
were detected, and kicked out of the Hazard room.'

F--d, the Clerk of the Arraigns, brought off Lookup when indicted
for perjury.  Foote, afterwards playing with him at Whist, said,
'F--d, you can do anything, after bringing of Lookup.  I don't
wonder you hold thirteen trumps in your hand.  The least he could
do was to teach you the "long shuffle" for your services.'

The Rev. Dr Dodd was a very unlucky gamester, and received a
guinea to forfeit twenty if he ever played again above a guinea. 
This, among gamblers, is termed being TIED UP.  When the doctor
was executed for forgery a gentleman observed to Foote--'I
suppose the doctor is launched into eternity by this time.'  'How
so?' said Foote, 'he was TIED UP long ago.'

EFFECT OF A SEVERE LOSS AT PLAY.

Lord C-- lost one night L33,000 to General Scott.  The amiable
peer, however, benefited by the severe lesson, and resolved never
again to lose more than one hundred at a sitting!  He is said to
have strictly kept his resolve.

PADDY'S DECISION.

Some gamblers duping a country fellow at the game called Put, in
a public-house near St Pancras, one of them appealed to an
Irishman who was looking on whether he had not THREE TREYS IN HIS
HAND?  'You had all that,' said Paddy; 'and what's more, I saw
you TAKE THEM ALL out of your pocket.'

GAMBLING CAUSED BY GRIEF.

The Honourable Jesse Anker, in order to dissipate the gloom
occasioned by the loss of his wife, whom he passionately loved,
had recourse to gaming, by which, at different times, he lost
considerable sums, but not so as to injure his property, which
was very large, in any material degree.  The remedy did not prove
effectual; he shot himself at his lodgings at Bath.

A GAMBLER'S EXCUSE FOR NOT BEING A SECOND IN A DUEL.

A gentleman who had been called out, applied to a friend who had
won a large sum of money to be his second.  'My dear friend,'
answered the gamester, 'I won fifteen hundred guineas last night,
and shall cut a poor figure at fighting to-day; but if you apply
to the person I won them of, he will fight like a devil, for he
has not a farthing left.'

'MORE FORTUNATE.'

Lord Mark Stair and Lord Stair were at play in a coffee-house,
when a stranger overlooked the game, and disturbed them with
questions.  Lord Mark said--'Let us throw dice to see which of us
shall pink this impudent fellow.'  Lord Stair won.  The other
exclaimed--'Ah!  Stair, Stair! you have been always more
fortunate in life than I.'

CAPTAIN ROCHE.

Captain Roche, alias Tyger, alias Savage Roche, who stuck his
gaming companion's hand to the table with a fork for concealing a
card under it, happened to be at the Bedford Billiard-table,
which was extremely crowded.  Roche was knocking the balls about
with his cue, and Major Williamson, another celebrity, with whom
he was engaged on business, desired him to leave off, as he
hindered gentlemen from playing.  'Gentlemen?' sneeringly
exclaimed Roche; 'why, major, except you and me (and two or three
more) there is not a gentleman in the room--the rest are all
blacklegs.'

On leaving the place, the major expressed his astonishment at his
rudeness, and wondered, out of so numerous a company, it was not
resented.  'Oh, sir,' said Roche, 'there was no fear of that;
there was not a thief in the room who did not suppose himself one
of "the two or three gentlemen" I mentioned.'

FARO AT ROUTS.

The following advertisement appeared in the Courier newspaper in
1794:--

'As Faro is the most fashionable circular game in the haut ton in
exclusion of melancholy Whist, and to prevent a company being
cantoned into separate parties, a gentleman of unexceptionable
character will, on invitation, do himself the honour to attend
the rout of any lady, nobleman, or gentleman, with a Faro Bank
and Fund, adequate to the style of play, from 500 to 2000
guineas.

'Address, G. A., by letter, to be left at Mr Harding's,
Piccadilly, nearly opposite Bond Street.

'N.B.--This advertisement will not appear again.'

PROSPECT OF L5200 PER ANNUM FROM A CAPITAL OF L2000.

The following advertisement appeared in the Morning Chronicle in
1817:--

'Any person who can command Two Thousand Pounds in ready money,
may advance it in a speculation which will realize at least L100
per week, and perhaps not require the advance of above one half
the money.  The personal attendance of the party engaging is
requisite; but there will be no occasion for articles of
partnership, or any establishment, as the profits may be divided
daily.'

OF WHAT TRADE IS A GAMING-HOUSE KEEPER?

At a Westminster election the keeper of a notorious gaming house
in St Ann's parish was asked, as usual, what his trade was, when,
after a little hesitation, he said, 'I am an ivory turner.'

THE GAME PLAYED IN THE COURT OF CHANCERY.

Mrs Law, executrix of George Law, late proprietor of the Smyrna
Coffee House, St James's Street, in 1807, found, among her
husband's papers, several notes and memoranda of money advanced
to a Mr Nelthorpe, which she put in suit.  The latter alleged
that they were for gambling purposes, and called Mrs Law to say
whether her husband did not keep a common gambling house; and his
counsel contended that it was clear the notes were for gaming
transactions, BECAUSE they were for 100 GUINEAS, 200 GUINEAS, and
so on--disdaining the vulgar enumeration of pounds.  But the lord
chancellor said that THE GAME PLAYED IN THE COURT OF CHANCERY--as
far as counsel was concerned--was for GUINEAS.

THE ORIGINAL OF A RECENT PROPOSAL.

Not long since an advertisement appeared, and was noticed by
several of the papers, purporting to enable any person to realize
a large fortune by a small advance to the advertiser.  It will
readily be seen that the following is the ORIGINAL of the scheme,
put forth in the  Morning Chronicle, in 1818:--

'Important Offer.  A gentleman of respectability has discovered a
method of winning at any game of chance, fairly and honourably,
to a certainty, by a method hitherto unknown;--he will SELL THE
SECRET for a consideration, or treat with a gentleman able to
join him with a capital of L300, by which a fortune may be made;
in either case he will engage with one person only.  This will be
found well worth the attention of a member of the superior clubs.
****  No personal application will be answered.'

GAME AND GAMBLING.

A gentleman celebrated for his quickness at repartee, when
informed that a young nobleman of his acquaintance (remarkably
fond of a fashionable game) had shot an immense number of RED
partridges, and also of the BLACK game, which abounded on his
estates, replied--'I am not in the least surprised; he was at all
times, EVEN WHEN IN LONDON, devotedly attached to the GAME OF
ROUGE ET NOIR.'

CATCHING A TARTAR.

'My skill at billiards,' says a confessing gamester, 'gave me a
superiority over most I met with.  I could also hide my skill
very dexterously, which is generally found a work of great
difficulty, and judiciously winning or losing, I contrived to
make it answer my purpose,--until one day, going to a table which
I was very much in the practice of frequenting, and where no one
was then engaged, I was invited by a stranger to play.  I
accepted the invitation for a small stake, and won very easily,
so much so, that on commencing a new game I offered to give him
six, to place us more on an equality.  He accepted it eagerly,
but it produced him no benefit; he played so badly, and managed
both his cue and mace so awkwardly--for I made no objection to
his changing them as often as he pleased--that, playing very
carelessly, I could not avoid beating him.  We continued
increasing the stakes every successive game; money seemed of no
value to him; he appeared to have plenty, and lost it with a
spirit that told me I had got hold of an excellent subject, who
could pay me well for beating him.  I did not wish to win too
palpably, and therefore kept increasing the advantage I yielded
him, till it amounted to sixteen.  He now proposed making the bet
ONE HUNDRED POUNDS, and that I should give him eighteen.  His
eagerness, as well as the manner in which he handled his tools,
convinced me of his inexperience, and I accepted the
proposal;--but, to my surprise, he won the game.  He laughed so
heartily at the event, and conducted himself so extravagantly,
that I felt persuaded the thing was accidental.  He proposed
doubling the stakes, which I refused; yet I agreed to play him
for the same sum as before, but giving him only fourteen.  By
some chance he won again; and then I declined playing any more;
but he pushed me so hard, and offered to play the even game
rather than I should give over, that I was induced to yield.  He
declared he did not want my money, and wished to give me an
opportunity of recovering it.  It was the depth of artifice, and
I discovered it too late.  He won . . . and I had no money to
pay!  One of the bystanders took part with him; my case did not
invite or interest any one to stand by me.  I was treated with
great indignity; and though I gave up my watch and every article
of value I possessed, yet I was not allowed to depart without
very ill usage.  I had transgressed the laws of gaming, by
betting after I had ceased to be able to pay; but I had so
confidently felt that I had my antagonist in my own power, that I
considered the stake as my own as soon as the bet was made.  The
injuries I received were very severe, and confined me to my bed
for several days.'[32]

[32] Confessions of a Gamester.


The splendid and fascinating game of Billiards seems to have been
an English invention; and it became greatly in vogue during the
reign of Louis XIV. of France, to whom it was recommended by his
physicians as an exercise after meals.

It is said that Chamillard, who played with the king, entirely
owed his political fortune to the skill which he displayed in
this game.  Billiards has not as yet been placed, like skittles
and bowls, under the interdict of the police authorities, and it
is difficult to see how they could venture upon so tremendous an
experiment.  The game seems to be more in vogue than ever, and
doubtless heavy sums are lost and won at it.  Billiard matches
have during the last three years become quite one of the winter
exhibitions, and particularly this season have the public shown
their taste for the game.  Perhaps the extraordinary performances
of some of the first-class cueists have stirred up the shades of
Kentfield's days, his homely game of cannons off list cushions
and gently-played strength strokes; or by chance those that
favour Marden's style, his losing hazards and forcing half balls,
have revived once more, and we yearn with wonder to see the great
spot strokes of the present age, when as many red hazards can be
scored in one break as were made in olden times in an evening's
play.  At the present time Roberts, sen., may claim the honour in
the billiard world of having brought the spot stroke to light: he
has made no less than 104 consecutive hazards in one break, and
up to the present winter that wonderful performance stood
unparalleled.  Cook, however, very recently in an exhibition
match with J. Bennett, scored the spot hazard no less than 119
times, making 388 off the balls, the biggest break on record. 
Such feats as these, supplemented by the but little inferior play
of Roberts, jun., and Bennett, have done more than excite
surprise, and have caused old heads carefully to look into the
style of play of 1869 and to ponder thereon.  It appears that
they affirm, and not without reason, that much of the success of
the spot stroke arises from the position of the spot being
further from the top cushion than formerly, and by this means not
only is the angle of the striker's ball for position made easier,
by a greater scope for screw or side, but the mouth of the
pockets themselves are easier of access; and the chance of a
wobble all but avoided.  Billiard players and table makers should
meet and arrange a regular standard size for table pockets and
balls, with the spots at regulated positions.  We should then be
able to compare merits with greater certainty, and such terrible
scores would not trouble the markers.

As a healthful exercise, and in its tendency to promote the
physical development of the body, the game of Billiards is
unsurpassed; but it is much to be regretted that it is generally-
played in ill-ventilated and crowded rooms, often reeking with
the pestilential fumes of tobacco, and not without the adjunct of
frequent alcoholic potations.  Moreover, there can be no doubt
that many modern instances of billiard sharping occur, such as I
have just quoted, in which the unwary are unscrupulously
'fleeced.'  I know of several.

'NOT KNOWING YOUR MAN.'

A certain high military character sat down to play with a Russian
prince, who introduced loaded dice.  The travelled Englishman
lost every bet; for the Russian never missed his seven or eleven,
and modestly threw only ten times.  The supposed pigeon then took
up the box with fair dice; and, having learned to 'secure,'[33]
called different mains at pleasure; threw sixteen times; won all
the aristocrat's money, and wished him good night.  Such is the
effect of not knowing your man!

[33] This term means making sure of what you throw.


A BLIND GAMESTER.

John Metcalfe, much better known by the nickname of blind Jack of
Knaresborough, was a celebrity at Harrowgate during the first
quarter of the present century.  This extraordinary man had been
deprived of his eyesight at so early a period that he retained no
idea of either light or vision; but his remaining faculties were
so actively employed that few persons in the full enjoyment of
sight have surpassed him in the execution of undertakings, which
seemed particularly to require the exercise of that faculty.  He
traversed the neighbourhood without a guide or companion;
surveyed tracts of country to plan and lay down roads, where none
had ever been before; contracted for the building of bridges, and
fulfilled his contracts without the assistance of another person,
either as architect or superintendent of the work; became a guide
to those who, possessing sight, could not find their way across
the neighbouring moors when covered with deep falls of snow and
impenetrable fogs; rode well, and followed the hounds with a zeal
and spirit equal to that of the most dashing horseman in the
field, and, finally, played at many games of chance, or skill,
with a knowledge and ingenuity that enabled him to come off
victorious in many contests with persons eager to try his ability
or to prove their own.

Such a man was sure to attract notice in any place or
neighbourhood, but particularly at a place of general resort. 
Besides, he possessed a facetious mode of talking, and on several
occasions exercised a practical sort of wit, which was equally
certain of gaining patronage.  Visitors of the highest rank
treated him with kindness, and even familiarity; and as he never
forgot himself, or trespassed upon those who thus favoured him,
he continued in fashion as long as he lived, and terminated his
singular career at more than 80 years of age.

Among his many exploits was the following.  Various trials of his
skill and activity were proposed by gentlemen who offered to
support their opinions with their money.  But Metcalfe had a
determination of his own, and refused taking a share in any of
the ingenious proposals urged upon him, until a country squire,
the Nimrod of a neighbouring district, submitted a plan which he
expected would baffle all his manoeuvres.  He asked the blind man
if he was willing to run 100 yards against his favourite mare. 
The offer was immediately accepted--provided he might CHOOSE THE
GROUND, which should be an open space on the adjoining moor.  The
stakes were deposited the same evening; and a fine level space
being selected, and the distance marked out with great exactness
early the following morning, the decision followed with little
delay.  The party selected to ride against the blind man was much
admired for his horsemanship; and at the appointed time, every
preparation being completed, the signal was given and the race
commenced.  The horseman was instantly far ahead, but before he
could finish his stipulated distance the fore feet of his hunter
sank deep in a bog, from which, being unable to extricate them,
he came completely over, treating his rider with a tremendous
somerset.  The loud shouts of the spectators announced to the
blind man that his expectations were realized.  The turf showed
no apparent difference, and was sufficiently strong to carry a
man with safety,--perhaps it would have borne a horse going only
at a moderate pace, but at full speed his feet pierced the sod,
and entangled him in the hidden danger.  Metcalfe passed his
extended rival, terminated his career, and won the race before
those who had run to the prostrate horseman could render him any
assistance.  Indeed, it was too late for that purpose, he had
finished his earthly course having ruptured a vessel near the
heart in his fall!

A NOBLE LORD AND A COMMONER, IN 1823.

A young and wealthy commoner, who seemed to vie with the pea-
green in the desperate folly of getting rid of a suddenly
obtained fortune of L130,000 in ready money, as fast as possible,
and whose relish for the society of legs, bullies, and fighting
men was equally notorious, went to the Fishmonger's Hall Club
late one morning, much flushed with wine.  The well-lighted
avenues directed him to the French Hazard table.  There was no
play going on at the time, but at the entrance of this PIGEON,
who before had been DRAWN of a good round sum, the box and dice
were soon put in motion, and 'seven's the main, seven,' was
promptly the cry.  A certain noble lord, who had been for years
an experienced NURSE of the dice, and who knew how to NICK the
MAINS or THROW CRABS, as well as the best leg in England, held
the bow.  The commoner commenced by backing the noble lord IN. 
The noble lord threw OUT.  He then backed the noble lord OUT, and
the noble lord threw in.  He backed the noble lord OUT again, who
threw five to the main.  The commoner betted the odds deeply at
the rate of three to two.  The noble lord threw the FIVE.  The
commoner, uneasy, changed about, and backed the noble lord IN for
a large stake,--the noble lord then threw OUT.  The commoner now
rose in a rage, and insinuated broadly that he was cheated,
robbed, and it could not be fair play.  Of course much
indignation was shown by the noble lord, and it was with
difficulty that a fight was prevented; but his lordship,
nevertheless, condescended to demonstrate that he played his own
money at the time, and what he lost found its way into the bank,
with which 'he was not at all connected.'  This reasoning
satisfied the suspicious young commoner (poor easy man!); an
apology was given; and peace was restored.

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.

A party of players were assembled to throw for a stake, which was
enormous.  It was, however, agreed that the LOWEST throw should
win.  The players threw until one of them turned up two aces. 
All but one had thrown, and shouts of applause greeted the lucky
caster, when the last who was to throw exclaimed--'Hold! I'll try
and beat that.' . . .

Rattling the dice, he turned down the box on the table, and on
lifting it up displayed the two dice ONE UPON THE TOP OF THE
OTHER, and both aces!  He was therefore declared the winner.[34]

[34] Menageana.


A TENDER MOTHER.

A French lady had an only child, a handsome young man, much
addicted to gaming.  He lost at one sitting L40,000, and being
destitute of other resources, he joined a company of strolling
players.  They chanced some time afterwards to pass a short time
at Worcester, near which his mother, who was considerably
advanced in years, resided.  The lady, though highly displeased
with her son's life, yet, hearing of his performance, could not
resist a wish to see him; and for this purpose she went thither
incog.  He supported the principal character in 'The Gamester.'

The feelings of the mother were so excited at the passages which
closely applied to her son's conduct, that she exclaimed aloud,
'Ay, there he is--the--the beggar--the scoundrel!  Always the
same--no change in him!'  The delusion so increased at the fifth
act, when Beverley lifts his hand to kill the child, that the
lady in a most distressing tone cried out--'Wretch that thou art,
don't kill the child--I'll take it home with me!'

TWO MASTERS OF THE ART.

A Frenchman who had become notorious for the unerring certainty
with which he won from all who ventured to play with him, at
length found himself unable to induce persons to sit down to the
table with him, there being not the slightest chance of winning
against his play.  After being thus idle for some time, an
Englishman, who had heard of his triumphs, expressed his
readiness to enter the lists against him.  They sat down, and
played for three hours without intermission, and at the end of
that time were exactly in the same position as when they begun. 
They at length paused to take some refreshment.  'Sare,' said the
Frenchman, in a sort of whisper, to a party who accompanied his
antagonist, 'your friend is a very clever man at de cards--deuced
clever, sare.'  'He is a very clever fellow,' observed the
Englishman.  'I shall try him again,' said Monsieur; and as he
made the observation he proceeded to the room in which they had
been playing, and which was fixed on as the scene of their
continued contest.  He had scarcely quitted the place when the
other made his appearance, and observed that the Frenchman was
the most skilful player he had ever met with.  The parties again
met, and the cards were again produced.  The game was renewed at
eleven o'clock, and continued without intermission till six
o'clock on the following morning, at which time they found, to
the surprise of each other, that they were still as they began.  
'Sare,' said the Frenchman, 'you are the best player I ever met
with.'  'And you, Monsieur,' returned the other, 'are the only
gentleman I ever played with, from whom I could win nothing.' 
'Indeed, sare!' said Monsieur, hesitatingly.  'It is a fact, I
assure you.'  'Sare, I am quite astonished at your skill.'  'And
I'm not less so at yours, Monsieur.'  'You're de most skilfullest
man at de cards in England.'  'Not while you are in it,
Monsieur,' replied the Englishman, with a smile.  'Sare, I
CHEATED, and yet could not win from you!' remarked the Frenchman,
hurriedly and with much emphasis, feeling it impossible any
longer to conceal his surprise at the circumstance of being
unable to play a winning game with the Englishman.  'And,
Monsieur, I did the same thing with you, and yet you are no
loser!' remarked the other, with corresponding energy of tone.

The problem was thus solved: both had been cheating during the
whole night, and were exactly equal in dexterity, both being
unconscious of the dishonest practices of each other; and the
result was that each got up from the table with the same amount
of money as he had when he sat down.  The cheats cordially shook
hands, apparently much gratified that they had at length
ascertained how it had happened that neither could pluck the
other.


CHAPTER VI.

THE GAMING CLUBS.

On the subject of Clubs Mr Cunningham in his 'Clubs of London,'
and Mr Timbs in his 'Club Life in London,' have said pretty well
everything that we want to know, and by their help, and that of
other writers, I shall endeavour to give an account of the
gambling carried on in such places.

1.  ALMACK'S.

'The gaming at Almack's,' writes Walpole to Horace Mann, 'which
has taken the pas of White's, is worthy of the decline of our
empire, or commonwealth, which you please.  The young men of the
age lose ten, fifteen, twenty thousand pounds in an evening
there.  Lord Stavordale, not one-and-twenty, lost L11,000 there
last Tuesday, but recovered it by one great hand at Hazard.  He
swore a great oath--"Now, if I had been playing DEEP I might have
won millions!"  His cousin, Charles Fox, shines equally here and
in the House of Commons.'

Among the rules of the establishment, it was ordered 'that every
person playing at the twenty-guinea table do not keep less than
twenty guineas before him,' and 'that every person playing at the
new guinea table do keep fifty guineas before him.'  That the
play ran high may be inferred from a note against the name of Mr
Thynne, in the Club-books:--'Mr Thynne having won ONLY 12,000
guineas during the last two months, retired in disgust, March
21st, 1772.'  Indeed, the play was unusually high--for rouleaus
of L50 each, and generally there was L10,000 in specie on the
table.  The gamesters began by pulling off their embroidered
clothes, and putting on frieze great coats, or turned their coats
inside out for luck!  They put on pieces of leather (such as are
worn by footmen when they clean knives) to save their laced
ruffles; and to guard their eyes from the light, and to keep
their hair in order, wore high-crowned straw hats with broad
brims adorned with flowers and ribbons; they also wore masks to
conceal their emotions when they played at quinz.[35]  Each
gamester had a small neat stand by him, to hold his tea, or a
wooden bowl with an edge of ormolu, to hold the rouleaus of
guineas.

[35] Quinze, the French for fifteen.  This is a game at cards, in
which the winner is he who counts fifteen, or nearest to that
number, in all the points of his hand.  Three, five, or six might
play at it.  Two entire packs of cards are used, so disposed that
the spades and clubs are on one side, and the hearts and diamonds
on the other.  The entire art of the game consists in making
fifteen; below that number the party loses.

2.  THE COCOA-TREE CLUB.

This club was remarkable for high if not for foul play.  Walpole,
writing to Horace Mann in 1780, says:--'Within this week there
has been a cast at Hazard at the Cocoa-tree (in St James's
Street) the difference of which amounted to one hundred and
fourscore thousand pounds!  Mr O'Birne, an Irish gamester, had
won one hundred thousand pounds of a young Mr Harvey of Chigwell,
just started into an estate by his elder brother's death. 
O'Birne said,--"You can never pay me."  "I can," said the youth,
"my estate will sell for the debt."  "No," said O'Birne, "I will
win ten thousand,--you shall throw for the odd ninety."  They
did, and Harvey won!'

3.  GRAHAM'S CLUB.

This gaming club is remarkable for a scandal which made some
noise at the time of its occurrence, and one version of which a
writer in the Times has been at some pains to rectify.  In Mr
Duncombe's 'Life' of his father occurs the following account of
this curious transaction.

'In Graham's Club there was also a good deal of play, and large
sums were lost and won among the noblemen and gentlemen who were
its members.  An unpleasant rumour circulated in town in the
winter of 1836, to the effect that a noble lord had been detected
in cheating by means of marked cards.  The presumed offender was
well known in society as a skilful card-player, but by those who
had been most intimate with him was considered incapable of any
unfair practice.  He was abroad when the scandal was set afloat,
but returned to England directly he heard of it, and having
traced the accusation to its source, defied his traducers.  Thus
challenged, they had no alternative but to support their
allegation, and it took this shape:--They accused Henry William
Lord de Ros of marking the edges of the court cards with his
thumb-nail, as well as of performing a certain trick by which he
unfairly secured an ace as the turn-up card.  His accusers were
---- ----, who had formerly kept a gaming table; Mr ---- ----,
also a professional gambler; Lord Henry Bentinck, and Mr F.
Cumming.  Lord Henry appears to have taken no very active part in
the proceedings; the other three had lost money in play with Lord
de Ros, and, as unsuccessful gamblers have done before and since,
considered that they had lost it unfairly.

'Lord de Ros, instead of prosecuting the four for a libel,
brought an action only against Cumming, which permitted the
others to come forward as witnesses against him.  The cause came
on in the Court of King's Bench before Lord Denman.  The
plaintiff's witnesses were Lord Wharncliffe, Lord Robert
Grosvenor, the Earl of Clare, and Sir Charles Dalbiac, who had
known and played with him from between 20 to 30 years, as a very
skilful but honourable Whist player.  The evidence of Mr
Lawrence, the eminent surgeon, proved that Lord de Ros had long
suffered under a stiffness of the joints of the fingers that made
holding a pack of cards difficult, and the performance of the
imputed trick of legerdemain impossible.  For the defence
appeared the keeper of the house and his son; two or three
gamblers who had lived by their winnings; one acknowledged to
have won L35,000 in 15 years.  Mr Baring Wall, one of the
witnesses, swore that he had never witnessed anything improper in
the play of Lord de Ros, though he had played with and against
him many years; another witness, the Hon. Colonel Anson, had
observed nothing suspicious; but the testimony of others went to
prove that the aces and kings had been marked inside their edges;
and one averred that he had seen Lord de Ros perform sauter la
coupe a hundred times.  The whole case wore much the look of a
combination among a little coterie who lived by gambling to drive
from the field a player whose skill had diminished their income;
nevertheless, the incidents sworn to by some of them wore a
suspicious significance, and a verdict was given against Lord de
Ros, which he only survived a short time.'

On this statement the Times' reviewer comments as follows:--

'If many old scandals may be revived with impunity, there are
some that cannot.  Mr Duncombe the younger has hit on one which
affects several gentlemen still living, and his injurious version
of it cannot be neutralized or atoned for by an apology to one. 
We call attention to it in the hope that any more serious notice
will be rendered needless by the simple exposure of its
inaccuracies.

'It is difficult to conceive a more inexcusable misstatement, for
the case was fully reported,[36] and the public judgment
perfectly coincided with the verdict.  Lord de Ros was not abroad
when the scandal was set afloat.  He went abroad after the scene
at Graham's had set all London talking, and he returned in
consequence of a peremptory call from his friends.  He was most
reluctantly induced to take the required steps for the
vindication of his character; and it is preposterous to suppose
that any little coterie would have dreamt of accusing a man of
his rank and position with the view of driving a skilful player
from the field.  His accusers were not challenged.  Neither were
they volunteers.  They became his accusers, because they formed
the Whist party at which he was first openly denounced.  They
signed a paper particularizing their charge, and offered to refer
the question to a tribunal of gentlemen, with the Duke of
Wellington or Lord Wharncliffe to preside.  Would a little
coterie, who lived by gambling, have made this offer?  Or would
Lord de Ros have refused it if he had been the intended victim of
a conspiracy?  Lord Henry Bentinck signed the paper, appeared as
a witness, and took quite as active a part in the proceedings as
any of the four, except Mr Cumming, who undertook the sole legal
liability by admitting the publication of the paper.

[36] The Times of February 11 and 13, 1837.


'The evidence was overwhelming.  Suspicions had long been rife;
and on no less than ten or twelve occasions the marked packs had
been examined in the presence of unimpeachable witnesses, and
sealed up.  These packs were produced at the trial.  Several
witnesses swore to the trick called sauter la coupe.  It was the
late Sir William Ingilby who swore that he had seen Lord de Ros
perform it from 50 to 100 times; and when asked why he did not at
once denounce him, he replied that if he had done so before his
Lordship began to get blown upon, he should have had no
alternative between the window and the door.  Of course, every
one who had been in the habit of playing with Lord de Ros prior
to the exposure would have said the same as Sir Charles Dalbiac
and Mr Baring Wall.  With regard to the gentlemen whose names we
have omitted we take it for granted that the author is not aware
of the position they held, and continue to hold, or he would
hardly have ventured to describe them so offensively.  He has
apologized to one, and he had better apologize to the other
without delay.

'The case was complete without the evidence of either of the
original accusers, and the few friends of Lord de Ros who tried
to bear him up against the resulting obloquy were obliged to go
with the stream.  When Lord Alvanley was asked whether he meant
to leave his card, he replied, "No, he will stick it in his
chimney-piece and count it among his honours.' "

Having read through the long case as reported in the Times, I
must declare that I do not find that the evidence against Lord de
Ros was, after all, so 'overwhelming' as the reviewer declares;
indeed, the 'leader' in the Times on the trial emphatically
raises a doubt on the subject.  Among other passages in it there
is the following:--

'In the process of the trial it appeared that the most material
part of the evidence against Lord de Ros, that called sauter la
coupe,--which, for the sake of our English readers we shall
translate into CHANGING THE TURN-UP CARD,--the times and places
at which it was said to have been done could not be specified. 
Some of the witnesses had seen the trick done 50 or 100 times by
Lord de Ros, but could neither say on what day, in what week,
month, or even year, they had so seen it done.  People were
excessively struck at this deviation from the extreme punctuality
required in criminal cases by the British courts of law.'

'The disclosures,' says Mr Grant,[27] 'which took place in the
Court of Queen's Bench, on the occasion of the trial of Lord de
Ros, for cheating at cards, furnished the strongest demonstration
that he was not the only person who was in the habit of cheating
in certain clubs; while there were others who, if they could not
be charged with direct cheating, or cheating in their own
persons, did cheat indirectly, and by proxy, inasmuch as they, by
their own admission, were, on frequent occasions, partners with
Lord de Ros, long after they knew that he habitually or
systematically cheated.  The noble lord, by the confession of the
titled parties to whom I allude, thus cheated for himself and
them at the same time.'

[37] Sketches in London.


Lord de Ros was at the head of the barons of England.  He was the
son of Lord Henry Fitzgerald, and Lady de Ros, who inherited in
her own right that ancient title, which dates from the reign of
Henry III.  He had studied at Eton and Oxford, and afterwards on
the Continent, and there was not a more accomplished man in
Europe.  He possessed an ample fortune, was a member of several
of the clubs--White's, Boodle's, Brookes', and Graham's, and one
of the best Whist players in England.

It appears that at Graham's Club, at the commencement of the
season, and before Lord de Ros came to town, whispers were
circulated of unfair play, and various persons were supposed
guilty.  A determination was therefore formed that the club
should be dissolved and reconstructed, leaving out the names of
certain persons to whom suspicion attached.  The main object of
the master of the club, and of some of those who attended it for
the purpose of professional gain, was that its character should
be cleared.  Not long after Lord de Ros came to town he received
an anonymous letter, cautioning him against continuing to play at
Graham's, and intimating to him, if he did so, that measures
would be taken which he would have reason to regret.  Of course
his Lordship disregarded the threat; he attended the club for
several days more assiduously than before, and continued to play
until the end of the season, in the beginning of July.  In
September the Satirist newspaper published a distinct charge of
unfair play against Lord de Ros, whilst the latter was at Baden,
and he returned to England and commenced an action for libel
against the newspaper.

He was charged with being in the habit of marking the cards, the
effect being to create a very slight and almost imperceptible
indentation, and to make a ridge or wave on the back, so that a
practised eye would be able, on looking at the right place,
knowing where to expect a mark, to discern whether the ace was
there or not.  He was also charged with cheating by reversing the
cut--that is, when the cards had come to him, after having been
cut by his adversary, instead of putting the bottom card at the
top, keeping the bottom card at the bottom, by some shuffling
contrivance when he dealt.  Another witness said:--

'When he took up the two parcels of cards, after the operation of
cutting the pack by his right-hand adversary, he was always
attacked with a hacking cough, or what I may properly denominate,
especially from the result it produced, a 'king cough,' because a
king or an ace was invariably its effect.  The cough always came
on at the most convenient moment to distract the attention of the
other players, and was evidently indulged in for the purpose of
abstracting their attention from the table and from the manoeuvre
he was about to perform.  However, I never saw him "slip the
card," and I never had cognizance of its execution, but certain
it was that the ace or the king, which was at the bottom of the
pack prior to the cut, invariably found its way to the same
position after the cut, and hence was the turn-up card.  With
regard to the operation of dealing, his Lordship delivered the
cards particularly slow, examining every card minutely towards
its corners, as if looking for some mark.'

Many curious facts came out during the trial.

It was Mr Brooke Greville who admitted that he was a considerable
winner at play--having 'no hesitation in saying that he had won
L35,000 in the course of 15 years,' chiefly at Whist; that he had
followed play as an occupation, at Graham's Club.  He lost,
however, L14,000 at Brighton in 1828, a considerable portion of
it to Lord de Ros; but this loss he made up in three or four
years (that is, won L14,000 in that time), and, excepting that
reverse, he was generally fortunate at play.'

A Captain J. Alexander, half-pay R. N., declared that he had won
as much as L700 at a time, having, however, to pay half to
another partner; his winnings might be L1600 a-year.  'I began to
play,' he said, 'about 25 or 28 years ago, and, expecting that I
should be asked the question, I have looked into my accounts, and
find that I am about L10,000 better than as though I had not
played.  That is a yearly average of L500.'  He had, however,
lost about L1000 during the previous year.

This Captain Alexander was asked how many hours he played before
dinner, and he answered--'From three to five hours'--adding,
however, that 'he HAD played ALL NIGHT.'  Then the counsel said,
'I suppose you take but a slight dinner?'  He replied:--

'Why, I generally make as good a dinner as I can get.'  The
learned counsel continued:--

'A small boiled chicken and a glass of lemonade, perhaps?'  This
seemed an offensive question, and the captain said,--

'I believe never, and (with increased earnestness of manner)
mind, I DENY THE LEMONADE ALTOGETHER; I never take lemonade. 
(Laughter, in which the noble lords on the bench joined
involuntarily.)

Sir W. Ingilby entered into a description and practical
illustration of the trick of sauter la coupe with a pack of
cards, and it is said that the performance of the honourable
baronet elicited demonstrations of laughter, which the judge
suppressed, and even REPROBATED.  Altogether, it must have been a
most interesting and exciting trial.

As before stated, Lord Denman was the presiding judge; there was
a special jury; the attorney-general, Sir W. Follet, and Mr
Wightman appeared for the noble plaintiff; and the keen-witted
and exquisitely polished Mr Thesiger (now Lord Cholmondeley), Mr
Alexander, and Mr W. H. Watson for the defendant.  A great many
of the nobility were present, together with several foreigners of
distinction.

4.  BROOKES' CLUB, IN ST JAMES'S STREET.

This was a house notorious for very high gaming, and was
frequented by the most desperate of gamblers, among the rest Fox,
Brummell, and Alderman Combe.  According to Captain Gronow:--

At Brookes's, for nearly half a century, the play was of a more
gambling character than at White's. . . .  On one occasion Lord
Robert Spencer contrived to lose the last shilling of his
considerable fortune given him by his brother, the Duke of
Marlborough.  General Fitzpatrick being much in the same
condition, they agreed to raise a sum of money, in order that
they might keep a Faro bank.  The members of the club made no
objection, and ere long they carried out their design.  As is
generally the case, the bank was a winner, and Lord Robert
bagged, as his share of the proceeds, L100,000.  He retired,
strange to say, from the fetid atmosphere of play, with the money
in his pocket, and never again gambled.  The lowest stake at
Brookes' was L50; and it was a common event for a gentleman to
lose or win L10,000 in an evening.  Sometimes a whole fortune was
lost at a single sitting.[38]

[38] Walpole, passim.


5.  WHITE'S CLUB.

White's Club seems to have won the darkest reputation for
gambling.  Lord Lyttleton, writing to Dr Doddridge, in 1750,
says:--'The Dryads of Hogley are at present pretty secure, but I
tremble to think that the rattling of a dice-box at White's may
one day or other (if my son should be a member of that noble
academy) shake down all our fine oaks.  It is dreadful to see,
not only there, but almost in every house in the town, what
devastations are made by that destructive fury, the spirit of
play.'  A fact stated by Walpole to Horace Mann shows the
character of the company at this establishment:--'There is a man
about town, Sir William Burdett, a man of very good family, but
most infamous character.  In short, to give you his character at
once--there is a wager in the bet-book at White's (a MS. of which
I may one day or other give you an account), that the first
baronet that will be hanged is this Sir William Burdett.'  Swift
says:--'I have heard that the late Earl of Oxford, in the time of
his ministry, never passed by White's chocolate-house (the common
rendezvous of infamous sharpers and noble cullies) without
bestowing a curse upon that famous academy as the bane of half
the English nobility.'

It was from the beginning a gaming club, 'pure and simple.'  The
play was mostly at Hazard and Faro.  No member was to hold a Faro
bank.  Whist was comparatively harmless.  Professional gamblers,
who lived by dice and cards, provided they were free from the
imputation of cheating, procured admission to White's.  It was a
great supper-house, and there was play before and after supper,
carried on to a late hour and to heavy amounts.

At White's they betted on every possible thing, as shown by the
betting-book of the establishment--on births, deaths, and
marriages; the length of a life; the duration of a ministry; a
placeman's prospect of a coronet; the last scandal at Ranelagh or
Madame Cornely's; or the shock of an earthquake!  'A man dropped
down at the door of White's; he was carried into the house.  Was
he dead or not?  The odds were immediately given and taken for
and against.  It was proposed to bleed him.  Those who had taken
the odds that the man was dead protested that the use of a lancet
would affect the fairness of the bet.'  I have met with a similar
anecdote elsewhere.  A waiter in a tavern in Westminster, being
engaged in attendance on some young men of distinction, suddenly
fell down in a fit.  Bets were immediately proposed by some of
the most thoughtless on his recovery, and accepted by others. 
The more humane part of the company were for sending immediately
for medical assistance, but this was overruled; since, by the
tenor of the bets, he was to be 'left to himself,' and he died
accordingly!

According to Walpole--'A person coming into the club on the
morning of the earthquake, in 1750, and hearing bets laid whether
the shock was caused by an earthquake or the blowing up of
powder-mills, went away in horror, protesting they were such an
impious set that he believed if the last trump were to sound they
would bet puppet-show against Judgment.'

And again:  'One of the youths at White's, in 1744, has committed
a murder, and intends to repeat it.  He betted L1500 that a man
could live twelve hours under water; hired a desperate fellow,
sunk him in a ship, by way of experiment, and both ship and man
have not appeared since.  Another man and ship are to be tried
for their lives instead of Mr Blake, the assassin.'

He also tells us of a very curious entry in the betting-book. 
Lord Mountford bets Sir John Bland twenty guineas that Nash
outlives Cibber.'  'How odd,' says Walpole, 'that these two old
creatures, selected for their antiquities, should live to see
both their wagerers put an end to their own lives!  Cibber is
within a few days of eighty-four, still hearty, and clear, and
well.  I told him I was glad to see him look so well.  "Faith,"
said he, "it is very well that I look at all."  Lord Mountford
would have been the winner:  Cibber died in 1757, Nash in 1761.'

Hogarth's scene at the gambling house is taken at White's.  'We
see the highwayman, with his pistols peeping out of his pocket,
waiting by the fireside till the heaviest winner takes his
departure, in order to "recoup" himself for his losings; and in
the Beaux' Stratagem, Aimwell asks of Gibbet--"Ha'n't I seen your
face at White's?"  "Ay, and at Will's too," is the highwayman's
answer.'

According to Captain Gronow, George Harley Drummond, of the
famous banking-house, Charing Cross, only played once in his
whole life at White's Club, at Whist, on which occasion he lost
L20,000 to Brummell.  This even caused him to retire from the
banking-house, of which he was a partner.

'Walpole and a party of friends (Dick Edgecumbe, George Selwyn,
and Williams), in 1756, composed a piece of heraldic satire--a
coat of arms for the two gaming clubs at White's--which was
"actually engraven from a very pretty painting of Edgecumbe, whom
Mr Chute, as Strawberry King at Arms," appointed their chief
herald-painter.  The blazon is vert (for a card-table); three
parolis proper on a chevron sable (for a Hazard table); two
rouleaux in saltire between two dice proper, on a canton sable; a
white ball (for election) argent.  The supporters are an old and
young knave of clubs; the crest, an arm out of an earl's coronet
shaking a dice-box; and the motto, Cogit amor nummi--"The love of
money compels."  Round the arms is a claret-bottle ticket by way
of order.'

6.  WATTIER'S CLUB.

This great Macao gaming house was of short duration.  Mr Raikes
says of it:--'The club did not endure for twelve years
altogether; the pace was too quick to last; it died a natural
death in 1819, from the paralyzed state of its members.  The
house was then taken by a set of blacklegs, who instituted a
common bank of gambling.  To form an idea of the ruin produced by
this short-lived establishment among men whom I have so
intimately known, a cursory glance to the past suggests the
following melancholy list, which only forms a part of its
deplorable results: none of the dead reached the average age of
man.'  Among the members were Beau Brummell and the madman Bligh.

7.  CROCKFORD'S CLUB.

This once celebrated gaming house is now 'The Wellington,' where
the rattle of knives and forks has succeeded that of dice.  It
was erected in 1827, and at its opening it was described as 'the
new Pandemonium--the drawing-rooms, or real hell, consisting of
four chambers: the first an ante-room, opening to a saloon
embellished to a degree which baffles description; thence to a
small curiously-formed cabinet or boudoir, which opens to the
supper-room.  All these rooms are panelled in the most gorgeous
manner; spaces are left to be filled up with mirrors and silk, or
gold enrichments; while the ceilings are as superb as the walls. 
A billiard-room on the upper floor completes the number of
apartments professedly dedicated to the use of the members. 
Whenever any secret manoeuvre is to be carried on, there are
smaller and more retired places, both under this roof and the
next, whose walls will tell no tales.'

'It rose,' says a writer in the Edinburgh Review, 'like a
creation of Aladdin's lamp; and the genii themselves could hardly
have surpassed the beauty of the internal decorations, or
furnished a more accomplished maitre d'hotel than Ude.  To make
the company as select as possible, the estabishment was regularly
organized as a club, and the election of members vested in a
committee.  "Crockford's" became the rage, and the votaries of
fashion, whether they like play or not, hastened to enroll
themselves.  The Duke of Wellington was an original member,
though (unlike Blucher, who repeatedly lost everything he had at
play) the great captain was never known to play deep at any game
but war or politics.  Card-tables were regularly placed, and
Whist was played occasionally; but the aim, end, and final cause
of the whole was the Hazard bank, at which the proprietor took
his nightly stand, prepared for all comers.  Le Wellington des
Joueurs lost L23,000 at a sitting, beginning at twelve at night,
and ending at seven the following evening.  He and three other
noblemen could not have lost less, sooner or later, than L100,000
a piece.[39]  Others lost in proportion (or out of proportion) to
their means; but we leave it to less occupied moralists and
better calculators to say how many ruined families went to make
Mr Crockford a MILLIONNAIRE--for a millionnaire he was in the
English sense of the term, after making the largest possible
allowance for bad debts.  A vast sum, perhaps half a million, was
sometimes due to him; but as he won, all his debtors were able to
raise, and easy credit was the most fatal of his lures.  He
retired in 1840, much as an Indian chief retires from a hunting
country when there is not game enough left for his tribe, and the
club tottered to its fall.'

[39] 'Le Wellington des Joueurs was the name given to Lord Rivers
in Paris.  The other three, we believe, were Lord Sefton, Lord
Chesterfield, and Lord Granville or Lord Talbot.' Times, 7 Jan.
1868.


Crockford was originally a FISHMONGER, keeping a shop near Temple
Bar.  By embarking in this speculation he laid the foundation of
the most colossal fortune that was ever made by play.

It was said there were persons of rank and station, who had never
paid their debts to Crockford, up to 1844, and that some of his
creditors compounded with him for their gambling debts.  His
proprietorship had lasted 15 or 16 years.

Crockford himself was examined by the committee of the House of
Commons on the Gaming Houses; but in spite of his assurance by
the members that were indemnified witnesses in respect of pending
actions, he resolutely declined to 'tell the secrets of his
prison-house.'  When asked whether a good deal of play was
carried on at his club, he said:--'There may have been so; but I
do not feel myself at liberty to answer that question--to DIVULGE
THE PURSUITS OF PRIVATE GENTLEMEN.  Situated as I was, I do not
feel myself at liberty to do so.  I do not feel myself at liberty
to answer that question.'

When asked to whom he had given up the house, he fenced in like
manner, saying that he had given it up to a 'committee' of about
200 gentlemen,--concerning which committee he professed to 'know
absolutely nothing'--he could not even say to whom he had given
up the house--he gave it up to the gentlemen of the club four
years before--he could not even say (upon his word) whether he
signed any paper in giving it up--he believed he did not--
adding--'I said I grew too old, and I could not continue in the
club any longer, and I wished to give up the club to the
gentlemen, who made their own arrangement.'

Being asked, 'Do you think that a person is just as honourably
bound to pay a debt which he loses upon a game of Hazard, as he
would be to pay a bet which he loses on a horse-race?'  Crockford
replied--'I think most certainly he would honourably be bound to
pay it.'--'Do you think that if the loser of a bet on a game at
Hazard had no charge to make of any kind of unfairness, and he
were to commence an action to recover that money back again, he
would lay himself open to a charge in the world of having acted
dishonourably?'  The old gambler's reply was most emphatic,
overwhelming, indignant--'I should take all the pains I could to
avoid such a man.'

If this evidence was not satisfactory, it was, at any rate, very
characteristic.

A few interesting facts came out before the parliamentary
committee on Gaming, in 1844, respecting Crockford's.

It was said that Crockford gave up the business in 1840, because
there were no more very high players visiting his house.

'A number of persons,' according to the admission of the
Honourable Frederick Byng, 'who were born to very large
properties, were very nearly ruined at Crockford's.'

The sums won on the turf were certainly larger than those won by
players at Crockford's; a man might lose L20,000 in one or more
bets, to one or more persons; but against this he might have won
an equivalent amount in small sums from 200 or more persons.[40]

[40] This is not very clearly put, but the meaning is that much
more money was lost at Crockford's than on the turf.


Some years previously to Crockford's retirement, it is said that
he found the debts so bad that he was obliged to leave off his
custom of paying cheques; and said he would cancel all previous
debts, but that in future gentlemen would have to pay with money.

He made them play for money instead of with counters, in
consequence of the large sums that were owing to him upon those
counters.

8.  THE TRAVELLERS' CLUB,

next the Athenseum in Pall Mall, originated soon after the peace
of 1814, in a suggestion of the late Lord Londonderry, then Lord
Castlereagh, for the resort of gentlemen who had resided or
travelled abroad, as well as with a view to the accommodation of
foreigners, who, when properly recommended, receive an invitation
for the period of their stay.[41]  Here Prince Talleyrand was
fond of a game at Whist.  With all the advantage of his great
imperturbability of face, he is said to have been an indifferent
player.

[41] Quarterly Review, No. cx. p. 481.


Rule 10 of the club directs, 'that no dice and no game of hazard
be allowed in the rooms of the club, nor any higher stake than
guinea points, and that no cards be introduced before dinner.'

CHAPTER VII.

DOINGS IN GAMING HOUSES.

Besides the aristocratic establishments just described, there
were numerous houses or places of resort for gambling, genteel
and ungenteel.  In vain did the officers of the law seem to exert
their utmost vigilance; if they drove the serpent out of one hole
it soon glided into another; never was the proverb--'Where
there's a will there's a way'--more strikingly fulfilled.

COFFEE-HOUSE SHARPERS.

Sir John Fielding thus describes the men in the year 1776.  'The
deceivers of this denomination are generally descended from
families of some repute, have had the groundwork of a genteel
education, and are capable of making a tolerable appearance. 
Having been equally profuse of their own substance and character,
and learnt, by having been undone, the ways of undoing, they lie
in wait for those who have more wealth and less knowledge of the
town.  By joining you in discourse, by admiring what you say, by
an officiousness to wait upon you, and to assist you in anything
you want to have or know, they insinuate themselves into the
company and acquaintance of strangers, whom they watch every
opportunity of fleecing.  And if one finds in you the least
inclination to cards, dice, the billiard table, bowling-green, or
any other sort of Gaming, you are morally sure of being taken in.

For this set of gentry are adepts in all the arts of knavery and
tricking.  If, therefore, you should observe a person, without
any previous acquaintance, paying you extraordinary marks of
civility; if he puts in for a share of your conversation with a
pretended air of deference; if he tenders his assistance, courts
your acquaintance, and would be suddenly thought your friend,
avoid him as a pest; for these are the usual baits by which the
unwary are caught.'[42]

[42] The Magistrate: Description of London and Westminster.


In 1792, Mr Br--gh--n, the son of a baronet, one day at a
billiard-table in St James's Street, won L7000 from a Mr B--, but
the latter, at the close of the day, recovered the loss, and won
L15,000 more.  Payment was thus arranged--L5000 on the death of
the father of the former, and L10,000 secured by a reversionary
annuity, to commence on the father's decease, on the life of the
Duc de Pienne, between whom and B-- a previous gaming account
existed.

In 1794, Mr ---- was a billiard player of the first class,
ranking with Brenton, Phillips, Orrel, and Captain Wallis, who
were the leaders of the day in this noble game of skill, tact,
and discretion.[43]  Having accidentally sported his abilities
with two other players, he was marked as a 'pigeon' whom every
preparation was made for 'plucking.'  Captain Cates, of Covent
Garden celebrity, was pitted against him at the coffee-room
billiard-table, during Epsom races, to play 21 games, for two
guineas each game, and five guineas the odds.  Mr ---- won 13
games to eight from his veteran opponent, who was invariably
backed by the leading sportingmen of the day, whilst the company
at large were casually the adherents of Mr ----.

[43] The game of Chess may be played in application of the
principles of Strategy; the game of Billiards in application of
Tactics; indeed, all man's favourite diversions and pastimes most
significantly relate to war--which has been called his natural
state--exemplifying always either the brute-force that crushes,
the skill that foils, the stratagem that surprises, or the ruse
that deceives; and such is war to all intents and purposes.  The
philosophic diversions of science also come in and lend their aid
in the game of war--the pastime of heroes and the necessary
defence of nations.

The match was renewed at the ensuing Ascot meeting, at the rooms
of the celebrated Simson, so much frequented by the Etonians--
where Mr ---- again obtained the victory, by 36 games to 17. 
Immense sums were sported on these occasions.

Mr ---- resided at Windsor, and was surprised by a message on the
Sunday evening preceding the Winchester races, purporting that a
gentleman wished to see him on very particular business.  It
proved to be a request to play a match at Billiards during the
races at Winchester, for which the parties offered 10 guineas for
the journey.  But it was explained to him that the match was of a
particular kind, and must be played in a PARTICULAR way-- either
to WIN or LOSE--so that those concerned might be sure of winning
upon the whole, let the match terminate how it would! . . . .
This
villainous proposal being made without the presence of a
third person, Mr ---- indignantly rejected it, instantly left the
room, and communicated the facts for the protection of the unwary
against a set of desperate sharpers.

MILLER'S GAMING HOUSE.

In 1796, one Thomas Miller was indicted for keeping a gaming
house; and wished to have the matter settled summarily by
admitting conviction; but Lord Kenyon, the presiding judge, chose
to have evidence brought forward.  John Shepherd, an attorney of
the King's Bench, who had himself been plundered, stated that he
was at the defendant's, Leicester Street, on a certain night, and
saw Hazard played.  Sometimes L20 or L30 depended on a throw. 
One morning between three and four o'clock, a gentleman came in
much intoxicated.  He had a great deal of money about him. 
Miller said--'I did not mean to play; but now I'll set to with
this fellow.'  Miller scraped a little wax with his finger off
one of the candles, and put the dice together, so that they came
seven every way.  Seven was the main, and he could not throw
anything but seven.  A dispute arose, and the persons at the
table gave it in Miller's favour.  The young man said he had lost
about L70.  Miller observed--'We have cleaned him.'  If the
attorney had remarked on this at the time, they would have broken
his head, or thrown him out of the window.

He had often seen men pawn their watches and rings to Miller, and
once a man actually pawned his coat, and went away without it! 
When articles were offered to be pawned, Liston, who was a
partner in the concern, said--'I don't understand the value of
these things well,' and he would then call Miller.[44]

[44] Even at the present day it is said that other 'articles'
besides 'valuables' are 'left' with the marker at billiards 'for
a consideration.'  A fine umbrella, very little used, was lately
shown to me as having been sold for five shillings, by a marker;
it probably cost twenty-five.


Miller said there was no disgrace in standing in the pillory for
gaming.  He could spare L500 out of his coffers without missing
it.  His gaming table was once broken up by a warrant from Bow
Street, when he said it was too good a thing to relinquish, and
he set up another, one large enough for 20 or 30 persons to sit
at.  They played at it all night, and on one or two occasions all
the next day too, so that Miller said to witness on his return in
the evening--'Some of the people are still here who came last
night.  They stick to it rarely.'  Sunday was the grand day.  He
had seen more than 40 persons at a time there, and they
frequently offered half-a-crown for a seat.  Wine and suppers
were furnished gratis.  Some looked over the backs of others and
betted.  A Mr Smith, the very man who had pawned his coat,
confirmed the above evidence.  Miller was convicted, and the
judge, Lord Kenyon, made the following solemn observations before
passing sentence:--

'Gaming is a crime of greater enormity, and of more destructive
consequences to society, than many which the laws of the country
have made capital.  What is the crime of stealing a sheep, or
picking a pocket of a handkerchief, when placed in comparison
with this crime, traced through all its consequences?

'With regard to those in the higher walks of life, experience
tells us it often leads to self-murder and duelling, about
gambling debts, which terminate in the total ruin of families
once opulent, and reduce to beggary their innocent and helpless
children; and as for those in a lower sphere of life, when they
have lost their money, they often betake themselves to
housebreaking and the highway, in order to replenish their
coffers, and at last end their lives by the hand of justice.'

With many other most excellent observations on the tendency of
this selfish and avaricious vice, he concluded by sentencing
Miller to a fine of L500, one year's imprisonment, and security
for his good behaviour for seven years, himself in L500 and two
others in L250 each, adding:--'It appeared that you played with
loaded dice.  The Court has not taken that into consideration,
because it was not charged in the indictment.'

ATTACKS ON GAMING HOUSES.

In 1797 the Bedford Arms, Covent Garden, kept by one John
Twycross, was attacked, under warrant.  The gaming-room stood an
hour's siege, for the doors were so plated with iron that the
repeated blows of a sledge-hammer made no impression on them. 
The officers at length entered the back through the window.  They
found fifteen persons at table, but not actually playing, so no
conviction could take place.

In the same year a party of Bow Street officers searched a gaming
house at 19, Great Suffolk Street.  They were an hour in
effecting their entrance.  Two very stout doors, strongly bolted
and barred, obstructed them.  All the gamesters but one escaped
by a subterraneous passage, through a long range of cellars,
terminating at a house in Whitcomb Street, whence their leader,
having the keys of every door, conducted them safely into the
open air.

In the previous year a party, mostly French emigrants, were taken
at a house in Oxendon Street, with the table, cards, &c.  A city
magistrate and a city officer had a dispute at cards, and a
knock-down game ensued.

In 1799 the Marlborough Street officers apprehended at the gaming
house, No. 3, Leicester Square, thirteen out of twenty persons,
from the first floor, playing at Rouge et Noir.  One of the
gamblers, when they first entered, threw up the sash, and,
stepping from the leads, fell into the area, and died in being
conveyed to the hospital.

In the same year, two notorious gaming houses, Nos. 1 and 3,
King's Place, were attacked, by authority of a search warrant. 
All the paraphernalia of the profession, as tables, dice,
counters, &c., were seized; but the inmates effected their escape
over the roofs of the adjoining houses.  The proprietor of No. 3
was smoked in a chimney, and three French emigrants intercepted
in their retreat.  On one of them was found a gold watch, which
appeared, by the robbery-book, to have been stolen about five
years previously.  The banks had been conveyed away,--at least,
they were not among the captures.

'SOMETHING HONOURABLE TO THE BRITISH FLAG.'

It is stated as highly honourable to the British flag that, among
the gamesters of the first quarter of the present century, no
Admirals were seen at the INFERIOR tables.  Their proper pride
kept them from a familiar association with pursers, clerks,
grocers, horse-dealers, linen-drapers, silk-mercers, masons,
builders, timber-merchants, booksellers, &c., &c., and men of the
very lowest walks of life.

COARSE LANGUAGE OF GAMESTERS.

'I heard those who, in another place, even in the most polished
courts, would take a high rank for good breeding and gentlemanly
education, at these tables make use of language which, I hope,
Billingsgate itself would turn from with disgust.  It cannot be
repeated; neither would it be believed, unless by such as, like
myself, have had "confirmation strong," too strong to be
rejected, if I did not, at the same time, reject the evidence of
my senses.'[45]

[45] Seymour Harcourt, The Gaming Calendar.


BOASTED PROTECTION OF GREAT NAMES TO GAMING HOUSES.

'On one occasion I was at the Pigeon Hole, in St James's Square
(since removed to King Street), when the apprehensions which the
rapid sale of The Greeks (a work exposing the system) excited
among the players were warmly debated.  To my great astonishment,
a person who I supposed was a proprietor, boasted the
impenetrability of HIS house, and on what ground, think you? 
Why, on that of it having the countenance of the Lord Chief
Justice of England!  True or false, it seemed to revive the
flagging spirits of its visitors.  They knew better.  Not even
the warm feelings of a father would turn the scale of justice in
the even hand of Lord Ellenborough.'

It must not, however, be taken for granted, merely because these
fellows assert it, that the sons of the late Chief Justice really
frequented that den of iniquity.  It is part of the system of
these houses to delude the ignorant, by pretending that this or
the other person uses their tables.  I had an instance of that
myself at ----, in Pall Mall.  Asking who that gentleman was,
pointing to the party, I was answered--'That is Mr Hay, private
secretary to Lord Melville, the First Lord of the Admiralty.' 
Now, I believe I may safely say, and from my own knowledge, too,
that Mr Hay, whose character and conduct is deservedly held in
the highest estimation, NEVER was at that or any such house; yet
his name was constantly quoted, and particularly to young
officers of the navy and marines, to whom his acquaintance held
out hopes of future advantage in their profession![46]

[46] Id. ibid.


FORTUNATE RISE OF A CLUB-HOUSE WAITER.

'A waitership at a club sometimes led to fortune.  Thomas
Rumbold, originally a waiter at White's gaming club, got an
appointment in India, and suddenly rose to be Sir Thomas, and
Governor of Madras!  On his return, with immense wealth, a bill
of pains and penalties was brought into the House by Dundas, with
the view of stripping Sir Thomas of his ill-gotten gains.  This
bill was briskly pushed through the earlier stages; suddenly the
proceedings were arrested by adjournment, and the measure fell to
the ground.  The rumour of the day attributed Rumbold's escape to
the corrupt assistance of Rigby; who, in 1782, found himself, by
Lord North's retirement, deprived of his place in the Pay Office,
and called upon to refund a large amount of public moneys
unaccounted for.  In this strait, Rigby was believed to have had
recourse to Rumbold.  Their acquaintance had commenced in earlier
days, when Rigby was one of the boldest "punters" at White's, and
Rumbold bowed to him for half-crowns as waiter.  Rumbold is said
to have given Rigby a large sum of money, on condition of the
former being released from the impending pains and penalties. 
The truth of the report has been vehemently denied; but the
circumstances are suspicious.  The bill was dropped; Dundas, its
introducer, was Rigby's intimate associate.  Rigby's nephew and
heir soon after married Rumbold's daughter.  Sir Thomas himself
had married a daughter of Dr Law, Bishop of Carlisle.  The worthy
bishop stood godfather to one of Rumbold's children; the other
godfather was the Nabob of Arcot, and the child was christened
"Mahomet."  So, at least, Walpole informs Mann.'[47]

[47] Timbs, Club Life in London.


PLAY IN 1820.

According to the Morning Post of May 15, 1820, at one of the
gaming houses at the West End, in one night, property to the
amount of L50,000 is said to have changed hands.

ACCOUNT OF A GAME AT HAZARD.

The following account of a game at Hazard was given by a young
man, who, in the year 1820, was decoyed into one of the gambling
houses in the city, kept by one John Morley, who was convicted by
the Lord Mayor, in the penalty of L200, 'for keeping Hazard;' but
who, it is stated, left this country for Ireland the moment
proceedings were instituted.

'The house in question was to all appearance devoted to the
game of billiards, and most of those who frequented it engaged
merely in that game.  Through the agency of professed gamesters,
who shared in the profits of the concern, those who appeared to
be proper objects of plunder were soon introduced to the Hazard
table, which was kept in a retired and private part of the house.

'The evidence of the young man was to the following effect:--He
had been in Morley's house; the game of Hazard was played in the
front room on the second floor; a door led into it from the
landing-place, and another from the public billiard-room, which
was the back room on the same floor; both these doors were during
the time of play kept barred and locked, and never opened except
to the voice of some person known to the master of the house. 
During the play the door was seldom or never opened, but before
the play commenced there was an understanding given that
proceedings were about to begin.

'In the centre of the room was a large circular table, over which
a lamp was suspended, and round the table the players sat, in
number, generally, from six to ten.

'The play commenced by one of the players taking the dice-box
with two dice in it; two other dice were covered on the table,
and might be substituted for those in the box, upon application
to Morley, who acted as "groom porter."  The person who held the
box was called the caster, and he called a main, that is, he
mentioned aloud any number on the dice from five to nine; and
throwing the dice on the table, counted the number on the two
dice as his chance, the number which he called being the chance
of his setter.  Before the main is called, the caster throws down
his stake, which any person present has the option of covering,
or, as it is called, "setting," by placing a similar sum on the
table.  For instance, if the caster, after being "set," call five
the main, and throws immediately four and one, or three and two,
he "nicks" it, that is, wins his money at once.  If he throws six
and one, five and two, or four and three, each of which two
numbers makes seven, he bets the ODDS, which are three to two in
his favour--inasmuch as there are three ways of throwing seven,
and only two of throwing five; and he continues throwing until
either five or seven come off.  By the former he loses, by the
latter he wins.

'If he calls seven the main, and throws three and one, or six and
four, the odds are two to one against him--inasmuch as there are
only three ways each of throwing, the four and the ten and six
wins, throwing the seven, that is, three on each die.[48]  If the
caster wishes, he calls a main, and continues to do so till he
loses, which, in the technical phraseology, is "throwing out." 
He then passes the bow to the person next on the left hand, who,
in like manner, passes it to his neighbour.  Morley is
remunerated for his table very handsomely.  When the caster
throws in three mains successively, he pays to Morley what is
called a box (one of the pieces of the house with which the game
is played).  The prices are eighteen-pence each, and he gives
them in exchange for notes, and retakes them.  The caster pays
nothing unless he wins.  The players generally leave off play at
eleven or twelve o'clock.  On Saturday there is most play, as
Morley on that day always gives a dinner at four o'clock,
immediately after which the play commences.  On other days tea
and coffee are given.'

[48] I confess I do not understand the above passage.


A number of young men, most of whom were clerks, were called to
confirm the evidence as to the system, but none of them appeared.

In a letter published in the Times of July 22, 1824, we read as
follows:--

'The action against the keepers of a certain notorious "hell,"
which was noticed in the different journals as "coming on," is
withdrawn, or, more properly speaking, is "compromised."  Thus it
will always be; and the different hells still flourish with
impunity, to the enrichment of a few knaves, and the ruin of many
thousands, till more effectual laws are framed to meet the evil. 
As they net thousands a night, a few hundreds or even thousands
can be well spared to smother a few actions and prosecutions,
which are very rarely instituted against them, and never but by
ruined men, who are easily quieted by a small consideration,
which, from recent judgments, will not be withheld; therefore we
shall see recorded but very few convictions if any at all.  At
the head of these infamous establishments is one yclept
"Fishmollgers' Hall,"[49] which sacks more plunder than all the
others put together, though they consist of about a dozen.  This
place has been fitted up at an expense of L40,000, and is the
most splendid house, interiorly and exteriorly, in all the
neighbourhood.  It is established as a bait for the fortunes of
the great, many of whom have already been severe sufferers. 
Invitations to dinner are sent to noblemen and gentlemen, at
which they are treated with every delicacy, and the most
intoxicating wines.

[49] Otherwise called Crock-odile Hall.


'After such "liberal" entertainment, a visit to the French Hazard
table, in the adjoining room, is a matter of course, when the
consequences are easily divined.  A man thus allured to the den
may determine not to lose more than the few pounds he has about
him; but in the intoxication of the moment, and the delirium of
play, it frequently happens that, notwithstanding the best
resolves, he borrows money on his cheques, which are known to be
good, and are readily cashed to very considerable amounts.  In
this manner L10,000, L20,000, L30,000, or more, have been often
swept away!

They left King Street about three years ago, when, in conjunction
with T ---- (a man who a few years ago took the benefit of the
act, and subsequently took one or two "hells" in Pall Mall, but
has amassed full L150,000 of plunder) and A ----, who has L70,000
of plunder, they opened a club-house in Piccadilly, with a French
Hazard bank of L10,000, when in a short time they divided between
the four--after all their heavy expenses were covered--upwards of
L200,000.  In proportion to the extent of the bank and the
stakes, so do they collect the plunder.'

PROGRESS IN THE GAMING TRADE.

In the minor gaming houses the players assembled in parties of
from 40 to 50 persons, who probably brought on an average, each
night, from one to twenty shillings to play with.  As the money
was lost, the losers fell off, if they could not borrow or beg
more; and this went on sometimes in the winter season for 14 to
16 hours in succession; so that from 100 to 150 persons might be
calculated to visit one gaming table in the course of a night;
and it not unfrequently happened that ultimately all the money
brought to the table got into the hands of one or two of the most
fortunate adventurers, save that which was paid to the table for
'box-hands'--that is, when a player won three times in
succession.  At these establishments the price of a box varied
from one shilling to half-a-crown.  Every man thus engaged was
destined to become either a more finished and mischievous
gambler, or to appear at the bar of the Old Bailey.  The
successful players by degrees improved their external appearance,
and obtained admittance into houses of higher play, where two
shillings and sixpence or three shillings and fourpence was
demanded for the box-hand.  If success attended them in the first
step of advancement, they next got initiated into better houses,
and associated with gamblers of a higher grade.

PLAY IN 1838.

About the year 1838 the gaming houses were kept open all day, the
dice were scarcely ever idle, day or night.  From Sunday to
Sunday, all the year round, persons were to be found in these
places, losing their money, and wasting away their very bodies by
the consuming anxiety consequent on their position at the Hazard
or Roulette table.

STATISTICS OF GAMBLING IN 1844.

The following facts came out in evidence before the committee of
the House of Commons, in 1844.

Down to that year there were no less than 12 gaming houses in St
James's and St George's.  The play was higher in old times, but
not so GENERAL.

'The increase of gambling houses was entirely the offspring of
Crockford's.'  Such was the opinion of the Honourable Frederick
Byng, before the committee, who added, 'that the facility to
everybody to gamble at Crockford's led to the establishment of
other gambling houses fitted up in a superior style, and
attractive to gentlemen who never would have thought of going
into them formerly.'

Previously, in the clubs, the gambling was confined to a very
high rate and to a very few people.  The above-named witness said
he 'could have named all the gamblers in his early days at the
clubs.  No person coming into a room where Hazard was carried on
would have been permitted to play for a SMALL SUM, and therefore
he left it.'

The same gentleman remembered the time when gambling tables were
kept in private houses.

'It is a fact that most of those who played very high were pretty
well cleaned out.'

'Crockford increased gambling everywhere.'  'Persons of the
middling classes, butchers, and gentleman's servants went to the
low gambling houses.'

These places held out inducements to robbery.  'If a servant or
shopman could scrape together L200 or L300, he had, by the agency
of the keepers of these houses, the opportunity of lending out
his money to the losers at 60 per cent.'

DESPERATION AT GAMING HOUSES.

The most particular inspection was made of the player's person by
the gaming house keeper's spies, and even his dress was strictly
observed.  He was obliged, before entering the saloon, to deposit
his great coat and cane, which might perchance afford the
introduction of some WEAPON; and the elegance of the covering did
not save him from the humiliation of having it taken from him at
the door.  The attempts which were sometimes made on the lives of
the bankers led to these precautions--like the indignities which
are practised only in prisons for the security of the unhappy
inmates.  It is certain that gamesters, reduced to desperation,
and on the eve of committing suicide, have conveyed into these
places infernal machines with an intention of destroying at once
their cruel plunderers and themselves.

'DEVILISH DOINGS IN A "HELL." '

In 'Doings in London,' a work published as lately as the year
1850, we find under this startling title a strange story.

'A scandalous scene of violence, which often happens at these
places, but seldom becomes publicly known, on account of the
disgrace attending exposures, occurred lately at a low "hell" in
King Street, St James's.  A gentleman who had lost considerable
sums of money at various times, announced his full determination
never to come to a place of the sort again with money.  His
visits, therefore, were no longer wanted, and so orders were
given to the porters not to admit him again.  About two o'clock
on a subsequent night, which happened to be Saturday, he sought
admittance, and was refused.  A warm altercation ensued in the
passage between him and the porters, which brought down some of
the proprietors.  One of them--a powerful man--a bankrupt
butcher--struck him a tremendous blow, which broke the bridge of
his nose, covered his face with blood, and knocked him down.  On
getting up he was knocked down again.  He arose once more, and
instantly received another blow, which would have laid him upon
his back, but one of the porters by this time had got behind him,
and as he was falling struck him at the back of his head, which
sent him upon his face.  The watch had now arrived, into whose
hands the keeper of the "hell" and the porter were given.  At the
watch-house they were ordered to find bail.  The gentleman was
then about quitting, when he was suddenly called back.  A certain
little lawyer, who alternately prosecutes and defends keepers of
gaming houses, was sent for.  He whispered to the ex- butcher to
charge the gentleman with stealing his handkerchief and hat,
which, it was alleged, had been lost in the affray.  Though
nothing was found upon the gentleman, who desired to be searched,
this preposterous and groundless charge was taken, and the
hellites admitted to bail; but the gentleman who had been so
cruelly beaten, being charged with a felony on purpose to cause
his detention, and the power held by magistrates to take bail in
doubtful cases not extending to night-constables, he was locked
up below with two wretches who had stolen lead, and five
disorderlies--his face a mass of blood and bruises--and there
detained till Monday morning, in a most pitiable condition.  The
magistrate before whom the party appeared on that day,
understanding that the affair took place at a gaming house,
dismissed both complaints, leaving the parties to their remedy at
the sessions.'

GAFFING.

Gaffing is or was one of the ten thousand modes of swindling
practised in London.  Formerly it was a game in very great vogue
among the macers, who congregated nightly at the 'flash houses.' 
One of these is described as follows:--This gaffer laughed a
great deal and whistled Moore's melodies, and extracted music
from a deal table with his elbow and wrist.  When he hid a
half-penny, and a flat cried 'head' for L10, a 'tail' was sure to
turn up.  One of his modes of commanding the turn-up was this: he
had a half-penny with two heads, and a half-penny with two tails.

When he gaffed, he contrived to have both half-pence under his
hand, and long practice enabled him to catch up in the wrinkles
or muscles of it the half-penny which it was his interest to
conceal.  If 'tail' was called a 'head' appeared, and the 'tail'
half-penny ran down his wrist with astonishing fidelity.  This
ingenious fellow often won 200 or 300 sovereigns a night by
gaffing; but the landlord and other men, who were privy to the
robbery, and 'pitched the baby card' (that is, encouraged the
loser by sham betting), always came in for the 'regulars,' that
is, their share of the plunder.

This gaffer contrived to 'bilk' all the turnpikes in the kingdom.

In going to a fight or to a race-course, when he reached a
turnpike he held a shilling between his fingers, and said to the
gatekeeper--'Here, catch,' and made a movement of the hand
towards the man, who endeavoured to catch what he saw.  The
shilling, however, by a backward jerk, ran down the sleeve of the
coat, as if it had life in it, and the gate-keeper turned round
to look in the dust, when the tall gaffer drove on, saying--'Keep
the change.'

A young fellow, who previously was a marker at a billiard-table,
and who had the appearance of a soft, inexperienced country-lad,
was another great hand at gaffing.  There was a strong adhesive
power in his hand, and such exquisite sensibility about it, that
he could ascertain by dropping his palm, even upon a worn-out
half-penny or shilling, what side was turned up.  Indeed, so
perfect a master was he of the science that Breslaw could never
have done more upon cards than he could do with a pair of 'grays'
(gaffing-coins).

A well-known macer, who was celebrated for slipping an 'old
gentleman' (a long card) into the pack, and was the inheritor by
birth of all the propensities of this description, although the
inheritance was equally divided between his brother and himself,
got hold of a young fellow who had L170 in his pocket, and
introduced him to one of the 'cock-and-hen' houses near Drury
Lane Theatre, well-primed with wine.  Gaffing began, and the
billiard-marker before described was pitched upon to 'do' the
stranger.  The macer 'pitched the baby card,' and of course lost,
as well as the unfortunate victim.  He had borrowed L10 of the
landlord, who was to come in for the 'regulars;' but when all was
over, the billiard-marker refused to make any division of the
spoil, or even to return the L10 which had been lost to him in
'bearing up' the cull.  The landlord pressed his demand upon the
macer, who, in fact, was privately reimbursed by the marker; but
he was coolly told that he ought not to allow such improper
practices in his house, and that the sum was not recoverable, the
transaction being illegal.

How these spurious coins are procured is a question; but I am
assured that they are still in use and often made to do service
at public-houses and other places.

TOMMY DODD.

This is a mode of gambling very much in vogue at the present
time.  It is often played at public-houses among parties to
decide who is to pay the reckoning.  Each party turns down a
half-penny, and, on uncovering it, the matter is decided as in
'heads or tails.'  Of course this expeditious method is also used
in gambling for money.  Not long ago a retired tradesman,
happening to be in a public-house, where such things were
connived at, allowed himself to be induced to play at Tommy Dodd
with two low sharpers.  They soon eased him of all the cash he
had about him.  A bright idea, however, occurred to him.  'Stop a
bit,' he said, 'I must have my revenge.  Just wait till I go home
for more money.'  The sharpers were rejoiced at the idea, and
rubbed their hands with delight, whilst the tradesman went, as
they felt sure, only to bring more money into their 'till.'  The
man made all haste, for he was determined to have his revenge,
and soon returned with a large bag of money, which he clinked on
the table.

He first pulled out some coppers, telling them to choose from the
lot the coins they would play with.  They assented, although they
did not seem 'much to like it.'  'And now,' said the tradesman,
'let's set to business.'

The game proceeded with alternate success on both sides; but the
tradesman went on DOUBLING THE STAKES EVERY TIME, WHETHER HE LOST
OR WON, and, of course, at length completely broke their bank,
and went off with their money.

GAMBLING AT THE WINE AND OYSTER ROOMS, OR 'SALOONS.'

The gambling which was carried on in the private rooms of the
wine and oyster houses, about thirty years ago, and perhaps
later, was just such as that which had so long flourished in the
low vicinity of St James's.  Indeed, the constant frequenters of
the former had attained the most profound knowledge of the art of
robbing at the West End gaming houses.  The blacklegs visited the
saloons every night, in order to pick up new acquaintances among
the young and inexperienced.  They were polite, well-dressed,
gentlemanlike persons; and if they could trace anything 'soft' in
the countenance of a new visitor, their wits went to work at once
to establish an acquaintance with him.  Wine was set a- going,
and cards were proposed.  The master of the concern soon provided
a room, and play advanced, accompanied by the certainty of loss
to the unfortunate stranger.  But if the invitation to play was
rejected, they made another plant upon him.  The ruffians
attacked him through a passion of a different kind.  They gave
the word to one of their female 'pals,' who threw herself in his
way, and prevailed upon him to accompany her to HER
establishment.  In the morning the 'gentleman,' who in vain had
solicited him to play at the saloon the night before, would
call--just to pay 'a friendly visit.'  Cards were again spoken
of, and again proposed, with the additional recommendation of the
'lady,' who offered to be the partner of her friend in the game. 
The consequence was inevitable.  Many young noblemen and
gentlemen were plundered by this scheme, of hundreds, nay, of
thousands of pounds.  To escape without loss was impossible. 
They packed and distributed the cards with such amazing
dexterity, that they could give a man, as it were, whatever cards
they pleased. 

CARDS THAT WOULD BEAT THE D--L HIMSELF!

A number of sharpers were detected in a trick by which they had
won enormous sums.  An Ecarte party, consisting of a nobleman, a
captain in the army, an Armenian gentleman, and an Irish
gentleman, sat down in one of the private chambers attached to
one of the large wine and shell-fish rooms.  The Armenian and the
Irishman were partners, and were wonderfully successful; indeed,
so extraordinary was their luck in turning up cards, that the
captain, who had been in the town for some time, suspected the
integrity of his competitors, and, accordingly, handled the cards
very minutely.  He soon discovered that there was an 'old
gentleman' (a card somewhat larger and thicker than the rest of
the pack, and in considerable use among the LEGS) in the midst of
them.  The captain and his partner exclaimed that they were
robbed, and the cards were sealed up, and referred to a card-
maker for his opinion.

'The old saying,' said the referee, 'that THE CARDS WOULD BEAT
THE CARD-MAKER, was never more true than it is in this instance,
for this pack would beat not only me, but the very d--l himself;
there is not only an OLD GENTLEMAN, but an OLD LADY (a card
broader than the rest) amongst them.'

The two 'gentlemen' were immediately accused of the imposition,
but they feigned ignorance of the fraud, refused to return a
farthing of the 'swag,' and, in their turn, charged the losers
with having got up the story in order to recover what they had
fairly lost.

GENEROSITY (?) OF A GAMING HOUSE KEEPER.

A young West Indian chanced one night to enter one of the gaming
houses in London, and began trying his chance at Roulette. 
Fortune favoured him at first, and he won about a hundred pounds.

Instead of leaving off he only became the more excited by his
success, when his luck began to change, and he lost and lost
until he staked the last coin he had in his pocket.  He then
pawned to the master of the table successively every ring and
trinket he had, for money to continue the stakes.  All in vain. 
His luck never returned; and he made his way down-stairs in a
mood which may well be imagined.  But what was his surprise when
the master of the table came running after him, saying--'Sir,
these things may be valuable to you--do me the favour to take
them with you.  Next time I hope you will be more lucky,' and
returned all his rings and trinkets.

The moon was shining brightly at the time, and the young man
swore by it, that he would never again enter a gaming house, and
he kept his oath.  Of course the generosity was but a decoy to
entice the youth to further ruin.

HOSPITALITY OF GAMING HOUSES, AND POPULARITY OF CITY MEN AT THEM.

Joseph Atkinson and his wife, who for many years kept a gaming
house at No. 15 under the Piazza, Covent Garden, gave daily
magnificent play dinners,--cards of invitation for which were
sent to the clerks of merchants, bankers, and brokers in the
city.  Atkinson used to say that he liked CITIZENS--whom he
called FLATS--better than any one else, for when they had DINED
they played freely, and after they had lost all their money they
had credit to borrow more.  When he had CLEANED THEM OUT, when
THE PIGEONS WERE COMPLETELY PLUCKED, they were sent to some of
their solvent friends.  After dinner play was introduced, and,
till dinner time the nest day, different games at cards, dice,
and E O were continually going on.

THE TRAFFIC IN HUSH MONEY.

Theophilus Bellasis, an infamous character, was well known at Bow
Street, where he had been charged with breaking into the
counting-house of Sir James Sanderson, Bart.  Bellasis was
sometimes clerk and sometimes client to John Shepherd, an
attorney of Bow Street; while at other times Shepherd was
prosecutor of those who kept gaming houses, and Bellasis
attorney.  Sir William Addington, the magistrate, was so well
aware that these two men commenced prosecutions solely for the
purpose of HUSH MONEY, that he refused to act.  The Joseph
Atkinson just mentioned at one time gave them L100, at another
L80; and in this way they had amassed an immense sum, and
undertook, for a specific amount, to defend keepers of gaming
houses against all prosecutions!

WALKING OFF WITH A L200 BANK-NOTE.

The runaway son of an extensive linen-draper went to a gaming
house in King Street, and pocketed a L200 bank-note from the
table.  He was not kicked out, because it would not be safe for
the proprietors of these houses to run the risk of getting
involved in law; but he was civilly walked down-stairs by the
master of the establishment, who forbad him the house evermore. 
The dashing youth, however, put both the money and the affront in
his pocket, and was only too thankful to get away in so good a
plight.

PERQUISITES OF GAMBLING HOUSE WAITERS.

A waiter in one of the gambling houses in St James's Street
received in Christmas boxes above L500.  A nobleman, who had in
the course of a week won L80,000, gave him L100 of his winnings. 
He was said to have actually borrowed of the waiter the money
which led to his extraordinary success!

PAUL ROUBEL.

Paul Roubel was a gaming house keeper, who seems to have been an
exception to his class, according to the following account:--'A
foreigner once applied for the situation of croupier at old Paul
Roubel's, stating as his qualification that he could cut or turn
up whatever card he pleased.  The old man (for he was nearly
eighty, and a very good hearty fellow in his way) declined the
offer, saying--"You are too clever for me; my customers must have
some chance!"  It is true Roubel kept a gambling house; but it is
also true that few men in higher walks of life possessed a kinder
heart, or a hand which opened more freely or more liberally to
the calls of humanity!  Peace be to his manes!'

TITLED GREEKS, OR 'DECOYS.'

In all the gaming houses of any note there were unprincipled and
reckless persons paid by the hellites, employed in various
capacities, and for various purposes.  Sometimes they played for
the proprietors against any one who chose to put down his money;
at other times, when there were no other individuals playing at
all, they pretended to be strangers themselves, and got up sham
games with the proprietors, with the view of practising a
deception on any strangers who might be in the room, and by that
means inducing them to put down their money.  They were dressed
in the most fashionable manner, always exhibiting a profusion of
jewellery, and living in great splendour when they have any
particular person in their eye, in the various hotels throughout
town.[50]

[50] Grant, Sketches in London.


In some cases, in the higher class of gaming establishments, the
Greeks, or decoys, being men of title or considerable standing in
society, did not receive a fixed salary for seducing young men of
fortune, but being in every case very needy men, they nominally
borrowed, from time to time, large sums of money from the hell-
keepers.  It was, however, perfectly understood on both sides
that the amount so borrowed was never to be repaid.[51]

[51] Grant, Ubi supra.


WHY CHEATS WERE CALLED GREEKS.

M. Robert-Houdin says that this application of the term 'Greek'
originated from a certain modern Greek, named Apoulos, who in the
reign of Louis XIV. was caught cheating at court, and was
condemned to 20 years at the galleys.  I think this a very
improbable derivation, and unnecessary withal.  Aristotle of old,
as before stated, ranked gamesters 'with thieves and plunderers,
who for the sake of gain do not scruple to despoil their best
friends.'  We afterwards find them bearing just as bad a
character among the Romans.  Says Juvenal--

    Graeculus esuriens in coelum jusseris, ibit.     
'Bid the hungry Greek to heaven, to heaven he goes.'

Dr Johnson translated the words, 'Bid him to h--l, to h--l he
goes'--which is wrong.  A DIFFICULTY is implied, and everybody
knows that it is easier to go to the latter place than the
former.  It means that a needy Greek was capable of doing
anything.  Lord Byron protested that he saw no difference between
Greeks and Jews--of course, meaning 'Jews' in the offensive sense
of the word.  Among gamblers the term was chiefly applied to
'decoys.'

GAMING TABLE SLANG AND MANOEUVRES.

Captain Sharp.  A cheating bully, whose office it was to bully
any 'Pigeon,' who, suspecting roguery, refused to pay what he had
lost.

St Hugh's bones.  Dice.  A bale of bard cinque deuces; a bale of
flat cinque deuces; a bale of flat size aces; a bale of bard
cater treys; a bale of flat cater treys; a bale of Fulhams; a
bale of light graniers; a bale of gordes, with as many highmen
and lowmen for passage; a bale of demies; a bale of long dice for
even or odd; a bale of bristles; a bale of direct
contraries,--names of false dice.

Do.  To cheat.

Done up.  Ruined.

Down-hills.  False dice which run low.

Elbow-shaker.  A gamester.

Fulhams.  Loaded dice.

Fuzz.  To shuffle cards closely: to change the pack.

Game.  Bubbles, Flats, Pigeons.

Gull Gropers.  Usurers who lend money to gamesters.

Greeks.  Cheats at play.

Hedge.  To secure a bet by betting on the other side.

High Jinks.  A gambler who drinks to intoxicate his Pigeon.

Hunting.  Drawing in the unwary.

Main.  Any number on the dice from five to nine.

Paum.  To hide a card or die.

Pigeons.  Dupes of sharpers at play.

Vincent's Law.  The art of cheating at cards, by the banker, who
plays booty, Gripe, who bets, and the Vincent, who is cheated. 
The gain is called termage.

Vowel.  To give an I. O. U. in payment.

Up-hills.  False dice which run high.

SPECIMEN OF A QUASI GAMING HOUSE CIRCULAR.

'SIR,--I hope you will join with the rest of the parishioners in
recommending what friends you can to my shops.  They shall have
good candles and fair play. Sir, we are a not gang of swindlers, 

           Like other Gaming Houses,             
           We are men of character.                 
                 Our Party is,         
          Tom Carlos--alias Pistol,         
          Ned Mogg,--from Charing Cross,   
          Union Clarke, ------------                             

                      {The best in the world at  
          A Frenchman,{           
                      {sleight of hand.       
          My poor Brother,                 
              and         
          Melting Billy,                 
          Your humble Servant.    
To the Church-Wardens, Overseers, and each         
respectable inhabitant in the Parish.' 

 A card was enclosed, as follows:--                   
            '****             
       Gaming House Keeper,            
        and ****  **** to         
  The Honourable House of Commons       
   No. 7 and 8 **** St, St James's.'

This circular was sent to Stockdale, the publisher, in 1820, who
published it with the names in asterisks suppressed.  It was
evidently intended to expose some doings in high places.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO GAMBLING.

A distinction must be made between games of skill and games of
chance.  The former require application, attention, and a certain
degree of ability to insure success in them; while the latter are
devoid of all that is rational, and are equally within the reach
of the highest and lowest capacity.  To be successful in throwing
the dice is one of the most fickle achievements of fickle
fortune; and therefore the principal game played with them is
very properly and emphatically called 'Hazard.'  It requires,
indeed, some exertion of the mental powers, of memory, at least,
and a turn for such diversions, to play well many games at cards.

Nevertheless, it is often found that those who do so give no
further proofs of superior memory and judgment, whilst persons of
superior memory and judgment not unfrequently fail egregiously at
the card-table.

The gamester of skill, in games of skill, may at first sight seem
to have more advantage than the gamester of chance, in games of
chance; and while cards are played merely as an amusement, there
is no doubt that a recreation is more rational when it requires
some degree of skill than one, like dice, totally devoid of all
meaning whatever.  But when the pleasure becomes a business, and
a matter of mere gain, there is more innocence, perhaps, in a
perfect equality of antagonists--which games of chance, fairly
played, always secure--than where one party is likely to be an
overmatch for the other by his superior knowledge or ability.

Nevertheless, even games of chance may be artfully managed; and
the most apparently casual throw of the dice be made subservient
to the purposes of chicanery and fraud, as will be shown in the
sequel.

In the matter of skill and chance the nature of cards is mixed,--
most games having in them both elements of interest,--since the
success of the player must depend as much on the chance of the
'deal' as on his skill in playing the game.  But even the chance
of the deal is liable to be perverted by all the tricks of
shuffling and cutting--not to mention how the honourable player
may be deceived in a thousand ways by the craft of the sharper,
during the playing, of the cards themselves; consequently
professed gamblers of all denominations, whether their games be
of apparent skill or mere chance, may be confounded together or
considered in the same category, as being equally meritorious and
equally infamous.

Under the name of the Doctrine of Chances or Probabilities, a
very learned science,--much in vogue when lotteries were
prevalent,--has been applied to gambling purposes; and in spite
of the obvious abstruseness of the science, it is not impossible
to give the general reader an idea of its processes and
conclusions.

The probability of an event is greater or less according to the
number of chances by which it may happen, compared with the whole
number of chances by which it may either happen or fail. 
Wherefore, if we constitute a fraction whereof the numerator be
the number of chances whereby an event may happen, and the
denominator the number of all the chances whereby it may either
happen or fail, that fraction will be a proper designation of the
probability of happening.  Thus, if an event has 3 chances to
happen, and 2 to fail, then the fraction 3/5 will fairly
represent the probability of its happening, and may be taken to
be the measure of it.

The same may be said of the probability of failing, which will
likewise be measured by a fraction whose numerator is the number
of chances whereby it may fail, and the denominator the whole
number of chances both for its happening and failing; thus the
probability of the failing of that event which has 2 chances to
fail and 3 to happen will be measured by the fraction 2/5.

The fractions which represent the probabilities of happening and
failing, being added together, their sum will always be equal to
unity, since the sum of their numerators will be equal to their
common denominator.  Now, it being a certainty that an event will
either happen or fail, it follows that certainty, which may be
conceived under the notion of an infinitely great degree of
probability, is fitly represented by unity.

These things will be easily apprehended if it be considered that
the word probability includes a double idea; first, of the number
of chances whereby an event may happen; secondly, of the number
of chances whereby it may either happen or fail.  If I say that I
have three chances to win any sum of money, it is impossible from
the bare assertion to judge whether I am likely to obtain it; but
if I add that the number of chances either to obtain it or miss
it, is five in all, from this will ensue a comparison between the
chances that are for and against me, whereby a true judgment will
be formed of my probability of success; whence it necessarily
follows that it is the comparative magnitude of the number of
chances to happen, in respect of the whole number of chances
either to happen or to fail, which is the true measure of
probability.

To find the probability of throwing an ace in two throws with a
single die.  The probability of throwing an ace the first time is
1/6; whereof 1/ is the first part of the probability required. 
If the ace be missed the first time, still it may be thrown on
the second; but the probability of missing it the first time is
5/6, and the probability of throwing it the second time is 1/6;
therefore the probability of missing it the first time and
throwing it the second, is 5/6 X 1/6 = 5/36 and this is the
second part of the probability required, and therefore the
probability required is in all 1/6 + 5/36 = 11/36.

To this case is analogous a question commonly proposed about
throwing with two dice either six or seven in two throws, which
will be easily solved, provided it be known that seven has 6
chances to come up, and six 5 chances, and that the whole number
of chances in two dice is 36; for the number of chances for
throwing six or seven 11, it follows that the probability of
throwing either chance the first time is 11/36, but if both are
missed the first time, still either may be thrown the second
time; but the probability of missing both the first time is
25/36, and the probability of throwing either of them on the
second is 11/36; therefore the probability of missing both of
them the first time, and throwing either of them the second time,
is 25/36 X 11/36 = 275/1296, and therefore the probability
required is 11/36 + 275/1296 = 671/1296, and the probability of
the contrary is 625/1296.

Among the many mistakes that are committed about chances, one of
the most common and least suspected was that which related to
lotteries.  Thus,supposing a lottery wherein the proportion of
the blanks to the prizes was as five to one, it was very natural
to conclude that, therefore, five tickets were requisite for the
chance of a prize; and yet it is demonstrable that four tickets
were more than sufficient for that purpose.  In like manner,
supposing a lottery in which the proportion of the blanks to the
prize is as thirty-nine to one (as was the lottery of 1710), it
may be proved that in twenty-eight tickets a prize is as likely
to be taken as not, which, though it may contradict the common
notions, is nevertheless grounded upon infallible demonstrations.

When the Play of the Royal Oak was in use, some persons who lost
considerably by it, had their losses chiefly occasioned by an
argument of which they could not perceive the fallacy.  The odds
against any particular point of the ball were one and thirty to
one, which entitled the adventurers, in case they were winners,
to have thirty-two stakes returned, including their own; instead
of which, as they had but twenty-eight, it was very plain that,
on the single account of the disadvantage of the play, they lost
one-eighth part of all the money played for.  But the master of
the ball maintained that they had no reason to complain, since he
would undertake that any particular point of the ball should come
up in two and twenty throws; of this he would offer to lay a
wager, and actually laid it when required.  The seeming
contradiction between the odds of one and thirty to one, and
twenty-two throws for any chance to come up, so perplexed the
adventurers that they began to think the advantage was on their
side, and so they went on playing and continued to lose.

The doctrine of chances tends to explode the long-standing
superstition that there is in play such a thing as LUCK, good or
bad.  If by saying that a man has good luck, nothing more were
meant than that he has been generally a gainer at play, the
expression might be allowed as very proper in a short way of
speaking; but if the word 'good luck' be understood to signify a
certain predominant quality, so inherent in a man that he must
win whenever he plays, or at least win oftener than lose, it may
be denied that there is any such thing in nature.  The asserters
of luck maintain that sometimes they have been very lucky, and at
other times they have had a prodigious run of bad luck against
them, which whilst it continued obliged them to be very cautious
in engaging with the fortunate.  They asked how they could lose
fifteen games running if bad luck had not prevailed strangely
against them.  But it is quite certain that although the odds
against losing so many times together be very great, namely,
32,767 to 1,--yet the POSSIBILITY of it is not destroyed by the
greatness of the odds, there being ONE chance in 32,768 that it
may so happen; therefore it follows that the succession of lost
games was still possible, without the intervention of bad luck. 
The accident of losing fifteen games is no more to be imputed to
bad luck than the winning, with one single ticket, the highest
prize in a lottery of 32,768 tickets is to be imputed to good
luck, since the chances in both cases are perfectly equal.  But
if it be said that luck has been concerned in the latter case,
the answer will be easy; for let us suppose luck not existing, or
at least let us suppose its influence to be suspended,--yet the
highest prize must fall into some hand or other, not as luck
(for, by the hypothesis, that has been laid aside), but from the
mere necessity of its falling somewhere.

Among the many curious results of these inquiries according to
the doctrine of chances, is the prodigious advantage which the
repetition of odds will amount to.  Thus, 'supposing I play with
an adversary who allows me the odds of 43 to 40, and agrees with
me to play till 100 stakes are won or lost on either side, on
condition that I give him an equivalent for the gain I am
entitled to by the advantage of my odds;--the question is, what I
am to give him, supposing we play at a guinea a stake?  The
answer is 99 guineas and above 18 shillings,[52] which will seem
almost incredible, considering the smallness of the odds--43 to
40.  Now let the odds be in any proportion, and let the number of
stakes played for be never so great, yet one general conclusion
will include all the possible cases, and the application of it to
numbers may be worked out in less than a minute's time.'[53]

[52] The guinea was worth 21s. 6d. when the work quoted was
written.


[53] De Moivre, Doctrine of Chances.


The possible combinations of cards in a hand as dealt out by
chance are truly wonderful.  It has been established by
calculation that a player at Whist may hold above 635 thousand
millions of various hands!  So that, continually varied, at 50
deals per evening, for 313 evenings, or 15,650 hands per annum,
he might be above 40 millions of years before he would have the
same hand again!

The chance is equal, in dealing cards, that every hand will have
seven trumps in two deals, or seven trumps between two partners,
and also four court cards in every deal.  It is also certain on
an average of hands, that nothing can be more superstitious and
absurd than the prevailing notions about luck or ill-luck.  Four
persons, constantly playing at Whist during a long voyage, were
frequently winners and losers to a large amount, but as
frequently at 'quits;' and at the end of the voyage, after the
last game, one of them was minus only one franc!

The chance of having a particular card out of 13 is 13/52, or 1
to 4, and the chance of holding any two cards is 1/4 of 1/4 or
1/16.  The chances of a game are generally inversely as the
number got by each, or as the number to be got to complete each
game.

The chances against holding seven trumps are 160 to 1; against
six, it is 26 to 1; against five, 6 to 1; and against four nearly
2 to 1.  It is 8 to 1 against holding any two particular cards.

Similar calculations have been made respecting the probabilities
with dice.  There are 36 chances upon two dice.

It is an even chance that you throw 8.  It is 35 to 1 against
throwing any particular doublets, and 6 to 1 against any doublets
at all.  It is 17 to 1 against throwing any two desired numbers. 
It is 4 to 9 against throwing a single number with either of the
dice, so as to hit a blot and enter.  Against hitting with the
amount of two dice, the chances against 7, 8, and 9 are 5 to 1;
against 10 are 11 to 1; against 11 are 17 to 1; and against
sixes, 35 to 1.

The probabilities of throwing required totals with two dice,
depend on the number of ways in which the totals can be made up
by the dice;--2, 3, 11, or 12 can only be made up one way each,
and therefore the chance is but 1/36;--4, 5, 9, 10 may be made up
two ways, or 1/8;--6, 7, 8 three ways, or 1/12.  The chance of
doublets is 1/36, the chance of PARTICULAR doublets 1/216.

The method was largely applied to lotteries, cock-fighting, and
horse-racing.  It may be asked how it is possible to calculate
the odds in horse-racing, when perhaps the jockeys in a great
measure know before they start which is to win?

In answer to this a question may be proposed:--Suppose I toss up
a half-penny, and you are to guess whether it will be head or
tail--must it not be allowed that you have an equal chance to win
as to lose?  Or, if I hide a half-penny under a hat, and I know
what it is, have you not as good a chance to guess right, as if
it were tossed up?  My KNOWING IT TO BE HEAD can be no hindrance
to you, as long as you have liberty of choosing either head or
tail.  In spite of this reasoning, there are people who build so
much upon their own opinion, that should their favourite horse
happen to be beaten, they will have it to be owing to some fraud.

The following fact is mentioned as a 'paradox.'

It happened at Malden, in Essex, in the year 1738, that three
horses (and no more than three) started for a L10 plate, and they
were all three distanced the first heat, according to the common
rules in horse-racing, without any quibble or equivocation; and
the following was the solution:--The first horse ran on the
inside of the post; the second wanted weight; and the third fell
and broke a fore-leg.[54]

[54] Cheany's Horse-racing Book.


In horse-racing the expectation of an event is considered as the
present value, or worth, of whatsoever sum or thing is depending
on the happening of that event.  Therefore if the expectation on
an event be divided by the value of the thing expected, on the
happening of that event, the quotient will be the probability of
happening.

Example I.  Suppose two horses, A and B, to start for L50, and
there are even bets on both sides; it is evident that the present
value or worth of each of their expectations will be L25, and the
probabilities 25/50 or 1/2.  For, if they had agreed to divide
the prize between them, according as the bets should be at the
time of their starting, they would each of them be entitled to
L25; but if A had been thought so much superior to B that the
bets had been 3 to 2 in his favour, then the real value of A's
expectation would have been L30, and that of B's only L20, and
their several probabilities 30/50 and 20/50.

Example II.  Let us suppose three horses to start for a
sweepstake, namely, A, B, and C, and that the odds are 8 to 6 A
against B, and 6 to 4 B against C--what are the odds--A against
C, and the field against A?  Answer:--2 to 1 A against C, and 10
to 8, or 5 to 4 the field against A.  For        
 A's expectation is 8        
 B's expectation is 6        
 C's expectation is 4 
                   ----                         
                    18

But if the bets had been 7 to 4 A against B; and even money B
against C, then the odds would have been 8 to 7 the field against
A, as shown in the following scheme:--         
7 A         
4 B         
4 C         
----         
15

But as this is the basis upon which all the rest depends, another
example or two may be required to make it as plain as possible.

Example III.  Suppose the same three as before, and the common
bets 7 to 4 A against B; 21 to 20 (or 'gold to silver') B against
C; we must state it thus:--7 guineas to 4 A against B; and 4
guineas to L4, B against C; which being reduced into shillings,
the scheme will stand as follows:--

147 A's expectation.          
 81 B's expectation.         
 80 C's expectation.         
----         
311

By which it will be 164 to 147 the field against A, (something
more than 39 to 35).  Now, if we compare this with the last
example, we may conclude it to be right; for if it had been 40 to
35, then it would have been 8 to 7, exactly as in the last
example.  But, as some persons may be at a loss to know why the
numbers 39 and 35 are selected, it is requisite to show the same
by means of the Sliding Rule.  Set 164 upon the line A to 147
upon the slider B, and then look along till you see two whole
numbers which stand exactly one against the other (or as near as
you can come), which, in this case, you find to be 39 on A,
standing against 35 on the slider B (very nearly).  But as
164/311 and 147/311 are in the lowest terms, there are no less
numbers, in the same proportion, as 164 to 147,--39 and 35 being
the nearest, but not quite exact.

Example IV.  There are four horses to start for a sweepstake,
namely, A, B, C, D, and they are supposed to be as equally
matched as possible.  Now, Mr Sly has laid 10 guineas A against
C, and also 10 guineas A against D.  Likewise Mr Rider has laid
10 guineas A against C, and also 10 guineas B against D.  After
which Mr Dice laid Mr Sly 10 guineas to 4 that he will not win
both his bets.  Secondly, he laid Mr Rider 10 guineas to 4 that
he will not win both his bets.

Now, we wish to know what Mr Dice's advantage or disadvantage is,
in laying these two last-mentioned wagers.

First, the probability of Mr Sly's winning both his bets is 1/3
of 14 guineas; and Mr Dice's expectation is 2/3 of 14 guineas, or
L9 16s., which being deducted from his own stake (10 guineas),
there remains 14s., which is his disadvantage in that bet.

Secondly, Mr Rider's expectation of winning his two bets is 1/4,
and, therefore, Mr Dice's expectation of the 14 guineas, is 3/4,
or L11 0s. 6d., from which deduct 10 guineas (his own stake), and
there remains 10s. 6d., his advantage in this bet,--which being
deducted from 14s. (his disadvantage in the other), there remains
3s 6d., his disadvantage in paying both these bets.

These examples may suffice to show the working of the system;
regular tables exist adapted to all cases; and there can be no
doubt that those who have realized large fortunes by horse-racing
managed to do so by uniformly acting on some such principles, as
well as by availing themselves of such 'valuable information' as
may be secured, before events come off, by those who make
horse-racing their business.

The same system was applied, and with still greater precision, to
Cock-fighting, to Lotteries, Raffles, Backgammon, Cribbage, Put,
All Fours, and Whist, showing all the chances of holding any
particular card or cards.  Thus, it is 2 to 1 that your partner
has not one certain card; 17 to 2 that he has not two certain
cards; 31 to 26 that he has not one of them only; and 32 to 25
(or 5 to 4) that he has one or both--that is, when two cards are
in question.  It is 31 to 1 that he has three certain cards; 7 to
2 that he has not two; 7 to 6 that he has not one; 13 to 6 that
he has either one or two; 5 to 2 that he has one, two, or three
cards; that is, when three cards are in question.

With regard to the dealer and his partner, it is 57,798 to 7176
(better than 8 to 1) that they are not four by honours; it is
32,527 to 32,448 (or about an even bet) that they are not two by
honours; it is 36,924 to 25,350 (or 11 to 7 nearly) that the
honours count; it is 42,237 to 22,737 (or 15 to 8 nearly) that
the dealer is nothing by honours.[55]

[55] Proctor, The Sportsman's Sure Guide.  Lond. A.D. 1733.


Such is a general sketch of the large subject included under the
term of the calculation of probabilities, which comprises not
only the chances of games of hazard, insurances, lotteries, &c.,
but also the determination of future events from observations
made relative to events of the same nature.  This subject of
inquiry dates only from the 17th century, and occupied the minds
of Pascal, Huygens, Fermot, Bernouilli, Laplace, Fourier,
Lacroix, Poisson, De Moivre; and in more modern times, Cournot,
Quetelet, and Professor De Morgan.

In the matter of betting, or in estimating the 'odds' in betting,
of course an acquaintance with the method must be of some
service, and there can be no doubt that professional gamesters
endeavoured to master the subject.

M. Robert-Houdin, in his amusing work, Les Tricheries des Grecs
devoilees, has propounded some gaming axioms which are at least
curious and interesting; they are presented as those of a
professional gambler and cheat.

1.  'Every game of chance presents two kinds of chances which are
very distinct,--namely, those relating to the person interested,
that is, the player; and those inherent in the combinations of
the game.'

In the former there is what must be called, for the want of a
better name, 'good luck' or 'bad luck,' that is, some mysterious
cause which at times gives the play a 'run' of good or bad luck;
in the latter there is the entire doctrine of 'probabilities'
aforesaid, which, according to M. Houdin's gaming hero, may be
completely discarded for the following axiom:--

2.  'If chance can bring into the game all possible combinations,
there are, nevertheless, certain limits at which it seems to
stop.  Such, for instance, as a certain number turning up ten
times in succession at Roulette.  This is possible, but it has
never happened.'

Nevertheless a most remarkable fact is on record.  In 1813, a Mr
Ogden betted 1000 guineas to ONE guinea, that calling seven as
the main, the caster would not throw that number ten times
successively.  Wonderful to relate! the caster threw seven nine
times following.  Thereupon Mr Ogden offered him 470 guineas to
be off the bet--which he refused.  The caster took the box again
and threw nine,--and so Mr Ogden won his guinea![56]  In this
case there seems to have been no suspicion whatever of unfair
dice being used.

[56] Seymour Harcourt, The Gaming Calendar.


3.  'In a game of chance, the oftener the same combination has
occurred in succession, the nearer we are to the certainty that
it will not recur at the next cast or turn up.  This is the most
elementary of the theories on probabilities; it is termed the
MATURITY OF THE CHANCES.'

'Hence,' according to this great authority, 'a player must come
to the table not only "in luck," but he must not risk his money
excepting at the instant prescribed by the rules of the maturity
of the chances.'

Founded on this theory we have the following precepts for
gamesters:--

1.  'For gaming, prefer Roulette, because it presents several
ways of staking your money[57]--which permits the study of
several.

[57] 'Pair, impair, passe, manque, and the 38 numbers of the
Roulette, besides the different combinations of POSITION' and
'maturities' together.


2.  'A player should approach the gaming table perfectly calm and
cool--just as a merchant or tradesman in treaty about any affair.

If he gets into a passion, it is all over with prudence, all over
with good luck--for the demon of bad luck invariably pursues a
passionate player.

3.  'Every man who finds a pleasure in playing runs the risk of
losing.

4.  'A prudent player, before undertaking anything, should put
himself to the test to discover if he is "in vein"--in luck.  In
all doubt, you should abstain.'

I remember a curious incident in my childhood, which seems much
to the point of this axiom.  A magnificent gold watch and chain
were given towards the building of a church, and my mother took
three chances, which were at a very high figure, the watch and
chain being valued at more than L100.  One of these chances was
entered in my name, one in my brother's, and the third in my
mother's.  I had to throw for her as well as myself.  My brother
threw an insignificant figure; for myself I did the same; but,
oddly enough, I refused to throw for my mother on finding that I
had lost my chance, saying that I should wait a little longer--
rather a curious piece of prudence for a child of thirteen.  The
raffle was with three dice; the majority of the chances had been
thrown, and 34 was the highest.  After declining to throw I went
on throwing the dice for amusement, and was surprised to find
that every throw was better than the one I had in the raffle.  I
thereupon said--'Now I'll throw for mamma.'  I threw thirty-six,
which won the watch!  My mother had been a large subscriber to
the building of the church, and the priest said that my winning
the watch for her was quite PROVIDENTIAL.  According to M.
Houdin's authority, however, it seems that I only got into
'vein'--but how I came to pause and defer throwing the last
chance, has always puzzled me respecting this incident of my
childhood, which made too great an impression ever to be effaced.

5.  'There are persons who are constantly pursued by bad luck. 
To such I say--NEVER PLAY.

6.  'Stubborness at play is ruin.

7.  'Remember that Fortune does not like people to be overjoyed
at her favours, and that she prepares bitter deceptions for the
imprudent, who are intoxicated by success.'

Such are the chief axioms of a most experienced gamester, and M.
Houdin sums up the whole into the following:--

8.  'Before risking your money at play, you must deeply study
your "vein" and the different probabilities of the game--termed
the maturity of the chances.'

M. Robert-Houdin got all this precious information from a
gamester named Raymond.  It appears that the first meeting
between him and this man was at a subscription-ball, where the
sharper managed to fleece him and others to a considerable
amount, contriving a dexterous escape when detected.  Houdin
afterwards fell in with him at Spa, where he found him in the
greatest poverty, and lent him a small sum--to practise his grand
theories as just explained--but which he lost--whereupon Houdin
advised him 'to take up a less dangerous occupation.'  He then
appears to have revealed to Houdin the entertaining particulars
which form the bulk of his book, so dramatically written.  A year
afterwards Houdin unexpectedly fell in with him again; but this
time the fellow was transformed into what he called 'a demi-
millionnaire,' having succeeded to a large fortune by the death
of his brother, who died intestate.  According to Houdin the
following was the man's declaration at the auspicious meeting:--
'I have,' said Raymond, 'completely renounced gaming.  I am rich
enough, and care no longer for fortune.  And yet,' he added
proudly, 'if I now cared for the thing, how I could BREAK those
bloated banks in their pride, and what a glorious vengeance I
could take of BAD LUCK and its inflexible agents!  But my heart
is too full of my happiness to allow the smallest place for the
desire of vengeance.'

A very proper speech, unquestionably, and rendered still more
edifying by M. Houdin's assurance that Raymond, at his death
three years after, bequeathed the whole of his fortune to various
charitable institutions at Paris.

With regard to the man's gaming theories, however, it may be just
as well to consider the fact, that very many clever people, after
contriving fine systems and schemes for ruining gaming banks,
have, as M. Houdin reminds us, only succeeded in ruining
themselves and those who conformed to their precepts.

 Et s'il est un joueur qui vive de son pain,  On en voit tous les
jours mille mourir de faim.

 'If ONE player there be that can live by his gain,  There are
thousands that starve and strive ever in vain!'


CHAPTER IX.

THE HISTORY OF DICE AND CARDS.

The knights of hazard and devotees of chance, who live in and by
the rattle of the box, little know, or care, perhaps, to whom
they are indebted for the invention of their favourite cube. 
They will solace themselves, no doubt, on being told that they
are pursuing a diversion of the highest antiquity, and which has
been handed down through all civilized as well as barbarous
nations to our own times.

The term 'cube,' which is the figure of a die, comes originally
from the Arabic word 'ca'b,' or 'ca'be,' whence the Greeks
derived their cubos, and cubeia, which is used to signify any
solid figure perfectly square every way--such as the geometrical
cube, the die used in play, and the temple at Mecca, which is of
the same figure.  The Persic name for 'die' is 'dad,' and from
this word is derived the name of the thing in Spanish,
Portuguese, and Italian, namely, dado.  In the old French it is
det, in the plural dets; in modern French de and dez, whence our
English name 'die,' and its plural 'dies,' or 'dice.'

Plato tells us that dice and gaming originated with a certain
demon, whom he calls Theuth, which seems very much like the
original patronymic of our Teutonic races, always famous for
their gambling propensity.  The Greeks generally, however,
ascribed the invention of dice to one of their race, named
Palamedes, a sort of universal genius, who hit upon many other
contrivances, among the rest, weights and measures.  But this
worthy lived in the times of the Trojan war, and yet Homer makes
no mention of dice--the astragaloi named by the poet being merely
knuckle-bones.  Dice, however, are mentioned by Aristophanes in
his comedies, and so it seems that the invention must be placed
between the times of the two poets, that is, about 2300 years
ago.  At any rate the cube or die has been in use as an
instrument of play, at least, during that period of time.

The great antiquity, therefore, of the die as an instrument of
pastime is unquestionable, and the general reason assigned for
its invention was the amusement and relaxation of the mind from
the pressure of difficulties, or from the fatigues and toils of
protracted war.  Indeed, one conjecture is, that gaming was
invented by the Lydians when under the pressure of a great
famine; to divert themselves from their sufferings they contrived
dice, balls, tables, &c.  This seems, however, rather a bad joke.

The afflicted Job asks--'Can a man fill his belly with the east
wind?'  And we can imagine that plenty of tobacco to smoke and
'chaw' would mitigate the pangs of starvation to an army in the
field, as has been seriously suggested; but you might just as
well present a soldier with a stone instead of bread, as invite
him to amuse himself with dice, or anything else, to assuage the
pangs of hunger.

Be that as it may, time soon matured this instrument of
recreation into an engine of destruction; and the intended
palliative of care and labour has proved the fostering nurse of
innumerable evils.  This diminutive cube has usurped a tyranny
over mankind for more than two thousand years, and continues at
this day to rule the world with despotic sway-- levelling all
distinctions of fortune in an instant by the fiat of its single
turn.

The use of dice was probably brought into this island by the
Romans, if not before known; it became more frequent in the times
of our Saxon ancestry, and has prevailed with almost unimpaired
vigour from those days to our own.

The Astragalos of the Greeks and Talus of the Romans were, as
before stated, nothing but the knuckle-bones of sheep and goats,
numbered, and used for gaming, being tossed up in the air and
caught on the back of the hand.  Two persons played together at
this game, using four bones, which they threw up into the air or
emptied out of a dice-box (fritillus), observing the numbers of
the opposite sides.  The numbers on the four sides of the four
bones admitted of thirty-five different combinations.  The lowest
throw of all was four aces; but the value of the throw was not in
all cases the sum of the four numbers turned up.  The highest in
value was that called Venus, in which the numbers cast up were
all different; the sum of them being only fourteen.  It was by
obtaining this throw, hence called basilicus, that 'the King of
the Feast' was appointed by the Romans.  Certain other throws
were called by particular names, taken from the gods, heroes,
kings, courtesans, animals; altogether there were sixty- four
such names.  Thus, the throw consisting of two aces and two
treys, making eight, was denominated Stesichorus.  When the
object was simply to throw the highest number, the game was
called pleistobolinda, a Greek word of that meaning.  When a
person threw the tali, he often invoked either a god or his
mistress.

Dice were also made of ivory, bone, or some close-grained wood,
especially privet ligustris tesseris utilissima, Plin. H. N.). 
They were numbered as at present.

Arsacides, King of the Parthians, presented Demetrius Nicator,
among other presents, with golden dice--it is said, in contempt
for his frivolous propensity to play--in exprobationem puerilis
levitatis.'[58]

[58] Justini Hist., lib.  xxxviii. 9. 9.


Dice are also mentioned in the New Testament, where occurs the
word cubeia (Eph. iv. 14), ('the only word for "gambling" used in
the Bible'), a word in very common use, among Paul's kith and
kin, for 'cube,' 'dice,' 'dicery,' and it occurs frequently in
the Talmud and Midrash.  The Mishna declares unfit either as
'judge or witness,' 'a cubea-player, a usurer, a pigeon-flier
(betting-man), a vendor of illegal (seventh-year) produce, and a
slave.'  A mitigating clause--proposed by one of the weightiest
legal authorities, to the effect that the gambler and his kin
should only be disqualified 'if they have but that one
profession'--is distinctly negatived by the majority, and the
rule remains absolute.  The classical word for the gambler or
dice-player, cubeutes, appears aramaized in the same sources into
something like kubiustis, as the following curious instances may
show:  When the Angel, after having wrestled with Jacob all
night, asks him to let him go, 'for the dawn has risen' (A. V.,
'the day breaketh'), Jacob is made to reply to him, 'Art thou,
then, a thief or a kubiustis, that thou art afraid of the day?' 
To which the Angel replies, 'No, I am not; but it is my turn to-
day, and for the first time, to sing the Angelic Hymn of Praise
in Heaven: let me go.'  In another Tadmudical passage an early
biblical critic is discussing certain arithmetical difficulties
in the Pentateuch.  Thus he finds the number of Levites (in
Numbers) to differ, when summed up from the single items, from
that given in the total.  Worse than that, he finds that all the
gold and silver contributed to the sanctuary is not accounted
for, and, clinching his argument, he cries, 'Is, then, your
master Moses a thief or a kubiustis?  Or could he not make up his
accounts properly?'  The critic is then informed of a certain
difference between 'sacred' and other coins; and he further gets
a lesson in the matter of Levites and Firstborn, which silences
him.  Again, the Talmud decides that, if a man have bought a
slave who turns out to be a thief or a kubiustis,--which has here
been erroneously explained to mean a 'manstealer,'--he has no
redress.  He must keep him, as he bought him, or send him away;
for he has bought him with all his vices.

Regarding the translation 'sleight' in the A.V., this seems a
correct enough rendering of the term as far as the SENSE of the
passage goes, and comes very near the many ancient
translations--'nequitia,' 'versutia,' 'inanis labor,' 'vana et
inepta (?) subtilitas,' &c., of the Fathers.  Luther has
'Schalkheit,'--a word the meaning of which at his time differed
considerably from our acceptation of the term.  The Thesaurus
takes Paul's cubeia (s.v.) more literally, to mean 'in alea
hominum, i. e., in certis illis casibus quibus jactantur
homines.'[59]

[59] E. Deutseh in the Athenaeum of Sept. 28, 1867.


The ancient tali, marked and thrown as above described, were also
used in DIVINATION, just as dice are at the present day; and
doubtless the interpretations were the same among the ancients--
for all superstitions are handed down from generation to
generation with wondrous fidelity.  The procedure is curious
enough, termed 'the art of telling fortunes by dice.'

Three dice are taken and well shaken in the box with the left
hand, and then cast out on a board or table on which a circle is
previously drawn with chalk; and the following are the supposed
predictions of the throws:--

Three, a pleasing surprise; four, a disagreeable one; five, a
stranger who will prove a friend; six, loss of property; seven,
undeserved scandal; eight, merited reproach; nine, a wedding;
ten, a christening, at which some important event will occur;
eleven, a death that concerns you; twelve, a letter speedily;
thirteen, tears and sighs; fourteen, beware that you are not
drawn into some trouble or plot by a secret enemy; fifteen,
immediate prosperity and happiness; sixteen, a pleasant journey;
seventeen, you will either be on the water, or have dealings with
those belonging to it, to your advantage; eighteen, a great
profit, rise in life, or some desirable good will happen almost
immediately, for the answers to the dice are said to be fulfilled
within nine days.  To throw the same number twice at one trial
shows news from abroad, be the number what it may.  If the dice
roll over the circle, the number thrown goes for nothing, but the
occurrence shows sharp words impending; and if they fall on the
floor it is blows.  In throwing the dice if one remain on the top
of the other, 'it is a present of which you must take care,'
namely, 'a little stranger' at hand.

Two singular facts throw light on the kind of dice used some 100
and 150 years ago.  In an old cribbage card-box, curiously
ornamented, supposed to have been made by an amateur in the reign
of Queen Anne, and now in my possession, I found a die with one
end fashioned to a point, evidently for the purpose of spinning--
similar to the modern teetotum.  With the same lot at the sale
where it was bought, was a pack of cards made of ivory, about an
inch and a half in length and one inch in width--in other
respects exactly like the cards of the period.

Again, it is stated that in taking up the floors of the Middle
Temple Hall, about the year 1764, nearly 100 pairs of dice were
found, which had dropped, on different occasions, through the
chinks or joints of the boards.  They were very small, at least
one-third less that those now in use.  Certainly the benchers of
those times did not keep the floor of their magnificent hall in a
very decent condition.

A curious fact relating to dice may here be pointed out.  Each of
the six sides of a die is so dotted or numbered that the top and
bottom of every die (taken together) make 7; for if the top or
uppermost side is 5, the bottom or opposite side will be 2; and
the same holds through every face; therefore, let the number of
dice be what it may, their top and bottom faces, added together,
must be equal to the number of dice multiplied by 7.  In throwing
three dice, if 2, 3, and 4 are thrown, making 9, their
corresponding bottom faces will be 5, 4, and 3, making 12, which
together are 21--equal to the three dice multiplied by 7.

CARDS.

The origin of cards is as doubtful as that of dice.  All that we
know for certain is that they were first used in the East.  Some
think that the figures at first used on them were of moral
import: the Hindoo and Chinese cards are certainly emblematic in
a very high degree; the former illustrate the ten avatars, or
incarnations of the deity Vishnu; and the so-called 'paper-
tickets' of the Chinese typify the stars, the human virtues, and,
indeed, every variety of subject.  Sir William Jones was
convinced that the Hindoo game of Chaturaji--that is, 'the Four
Rajahs or Kings'--a species of highly-complicated chess--was the
first germ of that parti-coloured pasteboard, which has been the
ruin of so many modern fortunes.  A pack of Hindoostani cards, in
the possession of the Royal Asiatic Society, and presented to
Captain Cromline Smith in 1815, by a high caste Brahman, was
declared by the donor to be actually 1000 years old: 'Nor,' said
the Brahman, 'can any of us now play at them, for they are not
like our modern cards at all.'  Neither, indeed, do they bear any
remarkable resemblance to our own--the pack consisting of no less
than eight sorts of divers colours, the kings being mounted upon
elephants, and viziers, or second honours, upon horses, tigers,
and bulls.  Moreover, there are other marks distinguishing the
respective value of the common cards, which would puzzle our
club-quidnuncs not a little--such as 'a pine-apple in a shallow
cup,' and a something like a parasol without a handle, and with
two broken ribs sticking through the top.  The Chinese cards have
the advantage over those of Hindoostan by being oblong instead of
circular.

It was not before the end of the 14th century that cards became
known in Europe; and it is a curious fact that the French clergy
took greatly to card-playing about that time--their favourite
game being the rather ungenteel 'All Fours,' as now reputed; for
they were specially forbidden that pastime by the Synod of
Langres in 1404.

The ancient cards of both Spain and France, particularly the
'court-cards,' exhibit strong marks of the age of chivalry; but
here we may observe that the word is written by some ancient
writers, 'coate-cards,' evidently signifying no more than figures
in particular dresses.  The giving pre-eminence or victory to a
certain suit, by the name of 'trump,' which is only a corruption
of the word 'triumph,' is a strong trait of the martial ideas of
the inventors of these games.  So that, if the Chinese started
the idea, it seems clear that the French and Spanish improved
upon it and gave it a plain significance; and there is no reason
to doubt that cards were actually employed to amuse Charles VI.
in his melancholy and dejection.

The four suits of cards are supposed to represent the four
estates of a kingdom:--1.  The nobility and gentry; 2.  The
ecclesiastics or priesthood; 3.  The citizens or commercial men;
4.  The peasantry or Husbandmen.  The nobility are represented in
the old Spanish cards by the espada, or sword, corrupted by us
into 'spades,'--by the French with piques, 'pikes or spears.' 
The ecclesiastical order is pointed out by copas, or sacramental
cups, which are painted in one of the suits of old Spanish cards,
and by coeurs, or 'hearts,' on French cards, as in our
own--thereby signifying choir-men, gens de choeur, or
ecclesiastics--from choeur de l'eglise, 'the choir of the
church,' that being esteemed the most important part or the HEART
of the church.

The Spaniards depicted their citizens or commercial men under
dineros, a small coin, an emblem very well adapted to the
productive classes; the French by carreaux, squares or
lozenges--importing, perhaps, unity of interest, equality of
condition, regularity of manners, and the indispensable duty of
this class of men to deal with one another 'on the square.'  The
Spaniards made bastos, or knotty clubs, the emblem of the 'bold
peasantry,' taken probably from the custom that the plebeians
were permitted to challenge or fight each other with sticks and
quarter-staves only, but not with the sword, or any arms carried
by a gentleman; while the French peasantry were pointed out under
the ideas of husbandry, namely, by the trefles, trefoil or
clover-grass.  So much for the SUITS.

With regard to the depicted figures of cards, each nation
likewise followed its own inventions, though grounded in both on
those ideas of chivalry which then strongly prevailed.  The
Spanish cards were made to carry the insignia and accoutrements
of the King of Spain, the ace of deneros being emblazoned with
the royal arms, supported by an eagle.  The French ornamented
their cards with fleurs de lis, their royal emblem.  The Spanish
kings, in conformity to the martial spirit of the times when
cards were introduced, were all mounted on horseback, as befitted
generals and commanders-in-chief; but their next in command
(among the cards) was el caballo, the knight-errant on
horseback--for the old Spanish cards had no queens; and the third
in order was the soto, or attendant, that is, the esquire, or
armour-bearer of the knight--all which was exactly conformable to
those ideas of chivalry which ruled the age.  It is said that
David (king of spades), tormented by a rebellious son, is the
emblem of Charles VII., menaced by his son (Louis XI.), and that
Argine (queen of clubs) is the anagram of Regina, and the emblem
of Marie d'Anjou, the wife of that prince; that Pallas (queen of
spades) represents Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans; that Rachel
(queen of diamonds) is Agnes Sorel; lastly, that Judith (queen of
hearts) is the Queen Isabeau.  The French call the queens at
cards dames.

The four knaves (called in French, valets or varlets) are four
valiant captains--Ogier and Lancelot, the companions of
Charlemagne, Hector de Gallard, and Lahire, the generals of
Charles VII.  The remainder of the pack equally presents a sort
of martial allegory; the heart is bravery; the spade (espad,
'sword') and the diamond (carreau, that is, a square or shield)
are the arms of war; the club (in French trefle, 'trefoil') is
the emblem of provisions; and the ace (in French as, from the
Latin aes, 'coin') is the emblem of money--the sinews of war.

In accordance with this allegorical meaning, the function of the
ace is most significant.  It leads captive every other card,
queen and king included--thus indicating the omnipotence of gold
or mammon!

'To the mighty god of this nether world--   
To the spirit that roams with banner unfurl'd        
O'er the Earth and the rolling Sea--   
And hath conquer'd all to his thraldom   
Where his eye hath glanced or his footstep sped--   
Who hath power alike o'er the living and dead--        
Mammon![59]  I sing to thee!

[59] Steinmetz Ode to Mammon.


Some say that the four kings represent those famous champions of
antiquity--David, Alexander, Julius Caesar, and Charlemagne; and
that the four queens, Argine, Pallas, Esther, and Judith, are the
respective symbols of majesty, wisdom, piety, and fortitude; and
there can be no doubt, if you look attentively on the queens of a
pack of cards, you will easily discern the appropriate
expressions of all these attributes in the faces of the grotesque
ladies therein depicted.  The valets, or attendants, whom we call
knaves, are not necessarily 'rascals,' but simply servants royal;
at first they were knights, as appears from the names of some of
the famous French knights being formerly painted on the cards.

Thus a pack of cards is truly a monument of the olden time--the
days of chivalry and its numberless associations.

In addition to the details I have given in the previous chapter
respecting the probability of holding certain cards, there are a
few other curious facts concerning them, which it may be
interesting to know.

There is a difference in the eyes of two of the knaves--those of
diamonds and hearts, more apparent in the old patterns,
suggesting the inference that they are blind.  This has been made
the basis of a card trick, as to which two of the four knaves
presenting themselves would be selected as servants.  Of course
the blind ones would be rejected.  A bet is sometimes proposed to
the unwary, at Whist, but one of the party will have in his hand,
after the deal, only one of a suit, or none of a suit.  The bet
should not be taken, as this result very frequently happens.

Lastly, there is an arithmetical puzzle of the most startling
effect to be contrived with a pack of cards, as follows.  Let a
party make up parcels of cards, beginning with a number of pips
on any card, and then counting up to twelve with individual
cards.  In the first part of the trick it must be understood that
the court cards count as ten, all others according to the pips. 
Thus, a king put down will require only two cards to make up 12,
whereas the ace will require 11, and so on.  Now, when all the
parcels are completed, the performer of the trick requires to
know only the number of parcels thus made, and the remainder, if
any, to declare after a momentary calculation, the exact number
of pips on the first cards laid down--to the astonishment of
those not in the secret.  In fact, there is no possible
arrangement of the cards, according to this method, which can
prevent an adept from declaring the number of pips required,
after being informed of the number of parcels, and the remainder,
if any.  This startling performance will be explained in a
subsequent chapter--amusing card tricks.

Cards must soon have made their way among our countrymen, from
the great intercourse that subsisted between England and France
about the time of the first introduction of cards into the latter
kingdom.  If the din of arms in the reign of our fifth Henry
should seem unfavourable to the imitation of an enemy's private
diversions, it must be remembered that France was at that period
under the dominion of England, that the English lived much in
that country, and consequently joined in the amusements of the
private hour, as well as in the public dangers of the field.

Very soon, however, the evil consequences of their introduction
became apparent.  One would have thought that in such a
tumultuous reign at home as that of our sixth Henry, there could
not have been so much use made of cards as to have rendered them
an object of public apprehension and governmental solicitude; but
a record appears in the beginning of the reign of Edward IV.,
after the deposition of the unfortunate Henry, by which playing
cards, as well as dice, tennis-balls, and chessmen, were
forbidden to be imported.

If this tended to check their use for a time, the subsequent
Spanish connection with the court of England renewed an
acquaintance with cards and a love for them.  The marriage of
Prince Arthur with the Infanta Catherine of Arragon, brought on
an intimacy between the two nations, which probably increased
card-playing in England,--it being a diversion to which the
Spaniards were extremely addicted at that period.

Cards were certainly much in use, and all ideas concerning them
very familiar to the minds of the English, during the reign of
Henry VIII., as may be inferred from a remarkable sermon of the
good bishop Latimer.  This sermon was preached in St Edward's
church, Cambridge, on the Sunday before Christmas day, 1527, and
in this discourse he may be said to have 'dealt' out an
exposition of the precepts of Christianity according to the terms
of card-playing.  'Now ye have heard what is meant by this "first
card," and how you ought to "play" with it, I purpose again to
"deal" unto you "another card almost of the same suit," for they
be of so nigh affinity that one cannot be well "played" without
the other, &c.'  'It seems,' says Fuller, 'that he suited his
sermon rather to the TIME--being about Christmas, when cards were
much used--than to the text, which was the Baptist's question to
our Lord--"Who art thou?"--taking thereby occasion to conform his
discourse to the "playing at cards," making the "heart triumph."'

This blunt preaching was in those days admirably effectual,
but it would be considered ridiculous in ours--except from the
lips of such original geniuses as Mr Spurgeon, who hit upon this
vein and made a fortune of souls as well as money.  He is,
however, inimitable, and any attempt at entering into his domain
would probably have the same result as that which attended an
imitation of Latimer by a country minister, mentioned by Fuller. 
'I remember,' he says, 'in my time (about the middle of the
seventeenth century), a country minister preached at St Mary's,
from Rom. xii. 3,--"As God has DEALT to every man the measure of
faith."  In a fond imitation of Latimer's sermon he followed up
the metaphor of DEALING,--that men should PLAY ABOVE-BOARD, that
is, avoid all dissembling,--should not POCKET CARDS, but improve
their gifts and graces,--should FOLLOW SUIT, that is, wear the
surplice, &c.,-- all which produced nothing but laughter in the
audience.  Thus the same actions by several persons at several
times are made not the same actions, yea, differenced from
commendable discretion to ridiculous absurdity.  And thus he will
make but bad music who hath the instruments and fiddlesticks, but
none of the "resin" of Latimer.'

The habit of card-playing must have been much confirmed and
extended by the marriage of Philip of Spain with our Queen Mary,
whose numerous and splendid retinue could not but bring with them
that passionate love of cards which prevailed in the Spanish
court.

It seems also probable that the cards then used (whatever they
might have been before) were of Spanish form and figure, in
compliment to the imperious Philip; since even to this day the
names of two Spanish suits are retained on English cards, though
without any reference to their present figure.  Thus, we call one
suit spades, from the Spanish espada, 'sword,' although we retain
no similitude of the sword in the figure,--and another clubs, in
Spanish, bastos, but without regard to the figure also.

Old Roger Ascham, the tutor of Queen Elizabeth, gives us a
picture of the gambling arts of his day, as follows:--How will
they use these shiftes when they get a plaine man that cannot
skill of them!  How they will go about, if they perceive an
honest man have moneye, which list not playe, to provoke him to
playe!  They will seek his companye; they will let him pay
noughte, yea, and as I hearde a man once saye that he did, they
will send for him to some house, and spend perchaunce a crowne on
him, and, at last, will one begin to saye: at, my masters, what
shall we do?  Shall every man playe his twelve-pence while an
apple roste in the fire, and then we will drincke and departe?" 
"Naye" will another saye (as false as he), "you cannot leave when
you begin, and therefore I will not playe: but if you will gage,
that every man as he hath lost his twelve-pence, shall sit downe,
I am contente, for surelye I would Winne no manne's moneye here,
but even as much as woulde pay for my supper."  Then speaketh the
thirde to the honeste man that thought not to play:--"What?  Will
you play your twelve-pence?"  If he excuse him--"Tush! man!" will
the other saye, "sticke not in honeste company for twelve-pence;
I will beare your halfe, and here is my moneye."  Nowe all this
is to make him to beginne, for they knowe if he be once in, and
be a loser, that he will not sticke at his twelve-pence, but
hopeth ever to get it againe, whiles perhappes he will lose all. 
Then every one of them setteth his shiftes abroache, some with
false dyse, some with settling of dyse, some with having
outlandish silver coynes guilded, to put awaye at a time for good
golde.  Then, if there come a thing in controversye, must you be
judged by the table, and then farewell the honeste man's parte,
for he is borne downe on every syde.'

It is evident from this graphic description of the process, that
the villany of sharpers has been ever the same; for old Roger's
account of the matter in his day exactly tallies with daily
experience at the present time.

The love of card-playing was continued through the reign of
Elizabeth and James I.,[60] and in the reign of the latter it had
reached so high a pitch that the audiences used to amuse
themselves with cards at the play-house, while they were waiting
for the beginning of the play.  The same practice existed at
Florence.  If the thing be not done at the present day, something
analogous prevails in our railway carriages throughout the
kingdom.  It is said that professed card-sharpers take
season-tickets on all the lines, and that a great DEAL of money
is made by the gentry by duping unwary travellers into a game or
by betting.

[60] King James, the British Solomon, although he could not
'abide' tobacco, and denounced it in a furious 'Counterblaste,'
could not 'utterly condemn' play, or, as he calls it, 'fitting
house-pastimes.'  'I will not,' he says, 'agree in forbidding
cards, dice, and other like games of Hazard,' and enters into an
argument for his opinion, which is scarcely worth quoting.  See
Basilicon Doron--a prodigy of royal fatuity--but the perfect
'exponent' of the characteristics of the Stuart royal race in
England.


There is no reason to suppose that the fondness for this
diversion abated, except during the short 'trump or triumph of
the fanatic suit'--in the hard times of Old Oliver--when
undoubtedly cards were styled 'the devil's books.'  But, indeed,
by that time they had become an engine of much fraud and
destruction; so that one of the early acts of Charles II.'s reign
inflicted large penalties on those who should use cards for
fraudulent purposes.

'Primero was the fashionable game at the court of England during
the Tudor dynasty.  Shakspeare represents Henry VIII. playing at
it with the Duke of Suffolk; and Falstaff says, "I never
prospered since I forswore myself at Primero."  In the Earl of
Northumberland's letters about the Gunpowder-plot, it is noticed
that Joscelin Percy was playing at this game on Sunday, when his
uncle, the conspirator, called on him at Essex House.  In the
Sidney papers, there is an account of a desperate quarrel between
Lord Southampton, the patron of Shakspeare, and one Ambrose
Willoughby.  Lord Southampton was then "Squire of the Body" to
Queen Elizabeth, and the quarrel was occasioned by Willoughby
persisting to play with Sir Walter Raleigh and another at
Primero, in the Presence Chamber, after the queen had retired to
rest, a course of proceeding which Southampton would not permit. 
Primero, originally a Spanish game, is said to have been made
fashionable in England by Philip of Spain, after his marriage
with Queen Mary.

Maw succeeded Primero as the fashionable game at the English
court, and was the favourite game of James I., who appears to
have played at cards, just as he played with affairs of state, in
an indolent manner; requiring in both cases some one to hold his
cards, if not to prompt him what to play.  Weldon, alluding to
the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, in his Court and Character
of King James, says:  'The next that came on the stage was Sir
Thomas Monson, but the night before he was to come to his trial,
the king being at the game of Maw, said, "To-morrow comes Thomas
Monson to his trial."  "Yea," said the king's card-holder,
"where, if he do not play his master's prize, your Majesty shall
never trust me."  This so ran in the king's mind, that at the
next game he said he was sleepy, and would play out that set the
next night.

'It is evident that Maw differed very slightly from Five Cards,
the most popular game in Ireland at the present day.  As early as
1674 this game was popular in Ireland, as we learn from Cotton's
Compleat Gamester, which says:  "Five Cards is an Irish game, and
is much played in that kingdom for considerable sums of money, as
All-fours is played in Kent, and Post-and-pair in the west of
England."

'Noddy was one of the old English court games.  This has been
supposed to have been a children's game, and it was certainly
nothing of the kind.  Its nature is thus fully described in a
curious satirical poem, entitled Batt upon Batt, published in
1694.

"Show me a man can turn up Noddy still,       
And deal himself three fives too, when he will;       
Conclude with one-and-thirty, and a pair,       
Never fail ten in Stock, and yet play fair,       
If Batt be not that wight, I lose my aim."

'From these lines, there can be no doubt that the ancient Noddy
was the modern cribbage--the Nod of to-day, rejoicing in the name
of Noddy, and the modern Crib, being termed the Stock.

'Ombre was most probably introduced into this country by
Catherine of Portugal, the queen of Charles II.; Waller, the
court poet, has a poem on a card torn at Ombre by the queen. 
This royal lady also introduced to the English court the
reprehensible practice of playing cards on Sunday.  Pepys, in
1667, writes:  "This evening, going to the queen's side to see
the ladies, I did find the queen, the Duchess of York, and
another at cards, with the room full of ladies and great men;
which I was amazed at to see on a Sunday, having not believed,
but contrarily flatly denied the same, a little while since, to
my cousin."[61]

[61] Hombre, or rather El Hombre, or 'The Man,' was so named as
requiring thought and reflection, which are qualities peculiar to
man; or rather, alluding to him who undertakes to play the game
against the rest of the gamesters, emphatically called The Man. 
It requires very great application to play it well: and let a man
be ever so expert, he will be apt to fall into mistakes if he
thinks of anything else, or is disturbed by the conversation of
those that look on.  It is a game of three, with 40 cards, that
is, rejecting the eights, nines, and tens of all the suits.


'In a passage from Evelyn's Memoirs, the writer impressively
describes another Sunday-evening scene at Whitehall, a few days
before the death of Charles II., in which a profligate assemblage
of courtiers is represented as deeply engaged in the game of
Basset.  This was an Italian game, brought by Cardinal Mazarin to
France; Louis XIV. is said to have lost large sums at it; and it
was most likely brought to England by some of the French ladies
of the court.  It did not stand its ground, however, in this
country; Ombre continuing the fashionable game in England, down
till after the expiration of the first quarter of the last
century.

'Quadrille succeeded Ombre, but for a curious reason did not
reign so long as its predecessor.  From the peculiar nature of
Quadrille, an unfair confederacy might be readily established, by
any two persons, by which the other players could be cheated.

'While the preceding games were in vogue the magnificent temple
of Whist, destined to outshine and overshadow them, was in course
of erection.

"Let India vaunt her children's vast address,       
Who first contrived the warlike sport of Chess;       
Let nice Piquette the boast of France remain,       
And studious Ombre be the pride of Spain;        
Invention's praise shall England yield to none,      
When she can call delightful Whist her own."

'All great inventions and discoveries are works of time, and
Whist is no exception to the rule; it did not come into the world
perfect at all points, as Minerva emerged from the head of
Jupiter.  Nor were its wonderful merits early recognized.  Under
the vulgar appellations of Whisk and Swobbers, it long lingered
in the servants'-hall ere it could ascend to the drawing-room. 
At length, some gentlemen, who met at the Crown coffee-house, in
Bedford Row, studied the game, gave it rules, established its
principles, and then Edward Hoyle, in 1743, blazoned forth its
fame to all the world.

'Many attempts have been made, at various times, to turn playing-
cards to a very different use from that for which they were
originally intended.  Thus, in 1518, a learned Franciscan friar,
named Murner, published a Logica Memorativa, a mode of teaching
logic, by a pack of cards; and, subsequently, he attempted to
teach a summary of civil law in the same manner.  In 1656, an
Englishman, named Jackson, published a work, entitled the
Scholar's Sciential Cards, in which he proposed to teach reading,
spelling, grammar, writing, and arithmetic, with various arts and
sciences, by playing-cards; premising that the learner was well
grounded in all the games played at the period.  And later still,
about the close of the seventeenth century, there was published
the Genteel Housekeeper's Pastime; or the Mode of Carving at
Table represented in a Pack of Playing-Cards, by which any one of
ordinary Capacity may learn how to Carve, in Mode, all the most
usual Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked Meats, with the
several Sauces and Garnishes proper to Every Dish of Meat.  In
this system, flesh was represented by hearts, fish by clubs, fowl
by diamonds, and baked-meat by spades.  The king of hearts ruled
a noble sirloin of roast-beef; the monarch of clubs presided over
a pickled herring; and the king of diamonds reared his battle-axe
over a turkey; while his brother of spades smiled benignantly on
a well-baked venison-pasty.

'The kind of advertisements, now called circulars, were often,
formerly, printed on the backs of playing-cards.  Visiting-cards,
too, were improvised, by writing the name on the back of playing-
cards.  About twenty years ago, when a house in Dean Street,
Soho, was under repair, several visiting-cards of this
description were found behind a marble chimney-piece, one of them
bearing the name of Isaac Newton.  Cards of invitation were
written in a similar manner.  In the fourth picture, in Hogarth's
series of "Marriage a-la-Mode," several are seen lying on the
floor, upon one of which is inscribed:  "Count Basset begs to no
how Lade Squander sleapt last nite."  Hogarth, when he painted
this inscription, was most probably thinking of Mrs Centlivre's
play, The Basset Table, which a critic describes as containing a
great deal of plot and business, without much sentiment or
delicacy.

'A curious and undoubtedly authentic historical anecdote is told
of a pack of cards.  Towards the end of the persecuting reign of
Queen Mary, a commission was granted to a Dr Cole to go over to
Ireland, and commence a fiery crusade against the Protestants of
that country.  On coming to Chester, on his way, the doctor was
waited on by the mayor, to whom he showed his commission,
exclaiming, with premature triumph, "Here is what shall lash the
heretics of Ireland."  Mrs Edmonds, the landlady of the inn,
having a brother in Dublin, was much disturbed by overhearing
these words; so, when the doctor accompanied the mayor
downstairs, she hastened into his room, opened his box, took out
the commission, and put a pack of cards in its place.  When the
doctor returned to his apartment, he put the box into his
portmanteau without suspicion, and the next morning sailed for
Dublin.  On his arrival he waited on the lord-lieutenant and
privy council, to whom he made a speech on the subject of his
mission, and then presented the box to his Lordship; but on
opening it, there appeared only a pack of cards, with the knave
of clubs uppermost.  The doctor was petrified, and assured the
council that he had had a commission, but what was become of it
he could not tell.  The lord-lieutenant answered, "Let us have
another commission, and, in the mean while, we can shuffle the
cards."  Before the doctor could get his commission renewed Queen
Mary died, and thus the persecution was prevented.  We are
further informed that, when Queen Elizabeth was made acquainted
with the circumstances, she settled a pension of L40 per annum on
Mrs Edmonds, for having saved her Protestant subjects in
Ireland.'[62]

[62] The Book of Days, Dec. 28.


All the pursuits of life, all the trades and occupations of men,
have, in all times, lent expressions to the languages of nations,
and those resulting from the propensity of GAMING are among those
which perpetually recur in daily conversation, and with the
greatest emphasis.  Thus we have:--'He has played his cards well
or ill,'--applied to the management of fortune or one's interest;
jacta est alea, 'the die is cast,' as exclaimed Julius Caesar
before crossing the Rubicon; 'he has run his RACE--reached the
GOAL' a turf adage applied to consummate success or disastrous
failure; 'a lucky throw or hit;' 'within an ACE,' meaning one
point of gaining a thing; 'he HAZARDS everything;' 'chances are
for and against;' 'he was PIQUED,' from the game of piquet,
meaning, angry at losing something; 'left in the lurch,' from the
French game l'Ourche, wherein on certain points happening the
stake is to he paid double, and meaning, 'under circumstances
unexpected and peculiarly unfavourable;' 'to save your bacon or
gamon,' from the game Back-gammon[63] a blot is hit,' from the
same; 'checked in his career,' that is, stopped in his designs
from the game of chess.

[63] The etymology of the word Back-gamon has been disputed. 
Hyde seems to have settled it.  A certain portion of the hog is
called in Italian gambone, whence our English word gambon or
gammon.  Confounding things that differ, many think that 'gamon'
in the game has the same meaning, and therefore they say--'he
saved his gamon or bacon,' which is absurd, although it is a
proverbial phrase of sufficient emphasis.  The word Backgamon
seems to be derived from the very nature of the game itself,
namely, back-game-on, that is, when one of your pieces is taken,
you must go back--begin again--and then game on-- 'Back-game-on'.


The fabrication of cards is a most important manufacture of
France; and Paris and Nancy are the two places where most cards
are made.  The annual consumption of cards in France amounts to
1,500,000 francs, or L62,500; but France also supplies foreigners
with the article, especially the Spanish, American, Portuguese,
and English colonies, to the value of 1,000,000 francs, or
L41,666.  The government derives from this branch of French
industry not much less than L25,000 annual revenue, that is, from
20 to 25 per cent. of the product.  The duty on cards is secured
and enforced by severe penalties.

English cards are about a third larger than the French.  The
double-headed cards are an English invention, and they are being
adopted by the French.  Their advantage is obvious, in securing
the secrecy of the hand, for by observing a party in arranging
his cards after the deal, the act of turning up a card plainly
shows that it must be at least a face card, and the oftener this
is done the stronger the hand, in general.  In Germany, a fourth
face-card is sometimes added to the pack, called the Knight, or
Chevalier.  The Italians have also in use long cards, called
tarots, which, however, must not be confounded with the French
cards called tarotees, with odd figures on them, and used by
fortune-tellers.

The method of making playing-cards seems to have given the first
hint to the invention of printing, as appears from the first
specimens of printing at Haerlem, and those in the Bodleian
Library.

'The manufacture of playing-cards comprises many interesting
processes.  The cardboard employed for this purpose is formed of
several thicknesses of paper pasted together; there are usually
four such thicknesses; and the paper is so selected as to take
paste, paint, and polish equally well.  The sheets of paper are
pasted with a brush, and are united by successive processes of
cold-drying, hot-drying, and hydraulic pressure.  Each sheet is
large enough for forty cards.  The outer surfaces of the outer
sheets are prepared with a kind of flinty coating, which gives
sharpness to the outline of the various coloured devices.  Most
packs of cards are now made with coloured backs.  The ground-tint
is laid on with a brush, and consists of dis-temper colour, or
pigments mixed with warm melted size.  The device impressed on
this ground-tint is often very beautiful.  Messrs De la Rue, the
leading firm in the manufacture, employ tasteful artists, and
invest a large amount of capital in the introduction of new
patterns.  On cards sold at moderate prices, the colours at the
back are generally two--one for the ground, and one for the
device; but some of the choicer specimens display several
colours; and many of the designs are due to the pencil of Mr Owen
Jones.  The printing of the design is done on the sheets of
paper, before the pasting to form cardboard.  The pips or spots
on the faces of playing-cards are now spades, clubs, hearts, and
diamonds; but at different times, and in different countries,
there have been leaves, acorns, bells, cups, swords, fruit,
heads, parasols, and other objects similarly represented.  In
English cards the colours are red and black; Messrs De la Rue
once introduced red, black, green, and blue for the four suits;
but the novelty was not encouraged by card-players.  The same
makers have also endeavoured to supersede the clumsy devices of
kings, queens, and knaves, by something more artistic; but this,
too, failed commercially; for the old patterns, like the old
willow-pattern dinner-plates, are still preferred--simply because
the users have become accustomed to them.  Until within the last
few years the printing of cards was generally done by
stencilling, the colour being applied through perforated devices
in a stencil-plate.  The colour employed for this purpose is
mixed up with a kind of paste.  When there is a device at the
back, the outline of the device is printed from an engraved wood-
block, and the rest filled in by stencilling.  The stencilling of
the front and back can be done either before or after the pasting
of the sheets into cardboard.  One great improvement in the
manufacture has been the substitution of oil colour for paste or
size colour; and another, the substitution of printing for
stencilling.  Messrs De la Rue have expended large sums of money
on these novelties; for many experiments had to be made, to
determine how best to employ oil colour so that the spots or pips
may be equal-tinted, the outline clear and sharp, the pigment
well adherent to the surface, and the drying such as to admit of
polishing without stickiness.  The plates for printing are
engraved on copper or brass, or are produced by electrotype, or
are built up with small pieces of metal or interlaced wire.  The
printing is done in the usual way of colour-printing, with as
many plates as there are colours (usually five), and one for the
outlines; it is executed on the sheets of paper, before being
pasted into cardboard.  When the printing, drying, and pasting
are all completed, a careful polish is effected by means of
brush-wheels, pasteboard wheels, heated plates, and heated
rollers; in such a way that the polish on the back may differ
from that on the face--since it is found that too equally
polished surfaces do not slide quite so readily over each other. 
Formerly, every pack of cards made in England for home use paid a
duty of one shilling, which duty was levied on the ace of spades.

The maker engraved a plate for twenty aces of spades; the
printing was done by the government at Somerset House, and L1 was
paid by the maker for every sheet of aces so printed.  The law is
now altered.  Card sellers pay an annual license of 2s. 6d., and
to each pack of cards is affixed a three-pence stamp, across
which the seller must write or stamp his name, under a penalty of
L5 for the omission.

The cardboard, when all the printing is finished, is cut up into
cards; every card is minutely examined, and placed among the
'Moguls,' 'Harrys,' or 'Highlanders,' as they are technically
called, according to the degree in which they may be faultless or
slightly specked; and the cards are finally made up into
packs.'[64]

[64] Chambers's Cyclopaedia.


Machinery has been called into requisition in card-playing.  In
1815 a case was tried in which part of the debt claimed was for
an instrument to cut cards so as to give an unfair advantage to
the person using it.  The alleged debtor had been most fortunate
in play, winning at one time L11,000 from an officer in India. 
For an exactly opposite reason another machine was used in 1818
by the Bennet Street Club.  It consisted of a box curiously
constructed for dealing cards, and was invented by an American
officer.

Another curious fact relating to cards is the duty derived from
them.  In the year 1775 the number of packs stamped was 167,000,
amounting to between L3000 and L4000 duty.  Lord North put on
another sixpence.  Of course, a vast number of packs were
smuggled in, paying no duty, as in the case of tobacco, in all
times since its fiscal regulations.  In the time of Pitt, 1789,
L9000 were to be raised by an additional duty of sixpence on
cards and dice, consequently there must have been no less than
360,000 packs of cards and pairs of dice stamped in the year
1788, to justify the calculation--a proof that gaming in England
was not on the decline.  In the year 1790, the duty on cards was
two shillings per pack, and on dice thirteen shillings per pair.

This duty on cards went on increasing its annual addition to the
revenue, so that about the year 1820 the monthly payments of Mr
Hunt alone, the card-maker of Picadilly, for the stamp-duty
on cards, varied from L800 to L1000, that is, from L9600 to
L12,000 per annum.  In 1833 the stamp-duty on cards was 6d., and
it yielded L15,922, showing a consumption of 640,000 packs per
annum.  Much of this, however, was sheer waste, on account of the
rule of gamesters requiring a fresh pack at every game.

In the Harleian Miscellany[65] will be found a satirical poem
entitled 'The Royal Gamesters; or, the Odd Cards new shuffled for
a Conquering Game,' referring to the political events of the
years from 1702 to 1706, and concluding with the following
lines--

'Thus ends the game which Europe has in view,   
Which, by the stars, may happen to be true.'

[65] Vol. i. p. 177.


In vol. iv. of the same work there is another poem of the kind,
entitled 'The State Gamesters; or, the Old Cards new packed and
shuffled,' which characteristically concludes as follows--

'But we this resolution have laid down--   
Never to play so high as for a Crown.'

Finally, as to allusions to gaming, the reader may remember the
famous sarcasm of the late Earl of Derby (as Lord Stanley) some
thirty years ago, comparing the Government to Thimble-riggers in
operation.


CHAPTER X.

PIQUET, BASSET, FARO, HAZARD, PASSE-DIX, PUT, CROSS AND PILE,
THIMBLE-RIG.

----

PIQUET

Piquet is said to have derived its name from that of its
inventor,
who contrived it to amuse Charles VI. of France.  The game was
played with thirty two cards, that is, discarding out of the pack
all the deuces, treys, fours, fives, and sixes.  Regular
piquet-packs were sold.  In reckoning up the points, every card
counted for its value, as ten for ten, nine for nine, and so on
down to seven, which was, of course, the lowest; but the ace
reckoned for eleven.  All court cards reckoned for ten.  As in
other games, the ace won the king, the king the queen, and so on,
to the knave, which won the ten.  The cards were dealt at option
by
fours, threes, or twos, to the number of twelve, which was the
hand--'discarding' being allowed; but both the dealer and he that
led were OBLIGED to discard at least one card, let their game be
ever so good.  When the cards were played out, each counted his
tricks; and he that had most reckoned 10 for winning the cards;
if the tricks were equal, neither reckoned at all.  He who,
without playing (that is, according to the various terms of the
game), could reckon up 30 in hand, when his antagonist reckoned
nothing, scored 90 for them; this was called a repic; and all
above 30 counted so many,--32 counting 92, and so on.  He who
could make up 30, part in hand and part by play, before the other
made anything, scored 60; this was called a pic.

The game was also played as pool precisely according to the rules
briefly sketched as above, the penalty for losing being a guinea
to the pool.

Piquet required much practice to play it well.  It became so
great a favourite that, by the middle of the 18th century, the
meanest people were well acquainted with it, and 'let into all
the tricks and secrets of it, in order to render them complete
sharpers.'  Such are the words of an old author, who adds that
the game was liable to great imposition, and he explains the
methods in use.  Short cards were used for cutting, as in Whist,
at the time.  Of these cards there were two sorts, one longer
than the rest; and the advantage gained by them was as the
adversary managed it, by cutting the longer or broader, as best
suited his purpose, or imposing on the dealer, when it was his
turn, to cut those which made most against him.  The aces, kings,
queens, and knaves were marked with dots at the corners, and in
the very old book from which I am quoting precise directions are
given how this marking can be effected in such a manner 'as not
to be discovered by your ADVERSARY, and at the same time appear
plain to YOURSELF.'  With a fine pointed pen and some clear
spring water, players made dots upon the glazed card at the
corners according to the above method; or they coloured the water
with india ink, to make the marks more conspicuous.  The work
concludes as follows:--'There are but 32 cards made use of at
Piquet, so that just half of them will be known to you; and in
dealing you may have an opportunity to give yourself those you
LIKE best; and if you cannot conveniently CHANGE the PACK
according to your desire, you will commonly KNOW what YOU are to
TAKE IN, which is a demonstrative advantage to win any one's
money.'

Evidently they did not 'assume a virtue' in those days, 'if they
had it not.'

BASSET.

The game of Basset (in French Wassette) was considered one of the
most polite games with cards, and only fit for persons of the
highest rank to play at, on account of the great losses or gains
that might accrue on one side or the other.

The sums of money lost in France at this game were so
considerable that the princes of the blood were in danger of
being undone; and after many persons of distinction were ruined
the court of France thought fit to forbid Basset.  Then Faro was
invented; and both were soon introduced into England, and after
three or four years' play here, they impoverished so many
families, that Parliament enacted a suppression of both games,
with severe penalties.  The two games are, therefore, of
historical interest, and deserve an explanation.

Basset was a sort of lottery.  The dealer who kept the bank at
Basset, having the sole disposal of the first and last card, and
other considerable privileges in dealing the cards, had a much
greater prospect of gaining than those who played.  This was a
truth so acknowledged in France that the king, by public edict,
ordered that the privilege of a talliere, or banker at Basset,
should only be allowed to the 'chief cadets,' or sons of
noblemen--supposing that whoever kept the bank must, in a very
short time, acquire a considerable fortune.

In this game there was:  1. The Talliere, the banker, who laid
down a sum of money to answer every winning card which might turn
up.  2. The Croupiere, the assistant of the former, standing by
to supervise the losing cards,--so that when there were many at
play he might not lose by overlooking anything which might turn
up to his profit.  3. The Punter, or every player.  4. The Fasse,
that is, the first card turned up by the talliere, by which he
gained half the value of the money laid upon every card of THAT
SORT by the punters or players.  5. The Couch, which was the
first stake that every punter laid upon each card-- every player
having a book of 13 cards before him, upon which he must lay his
money, more or less, according to his fancy.  6. The Paroli: in
this, whoever won the couch, and intended to go on for another
advantage, crooked the corner of his card, letting his money lie,
without being paid the value by the talliere.  7. The Masse,
which was, when those who had won the couch, would venture more
money on the SAME card.  8. The Pay, which was when the player
had won the couch, and, being doubtful of making the paroli, left
off; for by going the pay, if the card turned up wrong, he lost
nothing, having won the couch before; but if by this adventure
fortune favoured him, he won double the money he had staked.  9.
The Alpieu was when the couch was won by turning up, or crooking,
the corner of the winning card.  10. The Sept-et-le-va was the
first great chance that showed the advantages of the game,
namely, if the player had won the couch, and then made a paroli
by crooking the corner of his card, and going on to a SECOND
chance, if his winning card turned up again it became a
sept-et-le-va, which was seven times as much as he had laid upon
his card.  11. Quinze-et-le-va, was attending the player's
humour, who, perhaps, was resolved to follow his fancy, and still
lay his money upon the SAME card, which was done by crooking the
third corner of his card: if this card came up by the dealing of
the talliere, it made him win fifteen times as much money as he
staked.  12. Trent-et-le-va was marked by the lucky player by
crooking the end of the fourth corner of his card, which, coming
up, made him win thirty-three times as much money as he staked. 
13. Soissante-et-le-va was the highest chance that could happen
in the game, for it paid sixty-seven times as much money as was
staked.  It was seldom won except by some player who resolved to
push his good fortune to the utmost.

The players sat round a table, the talliere in the midst of them,
with the bank of gold before him, and the punters or players each
having a book of 13 cards, laying down one, two, three, or more,
as they pleased, with money upon them, as stakes; then the
talliere took the pack in his hand and turned them up--the bottom
card appearing being called the fasse; he then paid half the
value of the stakes laid down by the punters upon any card of
THAT SORT.

After the fasse was turned up, and the talliere and croupiere had
looked round the cards on the table, and taken advantage of the
money laid on them, the former proceeded with his deal; and the
next card appearing, whether the king, queen, ace, or whatever it
might be, won for the player, the latter might receive it, or
making paroli, as before said, go on to sept-et-le-va.  The card
after that won for the talliere, who took money from each
player's card of that sort, and brought it into his
bank--obviously a prodigious advantage in the talliere over the
players.

The talliere, if the winning card was a king, and the next after
it was a ten, said (showing the cards all round), 'King wins, ten
loses,' paying the money to such cards as are of the winning
sort, and taking the money from those who lost, added it to his
bank.  This done, he went on with the deal, it might be after
this fashion--'Ace wins, five loses; ' 'Knave wins, seven loses;'
and so on, every other card alternately winning and losing, till
all the pack was dealt but the last card.

The LAST card turned up was, by the rules of the game, for the
advantage of the talliere; although a player might have one of
the same sort, still it was allowed to him as one of the dues of
his office, and he paid nothing on it.

The bold player who was lucky and adventurous, and could push on
his couch with a considerable stake to sept-et-le-va, quinze-
et-le-va, trente-et-le-va, &c., must in a wonderful manner have
multiplied his couch, or first stake; but this was seldom done;
and the loss of the players, by the very nature of the game,
invariably exceeded that of the bank; in fact, this game was
altogether in favour of the bank; and yet it is evident that--in
spite of this obvious conviction--the game must have been one of
the most tempting and fascinating that was ever invented.

Our English adventurers made this game very different to what it
was in France, for there, by royal edict, the public at large
were not allowed to play at more than a franc or ten-penny
bank,--and the losses or gains could not bring desolation to a
family; but in England our punters could do as they liked--
staking from one guinea to one hundred guineas and more, upon a
card, 'as was often seen at court,' says the old author, my
informant.  When the couch was alpieued, parolied, to sept-
et-le-va, quinze-et-le-va, trente-et-le-va, &c., the punter's
gains were prodigious, miraculous; and if fortune befriended him
so as to bring his stake to soissante-et-le-va, he was very
likely to break the bank, by gaining a sum which no talliere
could pay after such tremendous multiplication.  But this rarely
happened.  The general advantage was with the bank--as must be
quite evident from the explanation of the game--besides the
standing rule that no two cards of the same sort turning up could
win for the players; the second always won for the bank.  In
addition to this there were other 'privileges' which operated
vastly in favour of the banker.

However, it was 'of so bewitching a nature,' says our old writer,
'by reason of the several multiplications and advantages which it
seemingly offered to the unwary punter, that a great many like it
so well that they would play at small game rather than give out;
and rather than not play at all would punt at six-penny,
three-penny, nay, a twopenny bank,--so much did the hope of
winning the quinze-et-le-va and the trente-et-le-va intoxicate
them.'

Of course there were frauds practised at Basset by the talliere,
or banker, in addition to his prescriptive advantages.  The cards
might be dealt so as not to allow the punter any winning
throughout the pack; and it was in the power of the dealer to let
the punter have as many winnings as he thought convenient, and no
more!

It is said that Basset was invented by a noble Venetian, who was
punished with exile for the contrivance.  The game was prohibited
by Louis XIV., in 1691, and soon after fell into oblivion in
France, although flourishing in England.  It was also called
Barbacole and Hocca.

FARO, OR PHARAOH.

Although both Basset and Faro were forbidden in France, on severe
penalties, yet these games still continued in great vogue in
England during the 18th century, especially Faro; for the alleged
reasons that it was easy to learn, that it appeared to be very
fair, and, lastly, that it was a very quiet game.  It was,
however, the most dangerous game for the destruction of families
ever invented.  The Faro bankers seem to have employed some
'gentlemen' to give a very favourable report of the game to the
town, and so every one took it upon trust without further
inquiry.  Faro was the daughter of Basset--both alike notorious
frauds, there being no one, except professed gamblers, who could
be said to understand the secrets of these games.

Faro was played with an entire pack of cards, and admitted of an
indeterminate number of players, termed 'punters,' and a
'banker.'  Each player laid his stake on one of the 52 cards. 
The banker held a similar pack, from which he drew cards, one for
himself, placed on the right, and the other, called the carte
anglaise, or English card, for the players, placed on the left. 
The banker won all the money staked on the card on the right, and
had to pay double the sums staked on those on the left.  Certain
advantages were reserved to the banker:--if he drew a doublet,
that is, two equal cards, he won half of the stakes upon the card
which equalled the doublet; if he drew for the players the last
card of the pack, he was exempt from doubling the stakes
deposited on that card.

Suppose a person to put down 20s. upon a card when only eight are
in hand; the last card was a cipher, so there were four places to
lose, and only three to win, the odds against being as 4 to 3. 
If 10 cards only were in, then it was 5 to 4 against the player;
in the former case it was the seventh part of the money, whatever
it was, L1 or L100; in the latter case, a ninth.  The odds from
the beginning of the deal insensibly stole upon the player at
every pull, till from the first supposed 4 per cent. it became
about 15 per cent.

At the middle of the 18th century the expenses of a Faro bank, in
all its items of servants, rent, puffs, and other incidental
charges of candles, wine, arrack-punch, suppers, and safeguard
money, &c., in Covent Garden, amounted to L1000 per annum. 
Throughout this century Faro was the favourite game.  'Our life
here,' writes Gilly Williams to George Selwyn in 1752, 'would not
displease you, for we eat and drink well, and the Earl of
Coventry holds a Pharaoh-bank every night to us, which we have
plundered considerably.'  Charles James Fox preferred Faro to any
other game.

HAZARD.

This game was properly so called; for it made a man or undid him
in the twinkling of an eye.

It is played with only two dice; 20 persons may be engaged, or as
many as will.  The chief things in the game are the Main and the
Chance.  The chance is the caster's and the main is the setter's.

There can be no main thrown above 9, nor under 5; so that 5, 6,
7, 8, and 9 are all the mains which are flung at Hazard.  Chances
and nicks are from 4 to 10.  Thus 4 is a chance to 9, 5 to 8, 6
to 7, 7 to 6, 8 to 5, and 9 and 10 a chance to 5, 6, 7, and 8; in
short, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 are chances to any main, if any
of these 'nick' it not.

Nicks are either when the chance is the same with the main, as 5
and 5, 6 and 6, 7 and 7, and so on; or 6 and 12, 7 and 11, 8 and
12, where observe, that 12 is out to 9, 7, and 5, and 11 is out
to 9, 8, 6, and 5.

The better to illustrate the game we shall give an example.  Let
7 be the main named.  The caster throws 5, and that is his
chance; and so he has 5 to 7.  If the caster throws his own
chance he wins all the money set to him by the setter; but if he
throws 7, which is the main, he must pay as much money as is on
the table.

If, again, 7 be the main, and the caster throws 11, that is a
nick, and sweeps away all the money on the table; but if he
throws a chance he must wait which will come first.

The worst chances in the game are 4 to 10, and 7 is considered
the best and easiest main to be thrown.  It might be thought that
6 and 8 should admit of no difference in advantage to 7, but it
is just the reverse, although 6, 7, and 8 have eight equal
chances.

For 6, or sice, we have quatre-duce, cinque-ace, and two treys;
for 8, we have sice-duce, cinque-trey, and two quatres; but the
disadvantage is in the doublets required-- two treys, two
quatres; therefore sice-duce is easier thrown than two quatres,
and so, consequently, cinque-ace or quatre-duce sooner than two
treys.

'I saw an old rook (gambler),' says the writer before quoted,
'take up a young fellow in a tavern upon this very bet.  The
bargain was made that the rook should have seven always, and the
young gentleman six, and throw continually.  To play they went;
the rook won the first day L10, and the next day the like sum;
and so for six days together, in all L60.  Notwithstanding the
gentleman, I am confident, had fair dice, and threw them always
himself.  And further to confirm what I alleged before, not only
this gamester, but many more have told me that they desired no
greater advantage than this bet of 7 to 6.  But it is the opinion
of most that at the first throw the caster hath the worst of it.

'Hazard is certainly the most bewitching game that is played with
dice; for when a man begins to play, he knows not when to leave
off; and having once accustomed himself to it, he hardly ever
after minds anything else.'[66]

[66] The Compleat Gamester, by Richard Seymour, Esq. 1739.


As this game is of a somewhat complicated character, another
account of it, which appeared in the Pall Mall Gazette for Sept.
3, 1869, may not be unacceptable.

'The players assemble round a circular table, a space being
reserved for the "groom-porter," who occupies a somewhat elevated
position, and whose duty it is to call the odds and see that the
game is played correctly.  Whoever takes the box and dice places
in the centre of the table as much money as he wishes to risk,
which is at once covered with an equal amount either by some
individual speculator, or by the contributions of several.  The
player (technically called the "caster") then proceeds to call a
"main."  There are five mains on the dice, namely, 5, 6, 7, 8,
and 9; of these he mentally selects that one which either chance
or superstition may suggest, calls it aloud, shakes the box, and
delivers the dice.  If he throws the exact number he called, he
"nicks" it and wins; if he throws any other number (with a few
exceptions, which will be mentioned), he neither wins nor loses. 
The number, however, which he thus throws becomes his "chance,"
and if he can succeed in repeating it before he throws what was
his main, he wins; if not, he loses.  In other words, having
completely failed to throw his main in the first instance, he
should lose, but does not in consequence of the equitable
interference of his newly-made acquaintance, which constitutes
itself his chance.  For example, suppose the caster "sets"--that
is, places on the table--a stake of L10, and it is covered by an
equal amount, and he then calls 7 as his main and throws 5; the
groom-porter at once calls aloud, "5 to 7"-- that means, 5 is the
number to win and 7 the number to lose, and the player continues
throwing until the event is determined by the turning up of
either the main or the chance.  During this time, however, a most
important feature in the game comes into operation--the laying
and taking of the odds caused by the relative proportions of the
main and the chance.  These, as has been said, are calculated
with mathematical nicety, are proclaimed by the groom-porter, and
are never varied.  In the above instance, as the caster stands to
win with 5 and to lose with 7, the odds are declared to be 3 to 2
against him, inasmuch as there are three ways of throwing 7, and
only two of throwing 5.  As soon as the odds are declared, the
caster may increase his stake by any sum he wishes, and the other
players may cover it by putting down (in this instance)
two-thirds of the amount, the masse, or entire sum, to await the
turning up of either main or chance.  If a player "throws out"
three times in succession, the box passes to the next person on
his left, who at once takes up the play.  He may, however, "throw
in" without interruption, and if he can do so some half-dozen
times and back his luck, the gains will be enormous.

'The choice of a main is quite optional: many prefer 7 because
they may make a coup at once by throwing that number or by
throwing 11, which is a "nick" to 7, but to 7 only.  Shrewd
players, however, prefer some other main, with the view of having
a more favourable chance to depend upon of winning both stake and
odds.  For example, let us reverse what was mentioned above, and
suppose the caster to call 5 and throw 7; he then will have 7 as
his chance to win with odds of 3 to 2 IN HIS FAVOUR.

'Such is the game of English Hazard, at which large fortunes have
been won and lost.  It is exceedingly simple, and at times can
become painfully interesting.  Cheating is impossible, unless
with loaded dice, which have been used and detected by their
splitting in two, but never, perhaps, unless at some disreputable
silver hell.  The mode of remunerating the owner of the rooms was
a popular one.  The loser never paid, and the winner only when he
succeeded in throwing three mains in succession; and even then
the "box fee," as it was called, was limited to 5s.--a mere
trifle from what he must have gained.  In French Hazard a bank is
constituted at a board of green cloth, and the proceedings are
carried on in a more subdued and regular mode than is the case in
the rough-and-ready English game.  Every stake that is "set" is
covered by the bank, so that the player runs no risk of losing a
large amount, when, if successful, he may win but a trifling one;
but en revanche, the scale of odds is so altered as to put the
double zero of roulette and the "aprez" of Rouge et Noir to the
blush, and to operate most predjudicially to the player.  In no
case is an equal rate of odds between main and chance laid by the
French "banquier," as is insisted on by the English groomporter;
while again "direct nicks" alone are recognized by the former. 
Very extraordinary runs of luck have occurred at Hazard, one
player sometimes throwing five, seven, and even eleven mains in a
single hand.  In such cases as these the peculiar feature in the
French game becomes valuable, the bank being prepared to pay all
winnings, while, generally speaking, a hand of six or seven mains
at English Hazard would exhaust all the funds of the players, and
leave the caster in the position of "setting the table" and
finding the stakes totally unnoticed or only partially covered.

'In addition to the fixed rules of English Hazard, there are
several regulations which require to be observed.  The round
table on which it is played has a deeply bevelled edge, which is
intended to prevent the dice from landing on the floor, which
would be no throw.  Again, if either die after having left the
box should strike any object on the table (such as a man's elbow
or stick) except MONEY, it would be called no throw.  Again, each
player has the privilege of "calling dice," even when the dice
are in transitu, which, if done, renders the throw void, and
causes another set to be handed to the caster by the groom-
porter.  Many a lucky coup has become manque by some captious
player exercising this privilege, and many an angry rencontre has
ensued between the officious meddler and the disappointed caster,
who finds that he has nicked his main to no advantage.  Sometimes
one die remains in the box after the other has been landed; then
the caster may either throw it quickly, or may tantalize those
interested in the event by gently coaxing it from the bow.  If
one die lands on the top of another, it is removed by the
groom-porter and declared a throw.

'Some thirty years ago English Hazard was a favourite game in
Ireland, and Dublin could boast of three or four hells doing a
brisk trade.  The most frequented and longest established was
called "The Coal Hole," being situated on the coal quay.  Here,
at any hour after midnight, a motley company might be seen, each
individual, however, well known to the porter, who jealously
scanned his features before drawing back the noiseless bolts
which secured the door.  The professional gambler trying to live
by his winnings, the fashionable swell finishing his round of
excitement, the struggling tradesman hoping to avert impending
bankruptcy, the prize-fighter, and, more conspicuous than any,
the keen-eyed usurer with his roll of notes and sheaf of bill
stamps, were to be found there.  Many strange scenes have
occurred in this house, some followed by tragic consequences too
painful to relate, others ridiculous and amusing.  Here it was
that an angry caster, having lost his last sovereign and his
temper, also placed his black hat in the centre of the table,
swore that it was white, and finding no one disposed to dispute
his accuracy, flung himself from the room, and enabled the next
player who had won so largely and smiled so good-humouredly to
take the box in turn.  But fortune deserted him also, and left
him penniless, when, glaring savagely round the room, and
striking the table violently, he thundered forth the inquiry,
"Where was the rascal who said his hat was white?"  It was here
also (although the venue has been changed by story-mongers) that
a well-known frequenter of the house, a sporting M.P., on one
occasion dropped on the 'door or in the passage a bank-note
without discovering his loss till he had reached home.  On the
next evening he returned to inquire for it in a forlorn-hope
spirit, when the following conversation took place between him
and the porter:--

"M.P.  I think, Simpson, I dropped a note here last night--did
you see it?

"Porter.  Shure, then, mony a note was dropped here beside yours.

"M. P.  Ah! but I mean out of my pocket.  I did not lose it at
play.  It was for L20, one of Ball's Bank, and very old."

'Hereupon the porter brought the senator into a corner, fumbled
the note out of his fob, and, placing it in his hands, whispered,
"Shure, I know it's yours, and here it is; but (looking
cautiously round) wasn't it lucky that none of the jintlemin
found it?"

'Another establishment much patronized in those days was in
Nassau Street, where early in the evening unlimited Loo, never
under "three and three," sometimes "six and six," might be
indulged in, while a little later Roulette formed the attraction
of an adjacent room, and still later at night all flocked down-
stairs to the hot supper and rattling English Hazard.  For one or
two seasons St Stephen's Green lent one of its lordly mansions,
formerly the residence of a cruel and witty Lord Chief Justice,
to the votaries of fortune; here everything was done in grand
style, with gilded saloons, obsequious waiters, and champagne
suppers.  All this has long since become matter of the past, and
it would now puzzle the keenest detective to find the trace even
of a silver hell in the Irish capital.  No one will be hardy
enough to defend the vice of gambling, but some have argued, and
not without truth, that if a man will play it is far better for
him to indulge the propensity at Hombourg or Baden, where he
cannot lose more money than he has with him, than to do so in the
cozy club-room of a private "salon," where indulgent friends may
tempt him to become bankrupt not only in fortune but in
reputation.'

Passing over other less important games, called Biribi, and Kraps
(played with dice), we come to Passe-Dix, which seems to demand
some notice.

PASSE-DIX.

This game, considered the most ancient of all games of chance, is
said to have actually been made use of by the executioners at the
crucifixion of our Saviour, when they 'parted his garments,
casting lots,' Matt. xxvii. 35.

It is played with three dice.  There is always a banker, and the
number of players is unlimited.  Each gamester holds the box by
turns, and the other players follow his chance; every time he
throws a point UNDER ten he, as well as the other players, loses
the entire stakes, which go to the banker.  Every time he throws
a point ABOVE ten (or PASSES TEN--whence the name of the game),
the banker must double the player's stakes and the stakes of all
those who have risked their money on the same chance.  When the
game is played by many together, each gamester is banker in his
turn.

PUT.

This was and doubtless still is the special card-game of our
London sharpers.  Many of these are men who have run through a
fortune in the early part of their lives, by associating with
gamblers and sharpers, set up for themselves, set honour and
conscience at defiance, become blacklegs, and are scouted out of
even the gambler's company; and, as a last resource, are obliged
to resort to low pot-houses, robbing the poorest and most
ignorant of society.

Behind the dupe there stood a confederate sharper, looking over
the novice's hand, and telling his opponent, by his fingers, what
cards he holds--hence he was said to work the telegraph, of which
more in the sequel.  Another confederate plied the novice with
drink.

'The game of Put is played with an entire pack of cards,
generally by two, and sometimes by four persons.  At this game
the cards rank differently from all others; a trey being the
best, then a two, then an ace, then the king, queen, &c.  The
game consists of five points.  The parties cut for deal, as in
Whist.  The deal is made by giving three cards, one at a time, to
each player.  The non-dealer then examines his cards, and if he
thinks them bad, he is at liberty to PUT them upon the pack, and
his adversary scores one point to his game.  This, however,
should never be done.  Either party saying--"I put," that is, I
play, cannot retract, but must abide the event of the game, or
pay the stakes.

'The THREE being the best card, if the sharper can make certain
of having a three every time his opponent deals, he must have
considerably the best of the game; and this is effected as
follows:--the sharper places a three underneath an old gentleman
(a card somewhat larger and thicker than the rest of the pack),
and it does not signify how much his opponent shuffles the pack,
it is about five to one that he does not disturb the OLD
GENTLEMAN or the three.  The sharper then cuts the cards, which
he does by feeling for the old gentleman; the three being then
the top card, it is dealt to the sharper by his opponent.  That
is one way of securing a three, and this alone is quite
sufficient to make a certainty of winning.'[67]

[67] Doings in London.


CROSS AND PILE.

Cross and Pile, so called because anciently English coins were
stamped on one side with a cross, now bears the names, Head and
Tail, and is a pastime well known among the lowest and most
vulgar classes of the community, and to whom it is now confined;
formerly, however, it held a higher rank and was introduced at
Court.  Edward II. was partial to this and other frivolous
diversions, and spent much of his time in the pursuit of them. 
In one of his wardrobe 'rolls,' or accounts, we find the
following entries--'Item, paid to Henry, the king's barber, for
money which he lent to the king to play at Cross and Pile, five
shillings.  Item, paid to Pires Bernard, usher of the king's
chamber, money which he lent the king, and which he lost at Cross
and Pile; to Monsieur Robert Wartewille, eight- pence.'

A half-penny is now generally used in playing this game; but any
other coin with a head impressed will answer the purpose.  One
person tosses the half-penny up and the other cries at pleasure
HEAD or TAIL, and loses according to the result.

Cross and Pile is evidently derived from the Greek pastime called
Ostra Kinda, played by the boys of ancient Greece.  Having
procured a shell, they smeared it over with pitch on one side and
left the other side white.  A boy tossed up this shell, and his
antagonist called white or black,[68] as he thought proper, and
his success was determined by the white or black part of the
shell being uppermost.

[68] In the Greek, nux kai hmera, that is, 'night and day.'


It is the favourite game of the boys of London and the vicinity,
now, however, considerably, if not entirely, discontinued through
the vigilance of the police and the severity of the magistrates. 
Not long ago, however, I witnessed a sad and striking scene of it
at Twickenham.  It was on a Sunday morning.  Several boys
surrounded two players, one of the latter being about 14 years of
age, well dressed, and the other of about 10 years, all in
tatters and shoeless.  The younger urchin had a long run of good
luck, whereat his antagonist exhibited much annoyance, swearing
intemperately.  At length, however, his luck changed in turn, and
he went on winning until the former refused to play any longer,
saying--'There, you've got back all I won from you.'  The bigger
boy became enraged at this refusal to continue the play, and
seemed inclined to resort to fisticuff, but I interposed and put
a stop to the affray.  I then questioned the elder boy, and
gathered from him that he played as often as he could, sometimes
winning or losing from eight to ten shillings.  'And do you
generally win? was my next question.'  'No, sir,' he replied, 'I
oftener lose.'  I shuddered to conjecture what would be the
future of this boy.  The word of warning I gave him was received
with a shrug of the shoulder, and he walked off with the greatest
unconcern.

THIMBLE-RIG.

All races, fairs, and other such conglomerations of those whom
Heaven had blessed with more money than wit, used to be
frequented by minor members of 'The Fancy,' who are technically
called flat-catchers, and who picked up a very pretty living by a
quick hand, a rattling tongue, a deal board, three thimbles, and
a pepper-corn.  The game they played with these three curious
articles is a sort of Lilliputian game at cups and balls; and the
beauty of it lies in dexterously seeming to place the pepper-corn
under one particular thimble, getting a green to bet that it was
there, and then winning his money by showing that it is not. 
Every operator at this game was attended by certain of his
friends called eggers and bonnetters--the eggers to 'egg' on the
green ones to bet, by betting themselves; and the bonnetters to
'bonnet' any green one who might happen to win-- that is to say,
to knock his hat over his eyes, whilst the operator and the
others bolted with the stakes.

Some years ago a curious case was tried, exemplifying the mode of
procedure.  A Frenchman, M. Panchaud, was at Ascot Races, and he
there saw the defendant and several other 'gentlemen' betting
away, and apparently winning 'lots of sovereigns,' at one of
these same thimble-rigs.  'Try your luck, gentlemen,' cried the
operator; 'I'll bet any gentleman anything, from half-a-crown to
five sovereigns, that he doesn't name the thimble as covers the
corn!'  M. Panchaud betted half-a-crown--won it; betted a
sovereign--won it; betted a second sovereign--LOST it.  'Try your
luck, gentlemen!' cried the operator again, shifting his thimbles
and pepper-corn about the board, here and there and everywhere in
a moment; and this done, he offered M. Panchaud a bet of five
sovereigns that he could not 'name the thimble what covered the
corn.'  'Bet him!  Bet him!  Why don't you bet him?' said the
defendant (a landlord), nudging M. Panchaud on the elbow; and M.
Panchaud, convinced in his 'own breast' that he knew the right
thimble, said--'I shall betta you five sovereign if you will not
touch de timbles again till I name.'  'Done!' cried the operator;
and M. Panchaud was DONE-- for, laying down his L10 note, it was
caught up by SOMEBODY, the board was upset, the operator and his
friends vanished 'like a flash of lightning,' and M. Panchaud was
left full of amazement, but with empty pockets, with the
defendant standing by his side.  'They are a set of rascals!'
said the defendant; 'but don't fret, my fine fellow!  I'll take
you to somebody that shall soon get your money again; and so
saying he led him off in a direction thus described in court by
the fleeced Frenchman.--'You tooke me the WRONG way!  The thieves
ran one way, and you took me the other, you know, ahah!  You know
what you are about--you took me the WRONG WAY--ahah!'


CHAPTER XI.

COCK-FIGHTING.

Cock-fighting is a practice of high antiquity, like many other
detestable and abominable things that still cling to our social
fabric.  It was much in vogue in Greece and the adjacent isles. 
There was an annual festival at Athens called 'The Cock-
fighting,' instituted by Themistocles at the end of the Persian
war, under the following circumstances.  When Themistocles was
leading his army against the Persians, he saw some cocks
fighting; he halted his troops, looked on, and said:--'These
animals fight neither for the gods of their country, nor for the
monuments of their ancestors, nor for glory, nor for freedom, nor
for their children, but for the sake of victory, and in order
that one may not yield to the other;' and from this topic he
inspirited the Athenians.  After his victorious return, as an act
of gratitude for this accidental occasion of inspiring his troops
with courage, he instituted the above festival, 'in order that
what was an incitement to valour at that time might be
perpetuated as an encouragement to the like bravery hereafter.' 
One cannot help smiling at these naive stories of the ancients to
account for their mightiest results.  Only think of any modern
warrior halting his troops to make use of a cock-fight for the
purpose of inspiriting them to victory!

On one occasion during the Peninsular war, when an important
point was to be carried by assault, the officers were required to
say something encouraging to their men, in order to brace them up
for the encounter; but whilst the majority of the former recalled
the remembrance of previous victories, an Irish captain contented
himself with exclaiming--'Now, my lads, you see those fellows up
there.  Well, if you don't kill THEM, SHURE they'll kill YOU. 
That's all!'  Struck with the comic originality of this address,
the men rushed forward with a laugh and a shout, carrying all
before them.

Among the ancient Greeks the cock was sacred to Apollo, Mercury,
and aesculapius, on account of his vigilance, inferred from his
early rising--the natural consequence of his 'early to bed'--and
also to Mars, on account of his magnanimous and daring spirit.

It seems, then, that at first cock-fighting was partly a
religious, and partly a political, institution at Athens; and was
there continued--according to the above legend--for the purpose
of cherishing the seeds of valour in the minds of youth; but that
it was afterwards abused and perverted, both there and in other
parts of Greece, by being made a common pastime, and applied to
the purpose of gambling just as it was (and is still secretly)
practised in England.  An Attic law ran as follows--'Let cocks
fight publicly in the theatre one day in the year.'[69]

[69] Pegge, in Archoeologia, quoting aelian, Columella, &c.


As to cock-fighting at Rome, Pegge, in the same work, gives his
opinion, that it was not customary there till very late; but that
quails were more pitted against each other for gambling purposes
than cocks.  This opinion seems confirmed by the thankfulness
expressed by the good Antoninus--'that he had imbibed such
dispositions from his preceptor, as had prevented him from
breeding quails for the fight.'

'One cannot but regret,' wrote Pegge in 1775, 'that a creature so
useful and so noble as the cock should be so enormously abused by
us.  It is true the massacre of Shrove Tuesday seems in a
declining way, and in a few years, it is to be hoped, will be
totally disused; but the cock-pit still continues a reproach to
the humanity of Englishmen.  It is unknown to me when the pitched
battle first entered England; but it was probably brought hither
by the Romans.  The bird was here before Caesar's arrival; but no
notice of his fighting has occurred to me earlier than the time
of William Fitz-Stephen, who wrote the Life of Archbishop Becket,
some time in the reign of Henry II.  William describes the
cocking as the sport of school-boys on Shrove Tuesday.  "Every
year, on the day which is called Carnelevaria (Carnival)--to
begin with the sports of the London boys,--for we have all been
boys--all the boys are wont to carry to their schoolmaster their
fighting-cocks, and the whole of the forenoon is made a holiday
for the boys to see the fights of their cocks in their
schoolrooms."  The theatre, it seems, was their school, and the
master was the controller and director of the sport.  From this
time at least the diversion, however absurd, and even impious,
was continued among us.'

'Although disapproved of by many, and prohibited by law, cock-
fighting continued in vogue, patronized even by royalty, and
commonly called "the royal diversion."  St James's Park, which,
in the time of Henry VIII., belonged to the Abbot of Westminster,
was bought by that monarch and converted into a park, a tennis
court, and a cockpit, which was situated where Downing Street now
is.  The park was approached by two noble gates, and until the
year 1708 the Cock-pit Gate, which opened into the court where
Queen Anne lived, was standing.  It was surmounted with lofty
towers and battlements, and had a portcullis, and many rich
decorations.  Westminster Gate, the other entrance, was designed
by Hans Holbein, and some foreign architect doubtless erected the
Cockpit Gate.  The scene of the cruel diversion of cock-fighting
was, however, obliterated before Anne's time, and the palace,
which was a large range of apartments and offices reaching to the
river, extended over that space.'[69]

[69] Wharton, Queens of Society.


Cock-fighting was the favourite amusement of James I., in whose
reign there were cock-pits in St James's Park, Drury Lane, Tufton
Street, Shoe Lane, and Jermyn Street.  There was a cock-pit in
Whitehall, erected for the more magnificent exhibition of the
sport; and the present room in Westminster in which her Majesty's
Privy Council hold their sittings, is called the Cock-pit, from
its being the site of the veritable arena of old.

Cock-fighting was prohibited by one of Oliver's acts in 1654; but
with the return of Charles and his profligacy, the sport again
flourished in England.  Pepys often alludes to it in his 'Diary.'

Thus, Dec. 21, 1663, he writes:--

'To Shoe Lane, to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there, a spot
I was never at in my life; but, Lord! to see the strange variety
of people, from Parliament man, by name Wildes, that was Deputy-
Governor of the Tower when Robinson was Lord Mayor, to the
poorest 'prentices, bakers, brewers, butchers, draymen, and what
not; and all these fellows one with another cursing and betting. 
I soon had enough of it.  It is strange to see how people of this
poor rank, that look as if they had not bread to put in their
mouths, shall bet three or four pounds at a time, and lose it,
and yet bet as much the next battle; so that one of them will
lose L10 or L20 at a meeting.'

Again, April 6, 1668:--

'I to the new Cocke-pit by the king's gate, and there saw the
manner of it, and the mixed rabble of people that came thither,
and saw two battles of cockes, wherein is no great sport; but
only to consider how these creatures, without any provocation, do
fight and kill one another, and aim only at one another's heads!'

Up to the middle of the 18th century cock-fighting was 'all the
rage' in England.  'Cocking,' says a writer of the time, 'is a
sport or pastime so full of delight and pleasure, that I know not
any game in that respect which is to be preferred before it.'

The training of the pugnacious bird had now become a sort of art,
and this is as curious as anything about the old 'royal
diversion.'  A few extracts from a treatise on the subject may be
interesting as leaves from the book of manners and customs of the
good old times.

The most minute details are given as to the selection of
fighting-cocks, the breeding of game cocks, and 'the dieting and
ordering a cock for battle.'  Under this last head we read:--'In
the morning take him out of the pen, and let him spar a while
with another cock.  Sparring is after this manner.  Cover each of
your cock's heels with a pair of hots made of bombasted rolls of
leather, so covering the spurs that they cannot bruise or wound
one another, and so setting them down on straw in a room, or
green grass abroad; let them fight a good while, but by no means
suffer them to draw blood of one another.  The benefit that
accrues hereby is this: it heateth and chafeth their bodies, and
it breaketh the fat and glut that is within them.  Having sparred
as much as is sufficient, which you may know when you see them
pant and grow weary, then take them up, and, taking off their
hots, give them a diaphoretic or sweating, after this manner. 
You must put them in deep straw- baskets, made for this purpose,
and fill these with straw half way, then put in your cocks
severally, and cover them over with straw to the top; then shut
down the lids, and let them sweat; but don't forget to give them
first some white sugar-candy, chopped rosemary, and butter,
mingled and incorporated together.  Let the quantity be about the
bigness of a walnut; by so doing you will cleanse him of his
grease, increase his strength, and prolong his breath.  Towards
four or five o'clock in the evening take them out of their
stoves, and, having licked their eyes and head with your tongue,
and put them into their pens, and having filled their throats
with square-cut manchet, **** therein, and let them feed whilst
the****is hot; for this will cause their scouring to work, and
will wonderfully cleanse both head and body.'

Was ever poor animal subjected to such indignity?  The
preparation of the other animal, the jockey, is nothing to it. 
But, to continue:--

'The second day after his sparring, take your cock into a fair
green close, and, having a dunghill cock in your arms, show it
him, and then run from him, that thereby you may entice him to
follow, permitting him to have now and then a blow, and thus
chafe him up and down about half an hour; when he begins to pant,
being well-heated, take him up and carry him home, and give him
this scouring, &c.'

This training continued for six weeks, which was considered a
sufficient time for 'ordering a cock for the battle;' and then,
after the 'matching,' came the last preparation of the poor biped
for the terrible fight in which he would certainly be either
killed or kill his antagonist, if both were not doomed to bite
the dust.  This consisted in the following disfigurement of the
beautiful creature:--

'With a pair of fine cock-shears cut all his mane off close into
his neck from the head to the setting on of the shoulders:
secondly, clip off all the feathers from the tail close to his
rump; the redder it appears the better is the cock in condition:
thirdly, take his wings and spread them forth by the length of
the first rising feather, and clip the rest slope-wise with sharp
points, that in his rising he may therewith endanger the eye of
his adversary; fourthly, scrape, smooth, and sharpen his spurs
with a pen-knife; fifthly, and lastly, see that there be no
feathers on the crown of his head for his adversary to take hold
of; then, with your spittle moistening his head all over, turn
him into the pit TO MOVE TO HIS FORTUNE.'

I should, perhaps, state that, instead of the natural spurs, long
artificial ones of well-tempered steel were fixed to the cock's
heels in later times, and these were frequently driven into the
body of his antagonist with such vigour that the two cocks were
spitted together, and had to be separated.

The dreadful fight having come off, the following was the
treatment prescribed for the fortunate conqueror.

'The battle being ended, immediately search your cock's wounds,
as many as you can find.  SUCK the blood out of them; then wash
them well with warm ****, and that will keep them from rankling;
after this give him a roll of your best SCOURING, and so stove
him up as hot as you can for that night; in the morning, if you
find his head swelled, you must suck his wounds again, and bathe
them with warm ****; then take the powder of herb Robert, and put
it into a fine bag, and pounce his wounds therewith; after this,
give him a good handful of bread to eat out of warm ****, and so
put him into the stove again, and let him not feel the air till
the swelling be fallen.'

A cock sometimes took a long time to recover from his wounds--as,
indeed, may be well supposed from the terrible 'punishment' which
he necessarily received; and so our professor goes on to say:--
'If after you have put out your wounded cock to their walks, and
visiting them a month or two after, you find about their head any
swollen bunches, hard and blackish at one end, you may then
conclude that in such bunches there are unsound cores, which must
be opened and crushed out with your thumbs; and after this, you
must suck out the corruption, and filling the holes full of fresh
butter, you need not doubt a cure.'

A poetical description of a cock-fight, by Dr R. Wild, written at
the commencement of the last century, will give an idea of the
'diversion.'

'No sooner were the doubtful people set,  
The match made up, and all that would had bet,  
But straight the skilful judges of the play;  
Brought forth their sharp-heel'd warriors, and they  
Were both in linnen bags--as if 'twere meet,  
Before they died, to have their winding-sheet.  
Into the pit they're brought, and being there,  
Upon the stage, the Norfolk Chanticleer  
Looks stoutly at his ne'er before seen foe, 
 And like a challenger began to crow,  
And clap his wings, as if he would display  
His warlike colours, which were black and grey.

'Meantime, the wary Wisbich walks and breathes  
His active body, and in fury wreathes  
His comely crest, and often with a sound,  
He whets his angry beak upon the ground.  
This done, they meet, not like that coward breed  
Of Aesop; these can better fight than feed:   
They scorn the dunghill; 'tis their only prize  
TO DIG FOR PEARLS WITHIN EACH OTHER'S EYES.

'They fought so nimbly that 'twas hard to know,  
E'en to the skill'd, whether they fought or no;  
If that the blood which dyed the fatal floor  
Had not borne witness of 't.  Yet fought they more;  
As if each wound were but a spur to prick  
Their fury forward.  Lightning's not more quick,  
Or red, than were their eyes: 'twas hard to know  
Whether 'twas blood or anger made them so.  
I'm sure they had been out had they not stood  
More safe by being fenced in with blood.

Thus they vied blows; but yet (alas!) at length,  
Altho' their courage was full tried, their strength  
And blood began to ebb.

Their wings, which lately at each blow they clapp'd  
(As if they did applaud themselves), now flapp'd.  
And having lost th' advantage of the heel,  
Drunk with each other's blood, they only reel.  
From either eyes such drops of blood did fall  
As if they wept them for their funeral.  
And yet they fain would fight; they came so near,  
Methought they meant into each other's ear  
TO WHISPER WOUNDS; and when they could not rise,  
They lay and look'd blows into each other's eyes.

But now the tragic part!  After this fit,  
When Norfolk cock had got the best of it,  
And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none,  
Tho' sober, but might venture Seven to One;  
Contracting, like a dying taper, all  
His strength, intending with the blow to fall,
He struggles up, and having taken wind,  
Ventures a blow, and strikes the other blind!

'And now poor Norfolk, having lost his eyes,  
Fights only guided by antipathies:  
With him, alas! the proverb holds not true--  
The blows his eyes ne'er saw his heart most rue.  
At length, by chance, he stumbled on his foe,  
Not having any power to strike a blow.  
He falls upon him with his wounded head,  
And makes his conqueror's wings his feather-bed;  
Where lying sick, his friends were very chary  
Of him, and fetch'd in haste a Pothecary;  
But all in vain!  His body did so blister  
That 'twas incapable of any glyster;  
Wherefore, at length, opening his fainting bill,  
He call'd a scriv'ner and thus made his Will.

'IMPRIMIS--Let it never be forgot,  
My body freely I bequeath to th' pot,  
Decently to be boil'd. 
****
 ITEM: Executors I will have none  
But he that on my side laid Seven to One;  
And, like a gentleman that he may live,  
To him, and to his heirs, my COMB I give,  
Together with my brains, that all may know  
That oftentimes his brains did use to crow.
****
To him that 's dull I do my SPURS impart,  
And to the coward I bequeath my HEART.  
To ladies that are light, it is my will  
My FEATHERS shall be given; and for my BILL  
I'd give 't a tailor, but it is so short,  
That I'm afraid he'll rather curse me for 't:
****
Lastly, because I feel my life decay,  
I yield and give to Wisbich COCK THE DAY!'[70]

[70] The passages left out in the Will, as marked by asterisks,
though witty, are rather too gross for modern eyes.


To quote from Pegge once more:--What aggravates the reproach and
disgrace upon us Englishmen, are those species of fighting which
are called--"the battle royal and the Welsh main"--known nowhere
in the world, as I think, but here; neither in China, nor in
Persia, nor in Malacca, nor among the savage tribes of America. 
These are scenes so bloody as almost to be too shocking to
relate; and yet as many may not be acquainted with the horrible
nature of them, it may be proper, for the excitement of our
aversion and detestation, to describe them in a few words.

'In the battle royal, an unlimited number of fowls are pitted;
and after they have slaughtered one another, for the diversion
(dii boni!) of the otherwise generous and humane Englishman, the
single surviving bird is to be esteemed the victor, and carries
away the prize.  The Welsh main consists, we will suppose, of
sixteen pairs of cocks; of these the sixteen conquerors are
pitted a second time; and, lastly, the two conquerors of these
are pitted a fifth time; so that (incredible barbarity!)
thirty-one cocks are sure to be most inhumanly murdered for the
sport and pleasure, the noise and nonsense, nay, I may say the
profane cursing and swearing, of those who have the effrontery to
call themselves, with all these bloody doings, and with all this
impiety about them--Christians!' Moreover, this ungenerous
diversion was the bane and destruction of thousands, who thus
dissipated their patrimonial fortunes.  That its attractions were
irresistible is evident from the difficulty experienced in
suppressing the practice.  Down to a very recent date cock-
fighting was carried on in secret,--the police now and then
breaking into the secret pits, dispersing and chasing a motley
crew of noblemen, gentlemen, and 'the scum of rascaldom.'

The practice is very far from having died out; mains are still
fought in various parts of the country; but of course the
greatest precautions are taken to insure secrecy and to prevent
the interference of the police.

In connection with cock-fighting I remember a horrible incident
that occurred in the West Indies.  A gentleman who was
passionately fond of the sport, and prided himself on the
victories of his cocks, had the misfortune to see one of his
birds so terribly wounded in the first onset that, although not
killed, it was impossible for it to continue the fight.  His rage
at the mishap knew no bounds, and he vented it madly on the poor
creature.  He roasted it alive--standing by and hearing its
piteous cries.  In the midst of the horrible torture the wretched
man became so excited that a fit of apoplexy supervened, and he
positively expired before the poor bird at the fire!


CHAPTER XII.

THE TURF, HISTORICAL, SOCIAL, MORAL.

It appears that horse-races were customary at public festivals
even as early as the times of the patriarchs.  They originated
among the eastern nations, who were the first to discover the
physical aptitudes of the noble animal and the spirited emulation
of which he is capable.  The Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, in
succession, all indulged in the excitement; and it is a curious
fact that the Romans, like the English jockeys of the present
day, rode in different colours.

Horse-racing began very early in England.  Fitz-Stephen, who
wrote in the time of Henry VIII., mentions the delight taken by
the citizens of London in the diversion.  In the reign of Queen
Elizabeth it appears to have greatly flourished, and to have been
carried to such an excess as to have ruined many of the nobility.

The celebrated George, Earl of Cumberland, is said to have wasted
more of his estates than any of his ancestors, and principally by
his love of the turf and the tilt-yard.  In the reign of James
I., Croydon in the South, and Garterly in the North, were
celebrated courses.  Camden also states that in 1607 there were
meetings near York, and the prize was a small golden bell; hence
the origin of the saying 'bearing off the bell.'

Lord Herbert of Cherbury denounced the practice.  'The exercise,'
says this gallant philosopher, 'I do not approve of is running of
horses--there being much CHEATING in that kind,--neither do I see
why a brave man should delight in a creature whose chief use is
to help him to run away.'  As far as the cheating is concerned,
the philosopher may be right, but most assuredly his views of the
horse do no credit to his Lordship's understanding.

It appears that the turf-men of those days went on breeding for
shape and speed alone, without considering 'bottom,' until the
reign of Queen Anne; when a public-spirited nobleman left
thirteen plates or purses to be run for, at such places as the
Crown should appoint, upon condition that every horse should
carry twelve stone for the best of three heats--four miles.  By
this means a stronger horse was raised, who, if he was not good
enough upon the race-course, made a hunter.

The Merry Monarch, Charles II., had given cups or bowls,
estimated at one hundred guineas value, and upon which the names
of the winning horses, the winner, and jockey were usually
engraved.  William III. added to the plates, as did Queen Anne;
but in 1720 George I. discontinued this royal encouragement to
the sport, apparently through sheer meanness.  Since that period
'King's Plates' and 'Queen's Plates' have been paid in specie.

In the reign of Charles I. races were performed in Hyde Park; and
until a very recent period 'the Ring' in the Park was the
rendezvous of gentlemen's servants, for the purpose of betting or
making up their betting books.

Newmarket races were established by Charles II., in 1667.  Epsom,
by Mr Parkhurst, in 1711.  Ascot, by the Duke of Cumberland,
uncle to George III.  Doncaster, by Colonel St Leger, in 1778. 
Goodwood, by the Duke of Richmond, who died in 1806.

The Jockey Club began in the time of George II.  Its latest
rules, by which races are regulated, were enacted in 1828.

Tattersall's, the 'High Change of Horse-flesh,' was established
by Richard Tattersall, near Hyde Park Corner--hence termed 'The
Corner'--in 1766, for the sale of horses.  The lease of the
ground having expired, the new premises at Brompton were erected,
and opened for business, in 1803.

On the accession of Queen Victoria the Royal stud was sold for
L16,476, in Oct., 1837.[71]

[71] Haydon, Book of Dates.


Among the distinguished men who have supported the turf in this
country may be mentioned George IV.[72] and William IV.; the late
Duke of York; the Dukes of Richmond, Cleveland, Grafton, Bedford,
and Beaufort; Marquises of Exeter and Westminster; Earls of
Glasgow, Stradbrooke, Wilton, Chesterfield, Eglintoun, Verulam,
and Lonsdale; Lords George Bentinck, Foley, Kinnaird, &c.; and
last, though not least, the Right Honourable Charles James Fox. 
As to the turf, Fox used always to animadvert on his losses, and
repeatedly observed--that 'his horses had as much bottom as other
people's, but that they were such slow, good ones that they never
went fast enough to tire themselves.'  He had, however, the
gratification of experiencing some few exceptions to this
imaginary rule.  In April, 1772, he was so lucky at Newmarket as
to win nearly L16,000--the greater part of which he got by
betting against the celebrated Pincher, who lost the match by
only half a neck.  The odds at STARTING were two to one on the
losing horse.  At the spring meeting at Newmarket, in 1789, Fox
is said to have won not less than L50,000; and at the October
meeting, at the same place, the following year, he sold two of
his horses--Seagull and Chanticleer--for 4400 guineas.  In the
course of 1788 Fox and the Duke of Bedford won 8000 guineas
between them at the Newmarket spring meeting, and during these
races Fox and Lord Barrymore had a heavy match, which was given
as a dead heat, and the bets were off.

[72] For some period previous to 1790, George IV. had patronized
horse-racing and pugilism; but in that year, having attended a
prize fight in which one of the boxers was killed, he ceased to
support the ring, declaring that he would never be present at
such a scene of murder again; and in 1791 he disposed of his
stud, on account of some apparently groundless suspicion being
attached to his conduct with regard to a race, in the event of
which he had little or no real interest.


On coming into office with Lord North, in 1783, Mr Fox sold his
horses, and erased his name from several of the clubs of which he
was a member.  It was not long, however, before he again
purchased a stud, and in October he attended the Newmarket
meeting.  The king's messenger was obliged to appear on the
course, to seek one of the ministers of England among the
sportsmen on the heath, in order to deliver despatches upon which
perhaps the fate of the country might have depended.  The
messenger on these occasions had his badge of office, the
greyhound, not liking that the world should know that the king's
adviser was amusing himself at Newmarket, when he should have
been serving him in the metropolis.  But Charles Fox preferred
the betting rooms to Downing Street.

Again, in the year 1790, his horse Seagull won the Oatlands
stakes at Ascot, of 100 guineas (19 subscribers), beating the
Prince of Wales's Escape, Serpent, and several of the very best
horses of that year--to the great mortification of His Royal
Highness, who immediately matched Magpie against him, to run four
days afterwards, two miles, for 500 guineas.  This match, on
which immense sums were depending, was won with ease by Seagull. 
At this period Lord Foley and Mr Fox were confederates.  In those
days the plates averaged from L50 to L100.

Lord Foley, who died in 1793, entered upon the turf with a clear
estate of L1800 a year, and L100,000 ready money, which was
considerably diminished by his losses at Newmarket, Ascot, and
Epsom.

The race-horse of this country excels those of the whole world,
not only for speed, but bottom.  There is a great difference,
however, between the present race and that of fifty or sixty
years ago; for in those days four-mile heats were the fashion. 
The sporting records at the end of the last century give the
following exploits of horses of that and previous periods.

Childers, known by the name of Flying Childers, the property of
the Duke of Devonshire, was looked upon as the fleetest horse
that ever was bred.  He was never beaten; the sire of this
celebrated horse was an Arabian.

Dorimont, belonging to Lord Ossory, won prizes to the amount of
L13,360.

Eclipse was allowed to be the fastest horse that ever ran in
England since the time of Childers.  After winning largely for
his owner, he covered, by subscription, forty mares at 30 guineas
each, or 1200 guineas.

Highflyer, by King Herod, was the best horse of his day; was
never beaten, nor paid forfeit but once.  His winnings amounted
to above L9000, although he only ran as a three, four, and five
years old.

Matchem stood high both as a racer and as the sire of many of our
most favourite horses.  As a stallion he realized for his master
more than L12,000.  He died in 1781, at the advanced age of
thirty-three.

Shark won a cup value 120 guineas, eleven hogsheads of claret,
and above L16,000 in plates, matches, and forfeits.[73]

[73] Lord William Lennox, Merrie England.


Among recent celebrities must be mentioned Lord Stamford, who is
said to have engaged Jemmy Grimshaw, a light-weighted jockey, at
a salary of L1000 a year.

 The most astounding 'event' of late years was that of 1867, when
the horse Hermit--previously represented as being in an unfit
condition even to run, won the race--to the unspeakable ruin of
very many, and inflicting on the late Marquis of Hastings the
enormous loss of about L100,000, which, however, in spite of
unseemly rumours and, it is said, hopes of that nobleman's ruin,
was honourably paid, to the day and hour.

But if ruin did not immediately come upon the young marquis,
still the wound was deadly, inflicted as though with the ferocity
of a demon.  In his broken health and rapid decay sympathy was
not withheld from him; and when a premature death put an end to
his sufferings, and was speedily followed by the breaking up of
his establishment and the dispersion of his ancestral effects,
most men felt that he had, perhaps, atoned for his errors and
indiscretions, whilst all united in considering him another
unfortunate victim added to the long list of those who have
sacrificed their fortune, health, and honour to the Gambling
Moloch presiding over the Turf of England.[74]

[74] The 'Odds' or probabilities of horse racing are explained in
chapter VIII., in which the entire 'Doctrine of Chances' is
discussed.


Such are the leading facts of horse-racing in England.  One
cannot help observing that the sturdy strength and muscular
exertions of an Olympic charioteer of old exhibit a striking
contrast to the spider-like form and emaciated figure of a
Newmarket jockey.

    Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,     
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, SUDAVAT et alsit.

    'Who in a race would reach the long'd-for goal,      
     Must suffer much, do much, in youth, indeed,     
     Must SWEAT and fag.'

This is literally true respecting the English jockey, whose 
attenuated form is accounted for in the following dialogue in an
old work entitled 'Newmarket, or an Essay on the Turf,' 1771.

'Stop, stop, OLD GENTLEMAN! I desire to speak a word to you; pray
which is the way to----.'

'I beg, sir, you will not interrupt me.  I am a Newmarket
jockey--am to ride in a few days a match, upon which there is a
great deal depending, and I am now PREPARING.'

'Oh, I see now, you are a YOUNG man, instead of that old one for
whom I mistook you by your wrappings; but pray, explain.'

'Why, your Honour must know that we jockeys, in order to bring
ourselves down to the weight required for the horses we are to
ride, sweat under a load of flannel wrapped about us beneath
coats and great coats, and walk two or three miles in the heat of
summer, till we are ready to faint under our burden.'

'Indeed!  Why, you go through a deal!'

'Ah, sir, a great deal indeed!  Why, we sometimes lie hours and
hours between two feather-beds--to melt away our extraordinary
weight.'

'But will you give me leave to examine your present dress?  Hum! 
Two flannel waistcoats, a thick cloth coat, a Bath surtout!  It
is a vast weight to carry this warm weather.  I only hope you
won't sink under it.'

'Never fear, sir, I do not doubt but I shall do very well.'

The rewards of victory were as plain and simple in the Grecian
games as they were distinguishing and honourable.  A garland of
palm, or laurel, or parsley, or pine leaves, served to adorn the
brow of the fortunate victor, whilst his name stood a chance of
being transmitted to posterity in the strains of some lofty
Pindar.  The rewards of modern days are indeed more substantial
and solid, being paid in weighty gold or its equivalent, no
matter whether obtained by the ruin of others, while the fleet
coursers and their exulting proprietors stand conspicuous in the
list of the Racing Calendar.  The ingenious and ironical author
of 'Newmarket, or an Essay on the Turf,' in the year 1771,
bestowed the following titles and honours on the most famous
horse of the day--Kelly's Eclipse:--'Duke of Newmarket, Marquis
of Barnet, Earl of Epsom and York, Viscount Canterbury, Baron
Eclipse of Mellay; Lord of Lewes, Salisbury, Ipswich, and
Northampton; Comptroller-General of the race-grounds, and Premier
Racer of All England.'  To bear coat of arms--'A Pegasus argent
on a field verd;--the supporters--two Englishmen in ermined robes
and ducal coronets;--the crest--a purse, Or;--the motto--"Volat
ocior Euro." '[75]

[75] 'He flies swifter than the east wind.'


Again, in the exhibition of those useful and honourable Olympic
pastimes of old, the cause of morality was not overlooked:--there
was in them a happy union of utility, pleasure, and virtue.  A
spotless life and unblameable manners, a purity of descent by
being born in wedlock through several generations, and a series
of creditable relations, were indispensable qualifications of a
candidate on the Olympic turf.  It is true, there is at least as
much attention paid to purity and faultlessness on the plains of
Newmarket; but the application is to the blood and pedigree of
the horse, not of his rider.

Nay, it was, and is, notorious that the word 'jockey' has
acquired the meaning of 'to trick,' 'to cheat,' as appears in all
our dictionaries and in common parlance.  What is the inference
from this but that the winning of races is no absolute proof of
the superiority of the horse--for whose improvement racing is
said to be encouraged; but rather the result of a secret
combination of expedients or arrangements--in a word, jockeying,
that is, cheating, tricking.  The only 'moral' character required
in the jockey is the determination to do whatsoever may be agreed
upon or determined by those who are willing and able to give 'a
consideration' for the convenient accommodation.

But it is, or was, the associations, the inevitable concomitants,
of the turf and racing that stamp it, not only as something
questionable, but as a bane and infamy to the nation; and if
there is one spot more eminently distinguished for a general
rendezvous of fraud and gambling, that place is Newmarket.

The diversions of these plains have proved a decoy to many a
noble and ingenuous mind, caught in the snares laid to entrap
youth and inexperience.  Newmarket was a wily labyrinth of loss
and gain, a fruitful field for the display of gambling abilities,
the school of the sharping crew, the academy of the Greeks, the
unfathomable gulf that absorbed princely fortunes.

The amusements of the turf were in all other places intermixed
with a variety of social diversions, which were calculated to
promote innocent mirth and gaiety.  The breakfastings, the
concerts, the plays, the assemblies, attracted the circle of
female beauty, enlivened the scene, engaged the attention of
gentlemen, and thus prevented much of the evil contagion and
destruction of midnight play.  But encouragement to the GAMBLER
of high and low degree was the very charter of Newmarket.  Every
object that met the eye was encompassed with gambling--from the
aristocratic Rouge et Noir, Roulette, and Hazard, down to
Thimble-rig, Tossing, and Tommy Dodd.  Every hour of the day and
night was beset with gambling diversified; in short, gambling
must occupy the whole man, or he was lost to the sport and spirit
of the place.  The inhumanity of the cock-pit, the iniquitous
vortex of the Hazard table, employed each leisure moment from the
race, and either swallowed up the emoluments of the victorious
field, or sank the jockey still deeper in the gulf of ruin.

The common people of England have been stigmatized (and perhaps
too justly) for their love of bloody sports and cruel diversions;
cock-fighting, bull-baiting, boxing, and the crowded attendance
on executions, are but too many proofs of this sanguinary turn. 
But why the imputation should lie at the door of the vulgar alone
may well be questioned; for while the star of nobility and
dignified distinction was seen to glitter at a cock-match or on a
boxing-stage, or near the 'Ring'--where its proprietor was liable
to be elbowed by their highnesses of grease and soot, and to be
hemmed in by knights of the post and canditates for Tyburn tree--
when this motley group alike were fixed in eager attention, alike
betted on and enjoyed each blood-drawing stroke of the artificial
spur, or blow of the fist well laid in--what distinction was to
be made between peer and plebeian, except in derogation of the
former?

The race-course at Newmarket always presented a rare assemblage
of grooms, gamblers, and greatness.

'See, side by side, the jockey and Sir John   
Discuss the important point of six to one;   
For, O my Muse! the deep-felt bliss how dear--   
How great the pride to gain a jockey's ear!'[76]

[76] Wharton's Newmarket.


Newmarket fame was an object of ambition sought by the most
distinguished personages.

'Go on, brave youths, till in some future age   
Whips shall become the senatorial badge;   
Till England see her thronging senators   
Meet all at Westminster in boots and spurs;   
See the whole House with mutual phrensy mad,   
Her patriots all in leathern breeches clad;   
Of bets for taxes learnedly debate,   And guide with equal reins
a steed or state.'[77]

[77] Ibid.


And then at the winning-post what motley confusion.

  --------------------'A thousand tongues   
Jabber harsh jargon from a thousand lungs.
       ****  
Dire was the din--as when in caverns pent,   
Hoarse Boreas storms and Eurus works for vent,    
The aeolian brethren heave the labouring earth,   
And roar with elemental strife for birth.'[78]

[78] 'The Gamblers.' Horace had said long before--Tanto cum
strepitu ludi spectantur, 'So great a noise attends the games!


The frauds and stratagems of wily craft which once passed current
at Newmarket, surpassed everything that can be imagined at the
present day.  The intruding light of the morning was execrated by
the nightly gamblers.  'Grant us but to perish in the light,' was
the prayer of the warlike Ajax:--'Grant us black night for ever,'
exclaimed the gambler; and his wishes were consistent with the
place and the foul deeds perpetrated therein.[79]

[79] The principal gambling-room at Newmarket was called the
'Little Hell.'

    Sit mihi fas audita loqui--sit numine vestro,     
     Pandere res alta terra et caligine mersas.


The turf-events of every succeeding year verify the lament of the
late Lord Derby:--

'The secession from the turf of men who have station and
character, and the accession of men who have neither, are signs
visible to the dullest apprehension.  The once national sport of
horse-racing is being degraded to a trade in which it is
difficult to perceive anything either sportive or national.  The
old pretence about the improvement of the breed of horses has
become a delusion, too stale for jesting.'

Nothing is more incontestable than the fact that the breed of
English horses has not been really improved, certainly not by
racing and its requirements.  It has been truly observed that
'what is called the turf is merely a name for the worst kind of
gambling.  The men who engage in it are as far as possible from
any ideal of sporting men.  It is a grim joke, in fact, to speak
of "sport" at all in their connection.  The turf to them is but a
wider and more vicious sort of tapis vert--the racing but the
rolling of the balls--the horses but animated dice.  It is
difficult to name a single honest or manly instinct which is
propagated by the turf as it is, or which does not become debased
and vitiated by the association.  From a public recreation the
thing has got to be a public scandal.  Every year witnesses a
holocaust of great names sacrificed to the insatiable demon of
horse-racing--ancient families ruined, old historic memories
defiled at the shrine of this vulgarest and most vicious of
popular passions.'

Among those who have sought to reform the turf is Sir Joseph
Hawley, who last year succeeded in procuring the abolition of
two-year-old races before the 1st of May.  He is now
endeavouring, to go much further, and has given notice of a
motion for the appointment of a committee of the Jockey Club to
consider the question of the whole condition of the turf.

There can be no doubt, that, if Sir Joseph Hawley's propositions,
as announced, be adopted, even in a modified form, they would go
to the very root of the evil, and purify the turf of the worst of
the present scandals.

It would require a volume, or perhaps many volumes, to treat of
the subject of the present chapter--the Turf, Historical, Social,
Moral; but I must now leave this topic, of such terrible national
interest, to some other conscientious writer capable of 'doing
justice' to the theme, in all its requirements.


CHAPTER XIII.

FORTUNE-TELLING BY CARDS (FOR LADIES).

It must be admitted that this practice--however absurd in its
object and application--does great credit to human ingenuity. 
Once admitting the possibility of such conjuring, it is
impossible to deny the propriety of the reasonings deduced from
the turning up, the collocation, or the juxta-position of the
various cards, when the formalities of the peculiar shuffle and
cut required have been duly complied with by the consulter.

The cards are first shuffled ad libitum, then cut three different
times, and laid on a table, face upwards, one by one, in the form
of a circle, or more frequently nine in a row.  If the conjurer
is a man he chooses one of the kings as his representative; if a
woman, she selects one of the queens.  This is on the supposition
that persons are consulting for themselves; otherwise it is the
fortune-teller who selects the representative card.  Then the
queen of the chosen king, or the king of the chosen queen, stands
for a husband or wife, mistress or lover, of the party whose
fortune is to be told.  The knave of the suit represents the most
intimate person of their family.

The ninth card every way, that is, counted from the
representative, is of the greatest consequence, and that interval
comprises the 'circle' of the inquirer, for good or for evil.

Now, all the cards have had assigned to them arbitrary, but
plausible, characteristics.  Thus, the ace of clubs (that suit
representing originally the 'fortunate husbandmen') promises
great wealth, much prosperity in life, and tranquillity of mind--
if it turns up within your circle, as before mentioned.  King of
clubs announces a man of dark complexion who is humane, upright,
&c., in fact, just the man for a husband.  Queen of clubs is
equally propitious as the emblem of a dark lady who would prove a
paragon wife.  Knave of clubs, a jolly good friend in every way. 
Ten of clubs always flurries the heart of the inquirer--
especially if 'hard up'--for it denotes riches speedily
forthcoming from an unexpected quarter--which is usually the case
in such circumstances; but then it also threatens the loss of
some dear friend--which, however, cannot signify much if you get
'the money.'  Seven of clubs promises the most brilliant fortune,
and the most exquisite bliss this world can afford; but then you
are ungallantly warned that you must 'beware of the opposite
sex'--which seems a contradiction in terms--for how call 'the
most exquisite bliss this world can afford' be secured without
the aid of 'the opposite sex'?  Five of clubs is the main point
of maid-servants, young girls from the country, governesses, in
short, of all the floating womanhood of the land--for 'it
declares that you will shortly be married to a person who
will--MEND your CIRCUMSTANCES.'  The trey of clubs is scarcely
less exhilarating, for it promises that you will be married three
times, and each time to a wealthy person.  On the whole the suit
of clubs is very lucky, but, very appropriately, the deuce
thereof portends some 'unfortunate opposition to your favourite
inclination, which will disturb you.'[80]

[80] According to other authorities, the ace of clubs means a
letter; the nine, danger caused by drunkenness; the eight, danger
from covetousness; the seven, a prison, and danger from the
opposite sex; the six, competence by hard-working industry; the
five, a happy but NOT wealthy marriage; the four, danger of
misfortunes caused by inconstancy or capricious temper; the trey,
quarrels.


The suit of diamonds is by no means so satisfactory as the gem of
a name would seem to indicate; but perhaps we must remember that
this suit represented originally the COMMERCIAL CLASSES, and that
probably this divination by cards was invented by some proud
ARISTOCRAT in those times when tradesmen did not stand so high as
they now do in morality, uprightness, &c.  The ace of diamonds
puts you on the qui vive for the postman; it means a LETTER.  It
is only to be hoped that it is not one of those nasty things,
yellow outside and blue within--a dun from some importunate
butcher, baker, grocer, or--tailor.  The king of diamonds shows a
revengeful, fiery, obstinate fellow of very fair complexion in
your circle; the queen of diamonds is nothing but a gay coquette,
of the same complexion as the king, and not 'over- virtuous'--a
very odd phrase in use for the absence of virtue altogether; the
knave of diamonds is a selfish, impracticable fellow; ten of
diamonds is one of the few exceptions to the evil omens of this
suit, it promises a country husband or a wife with great wealth
and many children--the number of the latter being indicated by
the next card to it; it also signifies a purse of gold--but
where?  Oh, where?  Nine of diamonds indicates simply a vagabond,
full of vexation and disappointment; eight of diamonds shows an
enemy to marriage, who may, however, 'marry late,' and find
himself in a terrible 'fix;' seven of diamonds is worse still,
portending all the horrors of the divorce court and the
bankruptcy court--conjugal profligacy and extravagance; six of
diamonds means early marriage and premature widowhood, and a
second marriage, which will probably be worse; five of diamonds
is the next exception to the misery of this suit, it promises
'good children, who will KEEP YOU FROM GRIEF'--at best, however,
only a makeshift; four of diamonds is as bad as seven of
diamonds--portending the same results; the trey of diamonds
threatens all manner of strife, law-suits, &c., promises a vixen
for a wife, to your great domestic misery; the deuce of diamonds
concludes the catalogue of wretchedness with the assurance that
you will fall in love early, that your parents will not approve
of your choice, and if you marry, notwithstanding, that they will
hardly ever forgive you.[81]

[81] Otherwise the ace of diamonds means a wedding ring, the
king, a fiery but a placable person, of very fair complexion; the
ten, money, success in honourable business; the eight, a happy
prudent marriage, though late in life; the five, unexpected and
most likely good news; the four, a faithless friend, a betrayed
secret.


The suit of hearts, as previously explained, represented
originally the ecclesiastical order, the jolly monks, churchmen
of all degrees; how far the indications tally must be left to the
ingenious reader to determine.  The ace of hearts means feasting
and pleasure; but if attended by spades, it foretells
quarrelling; if by hearts it shows affection and friendship; if
by diamonds, you will hear of some absent friend; if by clubs, of
merry-making: the king of hearts denotes a not VERY fair man,
good-natured, but hot and hasty individual, and very amorous; the
queen of hearts promises a lady of golden locks (not necessarily
'carrots'), faithful and affectionate; the knave of hearts is a
particular friend, and great attention must be paid to the card
that stands next to him, as from it alone you can judge whether
the person it represents will favour your inclination or not,
because he is always the dearest friend or nearest relation of
the consulting party; the ten of hearts shows good nature and
many children, and is a corrective of the bad tidings of the
cards that stand next to it; and if its neighbouring cards are of
good import, it ascertains and confirms their value: nine of
hearts promises wealth, grandeur, and high esteem; if cards that
are unfavourable stand near it, you may expect disappointments;
and the reverse, if favourable cards follow; if these last be at
a small distance, expect to retrieve your losses, whether of
peace or goods: eight of hearts signifies drinking and feasting;
seven of hearts shows a fickle and unfaithful person, vicious,
spiteful, malicious; six of hearts promises a generous, open,
credulous disposition, often a dupe; if this card comes before
your king or queen (as the case may be) YOU will be the dupe; if
after, you will get the upper hand: five of hearts portends a
wavering, unsteady, unreliable individual of either sex: four of
hearts indicates late marriage from 'delicacy in making a
choice:' trey of hearts is rather a 'poser;' 'it shows that your
own impudence will greatly contribute to your experiencing the
ill-will of others:' deuce of hearts promises extraordinary
success and good fortune, though, perhaps, you may have to wait
long for 'the good time coming.'[82]

[82] Or,--the ace of hearts denotes the house of the consulter;
the queen, a lady not VERY fair; seven, many good friends; six,
honourable courtship; five, a present; four, domestic troubles
caused by jealousy.


The suit of spades originally represented the NOBILITY, and the
following are its significances in fortune-telling.  The ace of
spades wholly relates to love-affairs, without specifying whether
lawful or unlawful--a pretty general occupation of the
'nobility,' of course; it also denotes death when the card is
upside down: the king of spades shows a man ambitious and
successful at court, or with some great man who will have it in
his power to advance him--but, let him beware of the reverse! the
queen of spades shows that a person will be corrupted by the rich
of both sexes; if she is handsome great attempts will be made on
her virtue: the knave of spades shows a fellow that requires much
rousing, although 'quite willing to serve you' with his influence
and patronage--like many a member in the case of his importunate
constituents: the ten of spades is a card of caution,
counteracting the good effect of the card near you: the nine of
spades is positively the worst card in the whole pack; it
portends dangerous sickness, total loss of fortune, cruel
calamities, endless dissension in your family, and death at
last--I hope you may never see it near you: the eight of spades
indicates much opposition from your FRIENDS, or those you imagine
to be such; if this card comes near you, leave your plan and
adopt another: seven of spades shows the loss of a most valuable,
influential friend, whose death will plunge you in very great
distress and poverty: the six of spades announces a mediocrity of
fortune, and great uncertainty in your undertakings: the five of
spades is rather doubtful as to success or a rise in life; but it
promises luck in the choice of your companion for life, although
it shows that your own temper is rather sullen--and so to get a
'fond creature' to take care of you, with such a temper, is a
mighty great blessing, and more than you deserve: the four of
spades shows sickness speedily, and injury of fortune by friends:
the trey of spades shows that you will be fortunate in marriage,
but that your inconstant temper will make you unhappy:
the deuce of spades is the UNDERTAKER, at last; it positively
shows a COFFIN, but who it is for must depend entirely on the
cards that are near it.[83]

[83] Or,--the ace of spades denotes death, malice, a duel, a
general misfortune; the king, a man of very dark complexion,
ambitious, and unscrupulous; the queen, a very dark- complexioned
woman of malicious disposition, or a widow; the knave, a lawyer,
a person to be shunned; the ten, disgrace, crime, imprisonment,
death on the scaffold; the eight, great danger from imprudence;
the six, a child, to the unmarried a card of caution; the five,
great danger from giving way to bad temper; the trey, a journey
by land,--tears; the deuce, a removal.


'The nine of hearts is termed the wish card.  After the general
fortune has been told, a separate and different manipulation is
performed, to learn if the pryer into futurity will obtain a
particular wish; and from the position of the wish card in the
pack the required answer is deduced.

'The foregoing is merely the alphabet of the art; the letters, as
it were, of the sentences formed by the various combinations of
the cards.  A general idea only can be given here of the manner
in which those prophetic sentences are formed.  As before stated,
if a married woman consults the cards, the king of her own suit,
or complexion, represents her husband; but with single women, the
lover, either in esse or posse, is represented by his own colour;
and all cards, when representing persons, lose their own normal
significations.  There are exceptions, however, to these general
rules.  A man, no matter what his complexion, if he wear uniform,
even if he be the negro cymbal-player in a regimental band, can
be represented by the king of diamonds:-- note, the dress of
policemen and volunteers is not considered as uniform.  On the
other hand, a widow, even if she be an albiness, can be
represented only by the queen of spades.

'The ace of hearts always denoting the house of the person
consulting the decrees of fate, some general rules are applicable
to it.  Thus the ace of clubs signifying a letter, its position,
either before or after the ace of hearts, shows whether the
letter is to be sent to or from the house.  The ace of diamonds
when close to the ace of hearts foretells a wedding in the house;
but the ace of spades betokens sickness and death.

'The knaves represent the thoughts of their respective kings and
queens, and consequently the thoughts of the persons whom those
kings and queens represent, in accordance with their complexions.

For instance, a young lady of a rather but not decidedly dark
complexion, represented by the queen of clubs, when consulting
the cards, may be shocked to find her fair lover (the king of
diamonds) flirting with a wealthy widow (the queen of spades,
attended by the ten of diamonds), but she will be reassured
by finding his thoughts (the knave of diamonds) in combination
with a letter (ace of clubs), a wedding ring (ace of diamonds),
and her house (the ace of hearts); clearly signifying that,
though he is actually flirting with the rich widow, he is,
nevertheless, thinking of sending a letter, with an offer of
marriage, to the young lady herself.  And look, where are her own
thoughts, represented by the knave of clubs; they are far away
with the old lover, that dark man (king of spades) who, as is
plainly shown by his being attended by the nine of diamonds, is
prospering at the Australian diggings or elsewhere.  Let us
shuffle the cards once more, and see if the dark man, at the
distant diggings, ever thinks of his old flame, the club-
complexioned young lady in England.  No! he does not.  Here are
his thoughts (the knave of spades), directed to this fair, but
rather gay and coquettish, woman (the queen of diamonds); they
are separated but by a few hearts, one of them, the sixth
(honourable courtship), showing the excellent understanding that
exists between them.  Count, now, from the six of hearts to the
ninth card from it, and lo! it is a wedding ring (the ace of
diamonds); they will be married before the expiration of a
twelvemonth.'

Such is the scheme of fortune-telling by cards, as propounded in
the learned disquisitions of the adepts, and Betty, or Martha, or
her mistress can consult them by themselves according to the
established method--without exposing themselves to the
extortionate cunning of the wandering gipsies or the permanent
crone of the city or village.  They may just as well believe what
comes out according to their own manipulation as by that of the
heartless cheats in question.  Your ordinary fortune-tellers are
not over-particular, being only anxious to tell you exactly what
you want to know.  So if a black court card gets in juxta-
position with and looking towards a red court card, the fair
consulter's representative, then it is evident that some 'dark
gentleman' is 'after her;' and vice versa; and if a wife,
suspecting her husband's fidelity, consults the cards, the
probability is that her SUSPICIONS will receive 'confirmation
strong' from the fact that 'some dark woman,' that is, a black
queen, 'is after her husband;' or vice versa, if a husband
consults the card-woman respecting the suspicions he may have
reason to entertain with regard to his 'weaker rib' or his
'intended.'

It need scarcely be observed that fortune-tellers in any place
are 'posted up' in all information or gossip in the
neighbourhood; and therefore they readily turn their knowledge to
account in the answers they give to anxious inquirers.

Apart from this, however, the interpretations are so elaborately
comprehensive that 'something' MUST come true in the revelations;
and we all know that in such matters that something coming to
pass will far outweigh the non-fulfilment of other fatal
ordinations.  Of course no professional fortune-teller would
inform an old man that some dark or fair man was 'after' his old
woman; but nothing is more probable than the converse, and much
family distraction has frequently resulted from such perverse
revelation of 'the cards.'  In like manner your clever
fortune-teller will never promise half-a-dozen children to 'an
old lady,' but she will very probably hold forth that pleasant
prospect--if such it be--to a buxom lass of seventeen or
eighteen--especially in those counties of England where the
ladies are remarkable for such profuse bounty to their husbands.

As a general proposition, it matters very little what may be the
means of vaticination or prediction--whether cards, the tea-
grounds in the cup, &c.,--all POSSIBLE events have a degree of
probability of coming to pass, which may vary from 20 to 1 down
to a perfect equality of chance; and the clever fortune-teller,
who may be mindful of her reputation, will take care to regulate
her promises or predictions according to that proposition.

Many educated ladies give their attention to the cards, and some
have acquired great proficiency in the art.  On board a steamer
sailing for New York, on one occasion a French lady among the
saloon-passengers undertook to amuse the party by telling their
fortunes.  A Scotch young gentleman, who was going out to try and
get a commission in the Federal army, had his fortune told. 
Among the announcements, as interpreted by the lady, was the
rather unpleasant prospect that two constables would be 'after'
him!  We all laughed heartily at the odd things that came out for
everybody, and then the thing was forgotten; the steamer reached
her destination; and all the companions of the pleasant voyage
separated and went their different ways.

Some months after, I met the young gentleman above alluded to,
and among the various adventures which he had had, he mentioned
the following.  He said that shortly after his arrival in New
York he presented a ten-dollar note which he had received, at a
drinking-house, that it was declared a forged note, and that he
was given into custody; but that the magistrate, on being
conclusively convinced of his respectability, dismissed the
charge without even taking the trouble to establish the alleged
fact that the note was a forgery.  So far so good; but on the
following morning, whilst at breakfast at his hotel, another
police-officer pounced upon him, and led him once more on the
same charge to another magistrate, who, however, dismissed the
case like the other.[84]

[84] It appears that this is allowable in New York.  The
explanation of the perverse prosecution was, that the young
gentleman did not 'fee' the worthy policemen, according to custom
in such cases.


Thereupon I said--'Why, the French lady's card-prediction on
board came to pass!  Don't you remember what she said about two
constables being "after you"?'

'Now I remember it,' he said; 'but I had positively forgotten all
about it.  Well, she was right there--but I am sorry to say that
nothing else she PROMISED has come to pass.'

Doubtless all other consulters of the cards and of astrologers
can say the same, although all would not wisely conclude that a
system must be erroneous which misleads human hope in the great
majority of cases.  In fact, like the predictions in our weather-
almanacks, the fortune-teller's announcements are only right BY
CHANCE, and wrong ON PRINCIPLE.

FORTUNE-TELLING FORTY YEARS AGO, OR, THE STORY OF MARTHA CARNABY.

A certain Martha Carnaby, a tidy but rather 'unsettled' servant
girl, some forty years ago went to an old fortune-teller, to have
her fortune told, and the doings on both sides came out as
follows, before the magistrate at the Bow Street police-court. 
The fortune-teller was 'had up,' as usual, 'for obtaining money
and other valuables' from the former.

Miss Martha Carnaby said that this celebrated old fortune-teller
had first gained her acquaintance by attending at her master's
house, before the family had risen, and urging her to have her
fortune told.  At length, after much persuasion, she consented;
but the fortune-teller told her that before the secrets of her
future destiny were revealed, she must deposit in her hands some
little token, TO BIND THE CHARM, which the old lady said she
would invoke the same evening--'if I would call at her lodgings,
and also cast my nativity by her cards, and tell me every
particular of the future progress of my life.  I accordingly gave
her what money I had; but that, she told me, was not enough to
buy the ingredients with which she was to compose the charm.  I
at length gave her four silver teaspoons and two tablespoons,
which she put carefully in her pocket; and then asked me to let
her look at my hand, which I showed her.  She told me there were
many lines in it which clearly indicated great wealth and
happiness; and, after telling her my name was Martha Carnaby, she
took her departure, and I agreed to meet her at her lodgings the
same evening.  Agreeably to her directions, I dressed myself in
as fashionable a manner as I could, because I WAS TO SEE MY
SWEETHEART THROUGH A MIRROR, AND HE WAS TO SEE ME.'

The poor deluded creature then stated that she attended
punctually at the hour appointed, at the old lady's sanctum, and
seating herself upon an old chair, beheld with astonishment quite
as much as she bargained for.  'I felt myself,' said poor Martha,
'on entering the room, all of a twitter.  The old woman was
seated in her chair of state, and, reaching down from the
mantel-piece a pack of cards, began, after muttering a few words
in a language I could not understand, to lay them very carefully
in her lap; she then foretold that I should get married, but not
to the person in our house, as I expected, but to another young
man, whom, if I could afford a trifle, she would show me through
her MATRIMONIAL MIRROR.  To this I consented, and she desired me
to shut my eyes and keep my face covered while she made the
necessary preparations; and there she kept me, with my face hid
in her lap, until I was nearly smothered; when suddenly she told
me to turn round, and look through the mirror, which was seen
through a hole in a curtain, and I saw a young man pass quickly
before me, staring me in the face, at which I was much surprised,
she assuring me that he would be my husband.  It was then agreed
that she was to call on me the next morning, and return the
silver spoons; but, your Worship,' said the poor girl, 'she never
came; and as I was afraid my mistress would soon want them, I
asked the advice of a woman in our neighbourhood, as to what I
had better do, and to whom I related all the circumstances I have
told your Worship; when the woman asked me how I could have been
such a fool as to be duped by that old cheat at the bar,--that
she was a notorious old woman, that she had in her employ some
young man, who was always hid in the room, to overhear the
conversation, and to run from out of the hiding-place before the
mirror; and that I ought to be thankful I came away as well as I
did, as many young girls had been ruined through going to this
old creature; that, from her acquaintance with so many servant
girls, she always contrived to get from them such intelligence as
enabled her to answer those questions that might be put to her,
as to the business, name, place of abode, country, and other
circumstances of the party applying, the answering of which
always convinced the credulous creatures who went to her, of her
great skill in the art of astrology; and when she was right in
her guessing, she always took care to have it well published.'

Of course, and again, as usual, the magistrate 'hoped it would be
a lesson to Martha, and to all other foolish girls, never to
hearken to those infernal, wicked old wretches, the
fortune-tellers--many a girl having lost her character and virtue
by listening to their nonsense;' but there have been hundreds and
thousands of such Marthas since then, and no doubt there will be
very many more in future--in spite of the ridiculous exposure of
such dupes ever and anon, in courts of justice and in the columns
of the daily papers.

'The art of cartomancy, or divination by playing-cards, dates
from an early period of their obscure history.  In the museum of
Nantes there is a painting, said to be by Van Eyck, representing
Philippe le Bon, Archduke of Austria, and subsequently King of
Spain, consulting a fortune-teller by cards.  This picture cannot
be of a later date than the fifteenth century.  Then the art was
introduced into England is unknown; probably, however, the
earliest printed notice of it in this country is the following
curious story, extracted from Rowland's Judicial Astrology
Condemned:--"Cuffe, an excellent Grecian, and secretary to the
Earl of Essex, was told, twenty years before his death, that he
should come to an untimely end, at which Cuffe laughed, and in a
scornful manner entreated the soothsayer to show him in what
manner he should come to his end, who condescended to him, and
calling for cards, entreated Cuffe to draw out of the pack any
three which pleased him.  He did so, and drew three knaves, and
laid them on the table by the wizard's direction, who then told
him, if he desired to see the sum of his bad fortune, to take up
those cards.  Cuffe, as he was prescribed, took up the first
card, and looking on it, he saw the portraiture of himself
cap-a-pie, having men encompassing him with bills and halberds. 
Then he took up the second, and there he saw the judge that sat
upon him; and taking up the last card, he saw Tyburn, the place
of his execution, and the hangman, at which he laughed heartily. 
But many years after, being condemned, he remembered and declared
this prediction."

'The earliest work on cartomancy was written or compiled by one
Francesco Marcolini, and printed at Venice in 1540.'[85]

[85] The Book of Days, Feb. 21.  In this work there is a somewhat
different account of cartomancy to that which I have expounded
'on the best authorities' and from practical experience with the
adepts in the art; but, in a matter of such immense importance to
ladies of all degrees, I have thought proper to give, in
foot-notes, the differing interpretations of the writer in the
Book of Days, who professes to speak with some authority, not
however, I think, superior to mine, for I have investigated the
subject to the utmost.


CHAPTER XIV.

AMUSING CARD TRICKS.[86]

[86] These tricks appeared originally in Beeton's Christmas
Annual, and are here reproduced with permission.


Although my work is a history of gambling, in all its horrors,
and with all its terrible moral warnings, I gladly conclude it
'happily,' after the manner of the most pleasing novels and
romances,--namely, by a method of contriving innocent and
interesting amusement with cards, without the 'chance' of
encountering the risks, calamities, and disgrace of gambling.

I was led to the investigation of this branch of my subject by
the following incident.  Being present at a party when a
gentleman performed one of the tricks described, No. 7, the rest
of the company and myself were all much surprised at the result,
and urgently requested him to explain the method of his
performance, which, however, he stoutly refused to do, averring
that he would not take L1000 for it.  This was so ridiculously
provoking that I offered to bet him L5 that I would discover the
method within 24 hours.  To my astonishment he declined the bet,
not, however, without a sort of compliment, admitting that I
MIGHT do so.  He was right; for, as Edgar Poe averred, no man can
invent a puzzle which some other man cannot unravel.  In effect,
I called upon him the following day, and performed the trick not
only according to his method, but also by another, equally
successful.  I have reason to believe that most of the tricks of
my selection had not previously appeared in print; at any rate, I
have given to all of them an exposition which may entitle them to
some claim of originality.

PRELIMINARY HINTS.

I.  Shuffling, in the simple and inoffensive sense of the
expression, is an important point in all tricks with cards.  For
the most part, it is only a pretence or dexterous management--
keeping a card or cards in your command whilst seeming to shuffle
them into the pack.

Every performer has his method of such shuffling.  Some hold the
pack perpendicularly with the left hand, then with the right take
a portion of the pack--about one half--and make a show of
shuffling the two parts together edgeways, but, in reality,
replace them as they were.  With rapidity of execution every eye
is thus deceived.

If a single card is to be held in command, place it at the bottom
of the pack, which you hold in your left, and then, with your
right thumb and middle finger, raise and throw successively
portions of the pack, leaving the bottom card in contact with the
fingers of the left hand.

With dexterity, any portion of the pack may be shuffled, leaving
the remainder just as it was, by separating it during the process
by inserting one or more fingers of the left hand between it and
the portions shuffled.

II.  Cutting--not in the sense of bolting at the sight of 'blue,'
though that is of consequence to card-sharpers--is of importance
in all card tricks.  In many tricks cutting the cards is only a
pretence, as it is necessary for the success of the trick to
replace them as they were; in technical terms, we must 'blow up
the cut.'[87]

[87] This is the sauter la coupe referred to in the chapter on
the Gaming Clubs, in the account of the trial of Lord de Ros. 
See 'Graham's Club.'


There are several ways of performing this sleight-of-hand.  The
cards being cut, and forming two lots on the table, smartly
snatch up the lot which should be placed on the other, with the
left hand.

This lot being taken up and the hand being in the position shown
in the figure, snatch up in like manner the other lot, and, by a
movement of the palm of the hand and the tips of the fingers,
pass the second lot under the first.

The deception of the trick depends upon its dexterity, and this
can only be acquired by practice.  But really it may be dispensed
with; for it is a curious fact that, in every case when the cards
are cut, you may actually replace them just as they were without
being observed by the spectators--for the simple reason that the
ruse is not suspected, especially if their attention is otherwise
engaged with your pointed observations.

The 'gift of the gab' is in this case, as in many others, a very
great resource.  A striking remark or bon mot will easily mystify
the spectators, and attract their attention from what you are
DOING.  Hence all prestidigitators are always well stocked with
anecdotes and funny observations; indeed, they talk incessantly:
they speak well, too, and they take care to time the word
accurately with the moment when their fingers act most
energetically.

III.  To slip a card.--To slip a card is to pretend to take the
bottom card of the pack, and in reality to take the card which
precedes it.  To perform this feat without detection is a very
simple affair, but it requires practice.

The pack of cards being held in the right hand,
advance the left hand--palm upwards--just as if you were seizing
the last card with the middle finger; but, having slightly
moistened this finger with the lips, push back this card, and
make it slip under the palm of the right hand, whilst you seize
the preceding card with the thumb and forefinger.

In this manner you may successively draw out several cards
besides the last, and only draw the last as the sixth, seventh,
&c., which will serve to effect several interesting tricks to be
explained in the sequel.

IV.  To file the card.--To file the card is, when a card has been
taken from the pack to pretend to place it about the middle of
the pack, whilst, in reality, you place it at the bottom.

The pack must be held in the left hand, between the thumb and
forefinger, so that the three other fingers be free.  One of the
middle cards should project a little.  Then take the card to be
filed between the forefinger and the middle finger of the right
hand; advance the right hand from the left, and whilst the three
disengaged fingers of the left hand seize and place the card
under the pack, the thumb and forefinger of the right seize the
projecting card before mentioned, so that it seems to be that
card which you have slipped into the middle of the pack.  These
movements are very easy, and, when rapidly performed, the
illusion is complete.

TRICKS.

1. To tell a card thought of by a party after three deals.

Take twenty-one cards of a pack, and deal them out one by one in
three lots, requesting the party to think of a card, and remember
in which lot it is.

Having dealt out the cards, ask the party in which lot the card
is.

Take up the lots successively, and place the lot containing the
card in the MIDDLE.

Deal out the cards again, and ask the party to state in which lot
the card is; and proceed as before, placing the lot containing
the card in the middle.

Deal out the cards in like manner a third time, proceeding as
before.

Then deal them out as usual, and the eleventh card will be the
one thought of, infallibly.  This is the usual way of showing the
card thought of; but, as the trick may be partly discovered by
the counting, it is better to hold the cards in your hand, and
take out the eleventh card, counting to yourself, of course, from
the left hand, but pretending to be considering the guess.

This is apparently a most mysterious trick, although a necessary
consequence of the position of the lot containing the card in the
three deals.

2. The four inseparable kings.

Take four kings.  Beneath the last place any two cards, which you
take care to conceal.  Then show the four kings and replace the
six cards under the pack.

Then take a king and place it in the top of the pack, place one
of the TWO OTHER CARDS in the middle, and the other about the
same place, and then, turning up the pack, show that one king is
still at the bottom.  Then let the cards be cut, and as three
kings were left below, all must necessarily get together
somewhere about the middle of the pack.  Of course in placing the
two other cards you pretend to be placing two kings.

3. The barmaid and the three victimizers.

For this amusing trick you arrange the cards thus:  Holding the
pack in your hands, find all the knaves, place one of them next
to your left hand, and the other three on the table.  Then find a
queen, which also place on the table.  Then say:--

'Three scamps went into a tavern, and ordered drink.  Here they
are--the three knaves.  "Who's to pay?  I can't," said the first.

"I won't," said the second.  "I wish she may get it," said the
third.  "I'll manage it," said the first, the greatest rogue of
the three.  "I say, my pretty girl, haven't you some very old
wine in your cellar?"  Here's the barmaid thus addressed by the
rogue in question (showing the queen), and she replied:--"Oh yes,
sir, prime old wine."  "Let's have a bottle."  [Off went the
barmaid.  Put the queen in your pocket.]  "Now for it, my lads,"
said the knave in question; " 'mizzle' is the word.  Let's be off
in opposite directions, and meet to- night; you know where." 
Hereupon they decamped, taking opposite directions, which I will
indicate by placing one on the top of the pack, one at the
bottom, and the other in the middle.

'When the poor barmaid returned [taking out the queen from your
pocket] with the wine, great was her astonishment to find the
room empty.  "Lor!" she exclaimed, "why, I do declare--did you
ever!--Oh! but I'm not agoing to be sarved so.  I'll catch the
rogues, all of them--that I will."  And off she went after them,
as shown by placing her ON, or at any rate, AFTER the first.

'Now, to catch the three seemed impossible; but the ladies have
always smiled at impossibilities, and wonders never cease; for,
if you have the goodness to cut these cards, you will find that
she HAS caught the three rogues.'

When the cards are cut, proceed in the USUAL WAY after
cutting--NOT as required in the last trick; and taking up the
cards, you will find the queen and three knaves together, which
you take out and exhibit to the astonished audience.

Of course, one of these knaves is not one of the three first
exhibited, but the one which you slipped on your left hand at
first.  There is no chance of detection, however; simply for the
reason before given--nobody suspects the trick.

4. How to name every card in a pack successively turned up by a
second party, and win every trick at a hand of Whist.

This is, perhaps, the most astonishing of all tricks with cards. 
Although it may be true that whatever puzzle one man invents,
some other man may unravel, as before observed, I am decidedly of
opinion that this trick defies detection.  At the first blush it
seems very difficult to learn; but it is simplicity itself in
explanation.

Begin by laying out the cards in four rows according to the
suits, all of a suit in a row side by side.

The cards must now be arranged for the trick.  Take up the six in
the top or bottom row, then the two in the next row, the ten in
the third, and the nine in the fourth, placing them one upon the
other in the left hand.  Then begin again with the row from which
you took the six, and take up the three.  From the next row take
the king.  These numbers will be easily remembered with a little
practice, amounting altogether to 30, made up thus--6 and 2 are
8, 8 and 10 are 18, 18 and 9 are 27, 27 and 3 are 30--KING.

By repeating this addition a few times, it will be fixed in the
memory.

Proceed by next beginning with the row next to the one from which
you took the last card or the king, and take the eight; from the
next row take the four; from the next the ace; from the next the
knave.  These cards make up 13.  Therefore say, 8 and 4 are 12
and 1 are 13--knave.

From the next row to that whence you took the knave, take the
seven; from the next row take the five; from the next the queen. 
These cards make up 12.  Thus, 7 and 5 are 12--queen.

It thus appears that you have taken up thirteen cards consisting
of the four suits, successively taken and being arranged as
follows:--6, 2, 10, 9, 3, king; 8, 4, 1, knave; 7, 5, queen.

Proceed in like manner with the remainder of the cards, beginning
with the row next to that from which you took the queen, and take
the six, then from the next row the two, and so on as before,
making up another batch of 13 cards.

Repeat the process for a third batch, and finish with the
remainder for the fourth--always remembering to take the card
from the next row in succession continually; in other words, only
one card must be taken from each row at a time.

When the cards are thus arranged, request a party to cut them. 
This is only pretence; for you must take care dexterously to
replace the cut just as it was before.  Let them be cut again,
and replace them as before.  Your ruse will not be detected,
simply because nobody suspects the possibility of the thing.

Now take up the pack, and from the BOTTOM take the first four
cards; handing the remainder to a party, sitting before you,
saying--'I shall now call every card in succession from the top
of the pack in your hand.'

To do this, two things must be remembered; and there is no
difficulty in it.  First, the numbers 6, 2, 10, 9, 3, king, &c.,
before given; and next the SUIT of those cards.

Now you know the NUMBERS by heart, and the SUIT is shown by the
four cards which you hold in your hand, fan-like, in the usual
way.  If the first of the four cards be a club, the first card
you call will be the six of clubs; if the next be a heart, the
next card called will be the two of hearts, and so on throughout
the thirteen made up from every row, as before given, and the
suits of each card will be indicated successively by the suit of
each of your four indicator cards, thus, as the case may be,
clubs, hearts, diamonds, spades; clubs, hearts, diamonds, spades,
and so on.

After a little private practice, you will readily and rapidly
call, as the case may be, from the four cards in your hand:--the
six of clubs, two of hearts, ten of diamonds, nine of spades,
three of clubs, king of hearts, eight of diamonds, four of
spades, ace of clubs, knave of hearts, seven of diamonds, five of
spades, queen of clubs--and so on to the last card in the pack.

In the midst of the astonishment produced by this seemingly
prodigious display of memory, say--'Now, if you like, we will
have a hand at Whist, and I undertake to win every trick if I be
allowed to deal.'

Let the Whist party be formed, and get the cards cut as usual--
only taking care to REPLACE them, as before enjoined, precisely
as they were.  Deal the cards, and the result will be that your
thirteen cards will be ALL TRUMPS.  Let the game proceed until
your opponents 'give it up' in utter bewilderment.

This splendid trick seems difficult in description, but it is one
of the easiest; and even were it ten times more difficult than it
is, the reader will perhaps admit that it is worth mastering. 
Once committed to memory the figures are never forgotten, and a
few repetitions, with the cards before you, will suffice to
enable you to retain them.

5. Two persons having each drawn a card and replaced them in the
pack, to guess these cards.

Make a set of all the clubs and spades, and another set of hearts
and diamonds.  Shuffle well each set, and even let them be
shuffled by the spectators.  Then request a person to draw a card
from one of the sets, and another person to draw one from the
second set.

You now take a set in each hand, presenting them to the two
persons, requesting them to replace the drawn cards.  You must
pretend to present to each person the set from which he drew his
card, but in reality you present the red set to the person who
drew the black card, and the black set to the person who drew the
red card.

Each person having replaced his card, you get each set shuffled. 
Then you take them in hand, and by running them over you easily
find the red card amongst the black, and the black card amongst
the red.

Of course you will have prepared the sets beforehand, and take
care to alter the arrangement as soon as possible after the
trick.  But you can prepare the pack in the presence of others
without their detecting it.  Distribute the cards by dealing
according to the two colours; take them up, and having placed the
red set a little projecting over the black, set them down, and,
pretending to cut them, separate the sets.

6. Twenty cards being arranged upon a table, a person thinks of
two, and you undertake to guess them.

Lay out twenty cards of any kind, two by two,


--------------------- 
| c | i | c | o | s | 
---------------------
| d | e | d | i | t | 
--------------------- 
| t | u | m | u | s |
--------------------- 
| n | e | m | o | n | 
---------------------

and request a party to think of two in a line; that is, one of
the ten sets formed by the twenty cards.  This done you take up
the sets in the order in which they lie, and place them in rows
according to the letters of the words.  You may use a diagram
like the preceding, but as the words are easily retained it had
better be dispensed with, distributing the cards on the table
just as though upon the diagram, which will make the trick more
puzzling and extraordinary.  Proceed as follows:-- Place the
cards two by two on similar letters: thus, place the two cards of
the first set on the two d's in dedit; the two cards of the
second set on the two i's of cicos and dedit; the two of the
third set on the two c's, and so on with the ten sets.

All the letters of the words being thus covered, ask the party
who has thought of the cards to tell you in which lines these
cards are.  If both are in the first line (cicos), they must be
those on the two c's; if they are both in the second line, they
cover the d's in dedit; both in the third line, they cover the
u's in tumus; both in the fourth, they cover the n's in nemon.

If one be in the first line and the other in the second, they
cover the i's in cicos and dedit, and thus of the rest-- the two
cards thought of NECESSARILY covering two SIMILAR LETTERS, whilst
each of the letters occurs only TWICE in the diagram.

7. To tell a card thought of without even looking at the cards.

Take any number of cards,--say twenty.  Pretend to shuffle them
with the faces towards you, and REMEMBER THE FIRST CARD as you
close the pack--suppose the ten of diamonds.  Tell the party that
the only condition you require is to be told the ORDER in which
the card is dealt out by you; in other words, he must tell you
whether in dealing it comes out first, second, third, &c.

Remembering your first card, you may then turn your back to him,
and deal out the cards one by one, and one upon the top of the
other, requesting him to think of a card and its order as before
said.

Then take up the cards, and shuffle them repeatedly, by throwing
a portion of them from the bottom to the top, taking care not to
mix the cards or let any drop, and then let the party cut them as
often as he pleases.  Then, take the cards in hand.  Pretend to
examine them mysteriously, but in reality only look for YOUR
card--the first dealt out--the ten of diamonds for instance. 
Now, suppose he tells you that the card he thought of came out
FIFTH.  Then, for a certainty, it is the fourth card on the RIGHT
of the ten of diamonds, in spite of all YOUR shuffling, and all
regular cutting, for such shuffling and regular cutting cannot
alter the order or sequence of the cards.  Always remember to
count from your own card inclusive to the number of the card
thought of towards your right hand.  But should your card happen
to be so near the right hand or the top as not to allow
sufficient counting, then count as far as it admits to the RIGHT
and then continue at the LEFT.  Thus, suppose there are only two
cards above the ten of diamonds, then count two more on the left,
making the fifth.  If the card you remember, or your first card,
is first, then count the requisite number on the left, always
beginning with YOUR card, however.

The REASON of this trick is simply that by merely cutting the
cards, and shuffling them in the way indicated, you do not alter
the SEQUENCE of the cards.  With regard to this sort of
SHUFFLING, I may say that it is simply CUTTING the cards-- always
preserving their sequence--a most important fact for
card-players, since it may lead to a pretty accurate conjecture
of all the hands after a deal, from the study of the one in hand,
with reference to the tricks turned down after the previous deal,
as already suggested.  Hence, in shuffling for whist or other
games, the cards should not be shuffled in this way, but more
thoroughly mixed by the edgewise shuffling of certain players.

This is the trick I alluded to at the commencement of the
chapter, the mode of performing which I succeeded in discovering.

Of course ANY NUMBER of persons may think of cards, remembering
their order, and the operator will tell them, in like manner.

8. A person having thought of one of fifteen cards presented to
him, to guess the card thought of.

Form three ranks of five cards each, and request a party to think
of one of these cards, and tell you in which rank it is.  Take up
the cards of the three ranks, taking care to place the cards of
the ranks in which is the card thought of between those of the
two other ranks.

Make three more ranks as before.  Ask the party again in which
rank the card is, and take them up, placing the rank in which the
card is between the two others.  Operate in like manner a third
time, and the card thought of will infallibly be the THIRD of the
rank named by the party.

Observe, however, you must not form each rank with five
consecutive cards; but you must place the cards one by one,
placing one successively in each rank; thus, one at the top on
the left of the first rank, one below that first for the second
rank, one below the second for the third rank, then one in the
first, one in the second, one in the third, and so on.

This trick, which is very easy, always produces a great effect. 
It only requires a little attention, and it can never fail unless
you make a mistake in arranging the cards, which, however, is too
simple to admit of error.

9. Two persons having each drawn a card from a pack, and having
replaced them, to tell these cards after the pack has been
shuffled and cut by the spectators as often as they like.

The cards may be easily divided into two numerical parts, even
and odd: by taking a king for four points, a queen for three, a
knave for two, and the other cards for their especial points, we
may make up two sets of sixteen cards each, the even composing
one, and the odd the other.  These two sets being before the
performer, he takes one, shuffles it well, and lets a party take
a card.  He then takes the other, shuffles it, and lets another
party take a card.  Then, whilst each party is looking at his
card, which HE IS REQUESTED TO DO, the performer dexterously
changes the place of the two sets, and he requests the parties to
replace the cards in the set whence they took them.  It follows
that the party who took a card from the EVEN set places it in the
ODD set, and he who took it from the ODD set places it in the
even set.  Consequently, all the shuffling and cutting in the
world will be useless, for the performer has only to spread out
the cards of each set to point out the cards drawn.

10. Singular arrangement of sixteen cards.

Take the four kings, the four queens, the four knaves, and the
four tens of a pack, and ask if there be any one in the company
who can form a square with them in such a manner that, taken in
any direction, from right to left, from the top to the bottom, by
the diagonal--anyhow, in fact--there will always be in each line
a king, queen, knave, and a ten.  Everybody will think the thing
easy, but it is certain that no one will succeed in doing it. 
When they 'give it up,' take the sixteen cards and arrange them
as shown, when the king, queen, knave, and ten will stand as
required.

11. The seven trick.

Make up the four sevens of a pack, and take seven other cards, no
matter which, for another lot, and, presenting both lots, you
say:--Here are two lots totally dissimilar; nevertheless, there
is one of seven, and I declare it will be the first touched by
any party present.  Of course, when touched, you at once prove
your words by exhibiting either the sevens or the seven cards--
taking care to mix the cards into the pack immediately to prevent
detection.

12. Infallible method for guessing any number that a party has
thought of.

Take the first ten cards of a pack of 52 cards.  Set out these
ten cards as shown below, so that the point A should correspond
to the ace, and to 1--the point F to the card representing the
6--and E to the 10.

              2  3  4       
              B  C  D   
          1 A--------E 5  
         10 K--------F 6      
              I  H  G       
              9  8  7

Thus prepared, you request a party to think of a card, and then
you tell him to touch any number he pleases, requesting him to
name it aloud.  Then, adding the whole number of the cards to the
number touched, you tell him to count backwards to himself,
beginning with the card touched, and giving to that card the
number of the one thought of.  By counting in this way, the party
will at length count the entire number on the card thought of,
which you will thus be able to designate with certainty.

Example:--Suppose the card thought of is G, marking 7; again,
supposing the one touched to be D, equal to 4; you add to this
number the entire number of cards, which is, in this case, 10,
which will make 14.  Then, making the party count this sum, from
the number touched, D to C, B, A, and so on, backwards, so that
in commencing to count the number thought of, 7 on D, the party
will continue, saying, 8 on C, 9 on B, 10 on A, 11 on K, 12 on I,
13 on H, and end with counting 14 on G; and you will thus
discover that the number thought of is 7, which corresponds to G.

Of course the party counts TO himself, and only speaks to
designate the point on which he stops, namely, G in this example.

This trick may be performed with any number of cards-- as few as
six, or as many as fifteen.  Then you must always add to the
number the total of the cards used.  The trick will be much more
interesting and striking if you turn the cards face downwards,
only trusting to your memory to retain the order of the numbers.

Of course, the letters are only used to facilitate the
explanation.  The cards really form a sort of circle, beginning
at 1 or the ace on the left, and then continuing with the 2, the
3, the 4, the 5, and so on, to the 10 below the ace; and, by
necessity, the party must end his counting with the very card he
thought of, beginning from the one he happens to point out.

13. The card that cannot be found.

Take any number of cards and spread them out fan-like in your
hand, faces fronting the spectators.

Ask one of them to select a card.  You tell him to take it, and
then to place it at the bottom of the pack.  You hold up the
pack, so that the spectators may see that the card is really at
the bottom.  Suppose this card is the king of hearts.

Then, pretending to take that card, you take the card preceding
it, and place it at a point corresponding to A in the following
figure.

    A  C    
    B  D

You then take the card drawn, namely, the king of hearts, and
place it at the point corresponding to B in the above figure. 
Finally, you take any two other cards, and place them at C and D.

Of course, the cards are placed face downwards.

After this location of the cards, you tell the party who has
chosen the card that you will change the position of the cards,
by pushing alternately that at the point A to B, and that at D to
C, and vice versa; and you defy him to follow you in these
gyrations of the card, and to find it.

Of course, seeing no difficulty in the thing, and believing with
everybody that his card is placed at the point A, he will
undertake to follow and find his card.  Then performing what you
undertake to do, you rapidly change the places of the cards, and
yet slowly enough to enable the party to keep in view the card
which he thinks his own, and so that you may not lose sight of
the one you placed at B.

Having thus arranged the cards for a few moments, you ask the
party to perform his promise by pointing out his card.  Feeling
sure that he never lost sight of it, he instantly turns one of
the cards and is astonished to find that it is not his own.  Then
you say:--'I told you you would not be able to follow your card
in its ramble.  But I have done what you couldn't do: here is
your card!'

The astonishment of the spectators is increased when you actually
show the card; for, having made them observe in the first
instance, that you did not even look at the drawn card, they are
utterly at a loss to discover the means you employed to find out
and produce the card in question.

14. Cards being drawn from a pack, to get them guessed by a
person blindfolded.

At all these performances there are always amongst the spectators
persons in league with the prestidigitator.  In the present case
a woman is the assistant, with whom he has entered into an
arrangement by which each card is represented by a letter of the
alphabet; and the following are the cards selected for the trick
with their representative letters.

The performer takes a handkerchief and blindfolds the lady in
question, and places her in the centre of the circle of
spectators.  Then spreading out the cards, he requests each of
the spectators to draw a card.

He requests the first to give him the card he has drawn; he looks
at it, and placing it on the table face downwards, he asks the
lady to name the card, which she does instantly and without
hesitation.

Of course this appears wonderful to the spectators, and their
astonishment goes on increasing whilst the lady names every card
in succession to the last.

It is, however, a very simple affair.  Each card represents a
letter of the alphabet, as we see by the figure, and all the
performer has to do is to begin every question with the letter
corresponding to the card.

Suppose the party has drawn the king of hearts.  Its letter is A.

The performer exclaims--'Ah!  I'm sure you know this!'  The A at
once suggests the card in question.  Suppose it is the ace of
clubs.  He says--'Jump at conclusions if you like, but be sure in
hitting this card on the nail.'  J begins the phrase, and
represents the card in question.  Suppose it is the ten of
spades, he cries out--'Zounds! if you mistake this you are not so
clever a medium as I took you for.'  The ace of diamonds--'Quite
easy, my dear sir,' or 'my dear ma'am,' as the case may be.  Q
represents the ace of diamonds.  The queen of diamonds--'Oh, the
beauty!'  The ace of hearts--'Dear me! what is this?'  The ace of
spades--'You are always right, name it.'  The nine of diamonds--
'So! so! well, I'm sure she knows it.'

Doubtless these specimens will suffice to suggest phrases for
every other card.  Such phrases may be written out and got by
heart--only twenty-three being required; but this seems useless,
for it does not require much tact at improvisation to hit upon a
phrase commencing with any letter.  However, it will be better to
take every precaution rather than run the risk of stopping in the
performance, whose success mainly depends upon the apparently
inspired rapidity of the answers.  The performer might conceal in
the hollow of his hand a small table exactly like the figure, to
facilitate his questions.  As for the medium, he, or she, must
rely entirely on memory.  Of course the spectators may be allowed
to see that the medium is completely blindfolded.  This modern
trick has always puzzled the keenest spectators

15. The mystery of double sight.

All the cards of a pack, or indeed any common object touched by a
spectator, may be named by an assistant in the following way--
whilst in another apartment, or blindfolded.

Take 32 cards and arrange them in four lines, one under the
other.  You arrange with your assistant to name the first line
after the days of the week; the second will represent the weeks,
the third the months, the fourth the years.  The assistant is
enjoined to count the days aloud, and the first card by the left.

The following is the entire scheme:--

Days    1 2 3     4 5 6 7     8*  
Weeks   1 2 3     4 5 6 7     8  
Months  1 2 3**   4 5 6 7     8  
Years   1 2 3     4 5 6 7***  8

The cards being thus arranged, the party who has to guess them
retires from the room.  When he is recalled, whether blindfolded
or not, he pretends to count to himself for a considerable time,
so as to allow his associate time to say to him, without
affectation or exciting suspicion of collusion--'I give you,' or
'I give him SO MUCH TIME to guess what is required; 'for it is in
this phrase that the whole secret of the trick is contained, as I
shall proceed to demonstrate.

Suppose the card touched be one of those marked with the
asterisks *  **  ***; if it be the first, the associate says,; I
give him eight days to guess it.'  Then the medium, beginning
with the upper line, that of the days, will at once be able to
say that the card touched is the eighth of the first horizontal
line, or the first of the eighth vertical line.

If it be the card holding the place of the number marked with two
asterisks ** the associate says 'three months,' and 'seven years'
for the one marked with three asterisks ***.

Thus, whatever card is touched, it will be easy to indicate it,
by beginning with the line of days at the top, counting one from
the left of the associate and medium.

Such is the simple process; and the following is the conventional
catechism adopted by all theoperators in double sight, with a few
variations adapted to circumstances.

With this collection of words and phrases, every existing object
can be guessed, provided care be taken to classify them according
to the following indications.

To operate, two persons must establish a perfect understanding
between them.  One undertakes the questions, the other the
answers, the latter having his eyes perfectly blindfolded.  Both
of them must thoroughly know the following numbers with their
correspondences:--

1.  Now.                              9.  Quick.
2.  Answer or reply.                 10.  Say.  
3.  Name.                            20.  Tell me.
4.  What is the object, or thing.    30.  I request you.
5.  Try.                             40.  Will you.
6.  Again.                           50.  Will you (to) me.      
7.  Instantly.                       60.  Will you (to) us.
8.  Which? 


Example:--Add the question of the simple number to the question
of the decade or ten.  Thus, in pronouncing the words 'Say now,'
11--for say is 10, and now is 1, total 11.  This, therefore,
forms question 11.

Again--'Tell me which number,' 28--for 'tell me' is 20, and
'which' is 8, total 28.

Thirdly:--'I request you instantly,' 37; for 'I request you' is
30, and 'instantly' is 7, total 37.

All the expressions or words that follow are totally independent
of the answer, and are only adapted to embellish or mystify the
question as far as the audience is concerned.  For instance:

Question 7.  Instantly, what I have in my hand?  Answer, A watch.

Question 9.  Quick, the hour?  Answer, nine o'clock.

Question 30, I request you (2) reply--the minutes.  Answer, 32
minutes, that is 30 and 2, equal to 32.

It would be useless to give the entire correspondence invented
for this apparently mysterious revelation, as a few specimens
will suffice to show the principle.

Say what I hold?  A handkerchief.  
Say now what I hold?  A snuff-box.  
Say, reply, what I hold?  A pair of spectacles.  
Say and name what I hold?  A box.  
Say and try to say what I hold?  A hat.  
Say quickly what I hold?  An umbrella.

Tell me, reply, what I hold?  A knife.  
Tell me what I hold?  A purse.  
Tell me now what I hold?  A pipe.  
Tell me and try to say what I hold?  A needle.  
Tell me quickly what I hold?  A cane.

I request you to say what I hold?  A portfolio.  
I request you to say now what I hold?  Paper.  
I request you to say, reply, what I hold?  A book.  
I request you to say quickly what I hold?  A coin.

Will you say, reply, what I hold?--A cigar.  
Will you say, name what I hold?--A cane.  
Will you say, again, what I hold?--A newspaper.

Now, what I hold?--A bottle.  
Reply, what I hold?--A jug.  
Name what I hold?--A glass.  
Again, what contains this vessel?--Wine. 
Instantly, what this vessel contains?--Beer.  
Now the form?--Triangular.  
Reply, the form?--Round.  
Name the form?--Square.  
The form?--Oval.  
Try to indicate the form?--Pointed.  
Again, indicate the form?--Flat.

Now, the colour?--White.  
Reply, the colour?--Blue.  
Name the colour?--Red.  
The colour of this object?--Black.  
Try to tell the colour?--Green.  
Again, the colour?--Yellow.

Now, the metal?--Gold. 
Reply, the metal?--Silver.  
The metal of the thing?--Copper.  
Again, the metal?--Iron.  
Instantly, the metal?--Lead.
 
Ah! the figure or hour?--1.  
Well?--2.  'Tis good?--3.  
'Tis well?--4.  
Good?--5.  
But?--6.  
Let's see?--7.  
That's it?--8.  
&c.

Now name the suit of this card?--Clubs.  
Reply, the suit of this card?--Hearts.  
Name the suit of this card?--Spades.  
The suit of this card?--Diamonds.

It is obvious, from the preceding specimen, that a conventional
catechism involving every object can be contrived by two persons,
and adapted to every circumstance.  The striking performances of
the most notorious mesmeric 'patients' in this line prove the
possibility of the achievement.  The 'agent' who receives the
questions in writing or in a whisper thus communicates the answer
to the patient, who is laboriously trained in the entire
encyclopaedia of 'common things' and things generally known; but
it MAY happen that the question proposed by the spectator has
been omitted in the scheme.

On one occasion, when the famous Prudence was the 'patient,' and
was telling the taste of all manner of liquids from a glass of
water, I proposed 'Blood' to the 'agent.'  He shook his head,
said he would try; but it was useless.  She said she 'couldn't do
it,' and the agent frankly admitted that it was a failure.

Now, if the mesmeric consciousness were really, as pretended, the
result of mental intercommunication between the agent and
patient, it is obvious that the well-known taste of blood could
be communicated as well as any other taste.  This experiment
suffices to prove that the revelations are communicated in the
matter-of-fact way which I have sufficiently described.

Should it happen that a spectator has discovered the method, the
performers easily turn the tables against him.  They have always
ready a conventional list of common things; and the agent
undertakes that his mesmeric patient will indicate them without
hearing a word from him, even in another apartment.  The agent
then merely touches the object, and the patient begins with the
first name in his list.  The patient takes care to give the agent
sufficient time, lest he should name the object next to be
touched before the agent applies his finger, and thus, as it
were, call for it rather than name it when touched, as required
by the case.

1.  Guessing.

Five persons having each thought of a different card, to guess
five cards.

Take twenty-five cards, show five of them to a party, requesting
him to think of one, then place them one upon the other.  Proceed
in like manner with five more to a second party, and so on, five
parties in all, placing the fives on the top of each other. 
Then, beginning with the top cards, make five lots, placing one
card successively in each lot; and ask the five parties, one
after the other, in which lot their card is.  As the first five
cards are the first of each lot, it is evident that the card
thought of by the first party is the first of the lot he points
to; that of the second, is the second of the lot he points to;
that of the third, the third of the third lot; that of the
fourth, the fourth of the fourth lot; that of the fifth, the
fifth of the fifth lot.

Of course five persons are not necessary.  If there be but one
person, the card must be the first of the lot he points to.

It would be more artistic, perhaps, if you dispense with seeing
the cards, making the lots up with your eyes turned away from the
table.  Then request the parties to observe in which lot their
respective card is, and, taking the lots successively in hand,
present to each the card thought of without looking at it
yourself.

17. The Arithmetical Puzzle.

This card trick, to which I have alluded in a previous page,
cannot fail to produce astonishment; and it is one of the most
difficult to unravel.

Hand a pack of cards to a party, requesting him to make up
parcels of cards, in the following manner.  He is to count the
number of pips on the first card that turns up, say a five, and
then add as many cards as are required to make up the number 12;
in the case here supposed, having a five before him, he will
place seven cards upon it, turning down the parcel.  All the
court cards count as 10 pips; consequently, only two cards will
be placed on such to make up 12.  The ace counts as only one pip.

He will then turn up another, count the pips upon it, adding
cards as before to make up the number 12; and so on, until no
more such parcels can be made, the remainder, if any, to be set
aside, all being turned down.

During this operation, the performer of the trick may be out of
the room, at any rate, at such a distance that it will be
impossible for him to see the first cards of the parcels which
have been turned down; and yet he is able to announce the number
of pips made up by all the first cards laid down, provided he is
only informed of the number of parcels made up and the number of
the remainder, if any.

The secret is very simple.  It consists merely in multiplying the
number of parcels over four by 13 (or rather vice versa), and
adding the remaining cards, if any, to the product.

Thus, there have just been made up seven packets, with five cards
over.  Deducting 4 from 7, 3 remain; and I say to myself 13 times
3 (or rather 3 times 13) are 39, and adding to this the five
cards over, I at once declare the number of pips made up by the
first cards turned down to be 44.

There is another way of performing this striking trick.  Direct
six parcels of cards to be made up in the manner aforesaid, and
then, on being informed of the number of cards remaining over,
add that number to 26, and the sum will be the number of pips
made up by the first cards of the six parcels.

Such are the methods prescribed for performing this trick; but I
have discovered another, which although, perhaps, a little more
complicated, has the desirable advantage of explaining the
seeming mystery.

Find the number of cards in the parcels, by subtracting the
remainder, if any, from 52.  Subtract the number of pip cards
therefrom, deduct this last from the number made up of the number
of parcels multiplied by 12, and the remainder will be the number
of pips on the first cards.

To demonstrate this take the case just given.  There are seven
parcels and five cards over.  First, this proves that there are
47 cards in the seven parcels made up of pips and cards. 
Secondly, subtract the number of pip cards--seven from the number
of cards in the parcels; then, 7 from 47, 40 remain (cards). 
Thirdly, now, as the seven parcels are made up both of the pip
cards and cards, it is evident that we have only to find the
number of cards got at as above, to get the number of pips
required.  Thus, there being seven packets, 7 times 12 make 84;
take 40, as above found (the number of cards), and the remainder
is 44, the number of pips as found by the first method
explained,--the process being as follows:--

 52 - 5 = 47 - 7 = 40.

 Then, 7 X 12 = 84 - 40 = 44.

In general, however, the first method, being the easiest of
performance, should be adopted.  The second is in many respects
very objectionable.

18. To get a card into a pack firmly held by a party.

This trick strikingly shows how easily we may all be deceived by
appearances.

Select the five or seven of any suit, say the seven of hearts,
and handing the remainder of the pack to a party, show him the
card, with your thumb on the seventh pip, so as to conceal it,
saying:--'Now, hold the pack as firmly as you can, and keep your
eye upon it to see that there is no trickery, and yet I undertake
to get into it this six of hearts.'  This injunction rivets his
attention, and doubtless, like other wise people destined to be
deceived, he feels quite sure that nobody can 'take him in.'  In
this satisfactory condition for the operation on both sides, you
flourish the card so as just to reach the level of the top of
your hat (if you wear an Alpine scolloped, so much the better),
and then, bringing down the card, rapidly strike it on the pack
twice, uttering the words one, two, at each stroke; but, on the
third raising of the card, leave it on the top of your hat,
striking the pack with your hand--with the word three.  Then
request the party to look for the six of hearts in the pack, and
he will surely find it, to his amazement.

This trick may be performed in a drawing-room, if the operator be
seated, dropping the card behind his back, especially in an easy-
chair.





****End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Andrew Steinmetz's****
**********The Gaming Table:  Its Votaries and Victims***********
Volume #2

