*The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Mansion, by Henry van Dyke*
A Short Story

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.



The Mansion

by Henry van Dyke

October, 1996  [Etext #704]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of Daisy Miller, by Henry James**
*****This file should be named tmans10.txt or tmans10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, tmans11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, tmans10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This Project Gutenberg Etext Prepared by
Michael J. Leonard
Division of Undergraduate Studies
The Pennsylvania State University
226 Grange Building
University Park, PA  16802-6702
e-mail: mjl3@psu.edu





The Mansion

By Henry van Dyke



There was an air of calm and reserved opulence about 
the Weightman mansion that spoke not of money squandered, 
but of wealth prudently applied.  Standing on a corner of 
the Avenue no longer fashionable for residence, it looked upon 
the swelling tide of business with an expression of complacency 
and half-disdain.

The house was not beautiful.  There was nothing in its straight
front of 
chocolate-colored stone, its heavy cornices, its broad, staring
windows of 
plate glass, its carved and bronze-bedecked mahogany doors at the
top of the wide stoop, to charm the eye or fascinate the
imagination.  
But it was eminently respectable, and in its way imposing.  
It seemed to say that the glittering shops of the jewelers, the
milliners, 
the confectioners, the florists, the picture-dealers, the
furriers, 
the makers of rare and costly antiquities, retail traders in 
luxuries of life, were beneath the notice of a house that had its

foundations in the high finance, and was built literally and
figuratively 
in the shadow of St. Petronius' Church.

At the same time there was something self-pleased and
congratulatory in 
the way in which the mansion held its own amid the changing
neighborhood.  
It almost seemed to be lifted up a little, among the tall
buildings 
near at hand, as if it felt the rising value of the land on which
it stood.

John Weightman was like the house into which he had built himself

thirty years ago, and in which his ideals and ambitions were
incrusted.  
He was a self-made man.  But in making himself he had chosen a 
highly esteemed pattern and worked according to the approved
rules.  
There was nothing irregular, questionable, flamboyant about him. 

He was solid, correct, and justly successful.

His minor tastes, of course, had been carefully kept up to date. 

At the proper time, pictures of the Barbizon masters, old English

plate and portraits, bronzes by Barye and marbles by Rodin,
Persian carpets

and Chinese porcelains, had been introduced to the mansion.  
It contained a Louis Quinze reception-room, an Empire
drawing-room, 
a Jacobean dining-room, and various apartments dimly reminiscent
of 
the styles of furniture affected by deceased monarchs.  That the
hallways 
were too short for the historic perspective did not make much
difference.  
American decorative art is capable de tout, it absorbs all
periods.  
Of each period Mr. Weightman wished to have something of the
best.  
He understood its value, present as a certificate, and
prospective as 
an investment.

It was only in the architecture of his town house that he 
remained conservative, immovable, one might almost say 
Early-Victorian-Christian.  His country house at
Dulwich-on-the-Sound 
was a palace of the Italian Renaissance.  But in town 
he adhered to an architecture which had moral associations, 
the Nineteenth-Century-Brownstone epoch.  It was a symbol of 
his social position, his religious doctrine, and even, in a way, 
of his business creed.

"A man of fixed principles," he would say, "should express them
in 
the looks of his house.  New York changes its domestic
architecture 
too rapidly.  It is like divorce.  It is not dignified.  I don't
like it.  
Extravagance and fickleness are advertised in most of these new
houses.  
I wish to be known for different qualities.  Dignity and prudence
are 
the things that people trust.  Every one knows that I can afford
to 
live in the house that suits me.  It is a guarantee to the
public.  
It inspires confidence.  It helps my influence.  There is a text
in 
the Bible about 'a house that hath foundations.' That is the
proper kind of
a mansion for a solid man."

Harold Weightman had often listened to his father discoursing in 
this fashion on the fundamental principles of life, and always
with 
a divided mind.  He admired immensely his father's talents 
and the single-minded energy with which he improved them.  
But in the paternal philosophy there was something that
disquieted 
and oppressed the young man, and made him gasp inwardly for fresh
air 
and free action.

At times, during his college course and his years at the law
school, 
he had yielded to this impulse and broken away--now toward
extravagance 
and dissipation, and then, when the reaction came, toward a
romantic 
devotion to work among the poor.  He had felt his father's
disapproval 
for both of these forms of imprudence; but is was never expressed
in 
a harsh or violent way, always with a certain tolerant patience, 
such as one might show for the mistakes and vagaries of the very
young.  
John Weightman was not hasty, impulsive, inconsiderate, even
toward his 
own children.  With them, as with the rest of the world, he felt
that he 
had a reputation to maintain, a theory to vindicate.  He could
afford to 
give them time to see that he was absolutely right.

One of his favorite Scripture quotations was, "Wait on the Lord." 

He had applied it to real estate and to people, with profitable
results.

But to human persons the sensation of being waited for is not 
always agreeable.  Sometimes, especially with the young, it
produces 
a vague restlessness, a dumb resentment, which is increased by 
the fact that one can hardly explain or justify it.  Of this 
John Weightman was not conscious.  It lay beyond his horizon.  
He did not take it into account in the plan of life which he made
for 
himself and for his family as the sharers and inheritors of his
success.

"Father plays us," said Harold, in a moment of irritation, to his
mother, 
"like pieces in a game of chess.

"My dear," said that lady, whose faith in her husband was
religious, 
"you ought not to speak so impatiently.  At least he wins the
game.  
He is one of the most respected men in New York.  And he is 
very generous, too."

"I wish he would be more generous in letting us be ourselves," 
said the young man.  "He always has something in view for us 
and expects to move us up to it."

"But isn't it always for our benefit?" replied his mother.  
"Look what a position we have.  No one can say there is any taint
on 
our money.  There are no rumors about your father.  He has kept 
the laws of God and of man.  He has never made any mistakes."  
Harold got up from his chair and poked the fire.  Then he came
back to 
the ample, well-gowned, firm-looking lady, and sat beside her on
the sofa. 
He took her hand gently and looked at the two rings--a thin band
of 
yellow gold, and a small solitaire diamond--which kept their
place on 
her third finger in modest dignity, as if not shamed, but rather
justified,
by the splendor of the emerald which glittered beside them.

"Mother," he said, "you have a wonderful hand.  And father made
no mistake 
when he won you.  But are you sure he has always been so
inerrant?"

"Harold," she exclaimed, a little stiffly, "what do you mean?  
His life is an open book."

"Oh," he answered, "I don't mean anything bad, mother dear.  
I know the governor's life is an open book--a ledger, if you
like, 
kept in the best bookkeeping hand, and always ready for 
inspection--every page correct, and showing a handsome balance.  
But isn't it a mistake not to allow us to make our own mistakes, 
to learn for ourselves, to live our own lives?  Must we be 
always working for 'the balance,' in one thing or another?  
I want to be myself--to get outside of this everlasting, 
profitable 'plan'--to let myself go, and lose myself for a while 
at least--to do the things that I want to do, just because 
I want to do them."

"My boy," said his mother, anxiously, "you are not going to do
anything 
wrong or foolish?  You know the falsehood of that old proverb
about
wild oats."

He threw back his head and laughed.  "Yes, mother," he answered, 
"I know it well enough.  But in California, you know, the wild
oats are 
one of the most valuable crops.  They grow all over the hillsides
and 
keep the cattle and the horses alive.  But that wasn't what I
meant--to sow
wild oats.  Say to pick wild flowers, if you like, or even to
chase 
wild geese--to do something that seems good to me just for its
own sake, 
not for the sake of wages of one kind or another.  I feel like a
hired man,
in the service of this magnificent mansion--say in training for 
father's place as majordomo.  I'd like to get out some way, 
to feel free--perhaps to do something for others."

The young man's voice hesitated a little.  "Yes, it sound like
cant, 
I know, but sometimes I feel as if I'd like to do some good in
the world,
if father only wouldn't insist upon God's putting it into the
ledger."

His mother moved uneasily, and a slight look of bewilderment 
came into her face.

"Isn't that almost irreverent?" she asked.  "Surely the righteous

must have their reward.  And your father is good.  See how much 
he gives to all the established charities, how many things he has
founded. 
He's always thinking of others, and planning for them.  And
surely, 
for us, he does everything.  How well he has planned this trip 
to Europe for me and the girls--the court-presentation at Berlin,

the season on the Riviera, the visits in England with the
Plumptons and 
the Halverstones.  He says Lord Halverstone has the finest 
old house in Sussex, pure Elizabethan, and all the old customs
are 
kept up, too--family prayers every morning for all the domestics. 

By-the-way, you know his son Bertie, I believe."

Harold smiled a little to himself as he answered: "Yes, I fished
at
Catalina Island last June with the Honorable Ethelbert; 
he's rather a decent chap, in spite of his ingrowing mind.  
But you?--mother, you are simply magnificent!  You are 
father's masterpiece."  The young man leaned over to kiss her, 
and went up to the Riding Club for his afternoon canter in the
Park.

So it came to pass, early in December, that Mrs. Weightman and 
her two daughters sailed for Europe, on their serious pleasure
trip, 
even as it had been written in the book of Providence; and John
Weightman,
who had made the entry, was left to pass the rest of the winter
with 
his son and heir in the brownstone mansion.

They were comfortable enough.  The machinery of the massive
establishment
ran as smoothly as a great electric dynamo.  They were busy
enough, too. 
John Weightman's plans and enterprises were complicated, though
his
principle of action was always simple--to get good value for 
every expenditure and effort.  The banking-house of which he was
the chief,
the brain, the will, the absolutely controlling hand, was so
admirably
organized that the details of its direction took but little time. 

But the scores of other interests that radiated from it and were 
dependent upon it--or perhaps it would be more accurate to say, 
that contributed to its solidity and success--the many
investments,
industrial, political, benevolent, reformatory, ecclesiastical, 
that had made the name of Weightman well known and potent in
city, 
church, and state, demanded much attention and careful steering, 
in order that each might produce the desired result.  There were 
board meetings of corporations and hospitals, conferences in 
Wall Street and at Albany, consultations and committee meetings
in 
the brownstone mansion.

For a share in all this business and its adjuncts John Weightman 
had his son in training in one of the famous law firms of the
city; 
for he held that banking itself is a simple affair, the only real
difficulties of finance are on its legal side.  Meantime he
wished 
the young man to meet and know the men with whom he would have to
deal 
when he became a partner in the house.  So a couple of dinners 
were given in the mansion during December, after which the father

called the son's attention to the fact that over a hundred
million dollars 
had sat around the board.

But on Christmas Eve father and son were dining together without
guests,
and their talk across the broad table, glittering with silver and

cut glass, and softly lit by shaded candles, was intimate, though
a little
slow at times.  The elder man was in rather a rare mood, more
expansive and
confidential than usual; and, when the coffee was brought in and 
they were left alone, he talked more freely of his personal plans
and hopes
than he had ever done before.

"I feel very grateful to-night," said he, at last; "it must be
something in
the air of Christmas that gives me this feeling of thankfulness
for 
the many divine mercies that have been bestowed upon me.  All the
principles by which I have tried to guide my life have been
justified.  
I have never made the value of this salted almond by anything
that 
the courts would not uphold, at least in the long run, and
yet--or wouldn't
it be truer to say and therefore?--my affairs have been 
wonderfully prospered.  There's a great deal in that text
'Honesty is 
the best'--but no, that's not from the Bible, after all, is it?  
Wait a moment; there is something of that kind, I know."

"May I light a cigar, father," said Harold, turning away to hide
a smile,
"while you are remembering the text?"

"Yes, certainly," answered the elder man, rather shortly; "you
know 
I don't dislike the smell.  But it is a wasteful, useless habit, 
and therefore I have never practised it.  Nothing useless is
worth while,
that's my motto--nothing that does not bring the reward.  
Oh, now I recall the text, 'Verily I say unto you they have their
reward.'
I shall ask Doctor Snodgrass to preach a sermon on that verse
some day."

"Using you as an illustration?"

"Well, not exactly that; but I could give him some good materials
from 
my own experience to prove the truth of Scripture.  I can
honestly say that
there is not one of my charities that has not brought me in a
good return,
either in the increase of influence, the building up of credit, 
or the association with substantial people.  Of course you have
to 
be careful how you give, in order to secure the best results--no
indiscriminate giving--no pennies in beggars' hats!  It has been 
one of my principles always to use the same kind of judgment in
charities 
that I use in my other affairs, and they have not disappointed
me."

"Even the check that you put in the plate when you take the
offertory 
up the aisle on Sunday morning?"

"Certainly; though there the influence is less direct; and I must
confess
that I have my doubts in regard to the collection for Foreign
Missions. 
That always seems to me romantic and wasteful.  You never hear
from it in
any definite way.  They say the missionaries have done a good
deal 
to open the way for trade; perhaps--but they have also gotten us
into
commercial and political difficulties.  Yet I give to them--a
little--it is
a matter of conscience with me to identify myself with all the
enterprises
of the Church; it is the mainstay of social order and a 
prosperous civilization.  But the best forms of benevolence are 
the well-established, organized ones here at home, where people
can 
see them and know what they are doing."

"You mean the ones that have a local habitation and a name."

"Yes; they offer by far the safest return, though of course there
is
something gained by contributing to general funds.  A public man 
can't afford to be without public spirit.  But on the whole 
I prefer a building, or an endowment.  There is a mutual
advantage to 
a good name and a good institution in their connection in the
public mind. 
It helps them both.  Remember that, my boy.  Of course at the
beginning 
you will have to practise it in a small way; later, you will have

larger opportunities.  But try to put your gifts where they can
be
identified and do good all around.  You'll see the wisdom of it
in 
the long run."

"I can see it already, sir, and the way you describe it looks 
amazingly wise and prudent.  In other words, we must cast our
bread on 
the waters in large loaves, carried by sound ships marked with 
the owner's name, so that the return freight will be sure to 
come back to us."

The father laughed, but his eyes were frowning a little as if 
he suspected something irreverent under the respectful reply.  
"You put it humorously, but there's sense in what you say.  Why
not?  
God rules the sea; but He expects us to follow the laws of 
navigation and commerce.  Why not take good care of your bread, 
even when you give it away?"

"It's not for me to say why not--and yet I can think of cases--" 

The young man hesitated for a moment.  His half-finished cigar
had 
gone out.  He rose and tossed it into the fire, in front of which

he remained standing--a slender, eager, restless young figure, 
with a touch of hunger in the fine face, strangely like and
unlike 
the father, at whom he looked with half-wistful curiosity.

"The fact is, sir," he continued, "there is such a case in my
mind now, 
and it is a good deal on my heart, too.  So I thought of speaking
to you
about it to-night.  You remember Tom Rollins, the Junior who was 
so good to me when I entered college?"

The father nodded.  He remembered very well indeed the annoying
incidents
of his son's first escapade, and how Rollins had stood by him and
helped to
avoid a public disgrace, and how a close friendship had grown
between 
the two boys, so different in their fortunes.

"Yes," he said, "I remember him.  He was a promising young man.  
Has he succeeded?"

"Not exactly--that is not yet.  His business has been going
rather badly. 
He has a wife and little baby, you know.  And now he has broken
down,--
something wrong with his lungs.  The doctor says his only chance
is 
a year or eighteen months in Colorado.  I wish we could help
him."

"How much would it cost?"

"Three or four thousand, perhaps, as a loan."

"Does the doctor say he will get well?"

"A fighting chance--the doctor says."

The face of the older man changed subtly.  Not a line was
altered, 
but it seemed to have a different substance, as if it were 
carved out of some firm, imperishable stuff.

"A fighting chance," he said, "may do for a speculation, but it
is 
not a good investment.  You owe something to young Rollins.  
Your grateful feeling does you credit.  But don't overwork it.  
Send him three or four hundred, if you like.  You'll never 
hear from it again, except in the letter of thanks.  But for
Heaven's sake
don't be sentimental.  Religion is not a matter of sentiment; 
it's a matter of principle."

The face of the younger man changed now.  But instead of becoming

fixed and graven, it seemed to melt into life by the heat of 
an inward fire.  His nostrils quivered with quick breath, 
his lips were curled. "Principle!" he said.  "You mean
principal--and
interest too.  Well, sir, you know best whether that is religion
or not. 
But if it is, count me out, please.  Tom saved me from going to
the devil,
six years ago; and I'll be damned if I don't help him to the best
of 
my ability now."

John Weightman looked at his son steadily.  "Harold," he said at
last, 
"you know I dislike violent language, and it never has any 
influence with me.  If I could honestly approve of this 
proposition of yours, I'd let you have the money; but I can't; 
it's extravagant and useless.  But you have your Christmas check
for 
a thousand dollars coming to you to-morrow.  You can use it as
you please. 
I never interfere with your private affairs."

"Thank you," said Harold.  "Thank you very much!  But there's
another
private affair.  I want to get away from this life, this town,
this house. 
It stifles me.  You refused last summer when I asked you to let
me 
go up to Grenfell's Mission on the Labrador.  I could go now, 
at least as far as the Newfoundland Station.  Have you changed
your mind?"

"Not at all.  I think it is an exceedingly foolish enterprise.  
It would interrupt the career that I have marked out for you."

"Well, then, here's a cheaper proposition.  Algy Vanderhoof wants
me to
join him on his yacht with--well, with a little party--to cruise
in 
the West Indies.  Would you prefer that?"

"Certainly not!  The Vanderhoof set is wild and godless--I do not
wish to
see you keeping company with fools who walk in the broad and easy
way that
leads to perdition."

"It is rather a hard choice," said the young man, with a short
laugh,
turning toward the door.  "According to you there's very little 
difference--a fool's paradise or a fool's hell!  Well, it's one
or 
the other for me, and I'll toss up for it to-night: heads, I
lose; 
tails, the devil wins.  Anyway, I'm sick of this, and I'm out of
it."

"Harold," said the older man (and there was a slight tremor in
his voice),
"don't let us quarrel on Christmas Eve.  All I want is to
persuade you to
think seriously of the duties and responsibilities to which God
has 
called you--don't speak lightly of heaven and hell--remember,
there is
another life."

The young man came back and laid his hand upon his father's
shoulder.

"Father," he said, "I want to remember it.  I try to believe in
it.  
But somehow or other, in this house, it all seems unreal to me.  
No doubt all you say is perfectly right and wise.  I don't
venture to 
argue against it, but I can't feel it--that's all.  If I'm to
have a soul,
either to lose or to save, I must really live.  Just now neither
the
present nor the future means anything to me.  But surely we won't
quarrel. 
I'm very grateful to you, and we'll part friends.  Good-night,
sir."

The father held out his hand in silence.  The heavy portiere 
dropped noiselessly behind the son, and he went up the wide, 
curving stairway to his own room.

Meantime John Weightman sat in his carved chair in the Jacobean 
dining-room.  He felt strangely old and dull.  The portraits of 
beautiful women by Lawrence and Reynolds and Raeburn, which had
often
seemed like real company to him, looked remote and uninteresting. 

He fancied something cold and almost unfriendly in their
expression, 
as if they were staring through him or beyond him.  They cared
nothing for
his principles, his hopes, his disappointments, his successes; 
they belonged to another world, in which he had no place.  At
this he felt
a vague resentment, a sense of discomfort that he could not have
defined 
or explained.  He was used to being considered, respected, 
appreciated at his full value in every region, even in that of 
his own dreams.

Presently he rang for the butler, telling him to close the house
and 
not to sit up, and walked with lagging steps into the long
library, 
where the shaded lamps were burning.  His eye fell upon the low
shelves
full of costly books, but he had no desire to open them.  Even
the
carefully chosen pictures that hung above them seemed to have
lost 
their attraction.  He paused for a moment before an idyll of
Corot--a dance
of nymphs around some forgotten altar in a vaporous glade--and
looked at 
it curiously.  There was something rapturous and serene about the
picture, 
a breath of spring-time in the misty trees, a harmony of joy in 
the dancing figures, that wakened in him a feeling of
half-pleasure 
and half-envy.  It represented something that he had never known
in his
calculated, orderly life.  He was dimly mistrustful of it.

"It is certainly very beautiful," he thought, "but it is
distinctly pagan;
that altar is built to some heathen god.  It does not fit into 
the scheme of a Christian life.  I doubt whether it is consistent
with 
the tone of my house.  I will sell it this winter.  It will bring

three or four times what I paid for it.  That was a good
purchase, 
a very good bargain."

He dropped into the revolving chair before his big library table. 

It was covered with pamphlets and reports of the various
enterprises 
in which he was interested.  There was a pile of newspaper
clippings 
in which his name was mentioned with praise for his sustaining
power as 
a pillar of finance, for his judicious benevolence, for his
support of 
wise and prudent reform movements, for his discretion in making
permanent
public gifts--"the Weightman Charities," one very complaisant
editor 
called them, as if they deserved classification as a distinct
species.  
He turned he papers over listlessly.  There was a description and

a picture of the "Weightman Wing of the Hospital for Cripples," 
of which he was president; and an article on the new professor in

the "Weightman Chair of Political Jurisprudence" in Jackson
University, 
of which he was a trustee; and an illustrated account of the
opening of 
the "Weightman Grammar-School" at Dulwich-on-the-Sound, where he
had his
legal residence for purposes of taxation.

This last was perhaps the most carefully planned of all the 
Weightman Charities.  He desired to win the confidence and
support of 
his rural neighbors.  It had pleased him much when the local
newspaper 
had spoken of him as an ideal citizen and the logical candidate
for 
the Governorship of the State; but upon the whole it seemed to
him 
wiser to keep out of active politics.  It would be easier and
better to 
put Harold into the running, to have him sent to the Legislature
from 
the Dulwich district, then to the national House, then to the
Senate.  
Why not?  The Weightman interests were large enough to need a
direct
representative and guardian at Washington.

But to-night all these plans came back to him with dust upon
them.  
They were dry and crumbling like forsaken habitations.  The son 
upon whom his complacent ambition had rested had turned his back
upon 
the mansion of his father's hopes.  The break might not be final;

and in any event there would be much to live for; the fortunes of

the family would be secure.  But the zest of it all would be gone
if 
John Weightman had to give up the assurance of perpetuating his
name 
and his principles in his son.  It was a bitter disappointment, 
and he felt that he had not deserved it.

He rose from the chair and paced the room with leaden feet.  
For the first time in his life his age was visibly upon him.  
His head was heavy and hot, and the thoughts that rolled in it 
were confused and depressing.  Could it be that he had made a
mistake 
in the principles of his existence?  There was no argument in 
what Harold had said--it was almost childish--and yet 
it had shaken the elder man more deeply than he cared to show.  
It held a silent attack which touched him more than open
criticism.

Suppose the end of his life were nearer than he thought--the end 
must come some time--what if it were now?  Had he not 
founded his house upon a rock?  Had he not kept the Commandments? 

Was he not, "touching the law, blameless"?  And beyond this, 
even if there were some faults in his character--and all men are
sinners--
yet he surely believed in the saving doctrines of religion--the
forgiveness
of sins, the resurrection of the body, the life everlasting.  
Yes, that was the true source of comfort, after all.  He would
read a bit
in the Bible, as he did every night, and go to bed and to sleep.

He went back to his chair at the library table.  A strange weight
of
weariness rested upon him, but he opened the book at a familiar
place, 
and his eyes fell upon the verse at the bottom of the page.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth."

That had been the text of the sermon a few weeks before.  
Sleepily, heavily, he tried to fix his mind upon it and recall
it.  
What was it that Doctor Snodgrass had said?  Ah, yes--that it was

a mistake to pause here in reading the verse.  We must read on
without 
a pause--Lay not up treasures upon earth where moth and rust do
corrupt 
and where thieves break through and steal--that was the true
doctrine.  
We may have treasures upon earth, but they must not be put into 
unsafe places, but into safe places.  A most comforting doctrine! 

He had always followed it.  Moths and rust and thieves had done
no harm 
to his investments.

John Weightman's drooping eyes turned to the next verse, 
at the top of the second column.

"But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven."

Now what had the Doctor said about that?  How was it to 
be understood--in what sense--treasures--in heaven?

The book seemed to float away from him.  The light vanished.  
He wondered dimly if this could be Death, coming so suddenly, so
quietly,
so irresistibly.  He struggled for a moment to hold himself up, 
and then sank slowly forward upon the table.  His head rested
upon 
his folded hands.  He slipped into the unknown.

How long afterward conscious life returned to him he did not
know.  
The blank might have been an hour or a century.  He knew only
that 
omething had happened in the interval.  What is was he could not
tell.  
He found great difficulty in catching the thread of his identity
again.  
He felt that he was himself; but the trouble was to make his
connections, 
to verify and place himself, to know who and where he was.

At last it grew clear.  John Weightman was sitting on a stone, 
not far from a road in a strange land.

The road was not a formal highway, fenced and graded.  It was
more like 
a great travel-trace, worn by thousands of feet passing across 
the open country in the same direction.  Down in the valley, 
into which he could look, the road seemed to form itself
gradually out of 
many minor paths; little footways coming across the meadows, 
winding tracks following along beside the streams, faintly marked
trails
emerging from the woodlands.  But on the hillside the threads
were more
firmly woven into one clear band of travel, though there were
still 
a few dim paths joining it here and there, as if persons had been

climbing up the hill by other ways and had turned at last to seek
the road.

From the edge of the hill, where John Weightman sat, he could see

the travelers, in little groups or larger companies, gathering
from 
time to time by the different paths, and making the ascent.  
They were all clothed in white, and the form of their garments
was 
strange to him; it was like some old picture.  They passed him, 
group after group, talking quietly together or singing; not
moving 
in haste, but with a certain air of eagerness and joy as if they
were 
glad to be on their way to an appointed place.  They did not stay
to 
speak to him, but they looked at him often and spoke to one
another 
as they looked; and now and then one of them would smile and 
beckon him a friendly greeting, so that he felt they would like
him 
to be with them.

There was quite an interval between the groups; and he followed 
each of them with his eyes after it had passed, blanching the 
long ribbon of the road for a little transient space, rising and
receding
across the wide, billowy upland, among the rounded hillocks of 
aerial green and gold and lilac, until it came to the high
horizon, 
and stood outlined for a moment, a tiny cloud of whiteness
against 
the tender blue, before it vanished over the hill.

For a long time he sat there watching and wondering.  It was 
a very different world from that in which his mansion on the
Avenue 
was built; and it looked strange to him, but most real--as real
as 
anything he had ever seen.  Presently he felt a strong desire 
to know what country it was and where the people were going.  
He had a faint premonition of what it must be, but he wished to
be sure.  
So he rose from the stone where he was sitting, and came down
through 
the short grass and the lavender flowers, toward a passing group
of people.
One of them turned to meet him, and held out his hand.  It was an
old man,
under whose white beard and brows John Weightman thought he saw 
a suggestion of the face of the village doctor who had cared for
him 
years ago, when he was a boy in the country.

"Welcome," said the old man.  "Will you come with us?"

"Where are you going?"

"To the heavenly city, to see our mansions there."

"And who are these with you?"

"Strangers to me, until a little while ago; I know them better
now.  
But you I have known for a long time, John Weightman.  Don't you
remember
your old doctor?"

"Yes," he cried--"yes; your voice has not changed at all.  
I'm glad indeed to see you, Doctor McLean, especially now.  
All this seems very strange to me, almost oppressive.  
I wonder if--but may I go with you, do you suppose?"

"Surely," answered the doctor, with his familiar smile; "it will 
do you good.  And you also must have a mansion in the city
waiting 
for you--a fine one, too--are you not looking forward to it?"

"Yes," replied the other, hesitating a moment; "yes--I believe 
it must be so, although I had not expected to see it so soon.  
But I will go with you, and we can talk by the way."

The two men quickly caught up with the other people, and all went
forward
together along the road.  The doctor had little to tell of his
experience,
for it had been a plain, hard life, uneventfully spent for
others, 
and the story of the village was very simple.  John Weightman's
adventures
and triumphs would have made a far richer, more imposing history,

full of contacts with the great events and personages of the
time.  
But somehow or other he did not care to speak much about it, 
walking on that wide heavenly moorland, under that tranquil, 
sunless arch of blue, in that free air of perfect peace, where
the light
was diffused without a shadow, as if the spirit of life in all
things 
were luminous.

There was only one person besides the doctor in that little
company whom
John Weightman had known before--an old bookkeeper who had spent
his life
over a desk, carefully keeping accounts--a rusty, dull little
man, 
patient and narrow, whose wife had been in the insane asylum for 
twenty years and whose only child was a crippled daughter, for
whose
comfort and happiness he had toiled and sacrificed himself
without stint. 
It was a surprise to find him here, as care-free and joyful as
the rest.

The lives of others in the company were revealed in brief
glimpses 
as they talked together--a mother, early widowed, who had kept 
her little flock of children together and labored through hard
and heavy
years to bring them up in purity and knowledge--a Sister of
Charity 
who had devoted herself to the nursing of poor folk who were
being 
eaten to death by cancer--a schoolmaster whose heart and life 
had been poured into his quiet work of training boys for a clean
and 
thoughtful manhood--a medical missionary who had given up 
a brilliant career in science to take the charge of a hospital in

darkest Africa--a beautiful woman with silver hair who had 
resigned her dreams of love and marriage to care for an invalid
father, 
and after his death had made her life a long, steady search for
ways of
doing kindnesses to others--a poet who had walked among the
crowded
tenements of the great city, bringing cheer and comfort not only
by 
his songs, but by his wise and patient works of practical aid--a
paralyzed
woman who had lain for thirty years upon her bed, helpless but 
not hopeless, succeeding by a miracle of courage in her single
aim, 
never to complain, but always to impart a bit of joy and peace to

every one who came near her.  All these, and other persons like
them,
people of little consideration in the world, but now seemingly
all full of
great contentment and an inward gladness that made their steps
light, 
were in the company that passed along the road, talking together
of 
things past and things to come, and singing now and then with 
clear voices from which the veil of age and sorrow was lifted.

John Weightman joined in some of the songs--which were familiar
to him 
from their use in the church--at first with a touch of
hesitation, 
and then more confidently.  For as they went on his sense of 
strangeness and fear at his new experience diminished, and his
thoughts
began to take on their habitual assurance and complacency.  Were
not these
people going to the Celestial City?  And was not he in his right
place
among them?  He had always looked forward to this journey.  
If they were sure, each one, of finding a mansion there, could
not he be
far more sure?  His life had been more fruitful than theirs.  
He had been a leader, a founder of new enterprises, a pillar of 
Church and State, a prince of the House of Israel.  Ten talents
had been
given him, and he had made them twenty.  His reward would be
proportionate.
He was glad that his companions were going to find fit dwellings 
prepared for them; but he thought also with a certain pleasure of

the surprise that some of them would feel when they saw 
his appointed mansion.

So they came to the summit of the moorland and looked over into 
the world beyond.  It was a vast, green plain, softly rounded
like 
a shallow vase, and circled with hills of amethyst.  A broad, 
shining river flowed through it, and many silver threads of water

were woven across the green; and there were borders of tall trees

on the banks of the river, and orchards full of roses abloom
along 
the little streams, and in the midst of all stood the city, 
white and wonderful and radiant.

When the travelers saw it they were filled with awe and joy.  
They passed over the little streams and among the orchards 
quickly and silently, as if they feared to speak lest the city 
should vanish.

The wall of the city was very low, a child could see over it, 
for it was made only of precious stones, which are never large.  
The gate of the city was not like a gate a all, for it was not 
barred with iron or wood, but only a single pearl, softly
gleaming, 
marked the place where the wall ended and the entrance lay open.

A person stood there whose face was bright and grave, and whose
robe 
was like the flower of the lily, not a woven fabric, but a living
texture. 
"Come in," he said to the company of travelers; "you are at 
your journey's end, and your mansions are ready for you."

John Weightman hesitated, for he was troubled by a doubt.  
Suppose that he was not really, like his companions, at his
journey's end,
but only transported for a little while out of the regular course
of 
his life into this mysterious experience?  Suppose that, after
all, 
he had not really passed through the door of death, like these
others, 
but only through the door of dreams, and was walking in a vision,

a living man among the blessed dead.  Would it be right for him
to go 
with them into the heavenly city?  Would it not be a deception, 
a desecration, a deep and unforgivable offense?  The strange, 
confusing question had no reason in it, as he very well knew; 
for if he was dreaming, then it was all a dream; but if his
companions 
were real, then he also was with them in reality, and if they had
died 
then he must have died too.  Yet he could not rid his mind of 
the sense that there was a difference between them and him, 
and it made him afraid to go on.  But, as he paused and turned, 
the Keeper of the Gate looked straight and deep into his eyes, 
and beckoned to him.  Then he knew that it was not only right but

necessary that he should enter.

They passed from street to street among fair and spacious
dwellings, 
set in amaranthine gardens, and adorned with an infinitely varied
beauty of
divine simplicity.  The mansions differed in size, in shape, in
charm: 
each one seemed to have its own personal look of loveliness; 
yet all were alike in fitness to their place, in harmony with one
another,
in the addition which each made to the singular and tranquil
splendor of
the city.

As the little company came, one by one, to the mansions which
were 
prepared for them, and their Guide beckoned to the happy
inhabitant 
to enter in and take possession, there was a soft murmur of joy, 
half wonder and half recognition; as if the new and immortal
dwelling 
were crowned with the beauty of surprise, lovelier and nobler
than 
all the dreams of it had been; and yet also as if it were touched
with 
the beauty of the familiar, the remembered, the long-loved.  
One after another the travelers were led to their own mansions, 
and went in gladly; and from within, through the open doorways 
came sweet voices of welcome, and low laughter, and song.

At last there was no one left with the Guide but the two old
friends,
Doctor McLean and John Weightman.  They were standing in front of

one of the largest and fairest of the houses, whose garden glowed
softly
with radiant flowers.  The Guide laid his hand upon the doctor's
shoulder.

"This is for you," he said.  "Go in; there is no more pain here, 
no more death, nor sorrow, nor tears; for your old enemies are 
all conquered.  But all the good that you have done for others, 
all the help that you have given, all the comfort that you have
brought,
all the strength and love that you have bestowed upon the
suffering, 
are here; for we have built them all into this mansion for you."

The good man's face was lighted with a still joy.  He clasped his

old friend's hand closely, and whispered: "How wonderful it is!  
Go on, you will come to your mansion next, it is not far away, 
and we shall see each other again soon, very soon."

So he went through the garden, and into the music within.  
The Keeper of the Gate turned to John Weightman with level,
quiet,
searching eyes.  Then he asked, gravely:

"Where do you wish me to lead you now?"

"To see my own mansion," answered the man, with half-concealed
excitement. 
"Is there not one here for me?  You may not let me enter it yet,
perhaps,
for I must confess to you that I am only--"

"I know," said the Keeper of the Gate--"I know it all.  
You are John Weightman."

"Yes," said the man, more firmly than he had spoken at first, 
for it gratified him that his name was known.  "Yes, I am John
Weightman,
Senior Warden of St. Petronius' Church.  I wish very much to see 
my mansion here, if only for a moment.  I believe that you have
one for me.
Will you take me to it?"

The Keeper of the Gate drew a little book from the breast of his
robe 
and turned over the pages.

"Certainly," he said, with a curious look at the man, "your name
is here;
and you shall see your mansion if you will follow me."

It seemed as if they must have walked miles and miles, through
the 
vast city, passing street after street of houses larger and
smaller, 
of gardens richer and poorer, but all full of beauty and delight. 

They came into a kind of suburb, where there were many small
cottages, 
with plots of flowers, very lowly, but bright and fragrant.  
Finally they reached an open field, bare and lonely-looking.  
There were two or three little bushes in it, without flowers, 
and the grass was sparse and thin.  In the center of the field 
was a tiny hut, hardly big enough for a shepherd's shelter.  
It looked as if it had been built of discarded things, scraps and

fragments of other buildings, put together with care and pains, 
by some one who had tried to make the most of cast-off material. 

There was something pitiful and shamefaced about the hut.  
It shrank and drooped and faded in its barren field, and seemed
to 
cling only by sufferance to the edge of the splendid city.

"This," said the Keeper of the Gate, standing still and speaking
with 
a low, distinct voice--"this is your mansion, John Weightman."

An almost intolerable shock of grieved wonder and indignation 
choked the man for a moment so that he could not say a word.  
Then he turned his face away from the poor little hut 
and began to remonstrate eagerly with his companion.

"Surely, sir," he stammered, "you must be in error about this.  
There is something wrong--some other John Weightman--a confusion 
of names--the book must be mistaken."

"There is no mistake," said the Keeper of the Gate, very calmly; 
"here is your name, the record of your title and your possessions

in this place."

"But how could such a house be prepared for me," cried the man, 
with a resentful tremor in his voice--"for me, after my 
long and faithful service?  Is this a suitable mansion for 
one so well known and devoted?  Why is it so pitifully small and
mean?  
Why have you not built it large and fair, like the others?"

"That is all the material you sent us."

"What!"

"We have used all the material that you sent us," repeated the 
Keeper of the Gate.

"Now I know that you are mistaken," cried the man, with growing
earnestness, "for all my life long I have been doing things that 
must have supplied you with material.  Have you not heard that 
I have built a school-house; the wing of a hospital; two--yes, 
three--small churches, and the greater part of a large one, 
the spire of St. Petro--"

The Keeper of the Gate lifted his hand.

"Wait," he said; "we know all these things.  They were not ill
done.  
But they were all marked and used as foundation for the name and
mansion of
John Weightman in the world.  Did you not plan them for that?"

"Yes," answered the man, confused and taken aback, "I confess
that 
I thought often of them in that way.  Perhaps my heart was 
set upon that too much.  But there are other things--my endowment
for 
the college--my steady and liberal contributions to all the 
established charities--my support of every respectable--"

"Wait," said the Keeper of the Gate again.  "Were not all these 
carefully recorded on earth where they would add to your credit? 

They were not foolishly done.  Verily, you have had your reward
for them. 
Would you be paid twice?"

"No," cried the man, with deepening dismay, "I dare not claim
that.  
I acknowledge that I considered my own interest too much.  But
surely 
not altogether.  You have said that these things were not
foolishly done. 
They accomplished some good in the world.  Does not that count 
for something?"

"Yes," answered he Keeper of the Gate, "it counts in the
world--where you
counted it.  But it does not belong to you here.  We have saved
and used
everything that you sent us.  This is the mansion prepared for
you."

As he spoke, his look grew deeper and more searching, like a
flame of fire.
John Weightman could not endure it.  It seemed to strip him naked

and wither him.  He sank to the ground under a crushing weight of
shame,
covering his eyes with his hands and cowering face downward 
upon the stones.  Dimly through the trouble of his mind he felt
their
hardness and coldness.

"Tell me, then," he cried, brokenly, "since my life has been so 
little worth, how came I here at all?"

"Through the mercy of the King"--the answer was like the soft
tolling of 
a bell.

"And how have I earned it?" he murmured.

"It is never earned; it is only given," came the clear, low
reply.

"But how have I failed so wretchedly," he asked, "in all the
purpose of 
my life?  What could I have done better?  What is it that counts
here?"

"Only that which is truly given," answered the bell-like voice.  
Only that good which is done for the love of doing it.  
Only those plans in which the welfare of others is the master
thought. 
Only those labors in which the sacrifice is greater than the
reward.  
Only those gifts in which the giver forgets himself."

The man lay silent.  A great weakness, an unspeakable despondency
and
humiliation were upon him.  But the face of the Keeper of the
Gate was
infinitely tender as he bent over him.

"Think again, John Weightman.  Has there been nothing like that
in 
your life?"

"Nothing," he sighed.  "If there ever were such things, it must
have been
long ago--they were all crowded out--I have forgotten them."

There was an ineffable smile on the face of the Keeper of the
Gate, 
and his hand made the sign of the cross over the bowed head as he

spoke gently:

"These are the things that the King never forgets; and because 
there were a few of them in your life, you have a little place
here."

The sense of coldness and hardness under John Weightman's hands 
grew sharper and more distinct.  The feeling of bodily weariness
and
lassitude weighed upon him, but there was a calm, almost a
lightness, 
in his heart as he listened to the fading vibrations of the 
silvery bell-tones.  The chimney clock on the mantel had just
ended 
the last stroke of seven as he lifted his head from the table.  
Thin, pale strips of the city morning were falling into the room
through
the narrow partings of the heavy curtains.

What was it that had happened to him?  Had he been ill?  Had he
died and
come to life again?  Or had he only slept, and had his soul gone
visiting
in dreams?  He sat for some time, motionless, not lost, but
finding himself
in thought.  Then he took a narrow book from the table drawer, 
wrote a check, and tore it out.

He went slowly up the stairs, knocked very softly at his son's
door, 
and, hearing no answer, entered without noise.  Harold was
asleep, 
his bare arm thrown above his head, and his eager face relaxed in
peace. 
His father looked at him a moment with strangely shining eyes, 
and then tiptoed quietly to the writing-desk, found a pencil and 
a sheet of paper, and wrote rapidly:

"My dear boy, here is what you asked me for; do what you like
with it, 
and ask for more if you need it.  If you are still thinking of 
that work with Grenfell, we'll talk it over to-day after church. 

I want to know your heart better; and if I have made mistakes--"

A slight noise made him turn his head.  Harold was sitting up in
bed 
with wide-open eyes.

"Father!" he cried, "is that you?"

"Yes, my son," answered John Weightman; "I've come back--I mean 
I've come up--no, I mean come in--well, here I am, 
and God give us a good Christmas together."





End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of The Mansion

