The Project Gutenberg Etext:  The Travels of Sir John Mandeville


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Travels of Sir John Mandeville

Author Unknown [circa 1500]

January, 1997  [Etext #782]


The Project Gutenberg Etext:  The Travels of Sir John Mandeville
*****This file should be named tosjm10.txt or tosjm10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, tosjm11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, tosjm10a.txt.


Scanned and proofed by David Price
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.  We will try add 800 more,
during 1997, but it will take all the effort we can manage to do
the doubling of our library again this year, what with the other
massive requirements it is going to take to get incorporated and
establish something that will have some permanence.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg"


For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext97
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States
copyright on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy
and distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association within the 60
     days following each date you prepare (or were legally
     required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent periodic)
     tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Travels of Sir John Mandeville
Scanned and proofed by David Price
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE TRAVELS OF SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE




THE PROLOGUE



FOR as much as the land beyond the sea, that is to say the Holy
Land, that men call the Land of Promission or of Behest, passing
all other lands, is the most worthy land, most excellent, and lady
and sovereign of all other lands, and is blessed and hallowed of
the precious body and blood of our Lord Jesu Christ; in the which
land it liked him to take flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, to
environ that holy land with his blessed feet; and there he would of
his blessedness enombre him in the said blessed and glorious Virgin
Mary, and become man, and work many miracles, and preach and teach
the faith and the law of Christian men unto his children; and there
it liked him to suffer many reprovings and scorns for us; and he
that was king of heaven, of air, of earth, of sea and of all things
that be contained in them, would all only be clept king of that
land, when he said, REX SUM JUDEORUM, that is to say, 'I am King of
Jews'; and that land he chose before all other lands, as the best
and most worthy land, and the most virtuous land of all the world:
for it is the heart and the midst of all the world, witnessing the
philosopher, that saith thus, VIRTUS RERUM IN MEDIO CONSISTIT, that
is to say, 'The virtue of things is in the midst'; and in that land
he would lead his life, and suffer passion and death of Jews, for
us, to buy and to deliver us from pains of hell, and from death
without end; the which was ordained for us, for the sin of our
forme-father Adam, and for our own sins also; for as for himself,
he had no evil deserved:  for he thought never evil ne did evil:
and he that was king of glory and of joy, might best in that place
suffer death; because he chose in that land rather than in any
other, there to suffer his passion and his death.  For he that will
publish anything to make it openly known, he will make it to be
cried and pronounced in the middle place of a town; so that the
thing that is proclaimed and pronounced, may evenly stretch to all
parts:  right so, he that was former of all the world, would suffer
for us at Jerusalem, that is the midst of the world; to that end
and intent, that his passion and his death, that was published
there, might be known evenly to all parts of the world.

See now, how dear he bought man, that he made after his own image,
and how dear he again-bought us, for the great love that he had to
us, and we never deserved it to him.  For more precious chattel ne
greater ransom ne might he put for us, than his blessed body, his
precious blood, and his holy life, that he thralled for us; and all
he offered for us that never did sin.

Ah dear God!  What love had he to us his subjects, when he that
never trespassed, would for trespassers suffer death!  Right well
ought us for to love and worship, to dread and serve such a Lord;
and to worship and praise such an holy land, that brought forth
such fruit, through the which every man is saved, but it be his own
default.  Well may that land be called delectable and a fructuous
land, that was be-bled and moisted with the precious blood of our
Lord Jesu Christ; the which is the same land that our Lord behight
us in heritage.  And in that land he would die, as seised, to leave
it to us, his children.

Wherefore every good Christian man, that is of power, and hath
whereof, should pain him with all his strength for to conquer our
right heritage, and chase out all the misbelieving men.  For we be
clept Christian men, after Christ our Father.  And if we be right
children of Christ, we ought for to challenge the heritage, that
our Father left us, and do it out of heathen men's hands.  But now
pride, covetise, and envy have so inflamed the hearts of lords of
the world, that they are more busy for to dis-herit their
neighbours, more than for to challenge or to conquer their right
heritage before-said.  And the common people, that would put their
bodies and their chattels, to conquer our heritage, they may not do
it without the lords.  For a sembly of people without a chieftain,
or a chief lord, is as a flock of sheep without a shepherd; the
which departeth and disperpleth and wit never whither to go.  But
would God, that the temporal lords and all worldly lords were at
good accord, and with the common people would take this holy voyage
over the sea!  Then I trow well, that within a little time, our
right heritage before-said should be reconciled and put in the
hands of the right heirs of Jesu Christ.

And, for as much as it is long time passed, that there was no
general passage ne voyage over the sea; and many men desire for to
hear speak of the Holy Land, and have thereof great solace and
comfort; I, John Mandeville, Knight, albeit I be not worthy, that
was born in England, in the town of St. Albans, and passed the sea
in the year of our Lord Jesu Christ, 1322, in the day of St.
Michael; and hitherto been long time over the sea, and have seen
and gone through many diverse lands, and many provinces and
kingdoms and isles and have passed throughout Turkey, Armenia the
little and the great; through Tartary, Persia, Syria, Arabia, Egypt
the high and the low; through Lybia, Chaldea, and a great part of
Ethiopia; through Amazonia, Ind the less and the more, a great
part; and throughout many other Isles, that be about Ind; where
dwell many diverse folks, and of diverse manners and laws, and of
diverse shapes of men.  Of which lands and isles I shall speak more
plainly hereafter; and I shall devise you of some part of things
that there be, when time shall be, after it may best come to my
mind; and specially for them, that will and are in purpose for to
visit the Holy City of Jerusalem and the holy places that are
thereabout.  And I shall tell the way that they shall hold thither.
For I have often times passed and ridden that way, with good
company of many lords.  God be thanked!

And ye shall understand, that I have put this book out of Latin
into French, and translated it again out of French into English,
that every man of my nation may understand it.  But lords and
knights and other noble and worthy men that con Latin but little,
and have been beyond the sea, know and understand, if I say truth
or no, and if I err in devising, for forgetting or else, that they
may redress it and amend it.  For things passed out of long time
from a man's mind or from his sight, turn soon into forgetting;
because that mind of man ne may not be comprehended ne withholden,
for the frailty of mankind.



CHAPTER I



TO TEACH YOU THE WAY OUT OF ENGLAND TO CONSTANTINOPLE


IN the name of God, Glorious and Almighty!

He that will pass over the sea and come to land [to go to the city
of Jerusalem, he may wend many ways, both on sea and land], after
the country that he cometh from; [for] many of them come to one
end.  But troweth not that I will tell you all the towns, and
cities and castles that men shall go by; for then should I make too
long a tale; but all only some countries and most principal steads
that men shall go through to go the right way.

First, if a man come from the west side of the world, as England,
Ireland, Wales, Scotland, or Norway, he may, if that he will, go
through Almayne and through the kingdom of Hungary, that marcheth
to the land of Polayne, and to the land of Pannonia, and so to
Silesia.

And the King of Hungary is a great lord and a mighty, and holdeth
great lordships and much land in his hand.  For he holdeth the
kingdom of Hungary, Sclavonia, and of Comania a great part, and of
Bulgaria that men call the land of Bougiers, and of the realm of
Russia a great part, whereof he hath made a duchy, that lasteth
unto the land of Nyfland, and marcheth to Prussia.  And men go
through the land of this lord, through a city that is clept Cypron,
and by the castle of Neasburghe, and by the evil town, that sit
toward the end of Hungary.  And there pass men the river of Danube.
This river of Danube is a full great river, and it goeth into
Almayne, under the hills of Lombardy, and it receiveth into him
forty other rivers, and it runneth through Hungary and through
Greece and through Thrace, and it entereth into the sea, toward the
east so rudely and so sharply, that the water of the sea is fresh
and holdeth his sweetness twenty mile within the sea.

And after, go men to Belgrade, and enter into the land of Bougiers;
and there pass men a bridge of stone that is upon the river of
Marrok.  And men pass through the land of Pyncemartz and come to
Greece to the city of Nye, and to the city of Fynepape, and after
to the city of Dandrenoble, and after to Constantinople, that was
wont to be clept Bezanzon.  And there dwelleth commonly the Emperor
of Greece.  And there is the most fair church and the most noble of
all the world; and it is of Saint Sophie.  And before that church
is the image of Justinian the emperor, covered with gold, and he
sitteth upon an horse y-crowned.  And he was wont to hold a round
apple of gold in his hand:  but it is fallen out thereof.  And men
say there, that it is a token that the emperor hath lost a great
part of his lands and of his lordships; for he was wont to be
Emperor of Roumania and of Greece, of all Asia the less, and of the
land of Syria, of the land of Judea in the which is Jerusalem, and
of the land of Egypt, of Persia, and of Arabia.  But he hath lost
all but Greece; and that land he holds all only.  And men would
many times put the apple into the image's hand again, but it will
not hold it.  This apple betokeneth the lordship that he had over
all the world, that is round.  And the tother hand he lifteth up
against the East, in token to menace the misdoers.  This image
stands upon a pillar of marble at Constantinople.



CHAPTER II



OF THE CROSS AND THE CROWN OF OUR LORD JESU CHRIST


AT Constantinople is the cross of our Lord Jesu Christ, and his
coat without seams, that is clept TUNICA INCONSUTILIS, and the
sponge, and the reed, of the which the Jews gave our Lord eysell
and gall, in the cross.  And there is one of the nails, that Christ
was nailed with on the cross.

And some men trow that half the cross, that Christ was done on, be
in Cyprus, in an abbey of monks, that men call the Hill of the Holy
Cross; but it is not so.  For that cross that is in Cyprus, is the
cross, in the which Dismas the good thief was hanged on.  But all
men know not that; and that is evil y-done.  For for profit of the
offering, they say that it is the cross of our Lord Jesu Christ.

And ye shall understand that the cross of our Lord was made of four
manner of trees, as it is contained in this verse, - IN CRUCE FIT
PALMA, CEDRUS, CYPRESSUS, OLIVA.  For that piece that went upright
from the earth to the head was of cypress; and the piece that went
overthwart, to the which his hands were nailed, was of palm; and
the stock, that stood within the earth, in the which was made the
mortise, was of cedar; and the table above his head, that was a
foot and an half long, on the which the title was written in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that was of olive.

And the Jews made the cross of these four manner of trees; for they
trowed that our Lord Jesu Christ should have hanged on the cross,
as long as the cross might last.  And therefore made they the foot
of the cross of cedar; for cedar may not, in earth nor water, rot,
and therefore they would that it should have lasted long.  For they
trowed that the body of Christ should have stunken, they made that
piece, that went from the earth upwards of cypress, for it is well-
smelling, so that the smell of his body should not grieve men that
went forby.  And the overthwart piece was of palm, for in the Old
Testament it was ordained, that when one was overcome he should be
crowned with palm; and for they trowed that they had the victory of
Christ Jesus, therefore made they the overthwart piece of palm.
And the table of the title they made of olive; for olive betokeneth
peace, as the story of Noe witnesseth; when that the culver brought
the branch of olive, that betokened peace made between God and man.
And so trowed the Jews for to have peace, when Christ was dead; for
they said that he made discord and strife amongst them.  And ye
shall understand that our Lord was y-nailed on the cross lying, and
therefore he suffered the more pain.

And the Christian men, that dwell beyond the sea, in Greece, say
that the tree of the cross, that we call cypress, was of that tree
that Adam ate the apple off; and that find they written.  And they
say also, that their scripture saith, that Adam was sick, and said
to his son Seth, that he should go to the angel that kept Paradise,
that he would send him oil of mercy, for to anoint with his
members, that he might have health.  And Seth went.  But the angel
would not let him come in; but said to him, that he might not have
of the oil of mercy.  But he took him three grains of the same
tree, that his father ate the apple off; and bade him, as soon as
his father was dead, that he should put these three grains under
his tongue, and grave him so:  and so he did.  And of these three
grains sprang a tree, as the angel said that it should, and bare a
fruit, through the which fruit Adam should be saved.  And when Seth
came again, he found his father near dead.  And when he was dead,
he did with the grains as the angel bade him; of the which sprung
three trees, of the which the cross was made, that bare good fruit
and blessed, our Lord Jesu Christ; through whom, Adam and all that
come of him, should be saved and delivered from dread of death
without end, but it be their own default.

This holy cross had the Jews hid in the earth, under a rock of the
mount of Calvary; and it lay there two hundred year and more, into
the time that St. Helen, that was mother to Constantine the Emperor
of Rome.  And she was daughter of King Coel, born in Colchester,
that was King of England, that was clept then Britain the more; the
which the Emperor Constance wedded to his wife, for her beauty, and
gat upon her Constantine, that was after Emperor of Rome, and King
of England.

And ye shall understand, that the cross of our Lord was eight
cubits long, and the overthwart piece was of length three cubits
and a half.  And one part of the crown of our Lord, wherewith he
was crowned, and one of the nails, and the spear head, and many
other relics be in France, in the king's chapel.  And the crown
lieth in a vessel of crystal richly dight.  For a king of France
bought these relics some time of the Jews, to whom the emperor had
laid them in wed for a great sum of silver.

And if all it be so, that men say, that this crown is of thorns, ye
shall understand, that it was of jonkes of the sea, that is to say,
rushes of the sea, that prick as sharply as thorns.  For I have
seen and beholden many times that of Paris and that of
Constantinople; for they were both one, made of rushes of the sea.
But men have departed them in two parts:  of the which, one part is
at Paris, and the other part is at Constantinople.  And I have one
of those precious thorns, that seemeth like a white thorn; and that
was given to me for great specially.  For there are many of them
broken and fallen into the vessel that the crown lieth in; for they
break for dryness when men move them to show them to great lords
that come thither.

And ye shall understand, that our Lord Jesu, in that night that he
was taken, he was led into a garden; and there he was first
examined right sharply; and there the Jews scorned him, and made
him a crown of the branches of albespine, that is white thorn, that
grew in that same garden, and set it on his head, so fast and so
sore, that the blood ran down by many places of his visage, and of
his neck, and of his shoulders.  And therefore hath the white thorn
many virtues, for he that beareth a branch on him thereof, no
thunder ne no manner of tempest may dere him; nor in the house,
that it is in, may no evil ghost enter nor come unto the place that
it is in.  And in that same garden, Saint Peter denied our Lord
thrice.

Afterward was our Lord led forth before the bishops and the masters
of the law, into another garden of Annas; and there also he was
examined, reproved, and scorned, and crowned eft with a sweet
thorn, that men clepeth barbarines, that grew in that garden, and
that hath also many virtues.

And afterward he was led into a garden of Caiphas, and there he was
crowned with eglantine.

And after he was led into the chamber of Pilate, and there he was
examined and crowned.  And the Jews set him in a chair, and clad
him in a mantle; and there made they the crown of jonkes of the
sea; and there they kneeled to him, and scorned him, saying, AVE,
REX JUDEORUM! that is to say, 'Hail, King of Jews!'  And of this
crown, half is at Paris, and the other half at Constantinople.  And
this crown had Christ on his head, when he was done upon the cross;
and therefore ought men to worship it and hold it more worthy than
any of the others.

And the spear shaft hath the Emperor of Almayne; but the head is at
Paris.  And natheles the Emperor of Constantinople saith that he
hath the spear head; and I have often time seen it, but it is
greater than that at Paris.



CHAPTER III



OF THE CITY OF CONSTANTINOPLE, AND OF THE FAITH OF GREEKS


AT Constantinople lieth Saint Anne, our Lady's mother, whom Saint
Helen let bring from Jerusalem.  And there lieth also the body of
John Chrisostome, that was Archbishop of Constantinople.  And there
lieth also Saint Luke the Evangelist:  for his bones were brought
from Bethany, where he was buried.  And many other relics be there.
And there is the vessel of stone, as it were of marble, that men
clepe enydros, that evermore droppeth water, and filleth himself
every year, till that it go over above, without that that men take
from within.

Constantinople is a full fair city, and a good, and well walled;
and it is three-cornered.  And there is an arm of the sea
Hellespont:  and some men call it the Mouth of Constantinople; and
some men call it the Brace of Saint George:  and that arm closeth
the two parts of the city.  And upward to the sea, upon the water,
was wont to be the great city of Troy, in a full fair plain:  but
that city was destroyed by them of Greece, and little appeareth
thereof, because it is so long sith it was destroyed.

About Greece there be many isles, as Calliste, Calcas, Oertige,
Tesbria, Mynia, Flaxon, Melo, Carpate, and Lemnos.  And in this
isle is the mount Athos, that passeth the clouds.  And there be
many diverse languages and many countries, that be obedient to the
emperor; that is to say, Turcople, Pyncynard, Comange, and many
other, as Thrace and Macedonia, of the which Alexander was king.
In this country was Aristotle born, in a city that men clepe
Stagyra, a little from the city of Thrace.  And at Stagyra lieth
Aristotle; and there is an altar upon his tomb.  And there make men
great feasts for him every year, as though he were a saint.  And at
his altar they holden their great councils and their assemblies,
and they hope, that through inspiration of God and of him, they
shall have the better council.

In this country be right high hills, toward the end of Macedonia.
And there is a great hill, that men clepe Olympus, that departeth
Macedonia and Thrace.  And it is so high, that it passeth the
clouds.  And there is another hill, that is clept Athos, that is so
high, that the shadow of him reacheth to Lemne, that is an isle;
and it is seventy-six mile between.  And above at the cop of the
hill is the air so clear, that men may find no wind there, and
therefore may no beast live there, so is the air dry.

And men say in these countries, that philosophers some time went
upon these hills, and held to their nose a sponge moisted with
water, for to have air; for the air above was so dry.  And above,
in the dust and in the powder of those hills, they wrote letters
and figures with their fingers.  And at the year's end they came
again, and found the same letters and figures, the which they had
written the year before, without any default.  And therefore it
seemeth well, that these hills pass the clouds and join to the pure
air.

At Constantinople is the palace of the emperor, right fair and
well-dight:  and therein is a fair place for joustings, or for
other plays and desports.  And it is made with stages, and hath
degrees about, that every man may well see, and none grieve other.
And under these stages be stables well vaulted for the emperor's
horses; and all the pillars be of marble.

And within the Church of Saint Sophia, an emperor sometime would
have buried the body of his father, when he was dead.  And, as they
made the grave, they found a body in the earth, and upon the body
lay a fine plate of gold; and thereon was written, in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, letters that said thus; JESU CHRISTUS NASCETUR DE
VIRGINE MARIA, ET EGO CREDO IN EUM; that is to say, 'Jesu Christ
shall be born of the Virgin Mary, and I trow in him.'  And the date
when it was laid in the earth, was two thousand year before our
Lord was born.  And yet is the plate of gold in the treasury of the
church.  And men say, that it was Hermogenes the wise man.

And if all it so be, that men of Greece be Christian yet they vary
from our faith.  For they say, that the Holy Ghost may not come of
the Son; but all only of the Father.  And they are not obedient to
the Church of Rome, ne to the Pope.  And they say that their
Patriarch hath as much power over the sea, as the Pope hath on this
side the sea.  And therefore Pope John xxii. sent letters to them,
how Christian faith should be all one; and that they should be
obedient to the Pope, that is God's Vicar on earth, to whom God
gave his plein power for to bind and to assoil, and therefore they
should be obedient to him.

And they sent again diverse answers; and among others they said
thus:  POTENTIAM TUAM SUMMAM CIRCA TUOS SUBJECTOS, FIRMITER
CREDIMUS.  SUPERBIAM TUAM SUMMAM TOLERARE NON POSSUMUS.  AVARITIAM
TUAM SUMMAM SATIARE NON INTENDIMUS.  DOMINUS TECUM; QUIA DOMINUS
NOBISCUM EST.  That is to say:  'We trow well, that thy power is
great upon thy subjects.  We may not suffer thine high pride.  We
be not in purpose to fulfil thy great covetise.  Lord be with thee;
for our Lord is with us.  Farewell.'  And other answer might he not
have of them.

And also they make their sacrament of the altar of Therf bread, for
our Lord made it of such bread, when he made his Maundy.  And on
the Shere-Thursday make they their Therf bread, in token of the
Maundy, and dry it at the sun, and keep it all the year, and give
it to sick men, instead of God's body.  And they make but one
unction, when they christen children.  And they anoint not the sick
men.  And they say that there is no Purgatory, and that souls shall
not have neither joy ne pain till the day of doom.  And they say
that fornication is no sin deadly, but a thing that is kindly, and
that men and women should not wed but once, and whoso weddeth
oftener than once, their children be bastards and gotten in sin.
And their priests also be wedded.

And they say also that usury is no deadly sin.  And they sell
benefices of Holy Church.  And so do men in other places:  God
amend it when his will is!  And that is great sclaundre, for now is
simony king crowned in Holy Church:  God amend it for his mercy!

And they say, that in Lent, men shall not fast, ne sing Mass, but
on the Saturday and on the Sunday.  And they fast not on the
Saturday, no time of the year, but it be Christmas Even or Easter
Even.  And they suffer not the Latins to sing at their altars; and
if they do, by any adventure, anon they wash the altar with holy
water.  And they say that there should be but one Mass said at one
altar upon one day.

And they say also that our Lord ne ate never meat; but he made
token of eating.  And also they say, that we sin deadly in shaving
our beards, for the beard is token of a man, and gift of our Lord.
And they say that we sin deadly in eating of beasts that were
forbidden in the Old Testament, and of the old Law, as swine, hares
and other beasts, that chew not their cud.  And they say that we
sin, when we eat flesh on the days before Ash Wednesday, and of
that that we eat flesh the Wednesday, and eggs and cheese upon the
Fridays.  And they accurse all those that abstain them to eat flesh
the Saturday.

Also the Emperor of Constantinople maketh the patriarch, the
archbishops and the bishops; and giveth the dignities and the
benefices of churches and depriveth them that be unworthy, when he
findeth any cause.  And so is he lord both temporal and spiritual
in his country.

And if ye will wit of their A.B.C. what letters they be, here ye
may see them, with the names that they clepe them there amongst
them:  Alpha, Betha, Gama, Deltha, e longe, e brevis, Epilmon,
Thetha, Iota, Kapda, Lapda, Mi, Ni, Xi, o brevis, Pi, Coph, Ro,
Summa, Tau, Vi, Fy, Chi, Psi, Othomega, Diacosyn.

And all be it that these things touch not to one way, nevertheless
they touch to that, that I have hight you, to shew you a part of
customs and manners, and diversities of countries.  And for this is
the first country that is discordant in faith and in belief, and
varieth from our faith, on this half the sea, therefore I have set
it here, that ye may know the diversity that is between our faith
and theirs.  For many men have great liking, to hear speak of
strange things of diverse countries.



CHAPTER IV



[Of the Way from Constantinople to Jerusalem.]  Of Saint John the
Evangelist.  And of the Ypocras Daughter, transformed from a Woman
to a Dragon


NOW return I again, for to teach you the way from Constantinople to
Jerusalem.  He that will through Turkey, he goeth toward the city
of Nyke, and passeth through the gate of Chienetout, and always men
see before them the hill of Chienetout, that is right high; and it
is a mile and an half from Nyke.

And whoso will go by water, by the brace of St. George, and by the
sea where St. Nicholas lieth, and toward many other places - first
men go to an isle that is clept Sylo.  In that isle groweth mastick
on small trees, and out of them cometh gum as it were of plum-trees
or of cherry-trees.

And after go men through the isle of Patmos; and there wrote St.
John the Evangelist the Apocalypse.  And ye shall understand, that
St. John was of age thirty-two year, when our Lord suffered his
passion; and after his passion, he lived sixty-seven year, and in
the hundredth year of his age he died.

From Patmos men go unto Ephesus, a fair city and nigh to the sea.
And there died St. John, and was buried behind the high altar in a
tomb.  And there is a fair church; for Christian men were wont to
holden that place always.  And in the tomb of St. John is nought
but manna, that is clept angels' meat; for his body was translated
into Paradise.  And Turks hold now all that place, and the city and
the church; and all Asia the less is y-clept Turkey.  And ye shall
understand, that St. John let make his grave there in his life, and
laid himself therein all quick; and therefore some men say, that he
died not, but that he resteth there till the day of doom.  And,
forsooth, there is a great marvel; for men may see there the earth
of the tomb apertly many times stir and move, as there were quick
things under.

And from Ephesus men go through many isles in the sea, unto the
city of Patera, where St. Nicholas was born, and so to Martha,
where he was chosen to be bishop; and there groweth right good wine
and strong, and that men call wine of Martha.  And from thence go
men to the isle of Crete, that the emperor gave sometime to [the]
Genoese.

And then pass men through the isles of Colcos and of Lango, of the
which isles Ypocras was lord of.  And some men say, that in the
isle of Lango is yet the daughter of Ypocras, in form and likeness
of a great dragon, that is a hundred fathom of length, as men say,
for I have not seen her.  And they of the isles call her Lady of
the Land.  And she lieth in an old castle, in a cave, and sheweth
twice or thrice in the year, and she doth no harm to no man, but if
men do her harm.  And she was thus changed and transformed, from a
fair damosel, into likeness of a dragon, by a goddess that was
clept Diana.  And men say, that she shall so endure in that form of
a dragon, unto [the] time that a knight come, that is so hardy,
that dare come to her and kiss her on the mouth; and then shall she
turn again to her own kind, and be a woman again, but after that
she shall not live long.

And it is not long sithen, that a knight of Rhodes, that was hardy
and doughty in arms, said that he would kiss her.  And when he was
upon his courser, and went to the castle, and entered into the
cave, the dragon lift up her head against him.  And when the knight
saw her in that form so hideous and so horrible he fled away.  And
the dragon bare the knight upon a rock, maugre his head; and from
that rock, she cast him into the sea.  And so was lost both horse
and man.

And also a young man, that wist not of the dragon, went out of a
ship, and went through the isle till that he came to the castle,
and came into the cave, and went so long, till that he found a
chamber; and there he saw a damosel that combed her head and looked
in a mirror; and she had much treasure about her.  And he trowed
that she had been a common woman, that dwelled there to receive men
to folly.  And he abode, till the damosel saw the shadow of him in
the mirror.  And she turned her toward him, and asked him what he
would?  And he said, he would be her leman or paramour.  And she
asked him, if that he were a knight?  And he said, nay.  And then
she said, that he might not be her leman; but she bade him go again
unto his fellows, and make him knight, and come again upon the
morrow, and she should come out of the cave before him, and then
come and kiss her on the mouth and have no dread, - for I shall do
thee no manner of harm, albeit that thou see me in likeness of a
dragon; for though thou see me hideous and horrible to look on, I
do thee to wit that it is made by enchantment; for without doubt, I
am none other than thou seest now, a woman, and therefore dread
thee nought.  And if thou kiss me, thou shalt have all this
treasure, and be my lord, and lord also of all the isle.

And he departed from her and went to his fellows to ship, and let
make him knight and came again upon the morrow for to kiss this
damosel.  And when he saw her come out of the cave in form of a
dragon, so hideous and so horrible, he had so great dread, that he
fled again to the ship, and she followed him.  And when she saw
that he turned not again, she began to cry, as a thing that had
much sorrow; and then she turned again into her cave.  And anon the
knight died.  And sithen hitherward might no knight see her, but
that he died anon.  But when a knight cometh, that is so hardy to
kiss her, he shall not die; but he shall turn the damosel into her
right form and kindly shape, and he shall be lord of all the
countries and isles abovesaid.

And from thence men come to the isle of Rhodes, the which isle
Hospitallers holden and govern; and that took they some-time from
the emperor.  And it was wont to be clept Collos; and so call it
the Turks yet.  And Saint Paul in his epistle writeth to them of
that isle AD COLOSSENSES.  This isle is nigh eight hundred mile
long from Constantinople.



CHAPTER V



[Of diversities in Cyprus; of the Road from Cyprus to Jerusalem,
and of the Marvel of a Fosse full of Sand]


AND from this isle of Rhodes men go to Cyprus, where be many vines,
that first be red and after one year they become white; and those
wines that be most white, be most clear and best of smell.

And men pass by that way, by a place that was wont to be a great
city, and a great land; and the city was clept Cathailye, the which
city and land was lost through folly of a young man.  For he had a
fair damosel, that he loved well to his paramour; and she died
suddenly, and was done in a tomb of marble.  And for the great lust
that he had to her, he went in the night unto her tomb and opened
it, and went in and lay by her, and went his way.  And when it came
to the end of nine months, there came a voice to him and said, Go
to the tomb of that woman, and open it and behold what thou hast
begotten on her; and if thou let to go, thou shalt have a great
harm.  And he yede and opened the tomb, and there flew out an adder
right hideous to see; the which as swithe flew about the city and
the country, and soon after the city sank down.  And there be many
perilous passages without fail.

From Rhodes to Cyprus be five hundred mile and more.  But men may
go to Cyprus, and come not at Rhodes.  Cyprus is right a good isle,
and a fair and a great, and it hath four principal cities within
him.  And there is an Archbishop at Nicosea, and four other bishops
in that land.  And at Famagost is one of the principal havens of
the sea that is in the world; and there arrive Christian men and
Saracens and men of all nations.  In Cyprus is the Hill of the Holy
Cross; and there is an abbey of monks black and there is the cross
of Dismas the good thief, as I have said before.  And some men
trow, that there is half the cross of our Lord; but it is not so,
and they do evil that make men to believe so.

In Cyprus lieth Saint Zenonimus, of whom men of that country make
great solemnity.  And in the castle of Amours lieth the body of
Saint-Hilarion, and men keep it right worshipfully.  And beside
Famagost was Saint Barnabas the apostle born.

In Cyprus men hunt with papyonns, that be like leopards, and they
take wild beasts right well, and they be somewhat more than lions;
and they take more sharply the beasts, and more deliver than do
hounds.

In Cyprus is the manner of lords and all other men all to eat on
the earth.  For they make ditches in the earth all about in the
hall, deep to the knee, and they do pave them; and when they will
eat, they go therein and sit there.  And the skill is for they may
be the more fresh; for that land is much more hotter than it is
here.  And at great feasts, and for strangers, they set forms and
tables, as men do in this country, but they had lever sit in the
earth.

From Cyprus, men go to the land of Jerusalem by the sea:  and in a
day and in a night, he that hath good wind may come to the haven of
Tyre, that is now clept Surrye.  There was some-time a great city
and a good of Christian men, but Saracens have destroyed it a great
part; and they keep that haven right well, for dread of Christian
men.  Men might go more right to that haven, and come not in
Cyprus, but they go gladly to Cyprus to rest them on the land, or
else to buy things, that they have need to their living.  On the
sea-side men may find many rubies.  And there is the well of the
which holy writ speaketh of, and saith, FONS ORTORUM, ET PUTEUS
AQUARUM VIVENTIUM:  that is to say, 'the well of gardens, and the
ditch of living waters.'

In this city of Tyre, said the woman to our Lord, BEATUS VENTER QUI
TE PORTAVIT, ET UBERA QUE SUCCISTI:  that is to say, 'Blessed be
the body that thee bare, and the paps that thou suckedst.'  And
there our Lord forgave the woman of Canaan her sins.  And before
Tyre was wont to be the stone, on the which our Lord sat and
preached, and on that stone was founded the Church of Saint
Saviour.

And eight mile from Tyre, toward the east, upon the sea, is the
city of Sarphen, in Sarepta of Sidonians.  And there was wont for
to dwell Elijah the prophet; and there raised he Jonas, the widow's
son, from death to life.  And five mile from Sarphen is the city of
Sidon; of the which city, Dido was lady, that was Aeneas' wife,
after the destruction of Troy, and that founded the city of
Carthage in Africa, and now is clept Sidonsayete.  And in the city
of Tyre, reigned Agenor, the father of Dido.  And sixteen mile from
Sidon is Beirout.  And from Beirout to Sardenare is three journeys
and from Sardenare is five mile to Damascus.

And whoso will go long time on the sea, and come nearer to
Jerusalem, he shall go from Cyprus by sea to Port Jaffa.  For that
is the next haven to Jerusalem; for from that haven is not but one
day journey and a half to Jerusalem.  And the town is called Jaffa;
for one of the sons of Noah that hight Japhet founded it, and now
it is clept Joppa.  And ye shall understand, that it is one of the
oldest towns of the world, for it was founded before Noah's flood.
And yet there sheweth in the rock, there as the iron chains were
fastened, that Andromeda, a great giant, was bounden with, and put
in prison before Noah's flood, of the which giant, is a rib of his
side that is forty foot long.

And whoso will arrive at the port of Tyre or of Surrye, that I have
spoken of before, may go by land, if he will, to Jerusalem.  And
men go from Surrye unto the city of Akon in a day.  And it was
clept some-time Ptolemais.  And it was some-time a city of
Christian men, full fair, but it is now destroyed; and it stands
upon the sea.  And from Venice to Akon, by sea, is two thousand and
four score miles of Lombardy; and from Calabria, or from Sicily to
Akon, by sea, is a 1300 miles of Lombardy; and the isle of Crete is
right in the midway.

And beside the city of Akon, toward the sea, six score furlongs on
the right side, toward the south, is the Hill of Carmel, where
Elijah the prophet dwelled, and there was first the Order of Friars
Carmelites founded.  This hill is not right great, nor full high.
And at the foot of this hill was some-time a good city of Christian
men, that men clept Caiffa, for Caiaphas first founded it; but it
is now all wasted.  And on the left side of the Hill of Carmel is a
town, that men clepe Saffre, and that is set on another hill.
There Saint James and Saint John were born; and, in worship of them
there is a fair church.  And from Ptolemais, that men clepe now
Akon, unto a great hill, that is clept Scale of Tyre, is one
hundred furlongs.  And beside the city of Akon runneth a little
river, that is clept Belon.

And there nigh is the Foss of Mennon that is all round; and it is
one hundred cubits of largeness, and it is all full of gravel,
shining bright, of the which men make fair verres and clear.  And
men come from far, by water in ships, and by land with carts, for
to fetch of that gravel.  And though there be never so much taken
away thereof in the day, at morrow it is as full again as ever it
was; and that is a great marvel.  And there is evermore great wind
in that foss, that stirreth evermore the gravel, and maketh it
trouble.  And if any man do therein any manner metal, it turneth
anon to glass.  And the glass, that is made of that gravel, if it
be done again into the gravel, it turneth anon into gravel as it
was first.  And therefore some men say, that it is a swallow of the
gravelly sea.

Also from Akon, above-said, go men forth four journeys to the city
of Palestine, that was of the Philistines, that now is clept Gaza,
that is a gay city and a rich; and it is right fair and full of
folk, and it is a little from the sea.  And from this city brought
Samson the strong the gates upon an high land, when he was taken in
that city, and there he slew in a palace the king and himself, and
great number of the best of the Philistines, the which had put out
his eyen and shaved his head, and imprisoned him by treason of
Dalida his paramour.  And therefore he made fall upon them a great
hall, when they were at meat.

And from thence go men to the city of Cesarea, and so to the Castle
of Pilgrims, and so to Ascalon; and then to Jaffa, and so to
Jerusalem.

And whoso will go by land through the land of Babylon, where the
soldan dwelleth commonly, he must get grace of him and leave to go
more siker through those lands and countries.

And for to go to the Mount of Sinai, before that men go to
Jerusalem, they shall go from Gaza to the Castle of Daire.  And
after that, men come out of Syria, and enter into wilderness, and
there the way is full sandy; and that wilderness and desert lasteth
eight journeys, but always men find good inns, and all that they
need of victuals.  And men clepe that wilderness Achelleke.  And
when a man cometh out of that desert, he entereth into Egypt, that
men clepe Egypt-Canopac, and after other language, men clepe it
Morsyn.  And there first men find a good town, that is clept
Belethe; and it is at the end of the kingdom of Aleppo.  And from
thence men go to Babylon and to Cairo.



CHAPTER VI



OF MANY NAMES OF SOLDANS, AND OF THE TOWER OF BABYLON


AT Babylon there is a fair church of our Lady, where she dwelled
seven year, when she fled out of the land of Judea for dread of
King Herod.  And there lieth the body of Saint Barbara the virgin
and martyr.  And there dwelled Joseph, when he was sold of his
brethren.  And there made Nebuchadnezzar the king put three
children into the furnace of fire, for they were in the right truth
of belief, the which children men clept Anania, Azariah, Mishael,
as the Psalm of BENEDICITE saith:  but Nebuchadnezzar clept them
otherwise, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that is to say, God
glorious, God victorious, and God over all things and realms:  and
that was for the miracle, that he saw God's Son go with the
children through the fire, as he said.

There dwelleth the soldan in his Calahelyke (for there is commonly
his seat) in a fair castle, strong and great, and well set upon a
rock.  In that castle dwell alway, to keep it and to serve the
soldan, more then 6000 persons, that take all their necessaries off
the soldan's court.  I ought right well to know it; for I dwelled
with him as soldier in his wars a great while against the Bedouins.
And he would have married me full highly to a great prince's
daughter, if I would have forsaken my law and my belief; but I
thank God, I had no will to do it, for nothing that he behight me.

And ye shall understand that the soldan is lord of five kingdoms,
that he hath conquered and appropred to him by strength.  And these
be the names:  the kingdom of Canapac, that is Egypt; and the
kingdom of Jerusalem, where that David and Solomon were kings; and
the kingdom of Syria, of the which the city of Damascus was chief;
and the kingdom of Aleppo in the land of Mathe; and the kingdom
Arabia, that was to one of the three kings, that made offering to
our Lord, when he was born.  And many other lands he holdeth in his
hand.  And therewithal he holdeth caliphs, that is a full great
thing in their language, and it is as much to say as king.

And there were wont to be five soldans; but now there is no more
but he of Egypt.  And the first soldan was Zarocon, that was of
Media, as was father to Saladin that took the Caliph of Egypt and
slew him, and was made soldan by strength.  After that was Soldan
Saladin, in whose time the King of England, Richard the First, with
many other, kept the passage, that Saladin ne might not pass.
After Saladin reigned his son Boradin, and after him his nephew.
After that, the Comanians that were in servage in Egypt, felt
themselves that they were of great power, they chose them a soldan
amongst them, the which made him to be clept Melechsalan.  And in
his time entered into the country of the kings of France Saint
Louis, and fought with him; and [the soldan] took him and
imprisoned him; and this [soldan] was slain by his own servants.
And after, they chose another to be soldan, that they clept
Tympieman; and he let deliver Saint Louis out of prison for a
certain ransom.  And after, one of these Comanians reigned, that
hight Cachas, and slew Tympieman, for to be soldan; and made him be
clept Melechmenes.  And after another that had to name Bendochdare,
that slew Melechmenes, for to be sultan, and clept himself
Melechdare.  In his time entered the good King Edward of England
into Syria, and did great harm to the Saracens.  And after, was
this soldan empoisoned at Damascus, and his son thought to reign
after him by heritage, and made him to be clept Melechsache; but
another that had to name Elphy, chased him out of the country and
made him soldan.  This man took the city of Tripoli and destroyed
many of the Christian men, the year of grace 1289, and after was he
imprisoned of another that would be soldan, but he was anon slain.
After that was the son of Elphy chosen to be soldan, and clept him
Melechasseraff, and he took the city of Akon and chased out the
Christian men; and this was also empoisoned, and then was his
brother made soldan, and was clept Melechnasser.  And after, one
that was clept Guytoga took him and put him in prison in the castle
of Mountroyal, and made him soldan by strength, and clept him
Melechadel; and he was of Tartary.  But the Comanians chased him
out of the country, and did him much sorrow, and made one of
themself soldan, that had to name Lachin.  And he made him to be
clept Melechmanser, the which on a day played at the chess, and his
sword lay beside him; and so befell, that one wrathed him, and with
his own proper sword he was slain.  And after that, they were at
great discord, for to make a soldan; and finally they accorded to
Melechnasser, that Guytoga had put in prison at Mountroyal.  And
this reigned long and governed so that his eldest son was chosen
after him, Melechmader, the which his brother let slay privily for
to have the lordship, and made him to be clept Melechmadabron, and
he soldan when I departed from those countries.

And wit ye well that the soldan may lead out of Egypt more than
20,000 men of arms, and out of Syria, and out of Turkey and out of
other countries that he holds, he may arrere more than 50,000.  And
all those be at his wages, and they be always at him, without the
folk of his country, that is without number.  And every each of
them hath by year the mountance of six score florins; but it
behoveth, that every of them hold three horses and a camel.  And by
the cities and by towns be admirals, that have the governance of
the people; one hath to govern four, and another hath to govern
five, another more, and another well more.  And as many taketh the
admiral by him alone, as all the other soldiers have under him; and
therefore, when the soldan will advance any worthy knight, he
maketh him an admiral.  And when it is any dearth, the knights be
right poor, and then they sell both their horse and their harness.

And the soldan hath four wives, one Christian and three Saracens,
of the which one dwelleth at Jerusalem, and another at Damascus,
and another at Ascalon; and when them list, they remove to other
cities, and when the soldan will he may go to visit them.  And he
hath as many paramours as him liketh.  For he maketh to come before
him the fairest and the noblest of birth, and the gentlest damosels
of his country, and he maketh them to be kept and served full
honourably.  And when he will have one to lie with him, he maketh
them all to come before him, and he beholdeth in all, which of them
is most to his pleasure, and to her anon he sendeth or casteth a
ring from his finger.  And then anon she shall be bathed and richly
attired, and anointed with delicate things of sweet smell, and then
led to the soldan's chamber; and thus he doth as often as him list,
when he will have any of them.

And before the soldan cometh no stranger, but if he be clothed in
cloth of gold, or of Tartary or of Camaka, in the Saracens' guise,
and as the Saracens use.  And it behoveth, that anon at the first
sight that men see the soldan, be it in window or in what place
else, that men kneel to him and kiss the earth, for that is the
manner to do reverence to the soldan of them that speak with him.
And when that messengers of strange countries come before him, the
meinie of the soldan, when the strangers speak to him, they be
about the soldan with swords drawn and gisarmes and axes, their
arms lifted up in high with those weapons for to smite upon them,
if they say any word that is displeasance to the soldan.  And also,
no stranger cometh before him, but that he maketh him some promise
and grant of that the [stranger] asketh reasonably; by so it be not
against his law.  And so do other princes beyond, for they say that
no man shall come before no prince, but that [he be] better, and
shall be more gladder in departing from his presence than he was at
the coming before him.

And understandeth, that that Babylon that I have spoken of, where
that the sultan dwelleth, is not that great Babylon where the
diversity of languages was first made for vengeance by the miracle
of God, when the great Tower of Babel was begun to be made; of the
which the walls were sixty-four furlongs of height; that is in the
great desert of Arabia, upon the way as men go toward the kingdom
of Chaldea.  But it is full long since that any man durst nigh to
the tower; for it is all desert and full of dragons and great
serpents, and full of diverse venomous beasts all about.  That
tower, with the city, was of twenty-five mile in circuit of the
walls, as they of the country say, and as men may deem by
estimation, after that men tell of the country.

And though it be clept the Tower of Babylon, yet nevertheless,
there were ordained within many mansions and many great dwelling-
places, in length and breadth.  And that tower contained great
country in circuit, for the tower alone contained ten mile square.
That tower founded King Nimrod that was king of that country; and
he was the first king of the world.  And he let make an image in
the likeness of his father, and constrained all his subjects for to
worship it; and anon began other lords to do the same, and so began
the idols and the simulacres first.

The town and the city were full well set in a fair country and a
plain that men clepe the country of Samar, of the which the walls
of the city were two hundred cubits in height, and fifty cubits of
deepness; and the river of Euphrates ran throughout the city and
about the tower also.  But Cyrus the King of Persia took from them
the river, and destroyed all the city and the tower also; for he
departed that river in 360 small rivers, because that he had sworn,
that he should put the river in such point, that a woman might well
pass there, without casting off of her clothes, forasmuch as he had
lost many worthy men that trowed to pass that river by swimming.

And from Babylon where the soldan dwelleth, to go right between the
Orient and the Septentrion toward the great Babylon, is forty
journeys to pass by desert.  But it is not the great Babylon in the
land and in the power of the said soldan, but it is in the power
and the lordship of Persia, but he holdeth it of the great Chan,
that is the greatest emperor and the most sovereign lord of all the
parts beyond, and he is lord of the isles of Cathay and of many
other isles and of a great part of Ind, and his land marcheth unto
Prester John's Land, and he holdeth so much land, that he knoweth
not the end:  and he is more mighty and greater lord without
comparison than is the soldan:  of his royal estate and of his
might I shall speak more plenerly, when I shall speak of the land
and of the country of Ind.

Also the city of Mecca where Mohammet lieth is of the great deserts
of Arabia; and there lieth [the] body of him full honourably in
their temple, that the Saracens clepen Musketh.  And it is from
Babylon the less, where the soldan dwelleth, unto Mecca above-said,
into a thirty-two journeys.

And wit well, that the realm of Arabia is a full great country, but
therein is over-much desert.  And no man may dwell there in that
desert for default of water, for that land is all gravelly and full
of sand.  And it is dry and no thing fruitful, because that it hath
no moisture; and therefore is there so much desert.  And if it had
rivers and wells, and the land also were as it is in other parts,
it should be as full of people and as full inhabited with folk as
in other places; for there is full great multitude of people,
whereas the land is inhabited.  Arabia dureth from the ends of the
realm of Chaldea unto the last end of Africa, and marcheth to the
land of Idumea toward the end of Botron.  And in Chaldea the chief
city is Bagdad.  And of Africa the chief city is Carthage, that
Dido, that was Eneas's wife, founded; the which Eneas was of the
city of Troy, and after was King of Italy.

Mesopotamia stretcheth also unto the deserts of Arabia, and it is a
great country.  In this country is the city of Haran, where
Abraham's father dwelled, and from whence Abraham departed by
commandment of the angel.  And of that city was Ephraim, that was a
great clerk and a great doctor.  And Theophilus was of that city
also, that our lady saved from our enemy.  And Mesopotamia dureth
from the river of Euphrates, unto the river of Tigris, for it is
between those two rivers.

And beyond the river of Tigris is Chaldea, that is a full great
kingdom.  In that realm, at Bagdad above-said, was wont to dwell
the caliph, that was wont to be both as Emperor and Pope of the
Arabians, so that he was lord spiritual and temporal; and he was
successor to Mahommet, and of his generation.  That city of Bagdad
was wont to be clept Sutis, and Nebuchadnezzar founded it; and
there dwelled the holy prophet Daniel, and there he saw visions of
heaven, and there he made the exposition of dreams.

And in old time there were wont to be three caliphs, he of Arabia
and of Chaldea dwelt in the city of Bagdad above-said; and at Cairo
beside Babylon dwelt the Caliph of Egypt; and at Morocco, upon the
West Sea, dwelt the Caliph of the people of Barbary and of
Africans.  And now is there none of the caliphs, nor nought have
been since the time of the Soldan Saladin; for from that time
hither the soldan clepeth himself caliph, and so have the caliphs
lost their name.

Also witeth well, that Babylon the less, where the soldan dwelleth,
and at the city of Cairo that is nigh beside it, be great huge
cities many and fair; and that one sitteth nigh that other.
Babylon sitteth upon the river of Gyson, sometimes clept Nile, that
cometh out of Paradise terrestrial.

That river of Nile, all the year, when the sun entereth into the
sign of Cancer, it beginneth to wax, and it waxeth always as long
as the sun is in Cancer and in the sign of the Lion; and it waxeth
in such manner, that it is sometimes so great, that it is twenty
cubits or more of deepness, and then it doth great harm to the
goods that be upon the land.  For then may no man travail to plough
the lands for the great moisture, and therefore is there dear time
in that country.  And also, when it waxeth little, it is dear time
in that country, for default of moisture.  And when the sun is in
the sign of Virgo, then beginneth the river for to wane and to
decrease little and little, so that when the sun is entered into
the sign of Libra, then they enter between these rivers.  This
river cometh, running from Paradise terrestrial, between the
deserts of Ind, and after it smiteth unto land, and runneth long
time many great countries under earth.  And after it goeth out
under an high hill, that men clepe Alothe, that is between Ind and
Ethiopia the mountance of five months' journeys from the entry of
Ethiopia; and after it environeth all Ethiopia and Mauritania, and
goeth all along from the land of Egypt unto the city of Alexandria
to the end of Egypt, and there it falleth into the sea.  About this
river be many birds and fowls, as sikonies, that they clepen ibes.



CHAPTER VII



OF THE COUNTRY OF EGYPT; OF THE BIRD PHOENIX OF ARABIA; OF THE CITY
OF CAIRO; OF THE CUNNING TO KNOW BALM AND TO PROVE IT; AND OF THE
GARNERS OF JOSEPH


EGYPT is a long country, but it is straight, that is to say narrow,
for they may not enlarge it toward the desert for default of water.
And the country is set along upon the river of Nile, by as much as
that river may serve by floods or otherwise, that when it floweth
it may spread abroad through the country; so is the country large
of length.  For there it raineth not but little in that country,
and for that cause they have no water, but if it be of that flood
of that river.  And forasmuch as it ne raineth not in that country,
but the air is alway pure and clear, therefore in that country be
the good astronomers, for they find there no clouds to letten them.
Also the city of Cairo is right great and more huge than that of
Babylon the less, and it sitteth above toward the desert of Syria,
a little above the river above-said.

In Egypt there be two parts:  the height, that is toward Ethiopia,
and the lower, that is toward Arabia.  In Egypt is the land of
Rameses and the land of Goshen.  Egypt is a strong country, for it
hath many shrewd havens because of the great rocks that be strong
and dangerous to pass by.  And at Egypt, toward the east, is the
Red Sea, that dureth unto the city of Coston; and toward the west
is the country of Lybia, that is a full dry land and little of
fruit, for it is overmuch plenty of heat, and that land is clept
Fusthe.  And toward the part meridional is Ethiopia.  And toward
the north is the desert, that dureth unto Syria, and so is the
country strong on all sides.  And it is well a fifteen journeys of
length, and more than two so much of desert, and it is but two
journeys in largeness.  And between Egypt and Nubia it hath well a
twelve journeys of desert.  And men of Nubia be Christian, but they
be black as the Moors for great heat of the sun.

In Egypt there be five provinces:  that one is Sahythe; that other
Demeseer; another Resith, that is an isle in the Nile; another
Alexandria; and another the land of Damietta.  That city was wont
to be right strong, but it was twice won of the Christian men, and
therefore after that the Saracens beat down the walls; and with the
walls the tower thereof, the Saracens made another city more far
from the sea, and clept it the new Damietta; so that now no man
dwelleth at the rather town of Damietta.  At that city of Damietta
is one of the havens of Egypt; and at Alexandria is that other.
That is a full strong city, but there is no water to drink, but if
it come by conduit from Nile, that entereth into their cisterns;
and whoso stopped that water from them, they might not endure
there.  In Egypt there be but few forcelets or castles, because
that the country is so strong of himself.

At the deserts of Egypt was a worthy man, that was an holy hermit,
and there met with him a monster (that is to say, a monster is a
thing deformed against kind both of man or of beast or of anything
else, and that is clept a monster).  And this monster, that met
with this holy hermit, was as it had been a man, that had two horns
trenchant on his forehead; and he had a body like a man unto the
navel, and beneath he had the body like a goat.  And the hermit
asked him what he was.  And the monster answered him, and said he
was a deadly creature, such as God had formed, and dwelt in those
deserts in purchasing his sustenance.  And [he] besought the
hermit, that he would pray God for him, the which that came from
heaven for to save all mankind, and was born of a maiden and
suffered passion and death (as we well know) and by whom we live
and be.  And yet is the head with the two horns of that monster at
Alexandria for a marvel.

In Egypt is the city of Heliopolis, that is to say, the city of the
Sun.  In that city there is a temple, made round after the shape of
the Temple of Jerusalem.  The priests of that temple have all their
writings, under the date of the fowl that is clept phoenix; and
there is none but one in all the world.  And he cometh to burn
himself upon the altar of that temple at the end of five hundred
year; for so long he liveth.  And at the five hundred years' end,
the priests array their altar honestly, and put thereupon spices
and sulphur vif and other things that will burn lightly; and then
the bird phoenix cometh and burneth himself to ashes.  And the
first day next after, men find in the ashes a worm; and the second
day next after, men find a bird quick and perfect; and the third
day next after, he flieth his way.  And so there is no more birds
of that kind in all the world, but it alone, and truly that is a
great miracle of God.  And men may well liken that bird unto God,
because that there ne is no God but one; and also, that our Lord
arose from death to life the third day.  This bird men see often-
time fly in those countries; and he is not mickle more than an
eagle.  And he hath a crest of feathers upon his head more great
than the peacock hath; and is neck his yellow after colour of an
oriel that is a stone well shining, and his beak is coloured blue
as ind; and his wings be of purple colour, and his tail is barred
overthwart with green and yellow and red.  And he is a full fair
bird to look upon, against the sun, for he shineth full gloriously
and nobly.

Also in Egypt be gardens, that have trees and herbs, the which bear
fruits seven times in the year.  And in that land men find many
fair emeralds and enough; and therefore they be greater cheap.
Also when it raineth once in the summer in the land of Egypt, then
is all the country full of great mires.  Also at Cairo, that I
spake of before, sell men commonly both men and women of other laws
as we do here beasts in the market.  And there is a common house in
that city that is all full of small furnaces, and thither bring
women of the town their eyren of hens, of geese, and or ducks for
to be put into those furnaces.  And they that keep that house cover
them with heat of horse dung, without hen, goose or duck or any
other fowl.  And at the end of three weeks or of a month they come
again and take their chickens and flourish them and bring them
forth, so that all the country is full of them.  And so men do
there both winter and summer.

Also in that country and in others also, men find long apples to
sell, in their season, and men clepe them apples of Paradise; and
they be right sweet and of good savour.  And though ye cut them in
never so many gobbets or parts, overthwart or endlong, evermore ye
shall find in the midst the figure of the Holy Cross of our Lord
Jesu.  But they will rot within eight days, and for that cause men
may not carry of those apples to no far countries; of them men find
the mountance of a hundred in a basket, and they have great leaves
of a foot and a half of length, and they be convenably large.  And
men find there also the apple tree of Adam, that have a bite at one
of the sides; and there be also fig trees that bear no leaves, but
figs upon the small branches; and men clepe them figs of Pharaoh.

Also beside Cairo, without that city, is the field where balm
groweth; and it cometh out on small trees, that be none higher than
to a man's breeks' girdle, and they seem as wood that is of the
wild vine.  And in that field be seven wells, that our Lord Jesu
Christ made with one of his feet, when he went to play with other
children.  That field is not so well closed, but that men may enter
at their own list; but in that season that the balm is growing, men
put thereto good keeping, that no man dare be hardy to enter.

This balm groweth in no place, but only there.  And though that men
bring of the plants, for to plant in other countries, they grow
well and fair; but they bring forth no fructuous thing, and the
leaves of balm fall not.  And men cut the branches with a sharp
flintstone, or with a sharp bone, when men will go to cut them; for
whoso cut them with iron, it would destroy his virtue and his
nature.

And the Saracens crepe the wood ENONCH-BALSE, and the fruit, the
which is as cubebs, they clepe ABEBISSAM, and the liquor that
droppeth from the branches they clepe GUYBALSE.  And men make
always that balm to be tilled of the Christian men, or else it
would not fructify; as the Saracens say themselves, for it hath
been often-time proved.  Men say also, that the balm groweth in Ind
the more, in that desert where Alexander spake to the trees of the
sun and of the moon, but I have not seen it; for I have not been so
far above upward, because that there be too many perilous passages.

And wit ye well, that a man ought to take good keep for to buy
balm, but if he con know it right well, for he may right lightly be
deceived.  For men sell a gum, that men clepe turpentine, instead
of balm, and they put thereto a little balm for to give good odour.
And some put wax in oil of the wood of the fruit of balm, and say
that it is balm.  And some distil cloves of gilofre and of
spikenard of Spain and of other spices, that be well smelling; and
the liquor that goeth out thereof they clepe it balm, and they
think that they have balm, and they have none.  For the Saracens
counterfeit it by subtlety of craft for to deceive the Christian
men, as I have seen full many a time; and after them the merchants
and the apothecaries counterfeit it eft sones, and then it is less
worth, and a great deal worse.

But if it like you, I shall shew how ye shall know and prove, to
the end that ye shall not be deceived.  First ye shall well know,
that the natural balm is full clear, and of citron colour and
strongly smelling; and if it be thick, or red or black, it is
sophisticate, that is to say, counterfeited and made like it for
deceit.  And understand, that if ye will put a little balm in the
palm of your hand against the sun, if it be fine and good, ye ne
shall not suffer your hand against the heat of the sun.  Also take
a little balm with the point of a knife, and touch it to the fire,
and if it burn it is a good sign.  After take also a drop of balm,
and put it into a dish, or in a cup with milk of a goat, and if it
be natural balm anon it will take and beclippe the milk.  Or put a
drop of balm in clear water in a cup of silver or in a clear basin,
stir it well with the clear water; and if the balm be fine and of
his own kind, the water shall never trouble; and if the balm be
sophisticate, that is to say counterfeited, the water shall become
anon trouble; and also if the balm be fine it shall fall to the
bottom of the vessel, as though it were quicksilver, for the fine
balm is more heavy twice than is the balm that is sophisticate and
counterfeited.  Now I have spoken of balm.

And now also I shall speak of another thing that is beyond Babylon,
above the flood of the Nile, toward the desert between Africa and
Egypt; that is to say, of the garners of Joseph, that he let make
for to keep the grains for the peril of the dear years.  And they
be made of stone, full well made of masons' craft; of the which two
be marvellously great and high, and the tother ne be not so great.
And every garner hath a gate for to enter within, a little high
from the earth; for the land is wasted and fallen since the garners
were made.  And within they be all full of serpents.  And above the
garners without be many scriptures of diverse languages.  And some
men say, that they be sepultures of great lords, that were
sometime, but that is not true, for all the common rumour and
speech is of all the people there, both far and near, that they be
the garners of Joseph; and so find they in their scriptures, and in
their chronicles.  On the other part, if they were sepultures, they
should not be void within, ne they should have no gates for to
enter within; for ye may well know, that tombs and sepultures be
not made of such greatness, nor of such highness; wherefore it is
not to believe, that they be tombs or sepultures.

In Egypt also there be diverse languages and diverse letters, and
of other manner and condition than there be in other parts.  As I
shall devise you, such as they be, and the names how they clepe
them, to such intent, that ye may know the difference of them and
of others, - Athoimis, Bimchi, Chinok, Duram, Eni, Fin, Gomor,
Heket, Janny, Karacta, Luzanin, Miche, Naryn, Oldach, Pilon, Qyn,
Yron, Sichen, Thola, Urmron, Yph and Zarm, Thoit.



CHAPTER VIII



OF THE ISLE OF SICILY; OF THE WAY FROM BABYLON TO THE MOUNT SINAI;
OF THE CHURCH OF SAINT KATHERINE AND OF ALL THE MARVELS THERE


NOW will I return again, ere I proceed any further, for to declare
to you the other ways, that draw toward Babylon, where the sultan
himself dwelleth, that is at the entry of Egypt; for as much as
many folk go thither first and after that to the Mount Sinai, and
after return to Jerusalem, as I have said you here before.  For
they fulfil first the more long pilgrimage, and after return again
by the next ways, because that the more nigh way is the more
worthy, and that is Jerusalem; for no other pilgrimage is not like
in comparison to it.  But for to fulfil their pilgrimages more
easily and more sikerly, men go first the longer way rather than
the nearer way.

But whoso will go to Babylon by another way, more short from the
countries of the west that I have rehearsed before, or from other
countries next to them - then men go by France, by Burgundy and by
Lombardy.  It needeth not to tell you the names of the cities, nor
of the towns that be in that way, for the way is common, and it is
known of many nations.  And there be many havens [where] men take
the sea.  Some men take the sea at Genoa, some at Venice, and pass
by the sea Adriatic, that is clept the Gulf of Venice, that
departeth Italy and Greece on that side; and some go to Naples,
some to Rome, and from Rome to Brindisi and there they take the
sea, and in many other places where that havens be.  And men go by
Tuscany, by Campania, by Calabria, by Apulia, and by the hills of
Italy, by Corsica, by Sardinia, and by Sicily, that is a great isle
and a good.

In that isle of Sicily there is a manner of a garden, in the which
be many diverse fruits; and the garden is always green and
flourishing, all the seasons of the year as well in winter as in
summer.  That isle holds in compass about 350 French miles.  And
between Sicily and Italy there is not but a little arm of the sea,
that men clepe the Farde of Messina.  And Sicily is between the sea
Adriatic and the sea of Lombardy.  And from Sicily into Calabria is
but eight miles of Lombardy.

And in Sicily there is a manner of serpent, by the which men assay
and prove, whether their children be bastards or no, or of lawful
marriage:  for if they be born in right marriage, the serpents go
about them, and do them no harm, and if they be born in avoutry,
the serpents bite them and envenom them.  And thus many wedded men
prove if the children be their own.

Also in that isle is the Mount Etna, that men clepe Mount Gybelle,
and the volcanoes that be evermore burning.  And there be seven
places that burn and that cast out diverse flames and diverse
colour:  and by the changing of those flames, men of that country
know when it shall be dearth or good time, or cold or hot or moist
or dry, or in all other manners how the time shall be governed.
And from Italy unto the volcanoes ne is but twenty-five mile.  And
men say, that the volcanoes be ways of hell.

And whoso goeth by Pisa, if that men list to go that way, there is
an arm of the sea, where that men go to other havens in those
marches.  And then men pass by the isle of Greaf that is at Genoa.
And after arrive men in Greece at the haven of the city of Myrok,
or at the haven of Valone, or at the city of Duras; and there is a
Duke at Duras, or at other havens in those marches; and so men go
to Constantinople.  And after go men by water to the isle of Crete
and to the isle of Rhodes, and so to Cyprus, and so to Athens, and
from thence to Constantinople.  To hold the more right way by sea,
it is well a thousand eight hundred and four score mile of
Lombardy.  And after from Cyprus men go by sea, and leave Jerusalem
and all the country on the left hand, unto Egypt, and arrive at the
city of Damietta, that was wont to be full strong, and it sits at
the entry of Egypt.  And from Damietta go men to the city of
Alexandria, that sits also upon the sea.  In that city was Saint
Catherine beheaded:  and there was Saint Mark the evangelist
martyred and buried, but the Emperor Leo made his bones to be
brought to Venice.

And yet there is at Alexandria a fair church, all white without
paintures; and so be all the other churches that were of the
Christian men, all white within, for the Paynims and the Saracens
made them white for to fordo the images of saints that were painted
on the walls.  That city of Alexandria is well thirty furlongs in
length, but it is but ten on largeness; and it is a full noble city
and a fair.  At that city entereth the river of Nile into the sea,
as I to you have said before.  In that river men find many precious
stones, and much also of lignum aloes; and it is a manner of wood,
that cometh out of Paradise terrestrial, the which is good for many
diverse medicines, and it is right dear-worth.  And from Alexandria
men go to Babylon, where the sultan dwelleth; that sits also upon
the river of Nile:  and this way is the most short, for to go
straight unto Babylon.

Now shall I say you also the way, that goeth from Babylon to the
Mount of Sinai, where Saint Catherine lieth.  He must pass by the
deserts of Arabia, by the which deserts Moses led the people of
Israel.  And then pass men by the well that Moses made with his
hand in the deserts, when the people grucched; for they found
nothing to drink.  And then pass men by the Well of Marah, of the
which the water was first bitter; but the children of Israel put
therein a tree, and anon the water was sweet and good for to drink.
And then go men by desert unto the vale of Elim, in the which vale
be twelve wells; and there be seventy-two trees of palm, that bear
the dates the which Moses found with the children of Israel.  And
from that valley is but a good journey to the Mount of Sinai.

And whoso will go by another way from Babylon, then men go by the
Red Sea, that is an arm of the sea Ocean.  And there passed Moses
with the children of Israel, over-thwart the sea all dry, when
Pharaoh the King of Egypt chased them.  And that sea is well a six
mile of largeness in length; and in that sea was Pharaoh drowned
and all his host that he led.  That sea is not more red than
another sea; but in some place thereof is the gravel red, and
therefore men clepen it the Red Sea.  That sea runneth to the ends
of Arabia and of Palestine.

That sea lasteth more than a four journeys, and then go men by
desert unto the Vale of Elim, and from thence to the Mount of
Sinai.  And ye may well understand, that by this desert no man may
go on horseback, because that there ne is neither meat for horse ne
water to drink; and for that cause men pass that desert with
camels.  For the camel finds alway meat in trees and on bushes,
that he feedeth him with:  and he may well fast from drink two days
or three.  And that may no horse do.

And wit well that from Babylon to the Mount Sinai is well a twelve
good journeys, and some men make them more.  And some men hasten
them and pain them, and therefore they make them less.  And always
men find latiners to go with them in the countries, and further
beyond, into time that men con the language:  and it behoveth men
to bear victuals with them, that shall dure them in those deserts,
and other necessaries for to live by.

And the Mount of Sinai is clept the Desert of Sin, that is for to
say, the bush burning; because there Moses saw our Lord God many
times in the form of fire burning upon that hill, and also in a
bush burning, and spake to him.  And that was at the foot of the
hill.  There is an abbey of monks, well builded and well closed
with gates of iron for dread of the wild beasts; and the monks be
Arabians or men of Greece.  And there [is] a great convent, and all
they be as hermits, and they drink no wine, but if it be on
principal feasts; and they be full devout men, and live poorly and
simply with joutes and with dates, and they do great abstinence and
penances.

There is the Church of Saint Catherine, in the which be many lamps
burning; for they have of oil of olives enough, both for to burn in
their lamps and to eat also.  And that plenty have they by the
miracle of God; for the ravens and the crows and the choughs and
other fowls of the country assemble them there every year once, and
fly thither as in pilgrimage; and everych of them bringeth a branch
of the bays or of olive in their beaks instead of offering, and
leave them there; of the which the monks make great plenty of oil.
And this is a great marvel.  And sith that fowls that have no
kindly wit or reason go thither to seek that glorious Virgin, well
more ought men then to seek her, and to worship her.

Also behind the altar of that church is the place where Moses saw
our Lord God in a burning bush.  And when the monks enter into that
place, they do off both hosen and shoon or boots always, because
that our Lord said to Moses, Do off thy hosen and thy shoon, for
the place that thou standest on is land holy and blessed.  And the
monks clepe that place Dozoleel, that is to say, the shadow of God.
And beside the high altar, three degrees of height is the fertre of
alabaster, where the bones of Saint Catherine lie.  And the prelate
of the monks sheweth the relics to the pilgrims, and with an
instrument of silver he froteth the bones; and then there goeth out
a little oil, as though it were a manner sweating, that is neither
like to oil ne to balm, but it is full sweet of smell; and of that
they give a little to the pilgrims, for there goeth out but little
quantity of the liquor.  And after that they shew the head of Saint
Catherine, and the cloth that she was wrapped in, that is yet all
bloody; and in that same cloth so wrapped, the angels bare her body
to the Mount Sinai, and there they buried her with it.  And then
they shew the bush, that burned and wasted nought, in the which our
Lord spake to Moses, and other relics enough.

Also, when the prelate of the abbey is dead, I have understood, by
information, that his lamp quencheth.  And when they choose another
prelate, if he be a good man and worthy to be prelate, his lamp
shall light with the grace of God without touching of any man.  For
everych of them hath a lamp by himself, and by their lamps they
know well when any of them shall die.  For when any shall die, the
light beginneth to change and to wax dim; and if he be chosen to be
prelate, and is not worthy, his lamp quencheth anon.  And other men
have told me, that he that singeth the mass for the prelate that is
dead - he shall find upon the altar the name written of him that
shall be prelate chosen.  And so upon a day, I asked of the monks,
both one and other, how this befell.  But they would not tell me
nothing, into the time that I said that they should not hide the
grace that God did them, but that they should publish it to make
the people have the more devotion, and that they did sin to hide
God's miracle, as me seemed.  For the miracles that God hath done
and yet doth every day, be the witness of his might and of his
marvels, as David saith in the Psalter:  MIRABILIA TESTIMONIA TUA,
DOMINE, that is to say, 'Lord thy marvels be thy witness.'  And
then they told me, both one and other, how it befell full many a
time, but more I might not have of them.

In that abbey ne entereth not no fly, ne toads ne newts, ne such
foul venomous beasts, ne lice ne fleas, by the miracle of God, and
of our Lady.  For there were wont to be so many such manner of
filths, that the monks were in will to leave the place and the
abbey, and were from thence upon the mountain above to eschew that
place; and our Lady came to them and bade them turn again, and from
thence forwards never entered such filth in that place amongst
them, ne never shall enter hereafter.  Also, before the gate is the
well, where Moses smote the stone, of the which the water came out
plenteously.

From that abbey men go up the mountain of Moses, by many degrees.
And there men find first a church of our Lady, where that she met
the monks, when they fled away for the vermin above-said.  And more
high upon that mountain is the chapel of Elijah the prophet; and
that place they clepe Horeb, whereof holy writ speaketh, ET
AMBULAVIT IN FORTITUDINE CIBI ILLIUS USQUE, AD MONTEM OREB; that is
to say, 'And he went in strength of that meat unto the hill of God,
Horeb.'  And there nigh is the vine that Saint John the Evangelist
planted that men clepe raisins of Staphis.  And a little above is
the chapel of Moses, and the rock where Moses fled to for dread
when he saw our Lord face to face.  And in that rock is printed the
form of his body, for he smote so strongly and so hard himself in
that rock, that all his body was dolven within through the miracle
of God.  And there beside is the place where our Lord took to Moses
the Ten Commandments of the Law.  And there is the cave under the
rock where Moses dwelt, when he fasted forty days and forty nights.
But he died in the Land of Promission, and no man knoweth where he
was buried.  And from that mountain men pass a great valley for to
go to another mountain, where Saint Catherine was buried of the
angels of the Lord.  And in that valley is a church of forty
martyrs, and there sing the monks of the abbey, often-time:  and
that valley is right cold.  And after men go up the mountain of
Saint Catherine, that is more high than the mount of Moses; and
there, where Saint Catherine was buried, is neither church nor
chapel, nor other dwelling place, but there is an heap of stones
about the place, where body of her, was put of the angels.  There
was wont to be a chapel, but it was cast down, and yet lie the
stones there.  And albeit that the Collect of Saint Catherine says,
that it is the place where our Lord betaught the Ten Commandments
to Moses, and there, where the blessed Virgin Saint Catherine was
buried, that is to understand in one country, or in one place
bearing one name; for both that one and that other is clept the
mount of Sinai.  But it is a great way from that one to that other,
and a great deep valley between them.



CHAPTER IX



OF THE DESERT BETWEEN THE CHURCH OF SAINT CATHERINE AND JERUSALEM.
OF THE DRY TREE; AND HOW ROSES CAME FIRST INTO THE WORLD


NOW, after that men have visited those holy places, then will they
turn toward Jerusalem.  And then will they take leave of the monks,
and recommend themselves to their prayers.  And then they give the
pilgrims of their victuals for to pass with the deserts toward
Syria.  And those deserts dure well a thirteen journeys.

In that desert dwell many of Arabians, that men clepe Bedouins and
Ascopards, and they be folk full of all evil conditions.  And they
have none houses, but tents, that they make of skins of beasts, as
of camels and of other beasts that they eat; and there beneath
these they couch them and dwell in place where they may find water,
as on the Red Sea or elsewhere:  for in that desert is full great
default of water, and often-time it falleth that where men find
water at one time in a place it faileth another time; and for that
skill they make none habitations there.  These folk that I speak
of, they till not the land, and they labour nought; for they eat no
bread, but if it be any that dwell nigh a good town, that go
thither and eat bread sometime.  And they roast their flesh and
their fish upon the hot stones against the sun.  And they be strong
men and well-fighting; and there so is much multitude of that folk,
that they be without number.  And they ne reck of nothing, ne do
not but chase after beasts to eat them.  And they reck nothing of
their life, and therefore they fear not the sultan, ne no other
prince; but they dare well war with them, if they do anything that
is grievance to them.  And they have often-times war with the
sultan, and, namely, that time that I was with him.  And they bear
but one shield and one spear, without other arms; and they wrap
their heads and their necks with a great quantity of white linen
cloth; and they be right felonous and foul, and of cursed kind.

And when men pass this desert, in coming toward Jerusalem, they
come to Bersabe (Beersheba), that was wont to be a full fair town
and a delectable of Christian men; and yet there be some of their
churches.  In that town dwelled Abraham the patriarch, a long time.
That town of Bersabe founded Bersabe (Bathsheba), the wife of Sir
Uriah the Knight, on the which King David gat Solomen the Wise,
that was king after David upon the twelve kindreds of Jerusalem and
reigned forty year.

And from thence go men to the city of Hebron, that is the mountance
of twelve good mile.  And it was clept sometime the Vale of Mamre,
and some-time it was clept the Vale of Tears, because that Adam
wept there an hundred year for the death of Abel his son, that Cain
slew.  Hebron was wont to be the principal city of the Philistines,
and there dwelled some time the giants.  And that city was also
sacerdotal, that is to say, sanctuary of the tribe of Judah; and it
was so free, that men received there all manner of fugitives of
other places for their evil deeds.  In Hebron Joshua, Caleb and
their company came first to aspy, how they might win the land of
Behest.  In Hebron reigned first king David seven year and a half;
and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three year and a half.

And in Hebron be all the sepultures of the patriarchs, Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, and of Jacob; and of their wives, Eve, Sarah and
Rebecca, and of Leah; the which sepultures the Saracens keep full
curiously, and have the place in great reverence for the holy
fathers, the patriarchs that lie there.  And they suffer no
Christian man to enter into that place, but if it be of special
grace of the sultan; for they hold Christian men and Jews as dogs,
and they say, that they should not enter into so holy place.  And
men clepe that place, where they lie, Double Spelunk, or Double
Cave, or Double Ditch, forasmuch as that one lieth above that
other.  And the Saracens clepe that place in their language,
KARICARBA, that is to say, 'The Place of Patriarchs.'  And the Jews
clepe that place ARBOTH.  And in that same place was Abraham's
house, and there he sat and saw three persons, and worshipped but
one; as holy writ saith, TRES VIDIT ET UNUM ADORAVIT, that is to
say, 'He saw three and worshipped one':  and of those same received
Abraham the angels into his house.

And right fast by that place is a cave in the rock, where Adam and
Eve dwelled when they were put out of Paradise; and there got they
their children.  And in that same place was Adam formed and made,
after that some men say:  (for men were wont for to clepe that
place the field of Damascus, because that it was in the lordship of
Damascus), and from thence was he translated into Paradise of
delights, as they say; and after that he was driven out of Paradise
he was there left.  And the same day that he was put in Paradise,
the same day he was put out, for anon he sinned.  There beginneth
the Vale of Hebron, that dureth nigh to Jerusalem.  There the angel
commanded Adam that he should dwell with his wife Eve, of the which
he gat Seth; of which tribe, that is to say kindred, Jesu Christ
was born.

In that valley is a field, where men draw out of the earth a thing
that men clepe cambile, and they eat it instead of spices, and they
bear it to sell.  And men may not make the hole or the cave, where
it is taken out of the earth, so deep or so wide, but that it is,
at the year's end, full again up to the sides, through the grace of
God.

And two mile from Hebron is the grave of Lot, that was Abraham's
brother.

And a little from Hebron is the mount of Mamre, of the which the
valley taketh his name.  And there is a tree of oak, that the
Saracens clepe DIRPE, that is of Abraham's time:  the which men
clepe the Dry Tree.  And they say that it hath been there since the
beginning of the world, and was some-time green and bare leaves,
unto the time that our Lord died on the cross, and then it dried:
and so did all the trees that were then in the world.  And some
say, by their prophecies, that a lord, a prince of the west side of
the world, shall win the Land of Promission that is the Holy Land
with help of Christian men, and he shall do sing a mass under that
dry tree; and then the tree shall wax green and bear both fruit and
leaves, and through that miracle many Saracens and Jews shall be
turned to Christian faith:  and, therefore, they do great worship
thereto, and keep it full busily.  And, albeit so, that it be dry,
natheles yet he beareth great virtue, for certainly he that hath a
little thereof upon him, it healeth him of the falling evil, and
his horse shall not be a-foundered:  and many other virtues it
hath; wherefore men hold it full precious.

From Hebron men go to Bethlehem in half a day, for it is but five
mile; and it is full fair way, by plains and woods full delectable.
Bethlehem is a little city, long and narrow and well walled, and in
each side enclosed with good ditches:  and it was wont to be clept
Ephrata, as holy writ saith, ECCE, AUDIVIMUS EUM IN EPHRATA, that
is to say, 'Lo, we heard him in Ephrata.'  And toward the east end
of the city is a full fair church and a gracious, and it hath many
towers, pinacles and corners, full strong and curiously made; and
within that church be forty-four pillars of marble, great and fair.

And between the city and the church is the field FLORIDUS, that is
to say, the 'field flourished.'  For as much as a fair maiden was
blamed with wrong, and slandered that she had done fornication; for
which cause she was demned to death, and to be burnt in that place,
to the which she was led.  And, as the fire began to burn about
her, she made her prayers to our Lord, that as wisely as she was
not guilty of that sin, that he would help her and make it to be
known to all men, of his merciful grace.  And when she had thus
said, she entered into the fire, and anon was the fire quenched and
out; and the brands that were burning became red rose-trees, and
the brands that were not kindled became white rose-trees, full of
roses.  And these were the first rose-trees and roses, both white
and red, that ever any man saw; and thus was this maiden saved by
the grace of God.  And therefore is that field clept the field of
God flourished, for it was full of roses.

Also beside the choir of the church, at the right side, as men come
downward sixteen degrees, is the place where our Lord was born,
that is full well dight of marble, and full richly painted with
gold, silver, azure and other colours.  And three paces beside is
the crib of the ox and the ass.  And beside that is the place where
the star fell, that led the three kings, Jaspar, Melchior and
Balthazar:  but men of Greece clepe them thus, GALGALATH,
MALGALATH, and SERAPHIE, and the Jews clepe them, in this manner,
in Hebrew, APPELIUS, AMERRIUS, and DAMASUS.  These three kings
offered to our Lord, gold, incense and myrrh, and they met together
through miracle of God; for they met together in a city in Ind,
that men clepe Cassak, that is a fifty-three journeys from
Bethlehem; and they were at Bethlehem the thirteenth day; and that
was the fourth day after that they had seen the star, when they met
in that city, and thus they were in nine days from that city at
Bethlehem, and that was great miracle.

Also, under the cloister of the church, by eighteen degrees at the
right side, is the charnel of the Innocents, where their bones lie.
And before the place where our Lord was born is the tomb of Saint
Jerome, that was a priest and a cardinal, that translated the Bible
and the Psalter from Hebrew into Latin:  and without the minster is
the chair that he sat in when he translated it.  And fast beside
that church, a sixty fathom, is a church of Saint Nicholas, where
our Lady rested her after she was lighted of our Lord; and
forasmuch as she had too much milk in her paps, that grieved her,
she milked them on the red stones of marble, so that the traces may
yet be seen, in the stones, all white.

And ye shall understand, that all that dwell in Bethlehem be
Christian men.

And there be fair vines about the city, and great plenty of wine,
that the Christian men have do let make.  But the Saracens ne till
not no vines, ne they drink no wine:  for their books of their law,
that Mahomet betoke them, which they clepe their AL KORAN, and some
crepe it MESAPH, and in another language it is clept HARME, and the
same book forbiddeth them to drink wine.  For in that book, Mahomet
cursed all those that drink wine and all them that sell it:  for
some men say, that he slew once an hermit in his drunkenness, that
he loved full well; and therefore he cursed wine and them that
drink it.  But his curse be turned on to his own head, as holy writ
saith, ET IN VIRTICEM IPSIUS INIQUITAS EJUS DESCENDET, that is for
to say, 'His wickedness shall turn and fall in his own head.'

And also the Saracens bring forth no pigs, nor they eat no swine's
flesh, for they say it is brother to man, and it was forbidden by
the old law; and they hold him all accursed that eat thereof.  Also
in the land of Palestine and in the land of Egypt, they eat but
little or none of flesh of veal or of beef, but if be so old, that
he may no more travel for old; for it is forbidden, and for because
they have but few of them; therefore they nourish them for to ere
their lands.

In this city of Bethlehem was David the king born; and he had sixty
wives, and the first wife was called Michal; and also he had three
hundred lemans.

And from Bethlehem unto Jerusalem is but two mile; and in the way
to Jerusalem half a mile from Bethlehem is a church, where the
angel said to the shepherds of the birth of Christ.  And in that
way is the tomb of Rachel, that was Joseph's mother, the patriarch;
and she died anon after that she was delivered of her son Benjamin.
And there she was buried of Jacob her husband, and he let set
twelve great stones on her, in token that she had born twelve
children.  In the same way, half mile from Jerusalem, appeared the
star to the three kings.  In that way also be many churches of
Christian men, by the which men go towards the city of Jerusalem.



CHAPTER X



OF THE PILGRIMAGES IN JERUSALEM, AND OF THE HOLY PLACES THEREABOUT


AFTER, for to speak of Jerusalem the holy city:  ye shall
understand, that it stands full fair between hills, and there be no
rivers ne wells, but water cometh by conduit from Hebron.  And ye
shall understand, that Jerusalem of old time, unto the time of
Melchisadech, was clept Jebus; and after it was clept Salem, unto
the time of King David, that put these two names together, and
clept it Jebusalem; and after that, King Solomon clept it
Jerosolomye; and after that, men clept it Jerusalem, and so it is
clept yet.

And about Jerusalem is the kingdom of Syria.  And there beside is
the land of Palestine, and beside it is Ascalon, and beside that is
the land of Maritaine.  But Jerusalem is in the land of Judea, and
it is clept Judea, for that Judas Maccabeus was king of that
country; and it marcheth eastward to the kingdom of Arabia; on the
south side to the land of Egypt; and on the west side to the Great
Sea; on the north side, towards the kingdom of Syria and to the sea
of Cyprus.  In Jerusalem was wont to be a patriarch; and
archbishops and bishops about in the country.  About Jerusalem be
these cities:  Hebron, at seven mile; Jericho, at six mile;
Beersheba, at eight mile; Ascalon, at seventeen mile; Jaffa, at
sixteen mile; Ramath, at three mile; and Bethlehem, at two mile.
And a two mile from Bethlehem, toward the south, is the Church of
St. Karitot, that was abbot there, for whom they made much dole
amongst the monks when he should die; and yet they be in mourning
in the wise that they made their lamentation for him the first
time; and it is full great pity to behold.

This country and land of Jerusalem hath been in many divers
nations' hands, and often, therefore, hath the country suffered
much tribulation for the sin of the people that dwell there.  For
that country hath been in the hands of all nations; that is to say,
of Jews, of Canaanites, Assyrians, Persians, Medes, Macedonians, of
Greeks, Romans, of Christian men, of Saracens, Barbarians, Turks,
Tartars, and of many other divers nations; for God will not that it
be long in the hands of traitors ne of sinners, be they Christian
or other.  And now have the heathen men held that land in their
hands forty year and more; but they shall not hold it long, if God
will.

And ye shall understand, that when men come to Jerusalem, their
first pilgrimage is to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, where our
Lord was buried, that is without the city on the north side; but it
is now enclosed in with the town wall.  And there is a full fair
church, all round, and open above, and covered with lead; and on
the west side is a fair tower and an high for bells, strongly made.

And in the midst of the church is a tabernacle, as it were a little
house, made with a low little door, and that tabernacle is made in
manner of half a compass, right curiously and richly made of gold
and azure and other rich colours full nobly made.  And in the right
side of that tabernacle is the sepulchre of our Lord; and the
tabernacle is eight foot long, and five foot wide, and eleven foot
in height.  And it is not long sith the sepulchre was all open,
that men might kiss it and touch it; but for pilgrims that came
thither pained them to break the stone in pieces or in powder,
therefore the soldan hath do make a wall about the sepulchre that
no man may touch it:  but in the left side of the wall of the
tabernacle is, well the height of a man, a great stone to the
quantity of a man's head, that was of the holy sepulchre; and that
stone kiss the pilgrims that come thither.  In that tabernacle be
no windows, but it is all made light with lamps that hang before
the sepulchre.  And there is a lamp that hangeth before the
sepulchre, that burneth light; and on the Good Friday it goeth out
by himself, [and lighteth again by him self] at that hour that our
Lord rose from death to life.

Also within the church, at the right side, beside the choir of the
church, is the mount of Calvary, where our Lord was put on the
cross; and it is a rock of white colour and a little medled with
red.  And the cross was set in a mortise in the same rock.  And on
that rock dropped the wounds of our Lord when he was pined on the
cross.  And that is clept Golgotha.

And men go up to that Golgotha by degrees; and in the place of that
mortise was Adam's head found after Noah's flood, in token that the
sins of Adam should be bought in that same place.  And upon that
rock made Abraham sacrifice to our Lord.  And there is an altar;
and before that altar lie Godefray de Bouillon and Baldwin, and
other Christian kings of Jerusalem.

And there, nigh where our Lord was crucified, is this written in
Greek:

[Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

that is to say, in Latin, -

DEUS REX NOSTER ANTE SECULA OPERATUS EST SALUTEM, IN MEDIO TERRAE;

that is to say, -

THIS GOD OUR KING, BEFORE THE WORLDS, HATH WROUGHT HEALTH IN MIDST
OF THE EARTH.

And also on that rock, where the cross was set, is written within
the rock these words:

[Greek text which cannot be reproduced]

that is to say, in Latin, -

QUOD VIDES, EST FUNDAMENTUM TOTIUS FIDEI MUNDI HUJUS;

that is to say, -

THAT THOU SEEST, IS THE GROUND OF ALL THE FAITH OF THIS WORLD.

And ye shall understand, that when our Lord was done upon the
cross, he was thirty-three year and three months of old.  And the
prophecy of David saith thus:  QUADRAGINTA ANNIS PROXIMUS FUI
GENERATIONI HUIC; that is to say, 'Forty year was I neighbour to
this kindred.'  And thus should it seem that the prophecies were
not true.  But they be both true; for in old time men made a year
of ten months, of the which March was the first and December was
the last.  But Gaius, that was Emperor of Rome, put these two
months thereto, January and February, and ordained the year of
twelve months; that is to say, 365 days, without leap year, after
the proper course of the sun.  And therefore after counting of ten
months of the year, he died in the fortieth year, as the prophet
said.  And after the year of twelve months, he was of age thirty-
three year and three months.

Also, within the mount of Calvary, on the right side, is an altar,
where the pillar lieth that our Lord Jesu was bounden to when he
was scourged.  And there beside be four pillars of stone, that
always drop water; and some men say that they weep for our Lord's
death.  And nigh that altar is a place under earth forty-two
degrees of deepness, where the holy cross was found, by the wit of
Saint Helen, under a rock where the Jews had hid it.  And that was
the very cross assayed; for they found three crosses, one of our
Lord, and two of the two thieves; and Saint Helen proved them by a
dead body that arose from death to life, when that it was laid on
it, that our Lord died on.  And thereby in the wall is the place
where the four nails of our Lord were hid:  for he had two in his
hands and two in his feet.  And, of one of these, the Emperor of
Constantinople made a bridle to his horse to bear him in battle;
and, through virtue thereof, he overcame his enemies, and won all
the land of Asia the less, that is to say, Turkey, Armenia the less
and the more, and from Syria to Jerusalem, from Arabia to Persia,
from Mesopotamia to the kingdom of Aleppo, from Egypt the high and
the low and all the other kingdoms unto the depth of Ethiopia, and
into Ind the less that then was Christian.

And there were in that time many good holy men and holy hermits, of
whom the book of Father's lives speaketh, and they be now in
Paynims' and Saracens' hands:  but when God Almighty will, right as
the lands ere lost through sin of Christian men, so shall they be
won again by Christian men through help of God.

And in midst of that church is a compass, in the which Joseph of
Arimathea laid the body of our Lord when he had taken him down off
the cross; and there he washed the wounds of our Lord.  And that
compass, say men, is the midst of the world.

And in the church of the sepulchre, on the north side, is the place
where our Lord was put in prison (for he was in prison in many
places); and there is a part of the chain that he was bounden with;
and there he appeared first to Mary Magdalene when he was risen,
and she wend that he had been a gardener.

In the church of Saint Sepulchre was wont to be canons of the order
of Saint Augustine, and had a prior, but the patriarch was their
sovereign.

And without the doors of the church, on the right side as men go
upward eighteen grees, said our Lord to his mother, MULIER, ECCE
FILIUS TUUS; that is to say, Woman, lo! thy Son!  And after that he
said to John, his disciple, ECCE MATER TUA; that is to say, Lo!
behold thy mother!  And these words he said on the cross.  And on
these grees went our Lord when he bare the cross on his shoulder.
And under these grees is a chapel, and in that chapel sing priests,
Indians, that is to say, priests of Ind, not after our law, but
after theirs; and alway they make their sacrament of the altar,
saying, PATER NOSTER and other prayers therewith; with the which
prayers they say the words that the sacrament is made of, for they
ne know not the additions that many popes have made; but they sing
with good devotion.  And there near, is the place where that our
Lord rested him when he was weary for bearing of the cross.

And ye shall understand that before the church of the sepulchre is
the city more feeble than in any other part, for the great plain
that is between the church and the city.  And toward the east side,
without the walls of the city, is the vale of Jehosaphat that
toucheth to the walls as though it were a large ditch.  And above
that vale of Jehosaphat, out of the city, is the church of Saint
Stephen where he was stoned to death.  And there beside, is the
Golden Gate, that may not be opened, by the which gate our Lord
entered on Palm-Sunday upon an ass:  and the gate opened against
him when he would go unto the temple; and yet appear the steps of
the ass's feet in three places of the degrees that be of full hard
stone.

And before the church of Saint Sepulchre, toward the south, at 200
paces, is the great hospital of Saint John, of which the
hospitallers had their foundation.  And within the palace of the
sick men of that hospital be 124 pillars of stone.  And in the
walls of the house, without the number above-said, there be fifty-
four pillars that bear up the house.  And from that hospital to go
toward the east is a full fair church, that is clept NOTRE DAME LA
GRANDE.  And then is there another church right nigh, that is clept
NOTRE DAME DE LATINE.  And there were Mary Cleophas and Mary
Magdalene, and tore their hair when our Lord was pained in the
cross.



CHAPTER XI



OF THE TEMPLE OF OUR LORD.  OF THE CRUELTY OF KING HEROD.  OF THE
MOUNT SION.  OF PROBATICA PISCINA; AND OF NATATORIUM SILOE


AND from the church of the sepulchre, toward the east, at eight
score paces, is TEMPLUM DOMINI.  It is right a fair house, and it
is all round and high, and covered with lead.  And it is well paved
with white marble.  But the Saracens will not suffer no Christian
man ne Jews to come therein, for they say that none so foul sinful
men should not come in so holy place:  but I came in there and in
other places there I would, for I had letters of the soldan with
his great seal, and commonly other men have but his signet.  In the
which letters he commanded, of his special grace, to all his
subjects, to let me see all the places, and to inform me pleinly
all the mysteries of every place, and to conduct me from city to
city, if it were need, and buxomly to receive me and my company,
and for to obey to all my requests reasonable if they were not
greatly against the royal power and dignity of the soldan or of his
law.  And to others, that ask him grace, such as have served him,
he ne giveth not but his signet, the which they make to be borne
before them hanging on a spear.  And the folk of the country do
great worship and reverence to his signet or seal, and kneel
thereto as lowly as we do to CORPUS DOMINI.  And yet men do full
greater reverence to his letters; for the admiral and all other
lords that they be shewed to, before or they receive them, they
kneel down; and then they take them and put them on their heads;
and after, they kiss them and then they read them, kneeling with
great reverence; and then they offer them to do all that the bearer
asketh.

And in this TEMPLUM DOMINI were some-time canons regulars, and they
had an abbot to whom they were obedient; and in this temple was
Charlemagne when that the angel brought him the prepuce of our Lord
Jesus Christ of his circumcision; and after, King Charles let bring
it to Paris into his chapel, and after that he let bring it to
Peyteres, and after that to Chartres.

And ye shall understand, that this is not the temple that Solomon
made, for that temple dured not but 1102 year.  For Titus,
Vespasian's son, Emperor of Rome, had laid siege about Jerusalem
for to discomfit the Jews; for they put our Lord to death, without
leave of the emperor.  And, when he had won the city, he burnt the
temple and beat it down, and all the city, and took the Jews and
did them to death - 1,100,000; and the others he put in prison and
sold them to servage, - thirty for one penny; for they said they
bought Jesu for thirty pennies, and he made of them better cheap
when he gave thirty for one penny.

And after that time, Julian Apostate, that was emperor, gave leave
to the Jews to make the temple of Jerusalem, for he hated Christian
men.  And yet he was christened, but he forsook his law, and became
a renegade.  And when the Jews had made the temple, came an
earthquaking, and cast it down (as God would) and destroyed all
that they had made.

And after that, Adrian, that was Emperor of Rome, and of the
lineage of Troy, made Jerusalem again and the temple in the same
manner as Solomon made it.  And he would not suffer no Jews to
dwell there, but only Christian men.  For although it were so that
he was not christened, yet he loved Christian men more than any
other nation save his own.  This emperor let enclose the church of
Saint Sepulchre, and walled it within the city; that, before, was
without the city, long time before.  And he would have changed the
name of Jerusalem, and have clept it Aelia; but that name lasted
not long.

Also, ye shall understand, that the Saracens do much reverence to
that temple, and they say, that that place is right holy.  And when
they go in they go bare-foot, and kneel many times.  And when my
fellows and I saw that, when we came in we did off our shoes and
came in bare-foot, and thought that we should do as much worship
and reverence thereto, as any of the misbelieving men should, and
as great compunction in heart to have.

This temple is sixty-four cubits of wideness, and as many in
length; and of height it is six score cubits.  And it is within,
all about, made with pillars of marble.  And in the middle place of
the temple be many high stages, of fourteen degrees of height, made
with good pillars all about:  and this place the Jews call SANCTA
SANCTORUM; that is to say, 'Holy of Hallows.'  And, in that place,
cometh no man save only their prelate, that maketh their sacrifice.
And the folk stand all about, in diverse stages, after they be of
dignity or of worship, so that they all may see the sacrifice.  And
in that temple be four entries, and the gates be of cypress, well
made and curiously dight:  and within the east gate our Lord said,
'Here is Jerusalem.'  And in the north side of that temple, within
the gate, there is a well, but it runneth nought, of the which holy
writ speaketh of and saith, VIDI AQUAM EGREDIENTEM DE TEMPLO; that
is to say, 'I saw water come out of the temple.'

And on that other side of the temple there is a rock that men clepe
Moriach, but after it was clept Bethel, where the ark of God with
relics of Jews were wont to be put.  That ark or hutch with the
relics Titus led with him to Rome, when he had discomfited all the
Jews.  In that ark were the Ten Commandments, and of Aaron's yard,
and Moses' yard with the which he made the Red Sea depart, as it
had been a wall, on the right side and on the left side, whiles
that the people of Israel passed the sea dry-foot:  and with that
yard he smote the rock, and the water came out of it:  and with
that yard he did many wonders.  And therein was a vessel of gold
full of manna, and clothing and ornaments and the tabernacle of
Aaron, and a tabernacle square of gold with twelve precious stones,
and a box of jasper green with four figures and eight names of our
Lord, and seven candlesticks of gold, and twelve pots of gold, and
four censers of gold, and an altar of gold, and four lions of gold
upon the which they bare cherubin of gold twelve spans long, and
the circle of swans of heaven with a tabernacle of gold and a table
of silver, and two trumps of silver, and seven barley loaves and
all the other relics that were before the birth of our Lord Jesu
Christ.

And upon that rock was Jacob sleeping when he saw the angels go up
and down by a ladder, and he said, VERE LOCUS ISTE SANCTUS EST, ET
EGO IGNORABAM; that is to say, 'Forsooth this place is holy, and I
wist it nought.'  And there an angel held Jacob still, and turned
his name, and clept him Israel.  And in that same place David saw
the angel that smote the folk with a sword, and put it up bloody in
the sheath.  And in that same rock was Saint Simeon when he
received our Lord into the temple.  And in this rock he set him
when the Jews would have stoned him; and a star came down and gave
him light.  And upon that rock preached our Lord often-time to the
people.  And out that said temple our Lord drove out the buyers and
the sellers.  And upon that rock our Lord set him when the Jews
would have stoned him; and the rock clave in two, and in that
cleaving was our Lord hid, and there came down a star and gave
light and served him with clarity.  And upon that rock sat our
Lady, and learned her psalter.  And there our Lord forgave the
woman her sins, that was found in avowtry.  And there was our Lord
circumcised.  And there the angels shewed tidings to Zacharias of
the birth of Saint Baptist his son.  And there offered first
Melchisadech bread and wine to our Lord, in token of the sacrament
that was to come.  And there fell David praying to our Lord and to
the angel that smote the people, that he would have mercy on him
and on the people:  and our Lord heard his prayer, and therefore
would he make the temple in that place, but our Lord forbade him by
an angel; for he had done treason when he let slay Uriah the worthy
knight, for to have Bathsheba his wife.  And therefore, all the
purveyance that he had ordained to make the temple with he took it
Solomon his son, and he made it.  And he prayed our Lord, that all
those that prayed to him in that place with good heart - that he
would hear their prayer and grant it them if they asked it
rightfully:  and our Lord granted it him, and therefore Solomon
clept that temple the Temple of Counsel and of Help of God.

And without the gate of that temple is an altar where Jews were in
wont to offer doves and turtles.  And between the temple and that
altar was Zacharias slain.  And upon the pinnacle of that temple
was our Lord brought for to be tempted of the enemy, the fiend.
And on the height of that pinnacle the Jews set Saint James, and
cast him down to the earth, that first was Bishop of Jerusalem.
And at the entry of that temple, toward the west, is the gate that
is clept PORTA SPECIOSA.  And nigh beside that temple, upon the
right side, is a church, covered with lead, that is clept Solomon's
School.

And from that temple towards the south, right nigh, is the temple
of Solomon, that is right fair and well polished.  And in that
temple dwell the Knights of the Temple that were wont to be clept
Templars; and that was the foundation of their order, so that there
dwelled knights and in TEMPLO DOMINI canons regulars.

From that temple toward the east, a six score paces, in the corner
of the city, is the bath of our Lord; and in that bath was wont to
come water from Paradise, and yet it droppeth.  And there beside is
our Lady's bed.  And fast by is the temple of Saint Simeon, and
without the cloister of the temple, toward the north, is a full
fair church of Saint Anne, our Lady's mother; and there was our
Lady conceived; and before that church is a great tree that began
to grow the same night.  And under that church, in going down by
twenty-two degrees, lieth Joachim, our Lady's father, in a fair
tomb of stone; and there beside lay some-time Saint Anne, his wife;
but Saint Helen let translate her to Constantinople.  And in that
church is a well, in manner of a cistern, that is clept PROBATICA
PISCINA, that hath five entries.  Into that well angels were wont
to come from heaven and bathe them within.  And what man, that
first bathed him after the moving of the water, was made whole of
what manner of sickness that he had.  And there our Lord healed a
man of the palsy that lay thirty-eight year, and our Lord said to
him, TOLLE GRABATUM TUUM ET AMBULA, that is to say, 'Take thy bed
and go.'  And there beside was Pilate's house.

And fast by is King Herod's house, that let slay the innocents.
This Herod was over-much cursed and cruel.  For first he let slay
his wife that he loved right well; and for the passing love that he
had to her when he saw her dead, he fell in a rage and out of his
wit a great while; and sithen he came again to his wit.  And after
he let slay his two sons that he had of that wife.  And after that
he let slay another of his wives, and a son that he had with her.
And after that he let slay his own mother; and he would have slain
his brother also, but he died suddenly.  And after that he did all
the harm that he could or might.  And after he fell into sickness;
and when he felt that he should die, he sent after his sister and
after all the lords of his land; and when they were come he let
command them to prison.  And then he said to his sister, he wist
well that men of the country would make no sorrow for his death;
and therefore he made his sister swear that she should let smite
off all the heads of the lords when he were dead; and then should
all the land make sorrow for his death, and else, nought; and thus
he made his testament.  But his sister fulfilled not his will.
For, as soon as he was dead, she delivered all the lords out of
prison and let them go, each lord to his own, and told them all the
purpose of her brother's ordinance.  And so was this cursed king
never made sorrow for, as he supposed for to have been.  And ye
shall understand, that in that time there were three Herods, of
great name and fame for their cruelty.  This Herod, of which I have
spoken of was Herod Ascalonite; and he that let behead Saint John
the Baptist was Herod Antipas; and he that let smite off Saint
James's head was Herod Agrippa, and he put Saint Peter in prison.

Also, furthermore, in the city is the church of Saint Saviour; and
there is the left arm of John Chrisostome, and the more part of the
head of Saint Stephen.  And on that other side in the street,
toward the south as men go to Mount Sion, is a church of Saint
James, where he was beheaded.

And from that church, a six score paces, is the Mount Sion.  And
there is a fair church of our Lady, where she dwelled; and there
she died.  And there was wont to be an abbot of canons regulars.
And from thence was she borne of the apostles unto the vale of
Jehosaphat.  And there is the stone that the angel brought to our
Lord from the mount of Sinai, and it is of that colour that the
rock is of Saint Catherine.  And there beside is the gate where
through our Lady went, when she was with child, when she went to
Bethlehem.  Also at the entry of the Mount Sion is a chapel.  And
in that chapel is the stone, great and large, with the which the
sepulchre was covered with, when Joseph of Arimathea had put our
Lord therein; the which stone the three Marys saw turn upward when
they came to the sepulchre the day of his resurrection, and there
found an angel that told them of our Lord's uprising from death to
life.  And there also is a stone in the wall, beside the gate, of
the pillar that our Lord was scourged at.  And there was Annas's
house, that was bishop of the Jews in that time.  And there was our
Lord examined in the night, and scourged and smitten and villainous
entreated.  And that same place Saint Peter forsook our Lord thrice
or the cock crew.  And there is a part of the table that he made
his supper on, when he made his maundy with his disciples, when he
gave them his flesh and his blood in form of bread and wine.

And under that chapel, thirty-two degrees, is the place where our
Lord washed his disciples' feet, and yet is the vessel where the
water was.  And there beside that same vessel was Saint Stephen
buried.  And there is the altar where our Lady heard the angels
sing mass.  And there appeared first our Lord to his disciples
after his resurrection, the gates enclosed, and said to them, PAX
VOBIS! that is to say, 'Peace to you!'  And on that mount appeared
Christ to Saint Thomas the apostle and bade him assay his wounds;
and then believed he first, and said, DOMINUS MEUS ET DEUS MEUS!
that is to say 'My Lord and my God!'  In the same church, beside
the altar, were all the apostles on Whitsunday, when the Holy Ghost
descended on them in likeness of fire.  And there made our Lord his
pasque with his disciples.  And there slept Saint John the
evangelist upon the breast of our Lord Jesu Christ, and saw
sleeping many heavenly privities.

Mount Sion is within the city, and it is a little higher than the
other side of the city; and the city is stronger on that side than
on that other side.  For at the foot of the Mount Sion is a fair
castle and a strong that the soldan let make.  In the Mount Sion
were buried King David and King Solomon, and many other kings, Jews
of Jerusalem.  And there is the place where the Jews would have
cast up the body of our Lady when the apostles bare the body to be
buried in the vale of Jehosaphat.  And there is the place where
Saint Peter wept full tenderly after that he had forsaken our Lord.
And a stone's cast from that chapel is another chapel, where our
Lord was judged, for that time was there Caiaphas's house.  From
that chapel, to go toward the east, at seven score paces, is a deep
cave under the rock, that is clept the Galilee of our Lord, where
Saint Peter hid him when he had forsaken our Lord.  ITEM, between
the Mount Sion and the Temple of Solomon is the place where our
Lord raised the maiden in her father's house.

Under the Mount Sion, toward the vale of Jehosaphat, is a well that
is clept NATATORIUM SILOE.  And there was our Lord washed after his
baptism; and there made our Lord the blind man to see.  And there
was y-buried Isaiah the prophet.  Also, straight from NATATORIUM
SILOE, is an image, of stone and of old ancient work, that Absalom
let make, and because thereof men clepe it the hand of Absalom.
And fast by is yet the tree of elder that Judas hanged himself
upon, for despair that he had, when he sold and betrayed our Lord.
And there beside was the synagogue, where the bishops of Jews and
the Pharisees came together and held their council; and there cast
Judas the thirty pence before them, and said that he had sinned
betraying our Lord.  And there nigh was the house of the apostles
Philip and Jacob Alphei.  And on that other side of Mount Sion,
toward the south, beyond the vale a stone's cast, is Aceldama; that
is to say, the field of blood, that was bought for the thirty
pence, that our Lord was sold for.  And in that field be many tombs
of Christian men, for there be many pilgrims graven.  And there be
many oratories, chapels and hermitages, where hermits were wont to
dwell.  And toward the east, an hundred paces, is the charnel of
the hospital of Saint John, where men were wont to put the bones of
dead men.

Also from Jerusalem, toward the west, is a fair church, where the
tree of the cross grew.  And two mile from thence is a fair church,
where our Lady met with Elizabeth, when they were both with child;
and Saint John stirred in his mother's womb, and made reverence to
his Creator that he saw not.  And under the altar of that church is
the place where Saint John was born.  And from that church is a
mile to the castle of Emmaus:  and there also our Lord shewed him
to two of his disciples after his resurrection.  Also on that other
side, 200 paces from Jerusalem, is a church, where was wont to be
the cave of the lion.  And under that church, at thirty degrees of
deepness, were interred 12,000 martyrs, in the time of King Cosdroe
that the lion met with, all in a night, by the will of God.

Also from Jerusalem, two mile, is the Mount Joy, a full fair place
and a delicious; and there lieth Samuel the prophet in a fair tomb.
And men clepe it Mount Joy, for it giveth joy to pilgrims' hearts,
because that there men see first Jerusalem.

Also between Jerusalem and the mount of Olivet is the vale of
Jehosaphat, under the walls of the city, as I have said before.
And in the midst of the vale is a little river that men clepe
TORRENS CEDRON, and above it, overthwart, lay a tree (that the
cross was made of) that men yede over on. And fast by it is a
little pit in the earth, where the foot of the pillar is yet
interred; and there was our Lord first scourged, for he was
scourged and villainously entreated in many places.  Also in the
middle place of the vale of Jehosaphat is the church of our Lady:
and it is of forty-three degrees under the earth unto the sepulchre
of our Lady.  And our Lady was of age, when she died, seventy-two
year.  And beside the sepulchre of our Lady is an altar, where our
Lord forgave Saint Peter all his sins.  And from thence, toward the
west, under an altar, is a well that cometh out of the river of
Paradise.  And wit well, that that church is full low in the earth,
and some is all within the earth.  But I suppose well, that it was
not so founded.  But for because that Jerusalem hath often-time
been destroyed and the walls abated and beten down and tumbled into
the vale, and that they have been so filled again and the ground
enhanced; and for that skill is the church so low within the earth.
And, natheles, men say there commonly, that the earth hath so been
cloven sith the time that our Lady was there buried; and yet men
say there, that it waxeth and groweth every day, without doubt.  In
that church were wont to be monks black, that had their abbot.

And beside that church is a chapel, beside the rock that hight
Gethsemane.  And there was our Lord kissed of Judas; and there was
he taken of the Jews.  And there left our Lord his disciples, when
he went to pray before his passion, when he prayed and said, PATER,
SI FIERI POTEST, TRANSEAT A ME CALIX ISTE; that is to say, 'Father,
if it may be, do let this chalice go from me':  and, when he came
again to his disciples, he found them sleeping.  And in the rock
within the chapel yet appear the fingers of our Lord's hand, when
he put them in the rock, when the Jews would have taken him.

And from thence, a stone's cast towards the south, is another
chapel, where our Lord sweat drops of blood.  And there, right
nigh, is the tomb of King Jehosaphat, of whom the vale beareth the
name.  This Jehosaphat was king of that country, and was converted
by an hermit, that was a worthy man and did much good.  And from
thence, a bow draught towards the south, is the church, where Saint
James and Zachariah the prophet were buried.

And above the vale is the mount of Olivet; and it is clept so for
the plenty of olives that grow there.  That mount is more high than
the city of Jerusalem is; and, therefore, may men upon that mount
see many of the streets of the city.  And between that mount and
the city is not but the vale of Jehosaphat that is not full large.
And from that mount styed our Lord Jesu Christ to heaven upon
Ascension Day; and yet there sheweth the shape of his left foot in
the stone.  And there is a church where was wont to be an abbot and
canons regulars.  And a little thence, twenty-eight paces, is a
chapel; and therein is the stone on the which our Lord sat, when he
preached the eight blessings and said thus:  BEAU PAUPERES SPIRITU:
and there he taught his disciples the PATER NOSTER; and wrote with
his finger in a stone.  And there nigh is a church of Saint Mary
Egyptian, and there she lieth in a tomb.  And from thence toward
the east, a three bow shot, is Bethphage, to the which our Lord
sent Saint Peter and Saint James for to seek the ass upon Palm-
Sunday, and rode upon that ass to Jerusalem.

And in coming down from the mount of Olivet, toward the east, is a
castle that is clept Bethany.  And there dwelt Simon leprous, and
there harboured our Lord:  and after he was baptised of the
apostles and was clept Julian, and was made bishop; and this is the
same Julian that men clepe to for good harbourage, for our Lord
harboured with him in his house.  And in that house our Lord
forgave Mary Magdalene her sins:  there she washed his feet with
her tears, and wiped them with her hair.  And there served Saint
Martha our Lord.  There our Lord raised Lazarus from death to life,
that was dead four days and stank, that was brother to Mary
Magdalene and to Martha.  And there dwelt also Mary Cleophas.  That
castle is well a mile long from Jerusalem.  Also in coming down
from the mount of Olivet is the place where our Lord wept upon
Jerusalem.  And there beside is the place where our Lady appeared
to Saint Thomas the apostle after her assumption, and gave him her
girdle.  And right nigh is the stone where our Lord often-time sat
upon when he preached; and upon that same he shall sit at the day
of doom, right as himself said.

Also after the mount of Olivet is the mount of Galilee.  There
assembled the apostles when Mary Magdalene came and told them of
Christ's uprising.  And there, between the Mount Olivet and the
Mount Galilee, is a church, where the angel said to our Lady of her
death.

Also from Bethany to Jericho was sometime a little city, but it is
now all destroyed, and now is there but a little village.  That
city took Joshua by miracle of God and commandment of the angel,
and destroyed it, and cursed it and all them that bigged it again.
Of that city was Zaccheus the dwarf that clomb up into the sycamore
tree for to see our Lord, because he was so little he might not see
him for the people.  And of that city was Rahab the common woman
that escaped alone with them of her lineage:  and she often-time
refreshed and fed the messengers of Israel, and kept them from many
great perils of death; and, therefore, she had good reward, as holy
writ saith:  QUI ACCIPIT PROPHETAM IN NOMINE MEO, MERCEDEM
PROPHETAE ACCIPIET; that is to say, 'He that taketh a prophet in my
name, he shall take meed of the prophet.'  And so had she.  For she
prophesied to the messengers, saying, NOVI QUOD DOMINUS TRADET
VOBIS TERRAM HANC; that is to say, 'I wot well, that our Lord shall
betake you this land':  and so he did.  And after, Salomon,
Naasson's son, wedded her, and from that time was she a worthy
woman, and served God well.

Also from Bethany go men to flom Jordan by a mountain and through
desert.  And it is nigh a day journey from Bethany, toward the
east, to a great hill, where our Lord fasted forty days.  Upon that
hill the enemy of hell bare our Lord and tempted him, and said, DIC
UT LAPIDES ISTI PANES FIANT; that is to say, 'Say, that these
stones be made loaves.'  In that place, upon the hill, was wont to
be a fair church; but it is all destroyed, so that there is now but
an hermitage, that a manner of Christian men hold, that be clept
Georgians, for Saint George converted them.  Upon that hill dwelt
Abraham a great while, and therefore men clepe it Abraham's Garden.
And between the hill and this garden runneth a little brook of
water that was wont to be bitter; but, by the blessing of Elisha
the prophet, it became sweet and good to drink.  And at the foot of
this hill, toward the plain, is a great well, that entereth into
from Jordan.

From that hill to Jericho, that I spake of before, is but a mile in
going toward flom Jordan.  Also as men go to Jericho sat the blind
man crying, JESU, FILI DAVID, MISERERE MEI; that is to say, 'Jesu,
David's Son, have mercy on me.'  And anon he had his sight.  Also,
two mile from Jericho, is flome Jordan.  And, an half mile more
nigh, is a fair church of Saint John the Baptist, where he baptised
our Lord.  And there beside is the house of Jeremiah the prophet.



CHAPTER XII



OF THE DEAD SEA; AND OF THE FLOME JORDAN.  OF THE HEAD OF SAINT
JOHN THE BAPTIST; AND OF THE USAGES OF THE SAMARITANS


AND from Jericho, a three mile, is the Dead Sea.  About that sea
groweth much alum and of alkatran.  Between Jericho and that sea is
the land of Engeddi.  And there was wont to grow the balm; but men
make draw the branches thereof and bear them to be grafted at
Babylon; and yet men clepe them vines of Geddi.  At a coast of that
sea, as men go from Arabia, is the mount of the Moabites, where
there is a cave, that men clepe Karua.  Upon that hill led Balak,
the son of Beor, Balaam the priest for to curse the people of
Israel.

That Dead Sea parteth the land of Ind and of Arabia, and that sea
lasteth from Soara unto Arabia.  The water of that sea is full
bitter and salt, and, if the earth were made moist and wet with
that water, it would never bear fruit.  And the earth and the land
changeth often his colour.  And it casteth out of the water a thing
that men clepe asphalt, also great pieces, as the greatness of an
horse, every day and on all sides.  And from Jerusalem to that sea
is 200 furlongs.  That sea is in length five hundred and four score
furlongs, and in breadth an hundred and fifty furlongs; and it is
clept the Dead Sea, for it runneth nought, but is ever unmovable.
And neither man, ne beast, ne nothing that beareth life in him ne
may not die in that sea.  And that hath been proved many times, by
men that have deserved to be dead that have been cast therein and
left therein three days or four, and they ne might never die
therein; for it receiveth no thing within him that beareth life.
And no man may drink of the water for bitterness.  And if a man
cast iron therein, it will float above.  And if men cast a feather
therein, it will sink to the bottom, and these be things against
kind.

And also, the cities there were lost because of sin.  And there
beside grow trees that bear full fair apples, and fair of colour to
behold; but whoso breaketh them or cutteth them in two, he shall
find within them coals and cinders, in token that by wrath of God
the cities and the land were burnt and sunken into hell.  Some men
clepe that sea the lake Dalfetidee; some, the flome of Devils; and
some the flome that is ever stinking.  And into that sea sunk the
five cities by wrath of God; that is to say, Sodom, Gomorrah,
Aldama, Zeboim, and Zoar, for the abominable sin of sodomy that
reigned in them.  But Zoar, by the prayer of Lot, was saved and
kept a great while, for it was set upon a hill; and yet sheweth
thereof some part above the water, and men may see the walls when
it is fair weather and clear.  In that city Lot dwelt a little
while; and there was he made drunk of his daughters, and lay with
them, and engendered of them Moab and Ammon.  And the cause why his
daughters made him drunk and for to lie by him was this:  because
they saw no man about them, but only their father, and therefore
they trowed that God had destroyed all the world as he had done the
cities, as he had done before by Noah's flood.  And therefore they
would lie by with their father for to have issue, and for to
replenish the world again with people to restore the world again by
them; for they trowed that there had been no more men in all the
world; and if their father had not been drunk, he had not lain with
them.

And the hill above Zoar men cleped it then Edom and after men
cleped it Seir, and after Idumea.  Also at the right side of that
Dead Sea, dwelleth yet the wife of Lot in likeness of a salt stone;
for that she looked behind her when the cities sunk into hell.
This Lot was Haran's son, that was brother to Abraham; and Sarah,
Abraham's wife, and Milcah, Nahor's wife, were sisters to the said
Lot.  And the same Sarah was of eld four score and ten year when
Isaac her son was gotten on her.  And Abraham had another son
Ishmael that he gat upon Hagar his chamberer.  And when Isaac his
son was eight days old, Abraham his father let him be circumcised,
and Ishmael with him that was fourteen year old:  wherefore the
Jews that come of Isaac's line be circumcised the eighth day, and
the Saracens that come of Ishmael's line be circumcised when they
be fourteen year of age.

And ye shall understand, that within the Dead Sea, runneth the flom
Jordan, and there it dieth, for it runneth no further more, and
that is a place that is a mile from the church of Saint John the
Baptist toward the west, a little beneath the place where that
Christian men bathe them commonly.  And a mile from flom Jordan is
the river of Jabbok, the which Jacob passed over when he came from
Mesopotamia.  This flom Jordan is no great river, but it is
plenteous of good fish; and it cometh out of the hill of Lebanon by
two wells that be clept Jor and Dan, and of the two wells hath it
the name.  And it passeth by a lake that is clept Maron.  And after
it passeth by the sea of Tiberias, and passeth under the hills of
Gilboa; and there is a full fair vale, both on that one side and on
that other of the same river.  And men go [on] the hills of
Lebanon, all in length unto the desert of Pharan; and those hills
part the kingdom of Syria and the country of Phoenicia; and upon
those hills grow trees of cedar that be full high, and they bear
long apples, and as great as a man's head.

And also this flom Jordan departeth the land of Galilee and the
land of Idumea and the land of Betron, and that runneth under earth
a great way unto a fair plain and a great that is clept Meldan in
Sarmois; that is to say, Fair or market in their language, because
that there is often fairs in that plain.  And there becometh the
water great and large.  In that plain is the tomb of Job.

And in that flom Jordan above-said was our Lord baptised of Saint
John, and the voice of God the Father was heard saying:  HIC EST
FILIUS MEUS DILECTUS, ETC.; that is to say, 'This is my beloved
Son, in the which I am well pleased; hear him!' and the Holy Ghost
alighted upon him in likeness of a culver; and so at his baptising
was all the whole Trinity.

And through that flome passed the children of Israel, all dry feet;
and they put stones there in the middle place, in token of the
miracle that the water withdrew him so.  Also in that flome Jordan
Naaman of Syria bathed him, that was full rich, but he was mesell;
and there anon he took his health.

About the flome Jordan be many churches where that many Christian
men dwelled.  And nigh thereto is the city of Ai that Joshua
assailed and took.  Also beyond the flome Jordan is the vale of
Mamre, and that is a full fair vale.  Also upon the hill that I
spake of before, where our Lord fasted forty days, a two mile long
from Galilee, is a fair hill and an high, where the enemy the fiend
bare our Lord the third time to tempt him, and shewed him all the
regions of the world and said, HEC OMNIA TIBI DABO, SI CADENS
ADORAVERIS ME; that is to say, 'All this shall I give thee, if thou
fall and worship me.'

Also from the Dead Sea to go eastward, out of the marches of the
Holy Land that is clept the Land of Promission, is a strong castle
and a fair, in an hill that is clept Carak in Sarmois; that is to
say, Royally.  That castle let make King Baldwin, that was King of
France, when he had conquered that land, and put it into Christian
men's hands for to keep that country; and for that cause was it
clept the Mount Royal.  And under it there is a town that hight
Sobach, and there, all about, dwell Christian men, under tribute.

From thence go men to Nazareth, of the which our Lord beareth the
surname.  And from thence there is three journeys to Jerusalem:
and men go by the province of Galilee by Ramath, by Sothim and by
the high hill of Ephraim, where Elkanah and Hannah the mother of
Samuel the prophet dwelled.  There was born this prophet; and,
after his death, he was buried at Mount Joy, as I have said you
before.

And then go men to Shiloh, where the Ark of God with the relics
were kept long time under Eli the prophet.  There made the people
of Hebron sacrifice to our Lord, and they yielded up their vows.
And there spake God first to Samuel, and shewed him the mutation of
Order of Priesthood, and the mystery of the Sacrament.  And right
nigh, on the left side, is Gibeon and Ramah and Benjamin, of the
which holy writ speaketh of.

And after men go to Sichem, some-time clept Sichar; and that is in
the province of Samaritans.  And there is a full fair vale and a
fructuous; and there is a fair city and a good that men clepe
Neople.  And from thence is a journey to Jerusalem.  And there is
the well, where our Lord spake to the woman of Samaritan.  And
there was wont to be a church, but it is beaten down.  Beside that
well King Rehoboam let make two calves of gold and made them to be
worshipped, and put that one at Dan and that other at Bethel.  And
a mile from Sichar is the city of Luz; and in that city dwelt
Abraham a certain time.  Sichem is a ten mile from Jerusalem, and
it is clept Neople; that is for to say, the New City.  And nigh
beside is the tomb of Joseph the son of Jacob that governed Egypt:
for the Jews bare his bones from Egypt and buried them there, and
thither go the Jews often-time in pilgrimage with great devotion.
In that city was Dinah, Jacob's daughter, ravished, for whom her
brethren slew many persons and did many harms to the city.  And
there beside is the hill of Gerizim, where the Samaritans make
their sacrifice:  in that hill would Abraham have sacrificed his
son Isaac.  And there beside is the vale of Dotaim, and there is
the cistern, where Joseph, was cast in of his brethren, which they
sold; and that is two mile from Sichar.

From thence go men to Samaria that men clepe now Sebast; and that
is the chief city of that country, and it sits between the hill of
Aygnes as Jerusalem doth.  In that city was the sittings of the
twelve tribes of Israel; but the city is not now so great as it was
wont to be.  There was buried Saint John the Baptist between two
prophets, Elisha and Abdon; but he was beheaded in the castle of
Macharim beside the Dead Sea, and after he was translated of his
disciples, and buried at Samaria.  And there let Julianus Apostata
dig him up and let burn his bones (for he was at that time emperor)
and let winnow the ashes in the wind.  But the finger that shewed
our Lord, saying, ECCE AGNUS DEI; that is to say, 'Lo! the Lamb of
God,' that would never burn, but is all whole; - that finger let
Saint Thecla, the holy virgin, be born into the hill of Sebast; and
there make men great feast.

In that place was wont to be a fair church; and many other there
were; but they be all beaten down.  There was wont to be the head
of Saint John Baptist, enclosed in the wall.  But the Emperor
Theodosius let draw it out, and found it wrapped in a little cloth,
all bloody; and so he let it to be born to Constantinople.  And yet
at Constantinople is the hinder part of the head, and the fore part
of the head, till under the chin, is at Rome under the church of
Saint Silvester, where be nuns of an hundred orders:  and it is yet
all broilly, as though it were half-burnt, for the Emperor Julianus
above-said, of his cursedness and malice, let burn that part with
the other bones, and yet it sheweth; and this thing hath been
proved both by popes and by emperors.  And the jaws beneath, that
hold to the chin, and a part of the ashes and the platter that the
head was laid in, when it was smitten off, is at Genoa; and the
Genoese make of it great feast, and so do the Saracens also.  And
some men say that the head of Saint John is at Amiens in Picardy;
and other men say that it is the head of Saint John the Bishop.  I
wot never, but God knoweth; but in what wise that men worship it,
the blessed Saint John holds him a-paid.

From this city of Sebast unto Jerusalem is twelve mile.  And
between the hills of that country there is a well that four sithes
in the year changeth his colour, sometime green, sometime red,
sometime clear and sometime trouble; and men clepe that well, Job.
And the folk of that country, that men clepe Samaritans, were
converted and baptized by the apostles; but they hold not well
their doctrine, and always they hold laws by themselves, varying
from Christian men, from Saracens, Jews and Paynims.  And the
Samaritans lieve well in one God, and they say well that there is
but only one God, that all formed, and all shall doom; and they
hold the Bible after the letter, and they use the Psalter as the
Jews do.  And they say that they be the right sons of God.  And
among all other folk, they say that they be best beloved of God,
and that to them belongeth the heritage that God behight to his
beloved children.  And they have also diverse clothing and shape to
look on than other folk have; for they wrap their heads in red
linen cloth, in difference from others.  And the Saracens wrap
their heads in white linen cloth; and the Christian men, that dwell
in the country, wrap them in blue of Ind; and the Jews in yellow
cloth.  In that country dwell many of the Jews, paying tribute as
Christian men do.  And if ye will know the letters that the Jews
use they be such, and the names be as they clepe them written
above, in manner of their A. B. C.

Aleph  Beth  Gymel  Deleth  He  Vau  Zay

Heth  Thet  Joht  Kapho  Lampd  Mem  Num

Sameth  Ey  Fhee  Sade  Coph  Resch  Son  Tau



CHAPTER XIII



OF THE PROVINCE OF GALILEE, AND WHERE ANTICHRIST SHALL BE BORN.  OF
NAZARETH.  OF THE AGE OF OUR LADY.  OF THE DAY OF DOOM.  AND OF THE
CUSTOMS OF JACOBITES, SYRIANS; AND OF THE USAGES OF GEORGIANS


FROM this country of the Samaritans that I have spoken of before go
men to the plains of Galilee, and men leave the hills on that one
part.

And Galilee is one of the provinces of the Holy Land, and in that
province is the city of Nain - and Capernaum, and Chorazin and
Bethsaida.  In this Bethsaida was Saint Peter and Saint Andrew
born.  And thence, a four mile, is Chorazin.  And five mile from
Chorazin is the city of Kedar whereof the Psalter speaketh:  ET
HABITAVI CUM HABITANTIBUS KEDAR; that is for to say, 'And I have
dwelled with the dwelling men in Kedar.'  In Chorazin shall
Antichrist be born, as some men say.  And other men say he shall be
born in Babylon; for the prophet saith:  DE BABILONIA COLUBER
EXEST, QUI TOTUM MUNDUM DEVORABIT; that is to say 'Out of Babylon
shall come a worm that shall devour all the world.'  This
Antichrist shall be nourished in Bethsaida, and he shall reign in
Capernaum:  and therefore saith holy writ; VAE TIBI, CHORAZIN!  VAE
TIBI, BETHSAIDA!  VAE TIBI, CAPERNAUM! that is to say, 'Woe be to
thee, Chorazin!  Woe to thee, Bethsaida!  Woe to thee, Capernaum.'
And all these towns be in the land of Galilee.  And also the Cana
of Galilee is four mile from Nazareth:  of that city was Simon
Chananeus and his wife Canee, of the which the holy evangelist
speaketh of.  There did our Lord the first miracle at the wedding,
when he turned water into wine.

And in the end of Galilee, at the hills, was the Ark of God taken;
and on that other side is the Mount Endor or Hermon.  And,
thereabout, goeth the Brook of Torrens Kishon; and there beside,
Barak, that was Abimelech's son with Deborah the prophetess
overcame the host of Idumea, when Sisera the king was slain of Jael
the wife of Heber, and chased beyond the flome Jordan, by strength
of sword, Zeeb and Zebah and Zalmunna, and there he slew them.
Also a five mile from Nain is the city of Jezreel that sometime was
clept Zarim, of the which city Jezabel, the cursed queen, was lady
and queen, that took away the vine of Naboth by her strength.  Fast
by that city is the field Megiddo, in the which the King Joram was
slain of the King of Samaria and after was translated and buried in
the Mount Sion.

And a mile from Jezreel be the hills of Gilboa, where Saul and
Jonathan, that were so fair, died; wherefore David cursed them, as
holy writ saith:  MONTES GILBOAE, NEC ROS NEC PLUVIA, ETC.; that is
to say, 'Ye hills of Gilboa, neither dew ne rain come upon you.'
And a mile from the hills of Gilboa toward the east is the city of
Cyropolis, that was clept before Bethshan; and upon the walls of
that city was the head of Saul hanged.

After go men by the hill beside the plains of Galilee unto
Nazareth, where was wont to be a great city and a fair; but now
there is not but a little village, and houses abroad here and
there.  And it is not walled.  And it sits in a little valley, and
there be hills all about.  There was our Lady born, but she was
gotten at Jerusalem.  And because that our Lady was born at
Nazareth, therefore bare our Lord his surname of that town.  There
took Joseph our Lady to wife, when she was fourteen year of age.
And there Gabriel greeted our Lady, saying, AVE GRATIA PLENA,
DOMINUS TECUM! that is to say, 'Hail, full of grace, our Lord is
with thee!'  And this salutation was done in a place of a great
altar of a fair church that was wont to be sometime, but it is now
all down, and men have made a little receipt, beside a pillar of
that church, to receive the offerings of pilgrims.  And the
Saracens keep that place full dearly, for the profit that they have
thereof.  And they be full wicked Saracens and cruel, and more
despiteful than in any other place, and have destroyed all the
churches.  There nigh is Gabriel's Well, where our Lord was wont to
bathe him, when he was young, and from that well bare he water
often-time to his mother.  And in that well she washed often-time
the clouts of her Son Jesu Christ.  And from Jerusalem unto thither
is three journeys.  At Nazareth was our Lord nourished.  Nazareth
is as much to say as, 'Flower of the garden'; and by good skill may
it be clept flower, for there was nourished the flower of life that
was Christ Jesu.

And two mile from Nazareth is the city of Sephor, by the way that
goeth from Nazareth to Akon.  And an half mile from Nazareth is the
Leap of our Lord.  For the Jews led him upon an high rock for to
make him leap down, and have slain him; but Jesu passed amongst
them, and leapt upon another rock, and yet be the steps of his feet
seen in the rock, where he alighted.  And therefore say some men,
when they dread them of thieves in any way, or of enemies; JESUS
AUTEM TRANSIENS PER MEDIUM ILLORUM IBAT; that is to say, 'Jesus,
forsooth, passing by the midst of them, he went':  in token and
mind, that our Lord passed through, out the Jews' cruelty, and
scaped safely from them, so surely may men pass the peril of
thieves'.  And then say men two verses of the Psalter three sithes:
IRRUAT SUPER EOS FORMIDO & PAVOR, IN MAGNITUDINE BRACHII TUI,
DOMINE.  FIANT IMMOBILES, QUASI LAPIS, DONEC PERTRANSEAT POPULUS
TUUS, DOMINE; DONEC PERTRANSEAT POPULUS TUUS ISTE, QUEM POSSEDISTI;
and then may men pass without peril.

And ye shall understand, that our Lady had child when she was
fifteen year old.  And she was conversant with her son thirty-three
year and three months.  And after the passion of our Lord she lived
twenty-four year.

Also from Nazareth men go to the Mount Tabor; and that is a four
mile.  And it is a full fair hill and well high, where was wont to
be a town and many churches; but they be all destroyed.  But yet
there is a place that men clepe the school of God, where he was
wont to teach his disciples, and told them the privities of heaven.
And, at the foot of that hill, Melchisedech that was King of Salem,
in the turning of that hill met Abraham in coming again from the
battle, when he had slain Abimelech.  And this Melchisedech was
both king and priest of Salem that now is clept Jerusalem.  In that
hill Tabor our Lord transfigured him before Saint Peter, Saint John
and Saint Jame; and there they saw, ghostly, Moses and Elias the
prophets beside them.  And therefore said Saint Peter; DOMINE,
BONUM EST NOS HIC ESSE; FACIAMUS HIC TRIA TABERNACULA; that is to
say, 'Lord, it is good for us to be here; make we here three
dwelling-places.'  And there heard they a voice of the Father that
say; HIC EST FILIUS MEUS DILECTUS, IN QUO MIHI BENE COMPLACUI.  And
our Lord defended them that they should not tell that avision till
that he were risen from death to life.

In that hill and in that same place, at the day of doom, four
angels with four trumpets shall blow and raise all men that had
suffered death, sith that the world was formed, from death to life;
and shall come in body and soul in judgment, before the face of our
Lord in the Vale of Jehosaphat.  And the doom shall be on Easter
Day, such time as our Lord arose.  And the doom shall begin, such
hour as our Lord descended to hell and despoiled it.  For at such
hour shall he despoil the world and lead his chosen to bliss; and
the other shall he condemn to perpetual pains.  And then shall
every man have after his desert, either good or evil, but if the
mercy of God pass his righteousness.

Also a mile from Mount Tabor is the Mount Hermon; and there was the
city of Nain.  Before the gate of that city raised our Lord the
widow's son, that had no more children.  Also three miles from
Nazareth is the Castle Safra, of the which the sons of Zebedee and
the sons of Alpheus were.  Also a seven mile from Nazareth is the
Mount Cain, and under that is a well; and beside that well Lamech,
Noah's father, slew Cain with an arrow.  For this Cain went through
briars and bushes as a wild beast; and he had lived from the time
of Adam his father unto the time of Noah, and so he lived nigh to
2000 year.  And this Lamech was all blind for eld.

From Safra men go to the sea of Galilee and to the city of
Tiberias, that sits upon the same sea.  And albeit that men clepe
it a sea, yet is it neither sea ne arm of the sea.  For it is but a
stank of fresh water that is in length one hundred furlongs, and of
breadth forty furlongs, and hath within him great plenty of good
fish, and runneth into flom Jordan.  The city is not full great,
but it hath good baths within him.

And there, as the flome Jordan parteth from the sea of Galilee, is
a great bridge, where men pass from the Land of Promission to the
land of King Bashan and the land of Gennesaret, that be about the
flom Jordan and the beginning of the sea of Tiberias.  And from
thence may men go to Damascus, in three days, by the kingdom of
Traconitis, the which kingdom lasteth from Mount Hermon to the sea
of Galilee, or to the sea of Tiberias, or to the sea of Gennesaret;
and all is one sea, and this the tank that I have told you, but it
changeth thus the name for the names of the cities that sit beside
him.

Upon that sea went our Lord dry feet; and there he took up Saint
Peter, when he began to drench within the sea, and said to him,
MODICE FIDEI, QUARE DUBITASTI?  And after his resurrection our Lord
appeared on that sea to his disciples and bade them fish, and
filled all the net full of great fishes.  In that sea rowed our
Lord often-time; and there he called to him Saint Peter, Saint
Andrew, Saint James and Saint John, the sons of Zebedee.

In that city of Tiberias is the table upon the which our Lord ate
upon with his disciples after his resurrection; and they knew him
in breaking of bread, as the gospel saith:  ET COGNOVERUNT EUM IN
FRACTIONE PANIS.  And nigh that city of Tiberias is the hill, where
our Lord fed 5000 persons with five barley loaves and two fishes.

In that city a man cast a burning dart in wrath after our Lord.
And the head smote into the earth and waxed green; and it growed to
a great tree.  And yet it groweth and the bark thereof is all like
coals.

Also in the head of that sea of Galilee, toward the septentrion is
a strong castle and an high that hight Saphor.  And fast beside it
is Capernaum.  Within the Land of Promission is not so strong a
castle.  And there is a good town beneath that is clept also
Saphor.  In that castle Saint Anne our Lady's mother was born.  And
there beneath, was Centurio's house.  That country is clept the
Galilee of Folk that were taken to tribute of Zebulon and Napthali.

And in again coming from that castle, a thirty mile, is the city of
Dan, that sometime was clept Belinas or Cesarea Philippi; that sits
at the foot of the Mount of Lebanon, where the flome Jordan
beginneth.  There beginneth the Land of Promission and dureth unto
Beersheba in length, in going toward the north into the south, and
it containeth well a nine score miles; and of breadth, that is to
say, from Jericho unto Jaffa, and that containeth a forty mile of
Lombardy, or of our country, that be also little miles; these be
not miles of Gascony ne of the Province of Almayne, where be great
miles.  And wit ye well, that the Land of Promission is in Syria.
For the realm of Syria dureth from the deserts of Arabia unto
Cilicia, and that is Armenia the great; that is to say, from the
south to the north.  And, from the east to the west, it dureth from
the great deserts of Arabia unto the West Sea.  But in that realm
of Syria is the kingdom of Judea and many other provinces, as
Palestine, Galilee, Little Cilicia, and many other.

In that country and other countries beyond they have a custom, when
they shall use war, and when men hold siege about city or castle,
and they within dare not send out messengers with letters from lord
to lord for to ask succour, they make their letters and bind them
to the neck of a culver, and let the culver flee.  And the culvers
be so taught, that they flee with those letters to the very place
that men would send them to.  For the culvers be nourished in those
places where they be sent to, and they send them thus, for to bear
their letters.  And the culvers return again whereas they be
nourished; and so they do commonly.

And ye shall understand that amongst the Saracens, one part and
other, dwell many Christian men of many manners and diverse names.
And all be baptized and have diverse laws and diverse customs.  But
all believe in God the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost; but
always fail they in some articles of our faith.  Some of these be
clept Jacobites, for Saint James converted them and Saint John
baptized them.  They say that a man shall make his confession only
to God, and not to a man; for only to him should man yield him
guilty of all that he hath misdone.  Ne God ordained not, ne never
devised, ne the prophet neither, that a man should shrive him to
another (as they say), but only to God.  As Moses writeth in the
Bible, and as David saith in the Psalter Book; CONFITEBOR TIBI,
DOMINE, IN TOTO CORDE MEO, and DELICTUM MEUM TIBI COGNITUM FECI,
and DEUS MEUS ES TU, & CONFITEBOR TIBI, and QUONIAM COGITATIO
HOMINIS CONFITEBITUR TIBI, etc.  For they know all the Bible and
the Psalter.  And therefore allege they so the letter.  But they
allege not the authorities thus in Latin, but in their language
full apertly, and say well, that David and other prophets say it.

Natheles, Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory say thus:- Augustinus:
QUI SCELERA SUA COGITAT, & CONVERSUS FUERIT, VENIAM SIBI CREDAT.
Gregorius:  DOMINUS POTIUS MENTEM QUAM VERBA RESPICIT.  And Saint
Hilary saith:  LONGORUM TEMPORUM CRIMINA, IN ICTU OCULI PEREUNT, SI
CORDIS NATA FUERIT COMPUNCTIO.  And for such authorities they say,
that only to God shall a man knowledge his defaults, yielding
himself guilty and crying him mercy, and behoting to him to amend
himself.  And therefore, when they will shrive them, they take fire
and set it beside them, and cast therein powder of frankincense;
and in the smoke thereof they shrive them to God, and cry him
mercy.  But sooth it is, that this confession was first and kindly.
But Saint Peter the apostle, and they that came after him, have
ordained to make their confession to man, and by good reason; for
they perceived well that no sickness was curable, [ne] good
medicine to lay thereto, but if men knew the nature of the malady;
and also no man may give convenable medicine, but if he know the
quality of the deed.  For one sin may be greater in one man than in
another, and in one place and in one time than in another; and
therefore it behoveth him that he know the kind of the deed, and
thereupon to give him penance.

There be other, that be clept Syrians; and they hold the belief
amongst us, and of them of Greece.  And they use all beards, as men
of Greece do.  And they make the sacrament of therf bread.  And in
their language they use letters of Saracens.  But after the mystery
of Holy Church they use letters of Greece.  And they make their
confession, right as the Jacobites do.

There be other, that men clepe Georgians, that Saint George
converted; and him they worship more than any other saint, and to
him they cry for help.  And they came out of the realm of Georgia.
These folk use crowns shaven.  The clerks have round crowns, and
the lewd men have crowns all square.  And they hold Christian law,
as do they of Greece; of whom I have spoken of before.

Other there be that men clepe Christian men of Girding, for they be
all girt above.  And there be other that men clept Nestorians.  And
some Arians, some Nubians, some of Greece, some of Ind, and some of
Prester John's Land.  And all these have many articles of our
faith, and to other they be variant.  And of their variance were
too long to tell, and so I will leave, as for the time, without
more speaking of them.



CHAPTER XIV



OF THE CITY OF DAMASCUS.  OF THREE WAYS TO JERUSALEM; ONE, BY LAND
AND BY SEA; ANOTHER, MORE BY LAND THAN BY SEA; AND THE THIRD WAY TO
JERUSALEM, ALL BY LAND


NOW after that I have told you some part of folk in the countries
before, now will I turn again to my way, for to turn again on this
half.  Then whoso will go from the land of Galilee, of that that I
have spoke for, to come again on this half, men come again by
Damascus, that is a full fair city and full noble, and full of all
merchandises, and a three journeys long from the sea, and a five
journeys from Jerusalem.  But upon camels, mules, horses,
dromedaries and other beasts, men carry their merchandise thither.
And thither come the merchants with merchandise by sea from India,
Persia, Chaldea, Armenia, and of many other kingdoms.

This city founded Eliezer Damascus, that was yeoman and dispenser
of Abraham before that Isaac was born.  For he thought for to have
been Abraham's heir, and he named the town after his surname
Damascus.  And in that place, where Damascus was founded, Cain slew
Abel his brother.  And beside Damascus is the Mount Seir.  In that
city of Damascus there is great plenty of wells.  And within the
city and without be many fair gardens and of diverse fruits.  None
other city is not like in comparison to it of fair gardens, and of
fair disports.  The city is great and full of people, and well
walled with double walls.  And there be many physicians.  And Saint
Paul himself was there a physician for to keep men's bodies in
health, before he was converted.  And after that he was physician
of souls.  And Saint Luke the evangelist was disciple of Saint Paul
for to learn physic, and many other; for Saint Paul held then
school of physic.  And near beside Damascus was he converted.  And
after his conversion ne dwelt in that city three days, without
sight and without meat or drink; and in those three days he was
ravished to heaven, and there he saw many privities of our Lord.

And fast beside Damascus is the castle of Arkes that is both fair
and strong.

From Damascus men come again by our Lady of Sardenak, that is a
five mile on this half Damascus.  And it sitteth upon a rock, and
it is a full fair place; and it seemeth a castle, for there was
wont to be a castle, but it is now a full fair church.  And there
within be monks and nuns Christian.  And there is a vault under the
church, where that Christian men dwell also.  And they have many
good vines.  And in the church, behind the high altar, in the wall,
is a table of black wood, on the which sometime was depainted an
image of our Lady that turneth into flesh:  but now the image
sheweth but little, but alway, by the grace of God, that table
evermore drops oil, as it were of olive; and there is a vessel of
marble under the table to receive the oil.  Thereof they give to
pilgrims, for it heals of many sicknesses; and men say that, if it
be kept well seven year, afterwards it turns into flesh and blood.
From Sardenak men come through the vale of Bochar, the which is a
fair vale and a plenteous of all manner of fruit; and it is amongst
hills.  And there are therein fair rivers and great meadows and
noble pasture for beasts.  And men go by the mounts of Libanus,
which lasts from Armenia the more towards the north unto Dan, the
which is the end of the Land of Repromission toward the north, as I
said before.  Their hills are right fruitful, and there are many
fair wells and cedars and cypresses, and many other trees of divers
kinds.  There are also many good towns toward the head of their
hills, full of folk.

Between the city of Arkez and the city of Raphane is a river, that
is called Sabatory; for on the Saturday it runs fast, and all the
week else it stand still and runs not, or else but fairly.  Between
the foresaid hills also is another water that on nights freezes
hard and on days is no frost seen thereon.  And, as men come again
from those hills, is a hill higher than any of the other, and they
call it there the High Hill.  There is a great city and a fair, the
which is called Tripoli, in the which are many good Christian men,
yemand the same rites and customs that we use.  From thence men
come by a city that is called Beyrout, where Saint George slew the
dragon; and it is a good town, and a fair castle therein, and it is
three journeys from the foresaid city of Sardenak.  At the one side
of Beyrout sixteen mile, to come hitherward, is the city of Sydon.
At Beyrout enters pilgrims into the sea that will come to Cyprus,
and they arrive at the port of Surry or of Tyre, and so they come
to Cyprus in a little space.  Or men may come from the port of Tyre
and come not at Cyprus, and arrive at some haven of Greece, and so
come to these parts, as I said before.

I have told you now of the way by which men go farrest and longest
to Jerusalem, as by Babylon and Mount Sinai and many other places
which ye heard me tell of; and also by which ways men shall turn
again to the Land of Repromission.  Now will I tell you the
rightest way and the shortest to Jerusalem.  For some men will not
go the other; some for they have not spending enough, some for they
have no good company, and some for they may not endure the long
travel, some for they dread them of many perils of deserts, some
for they will haste them homeward, desiring to see their wives and
their children, or for some other reasonable cause that they have
to turn soon home.  And therefore I will shew how men may pass
tittest and in shortest time make their pilgrimage to Jerusalem.  A
man that comes from the lands of the west, he goes through France,
Burgoyne, and Lumbardy.  And so to Venice or Genoa, or some other
haven, and ships there and wends by sea to the isle of Greff, the
which pertains to the Genoans.

And syne he arrives in Greece at Port Mirrok, or at Valoun, or at
Duras, or at some other haven of that country, and rests him there
and buys him victuals and ships again and sails to Cyprus and
arrives there at Famagost and comes not at the isle of Rhodes.
Famagost is the chief haven of Cyprus; and there he refreshes him
and purveys him of victuals, and then he goes to ship and comes no
more on land, if he will, before he comes at Port Jaffa, that is
the next haven to Jerusalem, for it is but a day journey and a half
from Jerusalem, that is to say thirty-six mile.  From the Port
Jaffa men go to the city of Rames, the which is but a little
thence; and it is a fair city and a good and mickle folk therein.
And without that city toward the south is a kirk of our Lady, where
our Lord shewed him to her in three clouds, the which betokened the
Trinity.  And a little thence is another city, that men call
Dispolis, but it hight some time Lidda, a fair city and a well
inhabited:  there is a kirk of Saint George, where he was headed.
From thence men go to the castle of Emmaus, and so to the Mount
Joy; there may pilgrims first see Jerusalem.  At Mount Joy lies
Samuel the prophet.  From thence men go to Jerusalem.  Beside their
ways is the city of Ramatha and the Mount Modyn; and thereof was
Matathias, Judas Machabeus father, and there are the graves of the
Machabees.  Beyond Ramatha is the town of Tekoa, whereof Amos the
prophet was; and there is his grave.

I have told you before of the holy places that are at Jerusalem and
about it, and therefore I will speak no more of them at this time.
But I will turn again and shew you other ways a man may pass more
by land, and namely for them that may not suffer the savour of the
sea, but is liefer to go by land, if all it be the more pain.  From
a man be entered into the sea he shall pass till one of the havens
of Lumbardy, for there is the best making of purveyance of
victuals; or he may pass to Genoa or Venice or some other.  And he
shall pass by sea in to Greece to the Port Mirrok, or to Valoun or
to Duras, or some other haven of that country.  And from thence he
shall go by land to Constantinople, and he shall pass the water
that is called Brace Saint George, the which is one arm of the sea.
And from thence he shall by land go to Ruffynell, where a good
castle is and a strong; and from therein he shall go to Puluual,
and syne to the castle of Sinope, and from thence to Cappadocia,
that is a great country, where are many great hills.  And he shall
go though Turkey to the port of Chiutok and to the city of Nicaea,
which is but seven miles thence.  That city won the Turks from the
Emperor of Constantinople; and it is a fair city and well walled on
the one side, and on the other side is a great lake and a great
river, the which is called Lay.  From thence men go by the hills of
Nairmount and by the vales of Mailbrins and strait fells and by the
town of Ormanx or by the towns that are on Riclay and Stancon, the
which are great rivers and noble, and so to Antioch the less, which
is set on the river of Riclay.  And there abouts are many good
hills and fair, and many fair woods and great plenty of wild beasts
for to hunt at.

And he that will go another way, he shall go by the plains of
Romany coasting the Roman Sea.  On that coast is a fair castle that
men call Florach, and it is right a strong place.  And uppermore
amongst the mountains is a fair city, that is called Tarsus, and
the city of Longemaath, and the city of Assere, and the city of
Marmistre.  And when a man is passed those mountains and those
fells, he goes by the city of Marioch and by Artoise, where is a
great bridge upon the river of Ferne, that is called Farfar, and it
is a great river bearing ships and it runs right fast out of the
mountains to the city of Damascus.  And beside the city of Damascus
is another great river that comes from the hills of Liban, which
men call Abbana.  At the passing of this river Saint Eustace, that
some-time was called Placidas, lost his wife and his two children.
This river runs through the plain of Archades, and so to the Red
Sea.  From thence men go to the city of Phenice, where are hot
wells and hot baths.  And then men go to the city of Ferne; and
between Phenice and Ferne are ten mile.  And there are many fair
woods.  And then men come to Antioch, which is ten mile thence.
And it is a fair city and well walled about with many fair towers;
and it is a great city, but it was some-time greater than it is
now.  For it was some-time two mile on length and on breadth other
half mile.  And through the midst of that city ran the water of
Farphar and a great bridge over it; and there was some-time in the
walls about this city three hundred and fifty towers, and at each
pillar of the bridge was a stone.  This is the chief city of the
kingdom of Syria.  And ten mile from this city is the port of Saint
Symeon; and there goes the water of Farphar into the sea.  From
Antioch men go to a city that is called Lacuth, and then to Gebel,
and then to Tortouse.  And there near is the land of Channel; and
there is a strong castle that is called Maubek.  From Tortouse pass
men to Tripoli by sea, or else by land through the straits of
mountains and fells.  And there is a city that is called Gibilet.
From Tripoli go men to Acres; and from thence are two ways to
Jerusalem, the one on the left half and the other on the right
half.  By the left way men go by Damascus and by the flum Jordan.
By the right way men go by Maryn and by the land of Flagramy and
near the mountains into the city of Cayphas, that some men call the
castle of Pilgrims.  And from thence to Jerusalem are three day
journey, in the which men shall go through Caesarea Philippi, and
so to Jaffa and Rames and the castle of Emmaus, and so to
Jerusalem.

Now have I told you some ways by land and by water that men may go
by to the Holy Land after the countries that they come from.
Nevertheless they come all to one end.  Yet is there another way to
Jerusalem all by land, and pass not the sea, from France or
Flanders; but that way is full long and perilous and of great
travel, and therefore few go that way.  He that shall go that way,
he shall go through Almayne and Prussia and so to Tartary.  This
Tartary is holden of the great Caan of Cathay, of whom I think to
speak afterward.  This is a full ill land and sandy and little
fruit bearing.  For there grows no corn, ne wine, ne beans, ne
peas, ne none other fruit convenable to man for to live with.  But
there are beasts in great plenty:  and therefore they eat but flesh
without bread and sup the broth and they drink milk of all manner
of beasts.  They eat hounds, cats, ratons, and all other wild
beasts.  And they have no wood, or else little; and therefore they
warm and seethe their meat with horse-dung and cow-dung and of
other beasts, dried against the sun.  And princes and other eat not
but once in the day, and that but little.  And they be right foul
folk and of evil kind.  And in summer, by all the countries, fall
many tempests and many hideous thunders and leits and slay much
people and beasts also full often-time.  And suddenly is there
passing heat, and suddenly also passing cold; and it is the foulest
country and the most cursed and the poorest that men know.  And
their prince, that governeth that country, that they clepe Batho,
dwelleth at the city of Orda.  And truly no good man should not
dwell in that country, for the land and the country is not worthy
hounds to dwell in.  It were a good country to sow in thistle and
briars and broom and thorns and briars; and for no other thing is
it not good.  Natheles, there is good land in some place, but it is
pure little, as men say.

I have not been in that country, nor by those ways.  But I have
been at other lands that march to those countries, as in the land
of Russia, as in the land of Nyflan, and in the realm of Cracow and
of Letto, and in the realm of Daristan, and in many other places
that march to the coasts.  But I went never by that way to
Jerusalem, wherefore I may not well tell you the manner.

But, if this matter please to any worthy man that hath gone by that
way, he may tell it if him like, to that intent, that those, that
will go by that way and make their voyage by those coasts, may know
what way is there.  For no man may pass by that way goodly, but in
time of winter, for the perilous waters and wicked mareys, that be
in those countries, that no man may pass but if it be strong frost
and snow above.  For if the snow ne were not, men might not go upon
the ice, ne horse ne car neither.

And it is well a three journeys of such way to pass from Prussia to
the land of Saracens habitable.  And it behoveth to the Christian
men, that shall war against them every year, to bear their victuals
with them; for they shall find there no good.  And then must they
let carry their victual upon the ice with cars that have no wheels,
that they clepe sleighs.  And as long as their victuals last they
may abide there, but no longer; for there shall they find no wight
that will sell them any victual or anything.  And when the spies
see any Christian men come upon them, they run to the towns, and
cry with a loud voice; KERRA, KERRA, KERRA.  And then anon they arm
them and assemble them together.

And ye shall understand that it freezeth more strongly in those
countries than on this half.  And therefore hath every man stews in
his house, and in those stews they eat and do their occupations all
that they may.  For that is at the north parts that men clepe the
Septentrional where it is all only cold.  For the sun is but little
or none toward those countries.  And therefore in the Septentrion,
that is very north, is the land so cold, that no man may dwell
there.  And, in the contrary, toward the south it is so hot, that
no man ne may dwell there, because that the sun, when he is upon
the south, casteth his beams all straight upon that part.



CHAPTER XV



OF THE CUSTOMS OF SARACENS, AND OF THEIR LAW.  AND HOW THE SOLDAN
REASONED ME, AUTHOR OF THIS BOOK; AND OF THE BEGINNING OF MOHAMMET


NOW, because that I have spoken of Saracens and of their country -
now, if ye will know a part of their law and of their belief, I
shall tell you after that their book that is clept ALKARON telleth.
And some men clepe that book MESHAF.  And some men clepe it HARME,
after the diverse languages of the country.  The which book
Mohammet took them.  In the which book, among other things, is
written, as I have often-time seen and read, that the good shall go
to paradise, and the evil to hell; and that believe all Saracens.
And if a man ask them what paradise they mean, they say, to
paradise that is a place of delights where men shall find all
manner of fruits in all seasons, and rivers running of milk and
honey, and of wine and of sweet water; and that they shall have
fair houses and noble, every man after his desert, made of precious
stones and of gold and of silver; and that every man shall have
four score wives all maidens, and he shall have ado every day with
them, and yet he shall find them always maidens.

Also they believe and speak gladly of the Virgin Mary and of the
Incarnation.  And they say that Mary was taught of the angel; and
that Gabriel said to her, that she was for-chosen from the
beginning of the world and that he shewed to her the Incarnation of
Jesu Christ and that she conceived and bare child maiden; and that
witnesseth their book.

And they say also, that Jesu Christ spake as soon as he was born;
and that he was an holy prophet and a true in word and deed, and
meek and piteous and rightful and without any vice.

And they say also, that when the angel shewed the Incarnation of
Christ unto Mary, she was young and had great dread.  For there was
then an enchanter in the country that dealt with witchcraft, that
men clept Taknia, that by his enchantments could make him in
likeness of an angel, and went often-times and lay with maidens.
And therefore Mary dreaded lest it had been Taknia, that came for
to deceive the maidens.  And therefore she conjured the angel, that
he should tell her if it were he or no.  And the angel answered and
said that she should have no dread of him, for he was very
messenger of Jesu Christ.  Also their book saith, that when that
she had childed under a palm tree she had great shame, that she had
a child; and she greet and said that she would that she had been
dead.  And anon the child spake to her and comforted her, and said,
"Mother, ne dismay thee nought, for God hath hid in thee his
privities for the salvation of the world."  And in other many
places saith their ALKARON, that Jesu Christ spake as soon as he
was born.  And that book saith also that Jesu was sent from God
Almighty for to be mirror and example and token to all men.

And the ALKARON saith also of the day of doom how God shall come to
doom all manner of folk.  And the good he shall draw on his side
and put them into bliss, and the wicked he shall condemn to the
pains of hell.  And among all prophets Jesu was the most excellent
and the most worthy next God, and that he made the gospels in the
which is good doctrine and healthful, full of clarity and
soothfastness and true preaching to them that believe in God.  And
that he was a very prophet and more than a prophet, and lived
without sin, and gave sight to the blind, and healed the lepers,
and raised dead men, and styed to heaven.

And when they may hold the Book of the Gospels of our Lord written
and namely MISSUS EST ANGELUS GABRIEL, that gospel they say, those
that be lettered, often-times in their orisons, and they kiss it
and worship it with great devotion.

They fast an whole month in the year and eat nought but by night.
And they keep them from their wives all that month.  But the sick
men be not constrained to that fast.

Also this book speaketh of Jews and saith that they be cursed; for
they would not believe that Jesu Christ was come of God.  And that
they lied falsely on Mary and on her son Jesu Christ, saying that
they had crucified Jesu the son of Mary; for he was never
crucified, as they say, but that God made him to sty up to him
without death and without annoy.  But he transfigured his likeness
into Judas Iscariot, and him crucified the Jews, and weened that it
had been Jesus.  But Jesus styed to heavens all quick.  And
therefore they say, that the Christian men err and have no good
knowledge of this, and that they believe folily and falsely that
Jesu Christ was crucified.  And they say yet, that and he had been
crucified, that God had done against his righteousness for to
suffer Jesu Christ, that was innocent, to be put upon the cross
without guilt.  And in this article they say that we fail and that
the great righteousness of God might not suffer so great a wrong:
and in this faileth their faith.  For they knowledge well, that the
works of Jesu Christ be good, and his words and his deeds and his
doctrine by his gospels were true, and his miracles also true; and
the blessed Virgin Mary is good, and holy maiden before and after
the birth of Jesu Christ; and that all those that believe perfectly
in God shall be saved.  And because that they go so nigh our faith,
they be lightly converted to Christian law when men preach them and
shew them distinctly the law of Jesu Christ, and when they tell
them of the prophecies.

And also they say, that they know well by the prophecies that the
law of Mahomet shall fail, as the law of the Jews did; and that the
law of Christian people shall last to the day of doom.  And if any
man ask them what is their belief, they answer thus, and in this
form:  "We believe God, former of heaven and of earth, and of all
other things that he made.  And without him is nothing made.  And
we believe of the day of doom, and that every man shall have his
merit, after he hath deserved.  And, we believe it for sooth, all
that God hath said by the mouths of his prophets."

Also Mahomet commanded in his ALKARON, that every man should have
two wives, or three or four; but now they take unto nine, and of
lemans as many as he may sustain.  And if any of their wives mis-
bear them against their husband, he may cast her out of his house,
and depart from her and take another; but he shall depart with her
his goods.

Also, when men speak to them of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost, they say, that they be three persons, but not one
God; for their ALKARON speaketh not of the Trinity.  But they say
well, that God hath speech, and else were he dumb.  And God hath
also a spirit they know well, for else they say, he were not alive.
And when men speak to them of the Incarnation how that by the word
of the angel God sent his wisdom in to earth and enombred him in
the Virgin Mary, and by the word of God shall the dead be raised at
the day of doom, they say, that it is sooth and that the word of
God hath great strength.  And they say that whoso knew not the word
of God he should not know God.  And they say also that Jesu Christ
is the word of God:  and so saith their ALKARON, where it saith
that the angel spake to Mary and said:  "Mary, God shall preach
thee the gospel by the word of his mouth and his name shall be
clept Jesu Christ."

And they say also, that Abraham was friend to God, and that Moses
was familiar speaker with God, and Jesu Christ was the word and the
spirit of God, and that Mohammet was right messenger of God.  And
they say, that of these four, Jesu was the most worthy and the most
excellent and the most great.  So that they have many good articles
of our faith, albeit that they have no perfect law and faith as
Christian men have; and therefore be they lightly converted, and
namely those that understand the scriptures and the prophecies.
For they have the gospels and the prophecies and the Bible written
in their language; wherefore they ken much of holy writ, but they
understand it not but after the letter.  And so do the Jews, for
they understand not the letter ghostly, but bodily; and therefore
be they reproved of the wise, that ghostly understand it.  And
therefore saith Saint Paul:  LITERA OCCIDIT; SPIRITUS AUTEM
VIVIFICAT.  Also the Saracens say, that the Jews be cursed; for
they have befouled the law that God sent them by Moses:  and the
Christian be cursed also, as they say; for they keep not the
commandments and the precepts of the gospel that Jesu Christ taught
them.

And, therefore, I shall tell you what the soldan told me upon a day
in his chamber.  He let void out of his chamber all manner of men,
lords and others, for he would speak with me in counsel.  And there
he asked me how the Christian men governed them in our country.
And I said him, "Right well, thanked be God!"

And he said me, "Truly nay!  For ye Christian men reck right
nought, how untruly to serve God!  Ye should give ensample to the
lewd people for to do well, and ye give them ensample to do evil.
For the commons, upon festival days, when they should go to church
to serve God, then go they to taverns, and be there in gluttony all
the day and all night, and eat and drink as beasts that have no
reason, and wit not when they have enough.  And also the Christian
men enforce themselves in all manners that they may, for to fight
and for to deceive that one that other.  And therewithal they be so
proud, that they know not how to be clothed; now long, now short,
now strait, now large, now sworded, now daggered, and in all manner
guises.  They should be simple, meek and true, and full of alms-
deeds, as Jesu was, in whom they trow; but they be all the
contrary, and ever inclined to the evil, and to do evil.  And they
be so covetous, that, for a little silver, they sell their
daughters, their sisters and their own wives to put them to
lechery.  And one withdraweth the wife of another, and none of them
holdeth faith to another; but they defoul their law that Jesu
Christ betook them to keep for their salvation.  And thus, for
their sins, have they lost all this land that we hold.  For, for
their sins, their God hath taken them into our hands, not only by
strength of ourself, but for their sins.  For we know well, in very
sooth, that when ye serve God, God will help you; and when he is
with you, no man may be against you.  And that know we well by our
prophecies, that Christian men shall win again this land out of our
hands, when they serve God more devoutly; but as long as they be of
foul and of unclean living (as they be now) we have no dread of
them in no kind, for their God will not help them in no wise."

And then I asked him, how he knew the state of Christian men.  And
he answered me, that he knew all the state of all courts of
Christian kings and princes and the state of the commons also by
his messengers that he sent to all lands, in manner as they were
merchants of precious stones, of cloths of gold and of other
things, for to know the manner of every country amongst Christian
men.  And then he let clepe in all the lords that he made void
first out of his chamber, and there he shewed me four that were
great lords in the country, that told me of my country and of many
other Christian countries, as well as they had been of the same
country; and they spake French right well, and the soldan also;
whereof I had great marvel.

Alas! that it is great slander to our faith and to our law, when
folk that be without law shall reprove us and undernim us of our
sins, and they that should be converted to Christ and to the law of
Jesu by our good ensamples and by our acceptable life to God, and
so converted to the law of Jesu Christ, be, through our wickedness
and evil living, far from us and strangers from the holy and very
belief, shall thus appeal us and hold us for wicked livers and
cursed.  And truly they say sooth, for the Saracens be good and
faithful; for they keep entirely the commandment of the holy book
ALKARON that God sent them by his messenger Mahomet, to the which,
as they say, Saint Gabriel the angel oftentime told the will of
God.

And ye shall understand, that Mahomet was born in Arabia, that was
first a poor knave that kept camels, that went with merchants for
merchandise.  And so befell, that he went with the merchants into
Egypt; and they were then Christian in those parts.  And at the
deserts of Arabia, he went into a chapel where a hermit dwelt.  And
when he entered into the chapel that was but a little and a low
thing and had but a little door and a low, then the entry began to
wax so great, and so large and so high as though it had been of a
great minster or the gate of a palace.  And this was the first
miracle, the Saracens say, that Mahomet did in his youth.

After began he for to wax wise and rich.  And he was a great
astronomer.  And after, he was governor and prince of the land of
Cozrodane; and he governed it full wisely, in such manner, that
when the prince was dead, he took the lady to wife that hight
Gadrige.  And Mahomet fell often in the great sickness that men
call the falling evil; wherefore the lady was full sorry that ever
she took him to husband.  But Mahomet made her to believe, that all
times, when he fell so, Gabriel the angel came for to speak with
him, and for the great light and brightness of the angel he might
not sustain him from falling; and therefore the Saracens say, that
Gabriel came often to speak with him.

This Mahomet reigned in Arabia, the year of our Lord Jesu Christ
610, and was of the generation of Ishmael that was Abraham's son,
that he gat upon Hagar his chamberer.  And therefore there be
Saracens that be clept Ishmaelites; and some Hagarenes, of Hagar.
And the other properly be clept Saracens, of Sarah.  And some be
clept Moabites and some Ammonites, for the two sons of Lot, Moab
and Ammon, that he begat on his daughters that were afterward great
earthly princes.

And also Mahomet loved well a good hermit that dwelled in the
deserts a mile from Mount Sinai, in the way that men go from Arabia
toward Chaldea and toward Ind, one day's journey from the sea,
where the merchants of Venice come often for merchandise.  And so
often went Mahomet to this hermit, that all his men were wroth; for
he would gladly hear this hermit preach and make his men wake all
night.  And therefore his men thought to put the hermit to death.
And so it befell upon a night, that Mahomet was drunken of good
wine, and he fell on sleep.  And his men took Mahomet's sword out
of his sheath, whiles he slept, and therewith they slew this
hermit, and put his sword all bloody in his sheath again.  And at
morrow, when he found the hermit dead, he was full sorry and wroth,
and would have done his men to death.  But they all, with one
accord, said that he himself had slain him, when he was drunken,
and shewed him his sword all bloody.  And he trowed that they had
said sooth.  And then he cursed the wine and all those that drink
it.  And therefore Saracens that be devout drink never no wine.
But some drink it privily; for if they drunk it openly, they should
be reproved.  But they drink good beverage and sweet and nourishing
that is made of gallamelle and that is that men make sugar of, that
is of right good savour, and it is good for the breast.

Also it befalleth some-time, that Christian men become Saracens,
either for poverty or for simpleness, or else for their own
wickedness.  And therefore the archflamen or the flamen, as our
archbishop or bishop, when he receiveth them saith thus:  LA ELLEC
OLLA SILA, MACHOMETE RORES ALLA; that is to say, 'There is no God
but one, and Mahomet his messenger.'

Now I have told you a part of their law and of their customs, I
shall say you of their letters that they have, with their names and
the manner of their figures what they be:  Almoy, Bethath, Cathi,
Ephoti, Delphoi, Fothi, Garothi, Hechum, Iotty, Kaythi, Lothum,
Malach, Nabaloth, Orthi, Chesiri, 30ch, Ruth, Holath, Routhi,
Salathi, Thatimus, Yrthom, A3a30th, Arrocchi, 30tipyn, Ichetus.
And these be the names of their a. b. c.  Now shall ye know the
figures. . . . And four letters they have more than other for
diversity of their language and speech, forasmuch as they speak in
their throats; and we in England have in our language and speech
two letters more than they have in their a. b. c.; and that is
[character which cannot be reproduced] and [character which cannot
be reproduced], which be clept thorn and 30gh.



CHAPTER XVI



OF THE LANDS OF ALBANIA AND OF LIBIA.  OF THE WISHINGS FOR WATCHING
OF THE SPARROW-HAWK; AND OF NOAH'S SHIP


NOW, sith I have told you before of the Holy Land and of that
country about, and of many ways for to go to that land and to the
Mount Sinai, and of Babylon the more and the less, and to other
places that I have spoken before, now is time, if it like you, for
to tell you of the marches and isles and diverse beasts, and of
diverse folk beyond these marches.

For in those countries beyond be many diverse countries and many
great kingdoms, that be departed by the four floods that come from
paradise terrestrial.  For Mesopotamia and the kingdom of Chaldea
and Arabia be between the two rivers of Tigris and of Euphrates;
and the kingdom of Media and of Persia be between the rivers of
Nile and of Tigris; and the kingdom of Syria, whereof I have spoken
before, and Palestine and Phoenicia be between Euphrates and the
sea Mediterranean, the which sea dureth in length from Morocco,
upon the sea of Spain, unto the Great Sea, so that it lasteth
beyond Constantinople 3040 miles of Lombardy.

And toward the sea Ocean in Ind is the kingdom of Scythia, that is
all closed with hills.  And after, under Scythia, and from the sea
of Caspian unto the flom of Thainy, is Amazonia, that is the land
of feminye, where that no man is, but only all women.  And after is
Albania, a full great realm; and it is clept Albania, because that
the folk be whiter there than in other marches there-about:  and in
that country be so great hounds and so strong, that they assail
lions and slay them.  And then after is Hircania, Bactria, Hiberia
and many other kingdoms.

And between the Red Sea and the sea Ocean, toward the south is the
kingdom of Ethiopia and of Lybia the higher, the which land of
Lybia (that is to say, Lybia the low) that beginneth at the sea of
Spain from thence where the pillars of Hercules be, and endureth
unto anent Egypt and toward Ethiopia.  In that country of Lybia is
the sea more high than the land, and it seemeth that it would cover
the earth, and natheles yet it passeth not his marks.  And men see
in that country a mountain to the which no man cometh.  In this
land of Lybia whoso turneth toward the east, the shadow of himself
is on the right side; and here, in our country, the shadow is on
the left side.  In that sea of Lybia is no fish; for they may not
live ne dure for the great heat of the sun, because that the water
is evermore boiling for the great heat.  And many other lands there
be that it were too long to tell or to number.  But of some parts I
shall speak more plainly hereafter.

Whoso will then go toward Tartary, toward Persia, toward Chaldea
and toward Ind, he must enter the sea at Genoa or at Venice or at
some other haven that I have told you before.  And then pass men
the sea and arrive at Trebizond that is a good city; and it was
wont to be the haven of Pontus.  There is the haven of Persians and
of Medians and of the marches there beyond.  In that city lieth
Saint Athanasius that was bishop of Alexandria, that made the psalm
QUICUNQUE VULT.

This Athanasius was a great doctor of divinity.  And, because that
he preached and spake so deeply of divinity and of the Godhead, he
was accused to the Pope of Rome that he was an heretic.  Wherefore
the Pope sent after him and put him in prison.  And whiles he was
in prison he made that psalm and sent it to the Pope, and said,
that if he were an heretic, then was that heresy, for that, he
said, was his belief.  And when the Pope saw it, and had examined
it that it was perfect and good, and verily our faith and our
belief, he made him to be delivered out of prison, and commanded
that psalm to be said every day at prime; and so he held Athanasius
a good man.  But he would never go to his bishopric again, because
that they accused him of heresy.

Trebizond was wont to be holden of the Emperor of Constantinople;
but a great man, that he sent for to keep the country against the
Turks, usurped the land and held it to himself, and cleped him
Emperor of Trebizond.

And from thence men go through Little Armenia.  And in that country
is an old castle that stands upon a rock; the which is clept the
castle of the Sparrow-hawk, that is beyond the city of Layays
beside the town of Pharsipee, that belongeth to the lordship of
Cruk, that is a rich lord and a good Christian man; where men find
a sparrow-hawk upon a perch right fair and right well made, and a
fair lady of faerie that keepeth it.  And who that will watch that
sparrow-hawk seven days and seven nights, and, as some men say,
three days and three nights, without company and without sleep,
that fair lady shall give him, when he hath done, the first wish
that he will wish of earthly things; and that hath been proved
often-times.

And one time befell, that a King of Armenia, that was a worthy
knight and doughty man, and a noble princes watched that hawk some
time.  And at the end of seven days and seven nights the lady came
to him and bade him wish, for he had well deserved it.  And he
answered that he was great lord enough, and well in peace, and had
enough of worldly riches; and therefore he would wish none other
thing, but the body of that fair lady, to have it at his will.  And
she answered him, that he knew not what he asked, and said that he
was a fool to desire that he might not have; for she said that he
should not ask but earthly thing, for she was none earthly thing,
but a ghostly thing.  And the king said that he ne would ask none
other thing.  And the lady answered; "Sith that I may not withdraw
you from your lewd corage, I shall give you without wishing, and to
all them that shall come of you.  Sir king! ye shall have war
without peace, and always to the nine degree, ye shall be in
subjection of your enemies, and ye shall be needy of all goods."
And never since, neither the King of Armenia nor the country were
never in peace; ne they had never sith plenty of goods; and they
have been sithen always under tribute of the Saracens.

Also the son of a poor man watched that hawk and wished that he
might chieve well, and to be happy to merchandise.  And the lady
granted him.  And he became the most rich and the most famous
merchant that might be on sea or on earth.  And he became so rich
that he knew not the thousand part of that he had.  And he was
wiser in wishing than was the king.

Also a knight of the Temple watched there, and wished a purse
evermore full of gold.  And the lady granted him.  But she said him
that he had asked the destruction of their order for the trust and
the affiance of that purse, and for the great pride that they
should have.  And so it was.  And therefore look he keep him well,
that shall wake.  For if he sleep he is lost, that never man shall
see him more.

This is not the right way for to go to the parts that I have named
before, but for to see the marvel that I have spoken of.  And
therefore whoso will go right way, men go from Trebizond toward
Armenia the Great unto a city that is clept Erzeroum, that was wont
to be a good city and a plenteous; but the Turks have greatly
wasted it.  There-about groweth no wine nor fruit, but little or
else none.  In this land is the earth more high than in any other,
and that maketh great cold.  And there be many good waters and good
wells that come under earth from the flom of Paradise, that is
clept Euphrates, that is a journey beside that city; and that river
cometh towards Ind under earth, and resorteth into the land of
Altazar.  And so pass men by this Armenia and enter the sea of
Persia.

From that city of Erzeroum go men to an hill that is clept
Sabissocolle.  And there beside is another hill that men clepe
Ararat, but the Jews clepe it Taneez, where Noah's ship rested, and
yet is upon that mountain.  And men may see it afar in clear
weather.  And that mountain is well a seven mile high.  And some
men say that they have seen and touched the ship, and put their
fingers in the parts where the fiend went out, when that Noah said,
BENEDICITE.  But they that say such words, say their will.  For a
man may not go up the mountain, for great plenty of snow that is
always on that mountain, neither summer nor winter.  So that no man
may go up there, ne never man did, since the time of Noah, save a
monk that, by the grace of God, brought one of the planks down,
that yet is in the minster at the foot of the mountain.

And beside is the city of Dain that Noah founded.  And fast by is
the city of Any in the which were wont to be a thousand churches.

But upon that mountain to go up, this monk had great desire.  And
so upon a day, he went up.  And when he was upward the three part
of the mountain he was so weary that he might no further, and so he
rested him, and fell asleep.  And when he awoke he found himself
lying at the foot of the mountain.  And then he prayed devoutly to
God that he would vouchsafe to suffer him go up.  And an angel came
to him, and said that he should go up.  And so he did.  And sith
that time never none.  Wherefore men should not believe such words.

From that mountain go men to the city of Thauriso that was wont to
be clept Taxis, that is a full fair city and a great, and one of
the best that is in the world for merchandise; thither come all
merchants for to buy avoirdupois, and it is in the land of the
Emperor of Persia.  And men say that the emperor taketh more good
in that city for custom of merchandise than doth the richest
Christian king of all his realm that liveth.  For the toll and the
custom of his merchants is without estimation to be numbered.
Beside that city is a hill of salt, and of that salt every man
taketh what he will for to salt with, to his need.  There dwell
many Christian men under tribute of Saracens.  And from that city,
men pass by many towns and castles in going toward Ind unto the
city of Sadonia, that is a ten journeys from Thauriso, and it is a
full noble city and a great.  And there dwelleth the Emperor of
Persia in summer; for the country is cold enough.  And there be
good rivers bearing ships.

After go men the way toward Ind by many journeys, and by many
countries, unto the city that is clept Cassak, and that is a full
noble city, and a plenteous of corns and wines and of all other
goods.  This is the city where the three kings met together when
they went to seek our Lord in Bethlehem to worship him and to
present him with gold, incense, and myrrh.  And it is from that
city to Bethlehem fifty-three journeys.  From that city men go to
another city that is clept Gethe, that is a journey from the sea
that men clepe the Gravelly Sea.  That is the best city that the
Emperor of Persia hath in all his land.  And they clepe flesh there
Dabago and the wine Vapa.  And the Paynims say that no Christian
man may not long dwell ne endure with the life in that city, but
die within short time; and no man knoweth not the cause.

After go men by many cities and towns and great countries that it
were too long to tell unto the city of Cornaa that was wont to be
so great that the walls about hold twenty-five mile about.  The
walls shew yet, but it is not all inhabited.  From Cornaa go men by
many lands and many cities and towns unto the land of Job.  And
there endeth the land of the Emperor of Persia.  And if ye will
know the letters of Persians and what names they have, they be such
as I last devised you, but not in sounding of their words.



CHAPTER XVII



OF THE LAND OF JOB; AND OF HIS AGE.  OF THE ARRAY OF MEN OF
CHALDEA.  OF THE LAND WHERE WOMEN DWELL WITHOUT COMPANY OF MEN.  OF
THE KNOWLEDGE AND VIRTUES OF THE VERY DIAMOND


AFTER the departing from Cornaa, men enter into the land of Job
that is a full fair country and a plenteous of all goods.  And men
clepe that land the Land of Susiana.  In that land is the city of
Theman.

Job was a paynim, and he was Aram of Gosre, his son, and held that
land as prince of that country.  And he was so rich that he knew
not the hundred part of his goods.  And although he were a paynim,
nevertheless he served well God after his law.  And our Lord took
his service to his pleasane.  And when he fell in poverty he was
seventy-eight year of age.  And after, when God had proved his
patience and that it was so great, he brought him again to riches
and to higher estate than he was before.  And after that he was
King of Idumea after King Esau, and when he was king he was clept
Jobab.  And in that kingdom he lived after 170 year.  And so he was
of age, when he died, 248 year.

In that land of Job there ne is no default of no thing that is
needful to man's body.  There be hills, where men get great plenty
of manna in greater abundance than in any other country.  This
manna is clept bread of angels.  And it is a white thing that is
full sweet and right delicious, and more sweet than honey or sugar.
And it cometh of the dew of heaven that falleth upon the herbs in
that country.  And it congealeth and becometh all white and sweet.
And men put it in medicines for rich men to make the womb lax, and
to purge evil blood.  For it cleanseth the blood and putteth out
melancholy.  This land of Job marcheth to the kingdom of Chaldea.

This land of Chaldea is full great.  And the language of that
country is more great in sounding than it is in other parts of the
sea.  Men pass to go beyond by the Tower of Babylon the Great, of
the which I have told you before, where that all the languages were
first changed.  And that is a four journeys from Chaldea.  In that
realm be fair men, and they go full nobly arrayed in clothes of
gold, orfrayed and apparelled with great pearls and precious
stone's full nobly.  And the women be right foul and evil arrayed.
And they go all bare-foot and clothed in evil garments large and
wide, but they be short to the knees, and long sleeves down to the
feet like a monk's frock, and their sleeves be hanging about their
shoulders.  And they be black women foul and hideous, and truly as
foul as they be, as evil they be.

In that kingdom of Chaldea, in a city that is clept Ur, dwelled
Terah, Abraham's father.  And there was Abraham born.  And that was
in that time that Ninus was king of Babylon, of Arabia and of
Egypt.  This Ninus made the city of Nineveh, the which that Noah
had begun before.  And because that Ninus performed it, he cleped
it Nineveh after his own name.  There lieth Tobit the prophet, of
whom Holy Writ speaketh of.  And from that city of Ur Abraham
departed, by the commandment of God, from thence, after the death
of his father, and led with him Sarah his wife and Lot his
brother's son, because that he had no child.  And they went to
dwell in the land of Canaan in a place that is clept Shechem.  And
this Lot was he that was saved, when Sodom and Gomorrah and the
other cities were burnt and sunken down to hell, where that the
Dead Sea is now, as I have told you before.  In that land of
Chaldea they have their proper languages and their proper letters,
such as ye may see hereafter.

Beside the land of Chaldea is the land of Amazonia, that is the
land of Feminye.  And in that realm is all women and no man; not,
as some men say, that men may not live there, but for because that
the women will not suffer no men amongst them to be their
sovereigns.

For sometime there was a king in that country.  And men married, as
in other countries.  And so befell that the king had war with them
of Scythia, the which king hight Colopeus, that was slain in
battle, and all the good blood of his realm.  And when the queen
and all the other noble ladies saw that they were all widows, and
that all the royal blood was lost, they armed them and, as
creatures out of wit, they slew all the men of the country that
were left; for they would that all the women were widows as the
queen and they were.  And from that time hitherwards they never
would suffer man to dwell amongst them longer than seven days and
seven nights; ne that no child that were male should dwell amongst
them longer than he were nourished; and then sent to his father.
And when they will have any company of man then they draw them
towards the lands marching next to them.  And then they have loves
that use them; and they dwell with them an eight days or ten, and
then go home again.  And if they have any knave child they keep it
a certain time, and then send it to the father when he can go alone
and eat by himself; or else they slay it.  And if it be a female
they do away that one pap with an hot iron.  And if it be a woman
of great lineage they do away the left pap that they may the better
bear a shield.  And if it be a woman on foot they do away the right
pap, for to shoot with bow turkeys:  for they shoot well with bows.

In that land they have a queen that governeth all that land, and
all they be obeissant to her.  And always they make her queen by
election that is most worthy in arms; for they be right good
warriors and orped, and wise, noble and worthy.  And they go
oftentime in solde to help of other kings in their wars, for gold
and silver as other soldiers do; and they maintain themselves right
vigourously.  This land of Amazonia is an isle, all environed with
the sea save in two places, where be two entries.  And beyond that
water dwell the men that be their paramours and their loves, where
they go to solace them when they will.

Beside Amazonia is the land of Tarmegyte that is a great country
and a full delectable.  And for the goodness of the country King
Alexander let first make there the city of Alexandria, and yet he
made twelve cities of the same name; but that city is now clept
Celsite.

And from that other coast of Chaldea, toward the south, is
Ethiopia, a great country that stretcheth to the end of Egypt.
Ethiopia is departed in two parts principal, and that is in the
east part and in the meridional part; the which part meridional is
clept Mauritania; and the folk of that country be black enough and
more black than in the tother part, and they be clept Moors.  In
that part is a well, that in the day it is so cold, that no man may
drink thereof; and in the night it is so hot, that no man may
suffer his hand therein.  And beyond that part, toward the south,
to pass by the sea Ocean, is a great land and a great country; but
men may not dwell there for the fervent burning of the sun, so is
it passing hot in that country.

In Ethiopia all the rivers and all the waters be trouble, and they
be somedeal salt for the great heat that is there.  And the folk of
that country be lightly drunken and have but little appetite to
meat.  And they have commonly the flux of the womb.  And they live
not long.  In Ethiopia be many diverse folk; and Ethiope is clept
Cusis.  In that country be folk that have but one foot, and they go
so blyve that it is marvel.  And the foot is so large, that it
shadoweth all the body against the sun, when they will lie and rest
them.  In Ethiopia, when the children be young and little, they be
all yellow; and, when that they wax of age, that yellowness turneth
to be all black.  In Ethiopia is the city of Saba, and the land of
the which one of the three kings that presented our Lord in
Bethlehem, was king of.

From Ethiopia men go into Ind by many diverse countries.  And men
clepe the high Ind, Emlak.  And Ind is divided in three principal
parts; that is, the more that is a full hot country; and Ind the
less, that is a full attempre country, that stretcheth to the land
of Media; and the three part toward the septentrion is full cold,
so that, for pure cold and continual frost, the water becometh
crystal.  And upon those rocks of crystal grow the good diamonds
that be of trouble colour.  Yellow crystal draweth colour like oil.
And they be so hard, that no man may polish them.  And men clepe
them diamonds in that country, and HAMESE in another country.
Other diamonds men find in Arabia that be not so good, and they be
more brown and more tender.  And other diamonds also men find in
the isle of Cyprus, that be yet more tender, and them men may well
polish.  And in the land of Macedonia men find diamonds also.  But
the best and the most precious be in Ind.

And men find many times hard diamonds in a mass that cometh out of
gold, when men pure it and refine it out of the mine; when men
break that mass in small pieces, and sometime it happens that men
find some as great as a peas and some less, and they be as hard as
those of Ind.

And albeit that men find good diamonds in Ind, yet nevertheless men
find them more commonly upon the rocks in the sea and upon hills
where the mine of gold is.  And they grow many together, one
little, another great.  And there be some of the greatness of a
bean and some as great as an hazel nut.  And they be square and
pointed of their own kind, both above and beneath, without working
of man's hand.  And they grow together, male and female.  And they
be nourished with the dew of heaven.  And they engender commonly
and bring forth small children, that multiply and grow all the
year.  I have often-times assayed, that if a man keep them with a
little of the rock and wet them with May-dew oft-sithes, they shall
grow every year, and the small will wax great.  For right as the
fine pearl congealeth and waxeth great of the dew of heaven, right
so doth the very diamond; and right as the pearl of his own kind
taketh roundness, right so the diamond, by virtue of God, taketh
squareness.  And men shall bear the diamond on his left side, for
it is of greater virtue then, than on the right side; for the
strength of their growing is toward the north, that is the left
side of the world, and the left part of man is when he turneth his
face toward the east.

And if you like to know the virtues of the diamond, (as men may
find in THE LAPIDARY that many men know not), I shall tell you, as
they beyond the sea say and affirm, of whom all science and all
philosophy cometh from.  He that beareth the diamond upon him, it
giveth him hardiness and manhood, and it keepeth the limbs of his
body whole.  It giveth him victory of his enemies in plea and in
war, if his cause be rightful.  And it keepeth him that beareth it
in good wit.  And it keepeth him from strife and riot, from evil
swevens from sorrows and from enchantments, and from fantasies and
illusions of wicked spirits.  And if any cursed witch or enchanter
would bewitch him that beareth the diamond, all that sorrow and
mischance shall turn to himself through virtue of that stone.  And
also no wild beast dare assail the man that beareth it on him.
Also the diamond should be given freely, without coveting and
without buying, and then it is of greater virtue.  And it maketh a
man more strong and more sad against his enemies.  And it healeth
him that is lunatic, and them that the fiend pursueth or
travaileth.  And if venom or poison be brought in presence of the
diamond, anon it beginneth to wax moist and for to sweat.

There be also diamonds in Ind that be clept violastres, (for their
colour is like violet, or more brown than the violets), that be
full hard and full precious.  But yet some men love not them so
well as the other; but, in sooth, to me, I would love them as much
as the other, for I have seen them assayed.

Also there is another manner of diamonds that be as white as
crystal, but they be a little more trouble.  And they be good and
of great virtue, and all they be square and pointed of their own
kind.  And some be six squared, some four squared, and some three
as nature shapeth them.  And therefore when great lords and knights
go to seek worship in arms, they bear gladly the diamond upon them.

I shall speak a little more of the diamonds, although I tarry my
matter for a time, to the end, that they that know them not, be not
deceived by gabbers that go by the country, that sell them.  For
whoso will buy the diamond it is needful to him that he know them.
Because that men counterfeit them often of crystal that is yellow
and of sapphires of citron colour that is yellow also, and of the
sapphire loupe and of many other stones.  But I tell you these
counterfeits be not so hard; and also the points will break
lightly, and men may easily polish them.  But some workmen, for
malice, will not polish them; to that intent, to make men believe
that they may not be polished.  But men may assay them in this
manner.  First shear with them or write with them in sapphires, in
crystal or in other precious stones.  After that, men take the
adamant, that is the shipman's stone, that draweth the needle to
him, and men lay the diamond upon the adamant, and lay the needle
before the adamant; and, if the diamond be good and virtuous, the
adamant draweth not the needle to him whiles the diamond is there
present.  And this is the proof that they beyond the sea make.

Natheles it befalleth often-time, that the good diamond loseth his
virtue by sin, and for incontinence of him that beareth it.  And
then it is needful to make it to recover his virtue again, or else
it is of little value.



CHAPTER XVIII



OF THE CUSTOMS OF ISLES ABOUT IND.  OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWIXT IDOLS
AND SIMULACRES.  OF THREE MANNER GROWING OF PEPPER UPON ONE TREE.
OF THE WELL THAT CHANGETH HIS ODOUR EVERY HOUR OF THE DAY; AND THAT
IS MARVEL


IN Ind be full many diverse countries.  And it is clept Ind, for a
flom that runneth throughout the country that is clept Ind.  In
that flom men find eels of thirty foot long and more.  And the folk
that dwell nigh that water be of evil colour, green and yellow.

In Ind and about Ind be more than 5000 isles good and great that
men dwell in, without those that he inhabitable, and without other
small isles.  In every isle is great plenty of cities, and of
towns, and of folk without number.  For men of Ind have this
condition of kind, that they never go out of their own country, and
therefore is there great multitude of people.  But they be not
stirring ne movable, because that they be in the first climate,
that is of Saturn; and Saturn is slow and little moving, for he
tarryeth to make his turn by the twelve signs thirty year.  And the
moon passeth through the twelve signs in one month.  And for
because that Saturn is of so late stirring, therefore the folk of
that country that be under his climate have of kind no will for to
move ne stir to seek strange places.  And in our country is all the
contrary; for we be in the seventh climate, that is of the moon.
And the moon is of lightly moving, and the moon is planet of way;
and for that skill it giveth us will of kind for to move lightly
and for to go divers ways, and to seek strange things and other
diversities of the world; for the moon environeth the earth more
hastily than any other planet.

Also men go through Ind by many diverse countries to the great sea
Ocean.  And after, men find there an isle that is clept Crues.  And
thither come merchants of Venice and Genoa, and of other marches,
for to buy merchandises.  But there is so great heat in those
marches, and namely in that isle, that, for the great distress of
the heat, men's ballocks hang down to their knees for the great
dissolution of the body.  And men of that country, that know the
manner, let bind them up, or else might they not live, and anoint
them with ointments made therefore, to hold them up.

In that country and in Ethiopia, and in many other countries, the
folk lie all naked in rivers and waters, men and women together,
from undern of the day till it be past the noon.  And they lie all
in the water, save the visage, for the great heat that there is.
And the women have no shame of the men, but lie all together, side
to side, till the heat be past.  There may men see many foul figure
assembled, and namely nigh the good towns.

In that isle be ships without nails of iron or bonds, for the rocks
of the adamants, for they be all full thereabout in that sea, that
it is marvel to speak of.  And if a ship passed by those marches
that had either iron bonds or iron nails, anon he should be
perished; for the adamant of his kind draweth the iron to him.  And
so would it draw to him the ship because of the iron, that he
should never depart from it, ne never go thence.

From that isle men go by sea to another isle that is clept Chana,
where is great plenty of corn and wine.  And it was wont to be a
great isle, and a great haven and a good; but the sea hath greatly
wasted it and overcome it.  The king of that country was wont to be
so strong and so mighty that he held war against King Alexander.

The folk of that country have a diverse law.  For some of them
worship the sun, some the moon, some the fire, some trees, some
serpents, or the first thing that they meet at morrow.  And some
worship simulacres and some idols.  But between simulacres and
idols is a great difference.  For simulacres be images made after
likeness of men or of women, or of the sun, or of the moon, or of
any beast, or of any kindly thing.  And idols is an image made of
lewd will of man, that man may not find among kindly things, as an
image that hath four heads, one of a man, another of an horse or of
an ox, or of some other beast, that no man hath seen after kindly
disposition.

And they that worship simulacres, they worship them for some worthy
man that was sometime, as Hercules, and many other that did many
marvels in their time.  For they say well that they be not gods;
for they know well that there is a God of kind that made all
things, the which is in heaven.  But they know well that this may
not do the marvels that he made, but if it had been by the special
gift of God; and therefore they say that he was well with God, and
for because that he was so well with God, therefore they worship
him.  And so say they of the sun, because that he changeth the
time, and giveth heat, and nourisheth all things upon earth; and
for it is of so great profit, they know well that that might not
be, but that God loveth it more than any other thing, and, for that
skill, God hath given it more great virtue in the world.
Therefore, it is good reason, as they say, to do it worship and
reverence.  And so say they, and make their reasons, of other
planets, and of the fire also, because it is so profitable.

And of idols they say also that the ox is the most holy beast that
is in earth and most patient, and more profitable than any other.
For he doth good enough and he doth no evil; and they know well
that it may not be without special grace of God.  And therefore
make they their god of an ox the one part, and the other half of a
man.  Because that man is the most noble creature in earth, and
also for he hath lordship above all beasts, therefore make they the
halvendel of idol of a man upwards; and the tother half of an ox
downwards, and of serpents, and of other beasts and diverse things,
that they worship, that they meet first at morrow.

And they worship also specially all those that they have good
meeting of; and when they speed well in their journey, after their
meeting, and namely such as they have proved and assayed by
experience of long time; for they say that thilk good meeting ne
may not come but of the grace of God.  And therefore they make
images like to those things that they have belief in, for to behold
them and worship them first at morning, or they meet any
contrarious things.  And there be also some Christian men that say,
that some beasts have good meeting, that is to say for to meet with
them first at morrow, and some beasts wicked meeting; and that they
have proved oft-time that the hare hath full evil meeting, and
swine and many other beasts.  And the sparrow-hawk or other fowls
of ravine, when they fly after their prey and take it before men of
arms, it is a good sign; and if he fail of taking his prey, it is
an evil sign.  And also to such folk, it is an evil meeting of
ravens.

In these things and in such other, there be many folk that believe;
because it happeneth so often-time to fall after their fantasies.
And also there be men enough that have no belief in them.  And,
sith that Christian men have such belief, that be informed and
taught all day by holy doctrine, wherein they should believe, it is
no marvel then, that the paynims, that have no good doctrine but
only of their nature, believe more largely for their simplesse.
And truly I have seen of paynims and Saracens that men clepe
Augurs, that, when we ride in arms in divers countries upon our
enemies, by the flying of fowls they would tell us the
prognostications of things that fell after; and so they did full
oftentimes, and proffered their heads to-wedde, but if it would
fall as they said.  But natheles, therefore should not a man put
his belief in such things, but always have full trust and belief in
God our sovereign Lord.

This isle of Chana the Saracens have won and hold.  In that isle be
many lions and many other wild beasts.  And there be rats in that
isle as great as hounds here; and men take them with great
mastiffs, for cats may not take them.  In this isle and many other
men bury not no dead men, for the heat is there so great, that in a
little time the flesh will consume from the bones.

From thence men go by sea toward Ind the more to a city, that men
clepe Sarche, that is a fair city and a good.  And there dwell many
Christian men of good faith.  And there be many religious men, and
namely of mendicants.

After go men by sea to the land of Lomb.  In that land groweth the
pepper in the forest that men clepe Combar.  And it groweth nowhere
else in all the world, but in that forest, and that endureth well
an eighteen journeys in length.  In the forest be two good cities;
that one hight Fladrine and that other Zinglantz, and in every of
them dwell Christian men and Jews, great plenty.  For it is a good
country and a plentiful, but there is overmuch passing heat.

And ye shall understand, that the pepper groweth in manner as doth
a wild vine that is planted fast by the trees of that wood for to
sustain it by, as doth the vine.  And the fruit thereof hangeth in
manner as raisins.  And the tree is so thick charged, that it
seemeth that it would break.  And when it is ripe it is all green,
as it were ivy berries.  And then men cut them, as men do the
vines, and then they put it upon an oven, and there it waxeth black
and crisp.  And there is three manner of pepper all upon one tree;
long pepper, black pepper and white pepper.  The long pepper men
clepe SORBOTIN, and the black pepper is clept FULFULLE, and the
white pepper is clept BANO.  The long pepper cometh first when the
leaf beginneth to come, and it is like the cats of hazel that
cometh before the leaf, and it hangeth low.  And after cometh the
black with the leaf, in manner of clusters of raisins, all green.
And when men have gathered it, then cometh the white that is
somedeal less than the black.  And of that men bring but little
into this country; for they beyond withhold it for themselves,
because it is better and more attempre in kind than the black.  And
therefore is there not so great plenty as of the black.

In that country be many manner of serpents and of other vermin for
the great heat of the country and of the pepper.  And some men say,
that when they will gather the pepper, they make fire, and burn
about to make the serpents and the cockodrills to flee.  But save
their grace of all that say so.  For if they burnt about the trees
that bear, the pepper should be burnt, and it would dry up all the
virtue, as of any other thing; and then they did themselves much
harm, and they should never quench the fire.  But thus they do:
they anoint their hands and their feet [with a juice] made of
snails and of other things made therefore, of the which the
serpents and the venomous beasts hate and dread the savour; and
that maketh them flee before them, because of the smell, and then
they gather it surely enough.

Also toward the head of that forest is the city of Polombe.  And
above the city is a great mountain that also is clept Polombe.  And
of that mount the city hath his name.

And at the foot of that mount is a fair well and a great, that hath
odour and savour of all spices.  And at every hour of the day he
changeth his odour and his savour diversely.  And whoso drinketh
three times fasting of that water of that well he is whole of all
manner sickness that he hath.  And they that dwell there and drink
often of that well they never have sickness; and they seem always
young.  I have drunken thereof three or four sithes, and yet,
methinketh, I fare the better.  Some men clepe it the well of
youth.  For they that often drink thereof seem always young-like,
and live without sickness.  And men say, that that well cometh out
of Paradise, and therefore it is so virtuous.

By all that country groweth good ginger, and therefore thither go
the merchants for spicery.

In that land men worship the ox for his simpleness and for his
meekness, and for the profit that cometh of him.  And they say,
that he is the holiest beast in earth.  For them seemeth, that
whosoever be meek and patient, he is holy and profitable; for then,
they say, he hath all virtues in him.  They make the ox to labour
six year or seven, and then they eat him.  And the king of the
country hath alway an ox with him.  And he that keepeth him hath
every day great fees, and keepeth every day his dung and his urine
in two vessels of gold, and bring it before their prelate that they
clepe Archi-protopapaton.  And he beareth it before the king and
maketh there over a great blessing.  And then the king wetteth his
hands there, in that they clepe gall, and anointeth his front and
his breast.  And after, he froteth him with the dung and with the
urine with great reverence, for to be fullfilled of virtues of the
ox and made holy by the virtue of that holy thing that nought is
worth.  And when the king hath done, then do the lords; and after
them their ministers and other men, if they may have any remenant.

In that country they make idols, half man half ox.  And in those
idols evil spirits speak and give answer to men of what is asked
them.  Before these idols men slay their children many times, and
spring the blood upon the idols; and so they make their sacrifice.

And when any man dieth in the country they burn his body in name of
penance; to that intent, that he suffer no pain in earth to be
eaten of worms.  And if his wife have no child they burn her with
him, and say, that it is reason, that she make him company in that
other world as she did in this.  But and she have children with
him, they let her live with them, to bring them up if she will.
And if that she love more to live with her children than for to die
with her husband, men hold her for false and cursed; ne she shall
never be loved ne trusted of the people.  And if the woman die,
before the husband, men burn him with her, if that he will; and if
he will not, no man constraineth him thereto, but he may wed
another time without blame or reproof.

In that country grow many strong vines.  And the women drink wine,
and men not.  And the women shave their beards, and the men not.



CHAPTER XIX



OF THE DOOMS MADE BY ST. THOMAS'S HAND.  OF DEVOTION AND SACRIFICE
MADE TO IDOLS THERE, IN THE CITY OF CALAMYE; AND OF THE PROCESSION
IN GOING ABOUT THE CITY


FROM that country men pass by many marches toward a country, a ten
journeys thence, that is clept Mabaron; and it is a great kingdom,
and it hath many fair cities and towns.

In that kingdom lieth the body of Saint Thomas the apostle in flesh
and bone, in a fair tomb in the city of Calamye; for there he was
martyred and buried.  And men of Assyria bare his body into
Mesopotamia into the city of Edessa, and after, he was brought
thither again.  And the arm and the hand that he put in our Lord's
side, when he appeared to him after his resurrection and said to
him, NOLI ESSE INCREDULUS, SED FIDELIS, is yet lying in a vessel
without the tomb.  And by that hand they make all their judgments
in the country, whoso hath right or wrong.  For when there is any
dissension between two parties, and every of them maintaineth his
cause, and saith that his cause is rightful, and that other saith
the contrary, then both parties write their causes in two bills and
put them in the hand of Saint Thomas.  And anon he casteth away the
bill of the wrong cause and holdeth still the bill with the right
cause.  And therefore men come from far countries to have judgment
of doubtable causes.  And other judgment use they none there.

Also the church, where Saint Thomas' lieth, is both great and fair,
and all full of great simulacres, and those be great images that
they clepe their gods, of the which the least is as great as two
men.

And, amongst these other, there is a great image more than any of
the other, that is all covered with fine gold and precious stones
and rich pearls; and that idol is the god of false Christians that
have reneyed their faith.  And it sitteth in a chair of gold, full
nobly arrayed, and he hath about his neck large girdles wrought of
gold and precious stones and pearls.  And this church is full
richly wrought and, all overgilt within.  And to that idol go men
on pilgrimage, as commonly and with as great devotion as Christian
men go to Saint James, or other holy pilgrimages.  And many folk
that come from far lands to seek that idol for the great devotion
that they have, they look never upward, but evermore down to the
earth, for dread to see anything about them that should let them of
their devotion.  And some there be that go on pilgrimage to this
idol, that bear knives in their hands, that be made full keen and
sharp; and always as they go, they smite themselves in their arms
and in their legs and in their thighs with many hideous wounds; and
so they shed their blood for love of that idol.  And they say, that
he is blessed and holy, that dieth so for love of his god.  And
other there be that lead their children for to slay, to make
sacrifice to that idol; and after they have slain them they spring
the blood upon the idol.  And some there be that come from far; and
in going toward this idol, at every third pace that they go from
their house, they kneel; and so continue till they come thither:
and when they come there, they take incense and other aromatic
things of noble smell, and cense the idol, as we would do here
God's precious body.  And so come folk to worship this idol, some
from an hundred mile, and some from many more.

And before the minster of this idol, is a vivary, in manner of a
great lake, full of water.  And therein pilgrims cast gold and
silver, pearls and precious stones without number, instead of
offerings.  And when the minister of that church need to make any
reparation of the church or of any of the idols, they take gold and
silver, pearls and precious stones out of the vivary, to quit the
costage of such thing as they make or repair; so that that nothing
is faulty, but anon it shall be amended.  And ye shall understand,
that when [there be] great feasts and solemnities of that idol, as
the dedication of the church and the throning of the idol, all the
country about meet there together.  And they set this idol upon a
car with great reverence, well arrayed with cloths of gold, of rich
cloths of Tartary, of Camaka, and other precious cloths.  And they
lead him about the city with great solemnity.  And before the car
go first in procession all the maidens of the country, two and two
together full ordinatly.  And after those maidens go the pilgrims.
And some of them fall down under the wheels of the car, and let the
car go over them, so that they be dead anon.  And some have their
arms or their limbs all to-broken, and some the sides.  And all
this do they for love of their god, in great devotion.  And them
thinketh that the more pain, and the more tribulation that they
suffer for love of their god, the more joy they shall have in
another world.  And, shortly to say you, they suffer so great
pains, and so hard martyrdoms for love of their idol, that a
Christian man, I trow, durst not take upon him the tenth part the
pain for love of our Lord Jesu Christ.  And after, I say you,
before the car, go all the minstrels of the country without number,
with diverse instruments, and they make all the melody that they
can.

And when they have gone all about the city, then they return again
to the minster, and put the idol again into his place.  And then
for the love and in worship of that idol, and for the reverence of
the feast, they slay themselves, a two hundred or three hundred
persons, with sharp knives, of the which they bring the bodies
before the idol.  And then they say that those be saints, because
that they slew themselves of their own good will for love of their
idol.  And as men here that had an holy saint of his kin would
think that it were to them an high worship, right so then, thinketh
there.  And as men here devoutly would write holy saints' lives and
their miracles, and sue for their canonizations, right so do they
there for them that slay themselves wilfully for love of their
idol, and say, that they be glorious martyrs and saints, and put
them in their writings and in their litanies, and avaunt them
greatly, one to another, of their holy kinsmen that so become
saints, and say, I have more holy saints in my kindred, than thou
in thine!

And the custom also there is this, that when they that have such
devotion and intent for to slay himself for love of his god, they
send for all their friends, and have great plenty of minstrels; and
they go before the idol leading him that will slay himself for such
devotion between them, with great reverence.  And he, all naked,
hath a full sharp knife in his hand, and he cutteth a great piece
of his flesh, and casteth it in the face of his idol, saying his
orisons, recommending him to his god.  And then he smiteth himself
and maketh great wounds and deep, here and there, till he fall down
dead.  And then his friends present his body to the idol.  And then
they say, singing, Holy god! behold what thy true servant hath done
for thee.  He hath forsaken his wife and his children and his
riches, and all the goods of the world and his own life for the
love of thee, and to make thee sacrifice of his flesh and of his
blood.  Wherefore, holy god, put him among thy best beloved saints
in thy bliss of paradise, for he hath well deserved it.  And then
they make a great fire, and burn the body.  And then everych of his
friends take a quantity of the ashes, and keep them instead of
relics, and say that it is holy thing.  And they have no dread of
no peril whiles they have those holy ashes upon them.  And [they]
put his name in their litanies as a saint.



CHAPTER XX



OF THE EVIL CUSTOMS USED IN THE ISLE OF LAMARY.  AND HOW THE EARTH
AND THE SEA BE OF ROUND FORM AND SHAPE, BY PROOF OF THE STAR THAT
IS CLEPT ANTARCTIC, THAT IS FIXED IN THE SOUTH


FROM that country go men by the sea ocean, and by many divers isles
and by many countries that were too long for to tell of.  And a
fifty-two journeys from this land that I have spoken of, there is
another land, that is full great, that men clepe Lamary.  In that
land is full great heat.  And the custom there is such, that men
and women go all naked.  And they scorn when they see any strange
folk going clothed.  And they say, that God made Adam and Eve all
naked, and that no man should shame him to shew him such as God
made him, for nothing is foul that is of kindly nature.  And they
say, that they that be clothed be folk of another world, or they be
folk that trow not in God.  And they say, that they believe in God
that formed the world, and that made Adam and Eve and all other
things.  And they wed there no wives, for all the women there be
common and they forsake no man.  And they say they sin if they
refuse any man; and so God commanded to Adam and Eve and to all
that come of him, when he said, CRESCITE ET MULTIPLICAMINI ET
REPLETE TERRAM.  And therefore may no man in that country say, This
is my wife; ne no woman may say, This my husband.  And when they
have children, they may give them to what man they will that hath
companied with them.  And also all the land is common; for all that
a man holdeth one year, another man hath it another year; and every
man taketh what part that him liketh.  And also all the goods of
the land be common, corns and all other things:  for nothing there
is kept in close, ne nothing there is under lock, and every man
there taketh what he will without any contradiction, and as rich is
one man there as is another.

But in that country there is a cursed custom, for they eat more
gladly man's flesh than any other flesh; and yet is that country
abundant of flesh, of fish, of corns, of gold and silver, and of
all other goods.  Thither go merchants and bring with them children
to sell to them of the country, and they buy them.  And if they be
fat they eat them anon.  And if they be lean they feed them till
they be fat, and then they eat them.  And they say, that it is the
best flesh and the sweetest of all the world.

In that land, ne in many other beyond that, no man may see the Star
Transmontane, that is clept the Star of the Sea, that is unmovable
and that is toward the north, that we clepe the Lode-star.  But men
see another star, the contrary to him, that is toward the south,
that is clept Antartic.  And right as the ship-men take their
advice here and govern them by the Lode-star, right so do ship-men
beyond those parts by the star of the south, the which star
appeareth not to us.  And this star that is toward the north, that
we clepe the Lode-star, ne appeareth not to them.  For which cause
men may well perceive, that the land and the sea be of round shape
and form; for the part of the firmament sheweth in one country that
sheweth not in another country.  And men may well prove by
experience and subtle compassment of wit, that if a man found
passages by ships that would go to search the world, men might go
by ship all about the world and above and beneath.

The which thing I prove thus after that I have seen.  For I have
been toward the parts of Brabant, and beholden the Astrolabe that
the star that is clept the Transmontane is fifty-three degrees
high; and more further in Almayne and Bohemia it hath fifty-eight
degrees; and more further toward the parts septentrional it is
sixty-two degrees of height and certain minutes; for I myself have
measured it by the Astrolabe.  Now shall ye know, that against the
Transmontane is the tother star that is clept Antarctic, as I have
said before.  And those two stars ne move never, and by them
turneth all the firmament right as doth a wheel that turneth by his
axle-tree.  So that those stars bear the firmament in two equal
parts, so that it hath as much above as it hath beneath.  After
this, I have gone toward the parts meridional, that is, toward the
south, and I have found that in Lybia men see first the star
Antarctic.  And so far I have gone more further in those countries,
that I have found that star more high; so that toward the High
Lybia it is eighteen degrees of height and certain minutes (of the
which sixty minutes make a degree).  After going by sea and by land
toward this country of that I have spoken, and to other isles and
lands beyond that country, I have found the Star Antarctic of
thirty-three degrees of height and more minutes.  And if I had had
company and shipping for to go more beyond, I trow well, in
certain, that we should have seen all the roundness of the
firmament all about.  For, as I have said to you before, the half
of the firmament is between those two stars, the which halvendel I
have seen.  And of the tother halvendel I have seen, toward the
north under the Transmontane, sixty-two degrees and ten minutes,
and toward the part meridional I have seen under the Antarctic,
thirty-three degrees and sixteen minutes.  And then, the halvendel
of the firmament in all holdeth not but nine score degrees.  And of
those nine score, I have seen sixty-two on that one part and
thirty-three on that other part; that be, ninety-five degrees and
nigh the halvendel of a degree.  And so, there ne faileth but that
I have seen all the firmament, save four score and four degrees and
the halvendel of a degree, and that is not the fourth part of the
firmament; for the fourth part of the roundness of the firmament
holds four score and ten degrees, so there faileth but five degrees
and an half of the fourth part.  And also I have seen the three
parts of all the roundness of the firmament and more yet five
degrees and a half.  By the which I say you certainly that men may
environ all the earth of all the world, as well under as above, and
turn again to his country, that had company and shipping and
conduct.  And always he should find men, lands and isles, as well
as in this country.  For ye wit well, that they that be toward the
Antarctic, they be straight, feet against feet, of them that dwell
under the Transmontane; also well as we and they that dwell under
us be feet against feet.  For all the parts of sea and of land have
their opposites, habitable trepassable, and they of this half and
beyond half.

And wit well, that, after that that I may perceive and comprehend,
the lands of Prester John, Emperor of Ind, be under us.  For in
going from Scotland or from England toward Jerusalem men go upward
always.  For our land is in the low part of the earth toward the
west, and the land of Prester John is in the low part of the earth
toward the east.  And [they] have there the day when we have the
night; and also, high to the contrary, they have the night when we
have the day.  For the earth and the sea be of round form and
shape, as I have said before; and that that men go upward to one
coast, men go downward to another coast.

Also ye have heard me say that Jerusalem is in the midst of the
world.  And that may men prove, and shew there by a spear, that is
pight into the earth, upon the hour of midday, when it is equinox,
that sheweth no shadow on no side.  And that it should be in the
midst of the world, David witnesseth it in the Psalter, where he
saith, DEUS OPERATUS EST SALUTEM IN MEDIA TERRAE.  Then, they, that
part from those parts of the west for to go toward Jerusalem, as
many journeys as they go upward for to go thither, in as many
journeys may they go from Jerusalem unto other confines of the
superficiality of the earth beyond.  And when men go beyond those
journeys toward Ind and to the foreign isles, all is environing the
roundness of the earth and of the sea under our countries on this
half.

And therefore hath it befallen many times of one thing that I have
heard counted when I was young, how a worthy man departed some-time
from our countries for to go search the world.  And so he passed
Ind and the isles beyond Ind, where be more than 5000 isles.  And
so long he went by sea and land, and so environed the world by many
seasons, that he found an isle where he heard speak his own
language, calling on oxen in the plough, such words as men speak to
beasts in his own country whereof he had great marvel, for he knew
not how it might be.  But I say, that he had gone so long by land
and by sea, that he had environed all the earth; that he was come
again environing, that is to say, going about, unto his own
marches, and if he would have passed further, till he had found his
country and his own knowledge.  But he turned again from thence,
from whence he was come from.  And so he lost much painful labour,
as himself said a great while after that he was come home.  For it
befell after, that he went into Norway.  And there tempest of the
sea took him, and he arrived in an isle.  And, when he was in that
isle, he knew well that it was the isle, where he had heard speak
his own language before and the calling of oxen at the plough; and
that was possible thing.

But how it seemeth to simple men unlearned, that men ne may not go
under the earth, and also that men should fall toward the heaven
from under.  But that may not be, upon less than we may fall toward
heaven from the earth where we be.  For from what part of the earth
that men dwell, either above or beneath, it seemeth always to them
that dwell that they go more right than any other folk.  And right
as it seemeth to us that they be under us, right so it seemeth to
them that we be under them.  For if a man might fall from the earth
unto the firmament, by greater, reason the earth and the sea that
be so great and so heavy should fall to the firmament:  but that
may not be, and therefore saith our Lord God, NON TIMEAS ME, QUI
SUSPENDI TERRAM EX NIHILO?

And albeit that it be possible thing that men may so environ all
the world, natheles, of a thousand persons, one ne might not happen
to return into his country.  For, for the greatness of the earth
and of the sea, men may go by a thousand and a thousand other ways,
that no man could ready him perfectly toward the parts that he came
from, but if it were by adventure and hap, or by the grace of God.
For the earth is full large and full great, and holds in roundness
and about environ, by above and by beneath, 20425 miles, after the
opinion of old wise astronomers; and their sayings I reprove
nought.  But, after my little wit, it seemeth me, saving their
reverence, that it is more.

And for to have better understanding I say thus.  Be there imagined
a figure that hath a great compass.  And, about the point of the
great compass that is clept the centre, be made another little
compass.  Then after, be the great compass devised by lines in many
parts, and that all the lines meet at the centre.  So, that in as
many parts as the great compass shall be departed, in as many shall
be departed the little, that is about the centre, albeit that the
spaces be less.  Now then, be the great compass represented for the
firmament, and the little compass represented for the earth.  Now
then, the firmament is devised by astronomers in twelve signs, and
every sign is devised in thirty degrees; that is, 360 degrees that
the firmament hath above.  Also, be the earth devised in as many
parts as the firmament, and let every part answer to a degree of
the firmament.  And wit it well, that, after the authors of
astronomy, 700 furlongs of earth answer to a degree of the
firmament, and those be eighty-seven miles and four furlongs.  Now
be that here multiplied by 360 sithes, and then they be 31,500
miles every of eight furlongs, after miles of our country.  So much
hath the earth in roundness and of height environ, after mine
opinion and mine understanding.

And ye shall understand, that after the opinion of old wise
philosophers and astronomers, our country ne Ireland ne Wales ne
Scotland ne Norway ne the other isles coasting to them ne be not in
the superficiality counted above the earth, as it sheweth by all
the books of astronomy.  For the superficiality of the earth is
parted in seven parts for the seven planets, and those parts be
clept climates.  And our parts be not of the seven climates, for
they be descending toward the west [drawing] towards the roundness
of the world.  And also these isles of Ind which be even against us
be not reckoned in the climates.  For they be against us that be in
the low country.  And the seven climates stretch them environing
the world.



CHAPTER XXI



OF THE PALACE OF THE KING OF THE ISLE OF JAVA.  OF THE TREES THAT
BEAR MEAL, HONEY, WINE, AND VENOM; AND OF OTHER MARVELS AND CUSTOMS
USED IN THE ISLES MARCHING THEREABOUT


BESIDE that isle that I have spoken of, there is another isle that
is clept Sumobor.  That is a great isle, and the king thereof is
right mighty.  The folk of that isle make them always to be marked
in the visage with an hot iron, both men and women, for great
noblesse, for to be known from other folk; for they hold themselves
most noble and most worthy of all the world.  And they have war
always with the folk that go all naked.

And fast beside is another isle, that is clept Betemga, that is a
good isle and a plenteous.  And many other isles be thereabout,
where there be many of diverse folk, of the which it were too long
to speak of all.

But fast beside that isle, for to pass by sea, is a great isle and
a great country that men clepe Java.  And it is nigh two thousand
mile in circuit.  And the king of that country is a full great lord
and a rich and a mighty, and hath under him seven other kings of
seven other isles about him.  This isle is full well inhabited, and
full well manned.  There grow all manner of spicery, more
plenteously than in any other country, as of ginger, cloves-
gilofre, canell, seedwall, nutmegs and maces.  And wit well, that
the nutmeg beareth the maces; for right as the nut of the hazel
hath an husk without, that the nut is closed in till it be ripe and
that after falleth out, right so it is of the nutmeg and of the
maces.  Many other spices and many other goods grow in that isle.
For of all things is there plenty, save only of wine.  But there is
gold and silver, great plenty.

And the king of that country hath a palace full noble and full
marvellous, and more rich than any in the world.  For all the
degrees to go up into halls and chambers be, one of gold, another
of silver.  And also, the pavements of halls and chambers be all
square, of gold one, and another of silver.  And all the walls
within be covered with gold and silver in fine plates, and in those
plates be stories and battles of knights enleved, and the crowns
and the circles about their heads be made of precious stones and
rich pearls and great.  And the halls and the chambers of the
palace be all covered within with gold and silver, so that no man
would trow the riches of that palace but he had seen it.  And wit
well, that the king of that isle is so mighty, that he hath many
times overcome the great Chan of Cathay in battle, that is the most
great emperor that is under the firmament either beyond the sea or
on this half.  For they have had often-time war between them,
because that the great Chan would constrain him to hold his land of
him; but that other at all times defendeth him well against him.

After that isle, in going by sea, men find another isle, good and
great, that men clepe Pathen, that is a great kingdom full of fair
cities and full of towns.  In that land grow trees that bear meal,
whereof men make good bread and white and of good savour; and it
seemeth as it were of wheat, but it is not allinges of such savour.
And there be other trees that bear honey good and sweet, and other
trees that bear venom, against the which there is no medicine but
[one]; and that is to take their proper leaves and stamp them and
temper them with water and then drink it, and else he shall die;
for triacle will not avail, ne none other medicine.  Of this venom
the Jews had let seek of one of their friends for to empoison all
Christianity, as I have heard them say in their confession before
their dying:  but thanked be Almighty God! they failed of their
purpose; but always they make great mortality of people.  And other
trees there be also that bear wine of noble sentiment.  And if you
like to hear how the meal cometh out of the trees I shall say you.
Men hew the trees with an hatchet, all about the foot of the tree,
till that the bark be parted in many parts, and then cometh out
thereof a thick liquor, the which they receive in vessels, and dry
it at the heat of the sun; and then they have it to a mill to grind
and it becometh fair meal and white.  And the honey and the wine
and the venom be drawn out of other trees in the same manner, and
put in vessels for to keep.

In that isle is a dead sea, that is a lake that hath no ground; and
if anything fall into that lake it shall never come up again.  In
that lake grow reeds, that be canes, that they clepe Thaby, that be
thirty fathoms long; and of these canes men make fair houses.  And
there be other canes that be not so long, that grow near the land
and have so long roots that endure well a four quarters of a
furlong or more; and at the knots of those roots men find precious
stones that have great virtues.  And he that beareth any of them
upon him, iron ne steel may not hurt him, ne draw no blood upon
him; and therefore, they that have those stones upon them fight
full hardily both on sea and land, for men may not harm [them] on
no part.  And therefore, they that know the manner, and shall fight
with them, they shoot to them arrows and quarrels without iron or
steel, and so they hurt them and slay them.  And also of those
canes they make houses and ships and other things, as we have here,
making houses and ships of oak or of any other trees.  And deem no
man that I say it but for a trifle, for I have seen of the canes
with mine own eyes, full many times, lying upon the river of that
lake, of the which twenty of our fellows ne might not lift up ne
bear one to the earth.

After this isle men go by sea to another isle that is clept
Calonak.  And it is a fair land and a plenteous of goods.  And the
king of that country hath as many wives as he will.  For he maketh
search all the country to get him the fairest maidens that may be
found, and maketh them to be brought before him.  And he taketh one
one night, and another another night, and so forth continually
suing; so that he hath a thousand wives or more.  And he lieth
never but one night with one of them, and another night with
another; but if that one happen to be more lusty to his pleasance
than another.  And therefore the king getteth full many children,
some-time an hundred, some-time a two-hundred, and some-time more.
And he hath also into a 14,000 elephants or more that he maketh for
to be brought up amongst his villains by all his towns.  For in
case that he had any war against any other king about him, then
[he] maketh certain men of arms for to go up into the castles of
tree made for the war, that craftily be set upon the elephants'
backs, for to fight against their enemies.  And so do other kings
there-about.  For the manner of war is not there as it is here or
in other countries, ne the ordinance of war neither.  And men clepe
the elephants WARKES.

And in that isle there is a great marvel, more to speak of than in
any other part of the world.  For all manner of fishes, that be
there in the sea about them, come once in the year - each manner of
diverse fishes, one manner of kind after other.  And they cast
themselves to the sea bank of that isle so great plenty and
multitude, that no man may unnethe see but fish.  And there they
abide three days.  And every man of the country taketh of them as
many as him liketh.  And after, that manner of fish after the third
day departeth and goeth into the sea.  And after them come another
multitude of fish of another kind and do in the same manner as the
first did, other three days.  And after them another, till all the
diverse manner of fishes have been there, and that men have taken
of them that them liketh.  And no man knoweth the cause wherefore
it may be.  But they of the country say that it is for to do
reverence to their king, that is the most worthy king that is in
the world as they say; because that he fulfilleth the commandment
that God bade to Adam and Eve, when God said, CRESCITE ET
MULTIPLICAMINI ET REPLETE TERRAM.  And for because that he
multiplieth so the world with children, therefore God sendeth him
so the fishes of diverse kinds of all that be in the sea, to take
at his will for him and all his people.  And therefore all the
fishes of the sea come to make him homage as the most noble and
excellent king of the world, and that is best beloved with God, as
they say.  I know not the reason, why it is, but God knoweth; but
this, me-seemeth, is the most marvel I saw.  For this marvel is
against kind and not with kind, that the fishes that have freedom
to environ all the coasts of the sea at their own list, come of
their own will to proffer them to the death, without constraining
of man.  And therefore, I am siker that this may not be, without a
great token.

There be also in that country a kind of snails that be so great,
that many persons may lodge them in their shells, as men would do
in a little house.  And other snails there be that be full great
but not so huge as the other.  And of these snails, and of great
white worms that have black heads that be as great as a man's
thigh, and some less as great worms that men find there in woods,
men make viand royal for the king and for other great lords.  And
if a man that is married die in that country, men bury his wife
with him all quick; for men say there, that it is reason that she
make him company in that other world as she did in this.

From that country men go by the sea ocean by an isle that is clept
Caffolos.  Men of that country when their friends be sick they hang
them upon trees, and say that it is better that birds, that be
angels of God, eat them, than the foul worms of the earth.

From that isle men go to another isle, where the folk be of full
cursed kind.  For they nourish great dogs and teach them to
strangle their friends when they be sick.  For they will not that
they die of kindly death.  For they say, that they should suffer
too great pain if they abide to die by themselves, as nature would.
And, when they be thus enstrangled, they eat their flesh instead of
venison.

Afterward men go by many isles by sea unto an isle that men clepe
Milke.  And there is a full cursed people.  For they delight in
nothing more than for to fight and to slay men.  And they drink
gladliest man's blood, the which they clepe Dieu.  And the more men
that a man may slay, the more worship he hath amongst them.  And if
two persons be at debate and, peradventure, be accorded by their
friends or by some of their alliance, it behoveth that every of
them that shall be accorded drink of other's blood:  and else the
accord ne the alliance is nought worth:  ne it shall not be no
reproof to him to break the alliance and the accord, but if every
of them drink of others' blood.

And from that isle men go by sea, from isle to isle, unto an isle
that is clept Tracoda, where the folk of that country be as beasts,
and unreasonable, and dwell in caves that they make in the earth;
for they have no wit to make them houses.  And when they see any
man passing through their countries they hide them in their caves.
And they eat flesh of serpents, and they eat but little.  And they
speak nought, but they hiss as serpents do.  And they set no price
by no avoir ne riches, but only of a precious stone, that is
amongst them, that is of sixty colours.  And for the name of the
isle, they clepe it Tracodon.  And they love more that stone than
anything else; and yet they know not the virtue thereof, but they
covet it and love it only for the beauty.

After that isle men go by the sea ocean, by many isles, unto an
isle that is clept Nacumera, that is a great isle and good and
fair.  And it is in compass about, more than a thousand mile.  And
all the men and women of that isle have hounds' heads, and they be
clept Cynocephales.  And they be full reasonable and of good
understanding, save that they worship an ox for their God.  And
also every one of them beareth an ox of gold or of silver in his
forehead, in token that they love well their God.  And they go all
naked save a little clout, that they cover with their knees and
their members.  They be great folk and well-fighting.  And they
have a great targe that covereth all the body, and a spear in their
hand to fight with.  And if they take any man in battle, anon they
eat him.

The king of that isle is full rich and full mighty and right devout
after his law.  And he hath about his neck 300 pearls orient, good
and great and knotted, as paternosters here of amber.  And in
manner as we say our PATER NOSTER and our AVE MARIA, counting the
PATER NOSTERS, right so this king saith every day devoutly 300
prayers to his God, or that he eat.  And he beareth also about his
neck a ruby orient, noble and fine, that is a foot of length and
five fingers large.  And, when they choose their king, they take
him that ruby to bear in his hand; and so they lead him, riding all
about the city.  And from thence-fromward they be all obeissant to
him.  And that ruby he shall bear always about his neck, for if he
had not that ruby upon him men would not hold him for king.  The
great Chan of Cathay hath greatly coveted that ruby, but he might
never have it for war, ne for no manner of goods.  This king is so
rightful and of equity in his dooms, that men may go sikerly
throughout all his country and bear with them what them list; that
no man shall be hardy to rob them, and if he were, the king would
justified anon.

From this land men go to another isle that is clept Silha.  And it
is well a 800 miles about.  In that land is full much waste, for it
is full of serpents, of dragons and of cockodrills, that no man
dare dwell there.  These cockodrills be serpents, yellow and rayed
above, and have four feet and short thighs, and great nails as
claws or talons.  And there be some that have five fathoms in
length, and some of six and of eight and of ten.  And when they go
by places that be gravelly, it seemeth as though men had drawn a
great tree through the gravelly place.  And there be also many wild
beasts, and namely of elephants.

In that isle is a great mountain.  And in mid place of the mount is
a great lake in a full fair plain; and there is great plenty of
water.  And they of the country say, that Adam and Eve wept upon
that mount an hundred year, when they were driven out of Paradise,
and that water, they say, is of their tears; for so much water they
wept, that made the foresaid lake.  And in the bottom of that lake
men find many precious stones and great pearls.  In that lake grow
many reeds and great canes; and there within be many cocodrills and
serpents and great water-leeches.  And the king of that country,
once every year, giveth leave to poor men to go into the lake to
gather them precious stones and pearls, by way of alms, for the
love of God that made Adam.  And all the year men find enough.  And
for the vermin that is within, they anoint their arms and their
thighs and legs with an ointment made of a thing that is clept
lemons, that is a manner of fruit like small pease; and then have
they no dread of no cockodrills, ne of none other venomous vermin.
This water runneth, flowing and ebbing, by a side of the mountain,
and in that river men find precious stones and pearls, great
plenty.  And men of that isle say commonly, that the serpents and
the wild beasts of that country will not do no harm ne touch with
evil no strange man that entereth into that country, but only to
men that be born of the same country.

In that country and others thereabout there be wild geese that have
two heads.  And there be lions, all white and as great as oxen, and
many other diverse beasts and fowls also that be not seen amongst
us.

And wit well, that in that country and in other isles thereabout,
the sea is so high, that it seemeth as though it hung at the
clouds, and that it would cover all the world.  And that is great
marvel that it might be so, save only the will of God, that the air
sustaineth it.  And therefore saith David in the Psalter, MIRABILES
ELATIONES MARIS.



CHAPTER XXII



HOW MEN KNOW BY THE IDOL, IF THE SICK SHALL DIE OR NOT.  OF FOLK OF
DIVERSE SHAPE AND MARVELLOUSLY DISFIGURED.  AND OF THE MONKS THAT
GAVE THEIR RELIEF TO BABOONS, APES, AND MARMOSETS, AND TO OTHER
BEASTS


FROM that isle, in going by sea toward the south, is another great
isle that is clept Dondun.  In that isle be folk of diverse kinds,
so that the father eateth the son, the son the father, the husband
the wife, and the wife the husband.  And if it so befall, that the
father or mother or any of their friends be sick, anon the son
goeth to the priest of their law and prayeth him to ask the idol if
his father or mother or friend shall die on that evil or not.  And
then the priest and the son go together before the idol and kneel
full devoutly and ask of the idol their demand.  And if the devil
that is within answer that he shall live, they keep him well; and
if he say that he shall die, then the priest goeth with the son,
with the wife of him that is sick, and they put their hands upon
his mouth and stop his breath, and so they slay him.  And after
that, they chop all the body in small pieces, and pray all his
friends to come and eat of him that is dead.  And they send for all
the minstrels of the country and make a solemn feast.  And when
they have eaten the flesh, they take the bones and bury them, and
sing and make great melody.  And all those that be of his kin or
pretend them to be his friends, an they come not to that feast,
they be reproved for evermore and shamed, and make great dole, for
never after shall they be holden as friends.  And they say also,
that men eat their flesh for to deliver them out of pain; for if
the worms of the earth eat them the soul should suffer great pain,
as they say.  And namely when the flesh is tender and meagre, then
say their friends, that they do great sin to let them have so long
languor to suffer so much pain without reason.  And when they find
the flesh fat, then they say, that it is well done to send them
soon to Paradise, and that they have not suffered him too long to
endure in pain.

The king of this isle is a full great lord and a mighty, and hath
under him fifty-four great isles that give tribute to him.  And in
everych of these isles is a king crowned; and all be obeissant to
that king.  And he hath in those isles many diverse folk.

In one of these isles be folk of great stature, as giants.  And
they be hideous for to look upon.  And they have but one eye, and
that is in the middle of the front.  And they eat nothing but raw
flesh and raw fish.

And in another isle toward the south dwell folk of foul stature and
of cursed kind that have no heads.  And their eyen be in their
shoulders.

And in another isle be folk that have the face all flat, all plain,
without nose and without mouth.  But they have two small holes, all
round, instead of their eyes, and their mouth is plat also without
lips.

And in another isle be folk of foul fashion and shape that have the
lip above the mouth so great, that when they sleep in the sun they
cover all the face with that lip.

And in another isle there be little folk, as dwarfs.  And they be
two so much as the pigmies.  And they have no mouth; but instead of
their mouth they have a little round hole, and when they shall eat
or drink, they take through a pipe or a pen or such a thing, and
suck it in, for they have no tongue; and therefore they speak not,
but they make a manner of hissing as an adder doth, and they make
signs one to another as monks do, by the which every of them
understandeth other.

And in another isle be folk that have great ears and long, that
hang down to their knees.

And in another isle be folk that have horses' feet.  And they be
strong and mighty, and swift runners; for they take wild beasts
with running, and eat them.

And in another isle be folk that go upon their hands and their feet
as beasts.  And they be all skinned and feathered, and they will
leap as lightly into trees, and from tree to tree, as it were
squirrels or apes.

And in another isle be folk that be both man and woman, and they
have kind; of that one and of that other.  And they have but one
pap on the one side, and on that other none.  And they have members
of generation of man and woman, and they use both when they list,
once that one, and another time that other.  And they get children,
when they use the member of man; and they bear children, when they
use the member of woman.

And in another isle be folk that go always upon their knees full
marvellously.  And at every pace that they go, it seemeth that they
would fall.  And they have in every foot eight toes.

Many other diverse folk of diverse natures be there in other isles
about, of the which it were too long to tell, and therefore I pass
over shortly.

From these isles, in passing by the sea ocean toward the east by
many journeys, men find a great country and a great kingdom that
men crepe Mancy.  And that is in Ind the more.  And it is the best
land and one the fairest that may be in all the world, and the most
delectable and the most plenteous of all goods that is in power of
man.  In that land dwell many Christian men and Saracens, for it is
a good country and a great.  And there be therein more than 2000
great cities and rich, without other great towns.  And there is
more plenty of people there than in any other part of Ind, for the
bounty of the country.  In that country is no needy man, ne none
that goeth on begging.  And they be full fair folk, but they be all
pale.  And the men have thin beards and few hairs, but they be
long; but unnethe hath any man passing fifty hairs in his beard,
and one hair sits here, another there, as the beard of a leopard or
of a cat.  In that land be many fairer women than in any other
country beyond the sea, and therefore men clepe that land Albany,
because that the folk be white.

And the chief city of that country is clept Latorin, and it is a
journey from the sea, and it is much more than Paris.  In that city
is a great river bearing ships that go to all the coasts in the
sea.  No city of the world is so well stored of ships as is that.
And all those of the city and of the country worship idols.  In
that country be double sithes more birds than be here.  There be
white geese, red about the neck, and they have a great crest as a
cock's comb upon their heads; and they be much more there than they
be here, and men buy them there all quick, right great cheap.  And
there is great plenty of adders of whom men make great feasts and
eat them at great solemnities; and he that maketh there a feast be
it never so costly, an he have no adders he hath no thank for his
travail.

Many good cities there be in that country and men have great plenty
and great cheap of all wines and victuals.  In that country be many
churches of religious men, and of their law.  And in those churches
be idols as great as giants; and to these idols they give to eat at
great festival days in this manner.  They bring before them meat
all sodden, as hot as they come from the fire, and they let the
smoke go up towards the idols; and then they say that the idols
have eaten; and then the religious men eat the meat afterwards.

In that country be white hens without feathers, but they bear white
wool as sheep do here.  In that country women that be unmarried,
they have tokens on their heads like coronals to be known for
unmarried.  Also in that country there be beasts taught of men to
go into waters, into rivers and into deep stanks for to take fish;
the which beast is but little, and men clepe them loirs.  And when
men cast them into the water, anon they bring up great fishes, as
many as men will.  And if men will have more, they cast them in
again, and they bring up as many as men list to have.

And from that city passing many journeys is another city, one the
greatest of the world, that men clepe Cassay; that is to say, the
'City of heaven.'  That city is well a fifty mile about, and it is
strongly inhabited with people, insomuch that in one house men make
ten households.  In that city be twelve principal gates; and before
every gate, a three mile or a four mile in length, is a great town
or a great city.  That city sits upon a great lake on the sea as
doth Venice.  And in that city be more than 12,000 bridges.  And
upon every bridge be strong towers and good, in the which dwell the
wardens for to keep the city from the great Chan.  And on that one
part of the city runneth a great river all along the city.  And
there dwell Christian men and many merchants and other folk of
diverse nations, because that the land is so good and so plenteous.
And there groweth full good wine that men clepe Bigon, that is full
mighty, and gentle in drinking.  This is a city royal where the
King of Mancy was wont to dwell.  And there dwell many religious
men, as it were of the Order of Friars, for they be mendicants.

From that city men go by water, solacing and disporting them, till
they come to an abbey of monks that is fast by, that be good
religious men after their faith and law.  In that abbey is a great
garden and a fair, where be many trees of diverse manner of fruits.
And in this garden is a little hill full of delectable trees.  In
that hill and in that garden be many diverse beasts, as of apes,
marmosets, baboons and many other diverse beasts.  And every day,
when the convent of this abbey hath eaten, the almoner let bear the
relief to the garden, and he smiteth on the garden gate with a
clicket of silver that he holdeth in his hand; and anon all the
beasts of the hill and of diverse places of the garden come out a
3000, or a 4000; and they come in guise of poor men, and men give
them the relief in fair vessels of silver, clean over-gilt.  And
when they have eaten, the monk smiteth eftsoons on the garden gate
with the clicket, and then anon all the beasts return again to
their places that they come from.  And they say that these beasts
be souls of worthy men that resemble in likeness of those beasts
that be fair, and therefore they give them meat for the love of
God; and the other beasts that be foul, they say be souls of poor
men and of rude commons.  And thus they believe, and no man may put
them out of this opinion.  These beasts above-said they let take
when they be young, and nourish them so with alms, as many as they
may find.  And I asked them if it had not been better to have given
that relief to poor men, rather than to those beasts.  And they
answered me and said, that they had no poor men amongst them in
that country; and though it had been so that poor men had been
among them, yet were it greater alms to give it to those souls that
do there their penance.  Many other marvels be in that city and in
the country thereabout, that were too long to tell you.

From that city go men by the country a six journeys to another city
that men clepe Chilenfo, of the which city the walls be twenty mile
about.  In that city be sixty bridges of stone, so fair that no man
may see fairer.  In that city was the first siege of the King of
Mancy, for it is a fair and plenteous of all goods.

After, pass men overthwart a great river that men clepe Dalay.  And
that is the greatest river of fresh water that is in the world.
For there, as it is most narrow, it is more than four mile of
breadth.  And then enter men again into the land of the great Chan.

That river goeth through the land of Pigmies, where that the folk
be of little stature, that be but three span long, and they be
right fair and gentle, after their quantities, both the men and the
women.  And they marry them when they be half year of age and get
children.  And they live not but six year or seven at the most; and
he that liveth eight year, men hold him there right passing old.
These men be the best workers of gold, silver, cotton, silk and of
all such things, of any other that be in the world.  And they have
oftentimes war with the birds of the country that they take and
eat.  This little folk neither labour in lands ne in vines; but
they have great men amongst them of our stature that till the land
and labour amongst the vines for them.  And of those men of our
stature have they as great scorn and wonder as we would have among
us of giants, if they were amongst us.  There is a good city,
amongst others, where there is dwelling great plenty of those
little folk, and it is a great city and a fair.  And the men be
great that dwell amongst them, but when they get any children they
be as little as the pigmies.  And therefore they be, all for the
most part, all pigmies; for the nature of the land is such.  The
great Chan let keep this city full well, for it is his.  And
albeit, that the pigmies be little, yet they be full reasonable
after their age, and can both wit and good and malice enough.

From that city go men by the country by many cities and many towns
unto a city that men clepe Jamchay; and it is a noble city and a
rich and of great profit to the Lord, and thither go men to seek
merchandise of all manner of thing.  That city is full much worth
yearly to the lord of the country.  For he hath every year to rent
of that city (as they of the city say) 50,000 cumants of florins of
gold:  for they count there all by cumants, and every cumant is
10,000 florins of gold.  Now may men well reckon how much that it
amounteth.  The king of that country is full mighty, and yet he is
under the great Chan.  And the great Chan hath under him twelve
such provinces.  In that country in the good towns is a good
custom:  for whoso will make a feast to any of his friends, there
be certain inns in every good town, and he that will make the feast
will say to the hosteler, array for me to-morrow a good dinner for
so many folk, and telleth him the number, and deviseth him the
viands; and he saith also, thus much I will dispend and no more.
And anon the hosteler arrayeth for him so fair and so well and so
honestly, that there shall lack nothing; and it shall be done
sooner and with less cost than an a man made it in his own house.

And a five mile from that city, toward the head of the river of
Dalay, is another city that men clepe Menke.  In that city is
strong navy of ships.  And all be white as snow of the kind of the
trees that they be made of.  And they be full great ships and fair,
and well ordained, and made with halls and chambers and other
easements, as though it were on the land.

From thence go men, by many towns and many cities, through the
country, unto a city that men clepe Lanterine.  And it is an eight
journeys from the city above-said.  This city sits upon a fair
river, great and broad, that men clepe Caramaron.  This river
passeth throughout Cathay.  And it doth often-time harm, and that
full great, when it is over great.



CHAPTER XXIII



OF THE GREAT CHAN OF CATHAY.  OF THE ROYALTY OF HIS PALACE, AND HOW
HE SITS AT MEAT; AND OF THE GREAT NUMBER OF OFFICERS THAT SERVE HIM


CATHAY is a great country and a fair, noble and rich, and full of
merchants.  Thither go merchants all years for to seek spices and
all manner of merchandises, more commonly than in any other part.
And ye shall understand, that merchants that come from Genoa or
from Venice or from Romania or other parts of Lombardy, they go by
sea and by land eleven months or twelve, or more some-time, ere
they may come to the isle of Cathay that is the principal region of
all parts beyond; and it is of the great Chan.

From Cathay go men toward the east by many journeys.  And then men
find a good city between these others, that men clepe Sugarmago.
That city is one of the best stored of silk and other merchandises
that is in the world.

After go men yet to another old city toward the east.  And it is in
the province of Cathay.  And beside that city the men of Tartary
have let make another city that is dept Caydon.  And it hath twelve
gates, and between the two gates there is always a great mile; so
that the two cities, that is to say, the old and the new, have in
circuit more than twenty mile.

In this city is the siege of the great Chan in a full great palace
and the most passing fair in all the world, of the which the walls
be in circuit more than two mile.  And within the walls it is all
full of other palaces.  And in the garden of the great palace there
is a great hill, upon the which there is another palace; and it is
the most fair and the most rich that any man may devise.  And all
about the palace and the hill be many trees bearing many diverse
fruits.  And all about that hill be ditches great and deep, and
beside them be great vivaries on that one part and on that other.
And there is a full fair bridge to pass over the ditches.  And in
these vivaries be so many wild geese and ganders and wild ducks and
swans and herons that it is without number.  And all about these
ditches and vivaries is the great garden full of wild beasts.  So
that when the great Chan will have any disport on that, to take any
of the wild beasts or of the fowls, he will let chase them and take
them at the windows without going out of his chamber.

This palace, where his siege is, is both great and passing fair.
And within the palace, in the hall, there be twenty-four pillars of
fine gold.  And all the walls be covered within of red skins of
beasts that men clepe panthers, that be fair beasts and well
smelling; so that for the sweet odour of those skins no evil air
may enter into the palace.  Those skins be as red as blood, and
they shine so bright against the sun, that unnethe no man may
behold them.  And many folk worship those beasts, when they meet
them first at morning, for their great virtue and for the good
smell that they have.  And those skins they prize more than though
they were plate of fine gold.

And in the midst of this palace is the mountour for the great Chan,
that is all wrought of gold and of precious stones and great
pearls.  And at four corners of the mountour be four serpents of
gold.  And all about there is y-made large nets of silk and gold
and great pearls hanging all about the mountour.  And under the
mountour be conduits of beverage that they drink in the emperor's
court.  And beside the conduits be many vessels of gold, by the
which they that be of household drink at the conduit.

And the hall of the palace is full nobly arrayed, and full
marvellously attired on all parts in all things that men apparel
with any hall.  And first, at the chief of the hall is the
emperor's throne, full high, where he sitteth at the meat.  And
that is of fine precious stones, bordered all about with pured gold
and precious stones, and great pearls.  And the grees that he goeth
up to the table be of precious stones mingled with gold.

And at the left side of the emperor's siege is the siege of his
first wife, one degree lower than the emperor; and it is of jasper,
bordered with gold and precious stones.  And the siege of his
second wife is also another siege, more lower than his first wife;
and it is also of jasper, bordered with gold, as that other is.
And the siege of the third wife is also more low, by a degree, than
the second wife.  For he hath always three wives with him, where
that ever he be.

And after his wives, on the same side, sit the ladies of his
lineage yet lower, after that they be of estate.  And all those
that be married have a counterfeit made like a man's foot upon
their heads, a cubit long, all wrought with great pearls, fine and
orient, and above made with peacocks' feathers and of other shining
feathers; and that stands upon their heads like a crest, in token
that they be under man's foot and under subjection of man.  And
they that be unmarried have none such.

And after at the right side of the emperor first sitteth his eldest
son that shall reign after him.  And he sitteth also one degree
lower than the emperor, in such manner of sieges as do the
empresses.  And after him sit other great lords of his lineage,
every of them a degree lower than the other, as they be of estate.

And the emperor hath his table alone by himself, that is of gold
and of precious stones, or of crystal bordered with gold, and full
of precious stones or of amethysts, or of lignum aloes that cometh
out of paradise, or of ivory bound or bordered with gold.  And
every one of his wives hath also her table by herself.  And his
eldest son and the other lords also, and the ladies, and all that
sit with the emperor have tables alone by themselves, full rich.
And there ne is no table but that it is worth an huge treasure of
goods.

And under the emperor's table sit four clerks that write all that
the emperor saith, be it good, be it evil; for all that he saith
must be holden, for he may not change his word, ne revoke it.

And [at] great solemn feasts before the emperor's table men bring
great tables of gold, and thereon be peacocks of gold and many
other manner of diverse fowls, all of gold and richly wrought and
enamelled.  And men make them dance and sing, clapping their wings
together, and make great noise.  And whether it be by craft or by
necromancy I wot never; but it is a good sight to behold, and a
fair; and it is great marvel how it may be.  But I have the less
marvel, because that they be the most subtle men in all sciences
and in all crafts that be in the world:  for of subtlety and of
malice and of farcasting they pass all men under heaven.  And
therefore they say themselves, that they see with two eyes and the
Christian men see but with one, because that they be more subtle
than they.  For all other nations, they say, be but blind in
cunning and working in comparison to them.  I did great business
for to have learned that craft, but the master told me that he had
made avow to his god to teach it to no creature, but only to his
eldest son.

Also above the emperor's table and the other tables, and above a
great part in the hall, is a vine made of fine gold.  And it
spreadeth all about the hall.  And it hath many clusters of grapes,
some white, some green, some yellow and some red and some black,
all of precious stones.  The white be of crystal and of beryl and
of iris; the yellow be of topazes; the red be of rubies and of
grenaz and of alabrandines; the green be of emeralds, of perydoz
and of chrysolites; and the black be of onyx and garantez.  And
they be all so properly made that it seemeth a very vine bearing
kindly grapes.

And before the emperor's table stand great lords and rich barons
and other that serve the emperor at the meat.  And no man is so
hardy to speak a word, but if the emperor speak to him; but if it
be minstrels that sing songs and tell jests or other disports, to
solace with the emperor.  And all the vessels that men be served
with in the hall or in chambers be of precious stones, and
specially at great tables either of jasper or of crystal or of
amethysts or of fine gold.  And the cups be of emeralds and of
sapphires, or of topazes, of perydoz, and of many other precious
stones.  Vessels of silver is there none, for they tell no price
thereof to make no vessels of:  but they make thereof grecings and
pillars and pavements to halls and chambers.  And before the hall
door stand many barons and knights clean armed to keep that no man
enter, but if it be the will or the commandment of the emperor, or
but if they be servants or minstrels of the household; and other
none is not so hardy to neighen nigh the hall door.

And ye shall understand, that my fellows and I with our yeomen, we
served this emperor, and were his soldiers fifteen months against
the King of Mancy, that held against him.  And the cause was for we
had great lust to see his noblesse and the estate of his court and
all his governance, to wit if it were such as we heard say that it
was.  And truly we found it more noble and more excellent, and
richer and more marvellous, than ever we heard speak of, insomuch
that we would never have lieved it had we not seen it.  For I trow,
that no man would believe the noblesse, the riches ne the multitude
of folk that be in his court, but he had seen it; for it is not
there as it is here.  For the lords here have folk of certain
number as they may suffice; but the great Chan hath every day folk
at his costage and expense as without number.  But the ordinance,
ne the expenses in meat and drink, ne the honesty, ne the
cleanness, is not so arrayed there as it is here; for all the
commons there eat without cloth upon their knees, and they eat all
manner of flesh and little of bread, and after meat they wipe their
hands upon their skirts, and they eat not but once a day.  But the
estate of lords is full great, and rich and noble.

And albeit that some men will not trow me, but hold it for fable to
tell them the noblesse of his person and of his estate and of his
court and of the great multitude of folk that he holds, natheles I
shall say you a part of him and of his folk, after that I have seen
the manner and the ordinance full many a time.  And whoso that will
may lieve me if he will, and whoso will not, may leave also.  For I
wot well, if any man hath been in those countries beyond, though he
have not been in the place where the great Chan dwelleth, he shall
hear speak of him so much marvellous thing, that he shall not trow
it lightly.  And truly, no more did I myself, till I saw it.  And
those that have been in those countries and in the great Chan's
household know well that I say sooth.  And therefore I will not
spare for them, that know not ne believe not but that that they
see, for to tell you a part of him and of his estate that he
holdeth, when he goeth from country to country, and when he maketh
solemn feasts.



CHAPTER XXIV



WHEREFORE HE IS CLEPT THE GREAT CHAN.  OF THE STYLE OF HIS LETTERS,
AND OF THE SUPERSCRIPTION ABOUT HIS GREAT SEAL AND HIS PRIVY SEAL


FIRST I shall say you why he was clept the great Chan.

Ye shall understand, that all the world was destroyed by Noah's
flood, save only Noah and his wife and his children.  Noah had
three sons, Shem, Cham, and Japhet.  This Cham was he that saw his
father's privy members naked when he slept, and scorned them, and
shewed them with his finger to his brethren in scorning wise.  And
therefore he was cursed of God.  And Japhet turned his face away
and covered them.

These three brethren had seisin in all the land.  And this Cham,
for his cruelty, took the greater and the best part, toward the
east, that is clept Asia, and Shem took Africa, and Japhet took
Europe.  And therefore is all the earth parted in these three parts
by these three brethren.  Cham was the greatest and the most
mighty, and of him came more generations than of the other.  And of
his son Chuse was engendered Nimrod the giant, that was the first
king that ever was in the world; and he began the foundation of the
tower of Babylon.  And that time, the fiends of hell came many
times and lay with the women of his generation and engendered on
them diverse folk, as monsters and folk disfigured, some without
heads, some with great ears, some with one eye, some giants, some
with horses' feet, and many other diverse shape against kind.  And
of that generation of Cham be come the Paynims and divers folk that
be in isles of the sea by all Ind.  And forasmuch as he was the
most mighty, and no man might withstand him, he cleped himself the
Son of God and sovereign of all the world.  And for this Cham, this
emperor clepeth him Cham, and sovereign of all the world.

And of the generation of Shem be come the Saracens.  And of the
generation of Japhet is come the people of Israel.  And though that
we dwell in Europe, this is the opinion, that the Syrians and the
Samaritans have amongst them.  And that they told me, before that I
went toward Ind, but I found it otherwise.  Natheles, the sooth is
this; that Tartars and they that dwell in the great Asia, they came
of Cham; but the Emperor of Cathay clepeth him not Cham, but Can,
and I shall tell you how.

It is but little more but eight score year that all Tartary was in
subjection and in servage to other nations about.  For they were
but bestial folk and did nothing but kept beasts and led them to
pastures.  But among them they had seven principal nations that
were sovereigns of them all.  Of the which, the first nation or
lineage was clept Tartar, and that is the most noble and the most
prized.  The second lineage is clept Tanghot, the third Eurache,
the fourth Valair, the fifth Semoche, the sixth Megly, the seventh
Coboghe.

Now befell it so that of the first lineage succeeded an old worthy
man that was not rich, that had to name Changuys.  This man lay
upon a night in his bed.  And he saw in avision, that there came
before him a knight armed all in white.  And he sat upon a white
horse, and said to him, Can, sleepest thou?  The Immortal God hath
sent me to thee, and it is his will, that thou go to the seven
lineages and say to them that thou shalt be their emperor.  For
thou shalt conquer the lands and the countries that be about, and
they that march upon you shall be under your subjection, as ye have
been under theirs, for that is God's will immortal.

And when he came at morrow, Changuys rose, and went to seven
lineages, and told them how the white knight had said.  And they
scorned him, and said that he was a fool.  And so he departed from
them all ashamed.  And the night ensuing, this white knight came to
the seven lineages, and commanded them on God's behalf immortal,
that they should make this Changuys their emperor, and they should
be out of subjection, and they should hold all other regions about
them in their servage as they had been to them before.  And on the
morrow, they chose him to be their emperor.  And they set him upon
a black fertre, and after that they lift him up with great
solemnity.  And they set him in a chair of gold and did him all
manner of reverence, and they cleped him Chan, as the white knight
called him.

And when he was thus chosen, he would assay if he might trust in
them or no, and whether they would be obeissant to him or no.  And
then he made many statutes and ordinances that they clepe YSYA
CHAN.  The first statute was, that they should believe and obey in
God Immortal, that is Almighty, that would cast them out of
servage, and at all times clepe to him for help in time of need.
The tother statute was, that all manner of men that might bare arms
should be numbered, and to every ten should be a master, and to
every hundred a master, and to every thousand a master, and to
every ten thousand a master.  After he commanded to the principals
of the seven lineages, that they should leave and forsake all that
they had in goods and heritage, and from thenceforth to hold them
paid of that that he would give them of his grace.  And they did so
anon.  After he commanded to the principals of the seven lineages,
that every of them should bring his eldest son before him, and with
their own hands smite off their heads without tarrying.  And anon
his commandment was performed.

And when the Chan saw that they made none obstacle to perform his
commandment, then he thought well that he might trust in them, and
commanded them anon to make them ready and to sue his banner.  And
after this, Chan put in subjection all the lands about him.

Afterward it befell upon a day, that the Can rode with a few meinie
for to behold the strength of the country that he had won.  And so
befell, that a great multitude of enemies met with him.  And for to
give good example hardiness to his people, he was the first that
fought, and in the midst of his enemies encountered, and there he
was cast from his horse, and his horse slain.  And when his folk
saw him at the earth, they were all abashed, and weened he had been
dead, and flew every one, and their enemies after and chased them,
but they wist not that the emperor was there.  And when the enemies
were far pursuing the chase, the emperor hid him in a thick wood.
And whet, they were come again from the chase, they went and sought
the woods if any of them had been hid in the thick of the woods;
and many they found and slew them anon.  So it happened that as
they went searching toward the place that the emperor was, they saw
an owl sitting upon a tree above him; and then they said amongst
them, that there was no man because that they saw that bird there,
and so they went their way; and thus escaped the emperor from
death.  And then he went privily all by night, till he came to his
folk that were full glad of his coming, and made great thankings to
God Immortal, and to that bird by whom their lord was saved.  And
therefore principally above all fowls of world they worship the
owl; and when they have any of their feathers, they keep them full
preciously instead of relics, and bear them upon their heads with
great reverence; and they hold themselves blessed and safe from all
perils while that they have them upon them, and therefore they bear
their feathers upon their heads.

After all this the Chan ordained him, and assembled his people, and
went upon them that had assailed him before, and destroyed them,
and put them in subjection and servage.  And when he had won and
put all the lands and countries on this half the Mount Belian in
subjection, the white knight came to him again in his sleep, and
said to him, Chan! the will of God Immortal is that thou pass the
Mount Belian.  And thou shalt win the land and thou shalt put many
nations in subjection.  And for thou shalt find no good passage for
to go toward that country, go [to] the Mount Belian that is upon
the sea, and kneel there nine times toward the east in the worship
of God Immortal, and he shall shew the way to pass by.  And the
Chan did so.  And anon the sea that touched and was fast to the
mount began to withdraw him, and shewed fair way of nine foot
breadth large; and so he passed with his folk, and won the land of
Cathay that is the greatest kingdom of the world.

And for the nine kneelings and for the nine foot of way the Chan
and all the men of Tartary have the number of nine in great
reverence.  And therefore who that will make the Chan any present,
be it of horses, be it of birds, or of arrows or bows, or of fruit,
or of any other thing, always he must make it of the number of
nine.  And so then be the presents of greater pleasure to him; and
more benignly he will receive them than though he were presented
with an hundred or two hundred.  For him seemeth the number of nine
so holy, because the messenger of God Immortal devised it.

Also, when the Chan of Cathay had won the country of Cathay, and
put in subjection and under foot many countries about, he fell
sick.  And when he felt well that he should die, he said to his
twelve sons, that everych of them should bring him one of his
arrows.  And so they did anon.  And then he commanded that men
should bind them together in three places.  And then he took them
to his eldest son, and bade him break them all together.  And he
enforced him with all his might to break them, but he ne might not.
And then the Chan bade his second son to break them; and so,
shortly, to all, each after other; but none of them might break
them.  And then he bade the youngest son dissever every one from
other, and break everych by himself.  And so he did.  And then said
the Chan to his eldest son and to all the others, Wherefore might
ye not break them?  And they answered that they might not, because
that they were bound together.  And wherefore, quoth he, hath your
little youngest brother broken them?  Because, quoth they, that
they were parted each from other.  And then said the Chan, My sons,
quoth he, truly thus will it fare by you.  For as long as ye be
bound together in three places, that is to say, in love, in truth
and in good accord, no man shall be of power to grieve you.  But
and ye be dissevered from these three places, that your one help
not your other, ye shall be destroyed and brought to nought.  And
if each of you love other and help other, ye shall be lords and
sovereigns of all others.  And when he had made his ordinances, he
died.

And then after him reigned Ecchecha Cane, his eldest son.  And his
other brethren went to win them many countries and kingdoms, unto
the land of Prussia and of Russia, and made themselves to be clept
Chane; but they were all obeissant to their elder brother, and
therefore was he clept the great Chan.

After Ecchecha reigned Guyo Chan.

And after him Mango Chan that was a good Christian man and
baptized, and gave letters of perpetual peace to all Christian men,
and sent his brother Halaon with great multitude of folk for to win
the Holy Land and for to put it into Christian men's hands, and for
to destroy Mahomet's law, and for to take the Caliph of Bagdad that
was emperor and lord of all the Saracens.  And when this caliph was
taken, men found him of so high worship, that in all the remnant of
the world, ne might a man find a more reverend man, ne higher in
worship.  And then Halaon made him come before him, and said to
him, Why, quoth he, haddest thou not taken with thee more soldiers
and men enough, for a little quantity of treasure, for to defend
thee and thy country, that art so abundant of treasure and so high
in all worship?  And the caliph answered him, For he well trowed
that he had enough of his own proper men.  And then said Halaon,
Thou wert as a god of the Saracens.  And it is convenient to a god
to eat no meat that is mortal.  And therefore, thou shall not eat
but precious stones, rich pearls and treasure, that thou lovest so
much.  And then he commanded him to prison, and all his treasure
about him.  And so he died for hunger and thirst.  And then after
this, Halaon won all the Land of Promission, and put it into
Christian men's hands.  But the great Chan, his brother, died; and
that was great sorrow and loss to all Christian men.

After Mango Chan reigned Cobyla Chan that was also a Christian man.
And he reigned forty-two year.  He founded the great city Izonge in
Cathay, that is a great deal more than Rome.

The tother great Chan that came after him became a Paynim, and all
the others after him.

The kingdom of Cathay is the greatest realm of the world.  And also
the great Chan is the most mighty emperor of the world and the
greatest lord under the firmament.  And so he clepeth him in his
letters, right thus:  CHAN!  FILIUS DEI EXCELSI, OMNIUM UNIVERSAM
TERRAM COLENTIUM SUMMUS IMPERATOR, & DOMINUS OMNIUM DOMINANTIUM!
And the letter of his great seal, written about, is this; DEUS IN
COELO, CHAN SUPER TERRAM, EJUS FORTITUDO.  OMNIUM HOMINUM
IMPERATORIS SIGILLUM.  And the superscription about his little seal
is this; DEI FORTITUDO, OMNIUM HOMINUM IMPERATORIS SIGILLUM.

And albeit that they be not christened, yet nevertheless the
emperor and all the Tartars believe in God Immortal.  And when they
will menace any man, then they say, God knoweth well that I shall
do thee such a thing, and telleth his menace.

And thus have ye heard, why he is clept the great Chan.



CHAPTER XXV



OF THE GOVERNANCE OF THE GREAT CHAN'S COURT, AND WHEN HE MAKETH
SOLEMN FEASTS.  OF HIS PHILOSOPHERS.  AND OF HIS ARRAY, WHEN HE
RIDETH BY THE COUNTRY


NOW shall I tell you the governance of the court of the great Chan,
when he maketh solemn feasts; and that is principally four times in
the year.

The first feast is of his birth, that other is of his presentation
in their temple that they clepe their Moseache, where they make a
manner of circumcision, and the tother two feasts be of his idols.
The first feast of the idol is when he is first put into their
temple and throned; the tother feast is when the idol beginneth
first to speak, or to work miracles.  More be there not of solemn
feasts, but if he marry any of his children.

Now understand, that at every of these feasts he hath great
multitude of people, well ordained and well arrayed, by thousands,
by hundreds, and by tens.  And every man knoweth well what service
he shall do, and every man giveth so good heed and so good
attendance to his service that no man findeth no default.  And
there be first ordained 4000 barons, mighty and rich, for to govern
and to make ordinance for the feast, and for to serve the emperor.
And these solemn feasts be made without in halls and tents made of
cloths of gold and of tartaries, full nobly.  And all those barons
have crowns of gold upon their heads, full noble and rich, full of
precious stones and great pearls orient.  And they be all clothed
in cloths of gold or of tartaries or of camakas, so richly and so
perfectly, that no man in the world can amend it, ne better devise
it.  And all those robes be orfrayed all about, and dubbed full of
precious stones and of great orient pearls, full richly.  And they
may well do so, for cloths of gold and of silk be greater cheap
there a great deal than be cloths of wool.  And these 4000 barons
be devised in four companies, and every thousand is clothed in
cloths all of one colour, and that so well arrayed and so richly,
that it is marvel to behold.

The first thousand, that is of dukes, of earls, of marquises and of
admirals, all clothed in cloths of gold, with tissues of green
silk, and bordered with gold full of precious stones in manner as I
have said before.  The second thousand is all clothed in cloths
diapered of red silk, all wrought with gold, and the orfrays set
full of great pearl and precious stones, full nobly wrought.  The
third thousand is clothed in cloths of silk, of purple or of Ind.
And the fourth thousand is in cloths of yellow.  And all their
clothes be so nobly and so richly wrought with gold and precious
stones and rich pearls, that if a man of this country had but only
one of their robes, he might well say that he should never be poor;
for the gold and the precious stones and the great orient pearls be
of greater value on this half the sea than they be beyond the sea
in those countries.

And when they be thus apparelled, they go two and two together,
full ordinately, before the emperor, without speech of any word,
save only inclining to him.  And every one of them beareth a tablet
of jasper or of ivory or of crystal, and the minstrels going before
them, sounding their instruments of diverse melody.  And when the
first thousand is thus passed and hath made his muster, he
withdraweth him on that one side; and then entereth that other
second thousand, and doth right so, in the same manner of array and
countenance, is did the first; and after, the third; and then, the
fourth; and none of them saith not one word.

And at one side of the emperor's table sit many philosophers that
be proved for wise men in many diverse sciences, as of astronomy,
necromancy, geomancy, pyromancy, hydromancy, of augury and of many
other sciences.  And everych of them have before them astrolabes of
gold, some spheres, some the brain pan of a dead man, some vessels
of gold full of gravel or sand, some vessels of gold full of coals
burning, some vessels of gold full of water and of wine and of oil,
and some horologes of gold, made full nobly and richly wrought, and
many other manner of instruments after their sciences.

And at certain hours, when them thinketh time, they say to certain
officers that stand before them, ordained for the time to fulfil
their commandments; Make peace!

And then say the officers; Now peace! listen!

And after that, saith another of the philosophers; Every man do
reverence and incline to the emperor, that is God's Son and
sovereign lord of all the world!  For now is time!  And then every
man boweth his head toward the earth.

And then commandeth the same philosopher again; Stand up!  And they
do so.

And at another hour, saith another philosopher; Put your little
finger in your ears!  And anon they do so.

And at another hour, saith another philosopher; Put your hand
before your mouth!  And anon they do so.

And at another hour, saith another philosopher; Put your hand upon
your head!  And after that he biddeth them to do their hand away.
And they do so.

And so, from hour to hour, they command certain things; and they
say, that those things have diverse significations.  And I asked
them privily what those things betokened.  And one of the masters
told me, that the bowing of the head at that hour betokened this;
that all those that bowed their heads should evermore after be
obeissant and true to the emperor, and never, for gifts ne for
promise in no kind, to be false ne traitor unto him for good nor
evil.  And the putting of the little finger in the ear betokeneth,
as they say, that none of them ne shall not hear speak no
contrarious thing to the emperor but that he shall tell it anon to
his council or discover it to some men that will make relation to
the emperor, though he were his father or brother or son.  And so
forth, of all other things that is done by the philosophers, they
told me the causes of many diverse things.  And trust right well in
certain, that no man doth nothing to the emperor that belongeth
unto him, neither clothing ne bread ne wine ne bath ne none other
thing that longeth to him, but at certain hours that his
philosophers will devise.  And if there fall war in any side to the
emperor, anon the philosophers come and say their advice after
their calculations, and counsel the emperor of their advice by
their sciences; so that the emperor doth nothing without their
counsel.

And when the philosophers have done and performed their
commandments, then the minstrels begin to do their minstrelsy,
everych in their instruments, each after other, with all the melody
that they can devise.  And when they have done a good while, one of
the officers of the emperor goeth up on a high stage wrought full
curiously, and crieth and saith with loud voice; Make Peace!  And
then every man is still.

And then, anon after, all the lords that be of the emperor's
lineage, nobly arrayed in rich cloths of gold and royally
apparelled on white steeds, as many as may well sue him at that
time, be ready to make their presents to the emperor.  And then
saith the steward of the court to the lords, by name; N. of N.! and
nameth first the most noble and the worthiest by name, and saith;
Be ye ready with such a number of white horses, for to serve the
emperor, your sovereign lord!  And to another lord he saith; N. of
N., be ye ready with such a number, to serve your sovereign lord!
And to another, right so, and to all the lords of the emperor's
lineage, each after other, as they be of estate.  And when they be
all cleped, they enter each after other, and present the white
horses to the emperor, and then go their way.  And then after, all
the other barons every of them, give him presents or jewels or some
other thing, after that they be of estate.  And then after them,
all the prelates of their law, and religious men and others; and
every man giveth him something.  And when that all men have thus
presented the emperor, the greatest of dignity of the prelates
giveth him a blessing, saying an orison of their law.

And then begin the minstrels to make their minstrelsy in divers
instruments with all the melody that they can devise.  And when
they have done their craft, then they bring before the emperor,
lions, leopards and other diverse beasts, and eagles and vultures
and other divers fowls, and fishes and serpents, for to do him
reverence.  And then come jugglers and enchanters, that do many
marvels; for they make to come in the air, by seeming, the sun and
the moon to every man's sight.  And after they make the night so
dark that no man may see nothing.  And after they make the day to
come again, fair and pleasant with bright sun, to every man's
sight.  And then they bring in dances of the fairest damsels of the
world, and richest arrayed.  And after they make to come in other
damsels bringing cups of gold full of milk of diverse beasts, and
give drink to lords and to ladies.  And then they make knights to
joust in arms full lustily; and they run together a great random,
and they frussch together full fiercely, and they break their
spears so rudely that the truncheons fly in sprouts and pieces all
about the hall.  And then they make to come in hunting for the hart
and for the boar, with hounds running with open mouth.  And many
other things they do by craft of their enchantments, that it is
marvel for to see.  And such plays of disport they make till the
taking up of the boards.  This great Chan hath full great people
for to serve him, as I have told you before.  For he hath of
minstrels the number of thirteen cumants, but they abide not always
with him.  For all the minstrels that come before him, of what
nation that they be of, they be withholden with him as of his
household, and entered in his books as for his own men.  And after
that, where that ever they go, ever more they claim for minstrels
of the great Chan; and under that title, all kings and lords
cherish them the more with gifts and all things.  And therefore he
hath so great multitude of them.

And he hath of certain men as though they were yeomen, that keep
birds, as ostriches, gerfalcons, sparrow-hawks, falcons gentle,
lanyers, sakers, sakrets, popinjays well speaking, and birds
singing, and also of wild beasts, as of elephants tame and other,
baboons, apes, marmosets, and other diverse beasts; the mountance
of fifteen cumants of yeomen.

And of physicians Christian he hath 200, and of leeches that be
Christian he hath 210, and of leeches and physicians that be
Saracens twenty, but he trusteth more in the Christian leeches than
in the Saracen.  And his other common household is without number,
and they all have all necessaries and all that them needeth of the
emperor's court.  And he hath in his court many barons as
servitors, that be Christian and converted to good faith by the
preaching of religious Christian men that dwell with him; but there
be many more, that will not that men know that they be Christian.

This emperor may dispend as much as he will without estimation; for
he not dispendeth ne maketh no money but of leather imprinted or of
paper.  And of that money is some of greater price and some of less
price, after the diversity of his statutes.  And when that money
hath run long that it beginneth to waste, then men bear it to the
emperor's treasury and then they take new money for the old.  And
that money goeth throughout all the country and throughout all his
provinces, for there and beyond them they make no money neither of
gold nor of silver; and therefore he may dispend enough, and
outrageously.  And of gold and silver that men bear in his country
he maketh cylours, pillars and pavements in his palace, and other
diverse things what him liketh.

This emperor hath in his chamber, in one of the pillars of gold, a
ruby and a carbuncle of half a foot long, that in the night giveth
so great clearness and shining, that it is as light as day.  And he
hath many other precious stones and many other rubies and
carbuncles; but those be the greatest and the most precious.

This emperor dwelleth in summer in a city that is toward the north
that is clept Saduz; and there is cold enough.  And in winter he
dwelleth in a city that is clept Camaaleche, and that is an hot
country.  But the country, where he dwelleth in most commonly, is
in Gaydo or in Jong, that is a good country and a temperate, after
that the country is there; but to men of this country it were too
passing hot.

And when this emperor will ride from one country to another he
ordaineth four hosts of his folk, of the which the first host goeth
before him a day's journey.  For that host shall be lodged the
night where the emperor shall lie upon the morrow.  And there shall
every man have all manner of victual and necessaries that be
needful, of the emperor's costage.  And in this first host is the
number of people fifty cumants, what of horse what of foot, of the
which every cumant amounteth 10,000 as I have told you before.  And
another host goeth in the right side of the emperor, nigh half a
journey from him.  And another goeth on the left side of him, in
the same wise.  And in every host is as much multitude of people as
in the first host.  And then after cometh the fourth host, that is
much more than any of the others, and that goeth behind him, the
mountance of a bow draught.  And every host hath his journeys
ordained in certain places, where they shall be lodged at night,
and there they shall have all that them needeth.  And if it befall
that any of the host die, anon they put another in his place, so
that the number shall evermore be whole.

And ye shall understand, that the emperor, in his proper person,
rideth not as other great lords do beyond, but if he list to go
privily with few men, for to be unknown.  And else, he rides in a
chariot with four wheels, upon the which is made a fair chamber,
and it is made of a certain wood, that cometh out of Paradise
terrestrial, that men clepe lignum aloes, that the floods of
Paradise bring out at divers seasons, as I have told you here
before.  And this chamber is full well smelling because of the wood
that it is made of.  And all this chamber is covered within of
plate of fine gold dubbed with precious stones and great pearls.
And four elephants and four great destriers, all white and covered
with rich covertures, leading the chariot.  And four, or five, or
six, of the greatest lords ride about this chariot, full richly
arrayed and full nobly, so that no man shall neigh the chariot, but
only those lords, but if that the emperor call any man to him that
him list to speak withal.  And above the chamber of this chariot
that the emperor sitteth in be set upon a perch four or five or six
gerfalcons, to that intent, that when the emperor seeth any wild
fowl, that he may take it at his own list, and have the disport and
the play of the flight, first with one, and after with another; and
so he taketh his disport passing by the country.  And no man rideth
before him of his company, but all after him.  And no man dare not
come nigh the chariot, by a bow draught, but those lords only that
be about him.  And all the host cometh fairly after him in great
multitude.

And also such another chariot with such hosts ordained and arrayed
go with the empress upon another side, everych by himself, with
four hosts, right as the emperor did; but not with so great
multitude of people.  And his eldest son goeth by another way in
another chariot, in the same manner.  So that there is between them
so great multitude of folk that it is marvel to tell it.  And no
man should trow the number, but he had seen it.  And some-time it
happeth that when he will not go far, and that it like him to have
the empress and his children with him, then they go altogether, and
their folk be all mingled in fere, and divided in four parties
only.

And ye shall understand, that the empire of this great Chan is
divided in twelve provinces; and every province hath more than two
thousand cities, and of towns without number.  This country is full
great, for it hath twelve principal kings in twelve provinces, and
every of those Kings have many kings under them, and all they be
obeissant to the great Chan.  And his land and his lordship dureth
so far, that a man may not go from one head to another, neither by
sea ne land, the space of seven year.  And through the deserts of
his lordship, there as men may find no towns, there be inns
ordained by every journey, to receive both man and horse, in the
which they shall find plenty of victual, and of all things that
they need for to go by the country.

And there is a marvellous custom in that country (but it is
profitable), that if any contrarious thing that should be prejudice
or grievance to the emperor in any kind, anon the emperor hath
tidings thereof and full knowledge in a day, though it be three or
four journeys from him or more.  For his ambassadors take their
dromedaries or their horses, and they prick in all that ever they
may toward one of the inns.  And when they come there, anon they
blow an horn.  And anon they of the inn know well enough that there
be tidings to warn the emperor of some rebellion against him.  And
then anon they make other men ready, in all haste that they may, to
bear letters, and prick in all that ever they may, till they come
to the other inns with their letters.  And then they make fresh men
ready, to prick forth with the letters toward the emperor, while
that the last bringer rest him, and bait his dromedary or his
horse.  And so, from inn to inn, till it come to the emperor.  And
thus anon hath he hasty tidings of anything that beareth charge, by
his couriers, that run so hastily throughout all the country.  And
also when the Emperor sendeth his couriers hastily throughout his
land, every one of them hath a large throng full of small bells,
and when they neigh near to the inns of other couriers that be also
ordained by the journeys, they ring their bells, and anon the other
couriers make them ready, and run their way unto another inn.  And
thus runneth one to other, full speedily and swiftly, till the
emperor's intent be served, in all haste.  And these couriers be
clept CHYDYDO, after their language, that is to say, a messenger,

Also when the emperor goeth from one country to another, as I have
told you here before, and he pass through cities and towns, every
man maketh a fire before his door, and putteth therein powder of
good gums that be sweet smelling, for to make good savour to the
emperor.  And all the people kneel down against him, and do him
great reverence.  And there, where religious Christian men dwell,
as they do in many cities in the land, they go before him with
procession with cross and holy water, and they sing, VENI CREATOR
SPIRITUS! with an high voice, and go towards him.  And when he
heareth them, he commandeth to his lords to ride beside him, that
the religious men may come to him.  And when they be nigh him with
the cross, then he doth adown his galiot that sits on his head in
manner of a chaplet, that is made of gold and precious stones and
great pearls, and it is so rich, that men prize it to the value of
a realm in that country.  And then he kneeleth to the cross.  And
then the prelate of the religious men saith before him certain
orisons, and giveth him a blessing with the cross; and he inclineth
to the blessing full devoutly.  And then the prelate giveth him
some manner fruit, to the number of nine, in a platter of silver,
with pears or apples, or other manner fruit.  And he taketh one.
And then men give to the other lords that be about him.  For the
custom is such, that no stranger shall come before him, but if he
give him some manner thing, after the old law that saith, NEMO
ACCEDAT IN CONSPECTU MEO VACUUS.  And then the emperor saith to the
religious men, that they withdraw them again, that they be neither
hurt nor harmed of the great multitude of horses that come behind
him.  And also, in the same manner, do the religious men that dwell
there, to the empresses that pass by them, and to his eldest son.
And to every of them they present fruit.

And ye shall understand, that the people that he hath so many hosts
of, about him and about his wives and his soil, they dwell not
continually with him.  But always, when him liketh, they be sent
for.  And after, when they have done, they return to their own
households, save only they that be dwelling with him in household
for to serve him and his wives and his sons for to govern his
household.  And albeit, that the others be departed from him after
that they have performed their service, yet there abideth
continually with him in court 50,000 men at horse and 200,000 men a
foot, without minstrels and those that keep wild beasts and divers
birds, of the which I have told you the number before.

Under the firmament is not so great a lord, ne so mighty, ne so
rich as is the great Chan; not Prester John, that is emperor of the
high Ind, ne the Soldan of Babylon, ne the Emperor of Persia.  All
these ne be not in comparison to the great Chan, neither of might,
ne of noblesse, ne of royalty, ne of riches; for in all these he
passeth all earthly princes.  Wherefore it is great harm that he
believeth not faithfully in God.  And natheles he will gladly hear
speak of God.  And he suffereth well that Christian men dwell in
his lordship, and that men of his faith be made Christian men if
they will, throughout all his country; for he defendeth no man to
hold no law other than him liketh.

In that country some men hath an hundred wives, some sixty, some
more, some less.  And they take the next of their kin to their
wives, save only that they out-take their mothers, their daughters,
and their sisters of the mother's side; but their sisters on the
father's side of another woman they may well take, and their
brothers' wives also after their death, and their step-mothers also
in the same wise.



CHAPTER XXVI



OF THE LAW AND THE CUSTOMS OF THE TARTARIANS DWELLING IN CATHAY.
AND HOW THAT MEN DO WHEN THE EMPEROR SHALL DIE, AND HOW HE SHALL BE
CHOSEN


THE folk of that country use all long clothes without furs.  And
they be clothed with precious cloths of Tartary, and of cloths of
gold.  And their clothes be slit at the side, and they be fastened
with laces of silk.  And they clothe them also with pilches, and
the hide without; and they use neither cape ne hood.  And in the
same manner as the men go, the women go, so that no man may unneth
know the men from the women, save only those women that be married,
that bear the token upon their heads of a man's foot, in sign that
they be under man's foot and under subjection of man.

And their wives ne dwell not together, but every of them by
herself; and the husband may lie with whom of them that him liketh.
Everych hath his house, both man and woman.  And their houses be
made round of staves, and it hath a round window above that giveth
them light, and also that serveth for deliverance of smoke.  And
the heling of their houses and the walls and the doors be all of
wood.  And when they go to war, they lead their houses with them
upon chariots, as men do tents or pavilions.  And they make their
fire in the midst of their houses.

And they have great multitude of all manner of beasts, save only of
swine, for they bring none forth.  And they believe well one God
that made and formed all things.  And natheles yet have they idols
of gold and silver, and of tree and of cloth.  And to those idols
they offer always their first milk of their beasts, and also of
their meats and of their drinks before they eat.  And they offer
often-times horses and beasts.  And they clepe the God of kind
YROGA.

And their emperor also, what name that ever he have, they put
evermore thereto, Chan.  And when I was there, their emperor had to
name Thiaut, so that he was clept Thiaut-Chan.  And his eldest son
was clept Tossue; and when he shall be emperor, he shall be clept
Tossue-Chan.  And at that time the emperor had twelve sons without
him, that were named Cuncy, Ordii, Chadahay, Buryn, Negu, Nocab,
Cadu, [Siban], Cuten, Balacy, Babylan, and Garegan.  And of his
three wives, the first and principal, that was Prester John's
daughter, had to name Serioche-Chan, and the tother Borak-Chan, and
the tother Karanke-Chan.

The folk of that country begin all their things in the new moon,
and they worship much the moon and the sun and often-time kneel
against them.  And all the folk of the country ride commonly
without spurs, but they bear always a little whip in their hands
for to chace with their horses.

And they have great conscience and hold it for a great sin to cast
a knife in the fire, and for to draw flesh out of a pot with a
knife, and for to smite an horse with the handle of a whip, or to
smite an horse with a bridle, or to break one bone with another, or
for to cast milk or any liquor that men may drink upon the earth,
or for to take and slay little children.  And the most sin that any
man may do is to piss in their houses that they dwell in, and whoso
that may be found with that sin sikerly they slay him.  And of
everych of these sins it behoveth them to be shriven of their
priests, and to pay great sum of silver for their penance.  And it
behoveth also, that the place that men have pissed in be hallowed
again, and else dare no man enter therein.  And when they have paid
their penance, men make them pass through a fire or through two,
for to cleanse them of their sins.  And also when any messenger
cometh and bringeth letters or any present to the emperor, it
behoveth him that he, with the thing that he bringeth, pass through
two burning fires for to purge them, that he bring no poison ne
venom, ne no wicked thing that might be grievance to the Lord.  And
also if any man or woman be taken in avoutry or fornication, anon
they slay him.  And who that stealeth anything, anon they slay him.

Men of that country be all good archers and shoot right well, both
men and women, as well on horse-back, pricking, as on foot,
running.  And the women make all things and all manner mysteries
and crafts, as of clothes, boots and other things; and they drive
carts, ploughs and wains and chariots; and they make houses and all
manner mysteres, out taken bows and arrows and armours that men
make.  And all the women wear breeches, as well as men.

All the folk of that country be full obeissant to their sovereigns;
ne they fight not, ne chide not one with another.  And there be
neither thieves ne robbers in that country.  And every man
worshippeth other; but no man there doth no reverence to no
strangers, but if they be great princes.

And they eat hounds, lions, leopards, mares and foals, asses, rats
and mice and all manner of beasts, great and small, save only swine
and beasts that were defended by the old law.  And they eat all the
beasts without and within, without casting away of anything, save
only the filth.  And they eat but little bread, but if it be in
courts of great lords.  And they have not in many places, neither
pease ne beans ne none other pottages but the broth of the flesh.
For little eat they anything but flesh and the broth.  And when
they have eaten, they wipe their hands upon their skirts; for they
use no napery ne towels, but if it be before great lords; but the
common people hath none.  And when they have eaten, they put their
dishes unwashen into the pot or cauldron with remnant of the flesh
and of the broth till they will eat again.  And the rich men drink
milk of mares or of camels or of asses or of other beasts.  And
they will be lightly drunken of milk and of another drink that is
made of honey and of water sodden together; for in that country is
neither wine ne ale.  They live full wretchedly, and they eat but
once in the day, and that but little, neither in courts ne in other
places.  And in sooth, one man alone in this country will eat more
in a day than one of them will eat in three days.  And if any
strange messenger come there to a lord, men make him to eat but
once a day, and that full little.

And when they war, they war full wisely and always do their
business, to destroy their enemies.  Every man there beareth two
bows or three, and of arrows great plenty, and a great axe.  And
the gentles have short spears and large and full trenchant on that
one side.  And they have plates and helms made of quyrboylle, and
their horses covertures of the same.  And whoso fleeth from the
battle they slay him.  And when they hold any siege about castle or
town that is walled and defensible, they behote to them that be
within to do all the profit and good, that it is marvel to hear;
and they grant also to them that be within all that they will ask
them.  And after that they be yielden, anon they slay them all; and
cut off their ears and souse them in vinegar, and thereof they make
great service for lords.  All their lust and all their imagination
is for to put all lands under their subjection.  And they say that
they know well by their prophecies, that they shall be overcome by
archers and by strength of them; but they know not of what nation
ne of what law they shall be of, that shall overcome them.  And
therefore they suffer that folk of all laws may peaceably dwell
amongst them.

Also when they will make their idols or an image of any of their
friends for to have remembrance of him, they make always the image
all naked without any manner of clothing.  For they say that in
good love should be no covering, that man should not love for the
fair clothing ne for the rich array, but only for the body, such as
God hath made it, and for the good virtues that the body is endowed
with of Nature, not only for fair clothing that is not of kindly
Nature.

And ye shall understand that it is great dread for to pursue the
Tartars if they flee in battle.  For in fleeing they shoot behind
them and slay both men and horses.  And when they will fight they
will shock them together in a plump; that if there be 20,000 men,
men shall not ween that there be scant 10,000.  And they can well
win land of strangers, but they cannot keep it; for they have
greater lust to lie in tents without than for to lie in castle or
in towns.  And they prize nothing the wit of other nations.

And amongst them oil of olive is full dear, for they hold it for
full noble medicine.  And all the Tartars have small eyen and
little of beard, and not thick haired but shear.  And they be false
and traitors; and they last nought that they behote.  They be full
hardy folk, and much pain and woe may suffer and disease, more than
any other folk, for they be taught thereto in their own country of
youth.  And therefore they spend as who saith, right nought.

And when any man shall die, men set a spear beside him.  And when
he draweth towards the death, every man fleeth out of the house
till he be dead.  And after that they bury him in the fields.

And when the emperor dieth, men set him in a chair in midst the
place of his tent.  And men set a table before him clean, covered
with a cloth, and thereupon flesh and diverse viands and a cup full
of mare's milk.  And men put a mare beside him with her foal, and
an horse saddled and bridled.  And they lay upon the horse gold and
silver, great quantity.  And they put about him great plenty of
straw.  And then men make a great pit and a large, and with the
tent and all these other things they put him in earth.  And they
say that when he shall come into another world, he shall not be
without an house, ne without horse, ne without gold and silver; and
the mare shall give him milk, and bring him forth more horses till
he be well stored in the tother world.  For they trow that after
their death they shall be eating and drinking in that other world,
and solacing them with their wives, as they did here.

And after time that the emperor is thus interred no man shall be so
hardy to speak of him before his friends.  And yet natheles,
sometime falleth of many that they make him to be interred privily
by night in wild places, and put again the grass over the pit for
to grow; or else men cover the pit with gravel and sand, that no
man shall perceive where, ne know where, the pit is, to that intent
that never after none of his friends shall have mind ne remembrance
of him.  And then they say that he is ravished into another world,
where he is a greater lord than he was here.

And then, after the death of the emperor, the seven lineages
assemble them together, and choose his eldest son, or the next
after him of his blood.  And thus they say to him; we will and we
pray and ordain that ye be our lord and our emperor.

And then he answereth, If ye will that I reign over you as lord, do
everych of you that I shall command him, either to abide or to go;
and whomsoever that I command to be slain, that anon he be slain.

And they answer all with one voice, Whatsoever ye command, it shall
be done.

Then saith the emperor, Now understand well, that my word from
henceforth is sharp and biting as a sword.

After, men set him upon a black steed and so men bring him to a
chair full richly arrayed, and there they crown him.  And then all
the cities and good towns send him rich presents.  So that at that
journey he shall have more than sixty chariots charged with gold
silver, without jewels of gold and precious stones, that lords gave
him, that be without estimation, and without horses, and cloths of
gold, and of camakas, and tartarins that be without number.



CHAPTER XXVII



OF THE REALM OF THARSE AND THE LANDS AND KINGDOMS TOWARDS THE
SEPTENTRIONAL PARTS, IN COMING DOWN FROM THE LAND OF CATHAY


THIS land of Cathay is in Asia the deep; and after, on this half,
is Asia the more.  The kingdom of Cathay marcheth toward the west
unto the kingdom of Tharse, the which was one of the kings that
came to present our Lord in Bethlehem.  And they that be of the
lineage of that king are some Christian.  In Tharse they eat no
flesh, ne they drink no wine.

And on this half, toward the west, is the kingdom of Turkestan,
that stretcheth him toward the west to the kingdom of Persia, and
toward the septentrional to the kingdom of Khorasan.  In the
country of Turkestan be but few good cities; but the best city of
that land hight Octorar.  There be great pastures, but few corns;
and therefore, for the most part, they be all herdsmen, and they
lie in tents and they drink a manner ale made of honey.

And after, on this half, is the kingdom of Khorasan, that is a good
land and a plenteous, without wine.  And it hath a desert toward
the east that lasteth more than an hundred journeys.  And the best
city of that country is clept Khorasan, and of that city beareth
the country his name.  The folk of that country be hardy warriors.

And on this half is the kingdom of Comania, whereof the Comanians
that dwelled in Greece sometime were chased out.  This is one of
the greatest kingdoms of the world, but it is not all inhabited.
For at one of the parts there is so great cold that no man may
dwell there; and in another part there is so great heat that no man
may endure it, and also there be so many flies, that no man may
know on what side he may turn him.  In that country is but little
arboury ne trees that bear fruit ne other.  They lie in tents; and
they burn the dung of beasts for default of wood.  This kingdom
descendeth on this half toward us and toward Prussia and toward
Russia.

And through that country runneth the river of Ethille that is one
of the greatest rivers of the world.  And it freezeth so strongly
all years that many times men have fought upon the ice with great
hosts, both parties on foot, and their horses voided for the time,
and what on horse and on foot, more than 200,000 persons on every
side.

And between that river and the great sea Ocean, that they clepe the
Sea Maure, lie all these realms.  And toward the head, beneath, in
that realm is the Mount Chotaz, that is the highest mount of the
world, and it is between the Sea Maure and the Sea Caspian.  There
is full strait and dangerous passage for to go toward Ind.  And
therefore King Alexander let make there a strong city, that men
clepe Alexandria, for to keep the country that no man should pass
without his leave.  And now men clepe that city, the Gate of Hell.

And the principal city of Comania is clept Sarak, that is one of
the three ways for to go into Ind.  But by that way, ne may not
pass no great multitude of people, but if it be in winter.  And
that passage men clepe the Derbent.  The tother way is for to go
from the city of Turkestan by Persia, and by that way be many
journeys by desert.  And the third way is that cometh from Comania
and then to go by the Great Sea and by the kingdom of Abchaz.

And ye shall understand, that all these kingdoms and all these
lands above-said unto Prussia and to Russia be all obeissant to the
great Chan of Cathay, and many other countries that march to other
coasts.  Wherefore his power and his lordship is full great and
full mighty.



CHAPTER XXVIII



THE EMPEROR OF PERSIA, AND OF THE LAND OF DARKNESS; AND OF OTHER
KINGDOMS THAT BELONG TO THE GREAT CHAN OF CATHAY, AND OTHER LANDS
OF HIS, UNTO THE SEA OF GREECE


NOW, since I have devised you the lands and the kingdoms toward the
parts Septentrionals in coming down from the land of Cathay unto
the lands of the Christian, towards Prussia and Russia, - now shall
I devise you of other lands and kingdoms coming down by other
coasts, toward the right side, unto the sea of Greece, toward the
land of Christian men.  And, therefore, that after Ind and after
Cathay the Emperor of Persia is the greatest lord, therefore, I
shall tell you of the kingdom of Persia.

First, where he hath two kingdoms, the first kingdom beginneth
toward the east, toward the kingdom of Turkestan, and it stretcheth
toward the west unto the river of Pison, that is one of the four
rivers that come out of Paradise.  And on another side it
stretcheth toward the Septentrion unto the sea of Caspian; and also
toward the south unto the desert of Ind.  And this country is good
and plain and full of people.  And there be many good cities.  But
the two principal cities be these, Boyturra, and Seornergant, that
some men clepe Sormagant.  The tother kingdom of Persia stretcheth
toward the river of Pison and the parts of the west unto the
kingdom of Media, and from the great Armenia and toward the
Septentrion to the sea of Caspian and toward the south to the land
of Ind.  That is also a good land and a plenteous, and it hath
three great principal cities - Messabor, Saphon, and Sarmassan.

And then after is Armenia, in the which were wont to be four
kingdoms; that is a noble country and full of goods.  And it
beginneth at Persia and stretcheth toward the west in length unto
Turkey.  And in largeness it dureth to the city of Alexandria, that
now is clept the Gate of Hell, that I spake of before, under the
kingdom of Media.  In this Armenia be full many good cities, but
Taurizo is most of name.

After this is the kingdom of Media, that is full long, but it is
not full large, that beginneth toward the east to the land of
Persia and to Ind the less; and it stretcheth toward the west,
toward the kingdom of Chaldea and toward the Septentrion,
descending toward the little Armenia.  In that kingdom of Media
there be many great hills and little of plain earth.  There dwell
Saracens and another manner of folk, that men clepe Cordynes.  The
best two cities of that kingdom be Sarras and Karemen.

After that is the kingdom of Georgia, that beginneth toward the
east to the great mountain that is clept Abzor, where that dwell
many diverse folk of diverse nations.  And men clepe the country
Alamo.  This kingdom stretcheth him towards Turkey and toward the
Great Sea, and toward the south it marcheth to the great Armenia.
And there be two kingdoms in that country; that one is the kingdom
of Georgia, and that other is the kingdom of Abchaz.  And always in
that country be two kings; and they be both Christian.  But the
king of Georgia is in subjection to the great Chan.  And the king
of Abchaz hath the more strong country, and he always vigorously
defendeth his country against all those that assail him, so that no
man may make him in subjection to no man.

In that kingdom of Abchaz is a great marvel.  For a province of the
country that hath well in circuit three journeys, that men clepe
Hanyson, is all covered with darkness, without any brightness or
light; so that no man may see ne hear, ne no man dare enter into
him.  And, natheles, they of the country say, that some-times men
hear voice of folk, and horses neighing, and cocks crowing.  And
men wit well, that men dwell there, but they know not what men.
And they say, that the darkness befell by miracle of God.  For a
cursed emperor of Persia, that hight Saures, pursued all Christian
men to destroy them and to compel them to make sacrifice to his
idols, and rode with great host, in all that ever he might, for to
confound the Christian men.  And then in that country dwelled many
good Christian men, the which that left their goods and would have
fled into Greece.  And when they were in a plain that hight Megon,
anon this cursed emperor met with them with his host for to have
slain them and hewn them to pieces.  And anon the Christian men
kneeled to the ground, and made their prayers to God to succour
them.  And anon a great thick cloud came and covered the emperor
and all his host.  And so they endure in that manner that they ne
may not go out on no side; and so shall they evermore abide in that
darkness till the day of doom, by the miracle of God.  And then the
Christian men went where them liked best, at their own pleasance,
without letting of any creature, and their enemies enclosed and
confounded in darkness, without any stroke.

Wherefore we may well say with David, A DOMINO FACTUM EST ISTUD; &
EST MIRABILE IN OCULIS NOSTRIS.  And that was a great miracle, that
God made for them.  Wherefore methinketh that Christian men should
be more devout to serve our Lord God than any other men of any
other sect.  For without any dread, ne were not cursedness and sin
of Christian men, they should be lords of all the world.  For the
banner of Jesu Christ is always displayed, and ready on all sides
to the help of his true loving servants.  Insomuch, that one good
Christian man in good belief should overcome and out-chase a
thousand cursed misbelieving men, as David saith in the Psalter,
QUONIAM PERSEQUEBATUR UNUS MILLS, & DUO FUGARENT DECEM MILIA; ET
CADENT A LATERE TUO MILLE, & DECEM MILIA A DEXTRIS TUIS.  And how
that it might be that one should chase a thousand, David himself
saith following, QUIA MANUS DOMINI FECIT HAEC OMNIA, and our Lord
himself saith, by the prophet's mouth, SI IN VIIS MEIS
AMBULAVERITIS, SUPER TRIBULANTES VOS MISISSEM MANUM MEAM.  So that
we may see apertly that if we will be good men, no enemy may not
endure against us.

Also ye shall understand that out of that land of darkness goeth
out a great river that sheweth well that there be folk dwelling, by
many ready tokens; but no man dare not enter into it.

And wit well, that in the kingdoms of Georgia, of Abchaz and of the
little Armenia be good Christian men and devout.  For they shrive
them and housel them evermore once or twice in the week.  And there
be many of them that housel them every day; and so do we not on
this half, albeit that Saint Paul commandeth it, saying, OMNIBUS
DIEBUS DOMINICIS AD COMMUNICANDUM HORTOR.  They keep that
commandment, but we ne keep it not.

Also after, on this half, is Turkey, that marcheth to the great
Armenia.  And there be many provinces, as Cappadocia, Saure,
Brique, Quesiton, Pytan, and Gemethe.  And in everych of these be
many good cities.  This Turkey stretcheth unto the city of Sachala
that sitteth upon the sea of Greece, and so it marcheth to Syria.
Syria is a great country and a good, as I have told you before.
And also it hath, above toward Ind, the kingdom of Chaldea, that
stretcheth from the mountains of Chaldea toward the east unto the
city of Nineveh, that sitteth upon the river of Tigris; and in
largeness it beginneth toward the north to the city of Maraga; and
it stretcheth toward the south unto the sea Ocean.  In Chaldea is a
plain country, and few hills and few rivers.

After is the kingdom of Mesopotamia, that beginneth, toward the
east, to the flom of Tigris, unto a city that is clept Mosul; and
it stretcheth toward the west to the flom of Euphrates unto a city
that is clept Roianz; and in length it goeth to the mount of
Armenia unto the desert of Ind the less.  This is a good country
and a plain, but it hath few rivers.  It hath but two mountains in
that country, of the which one hight Symar and that other Lyson.
And this land marcheth to the kingdom of Chaldea.

Yet there is, toward the parts Meridionals many countries and many
regions, as the land of Ethiopia, that marcheth, toward the east to
the great deserts, toward the west to the kingdom of Nubia, toward
the south to the kingdom of Moretane, and toward the north to the
Red Sea.

After is Moretane, that dureth from the mountains of Ethiopia unto
Lybia the high.  And that country lieth along from the sea ocean
toward the south; and toward the north it marcheth to Nubia and to
the high Lybia.  (These men of Nubia be Christian.)  And it
marcheth from the lands above-said to the deserts of Egypt, and
that is the Egypt that I have spoken of before.

And after is Lybia the high and Lybia the low, that descendeth down
low toward the great sea of Spain, in the which country be many
kingdoms and many diverse folk.

Now I have devised you many countries on this half the kingdom of
Cathay, of the which many be obeissant to the great Chan.



CHAPTER XXIX



OF THE COUNTRIES AND ISLES THAT BE BEYOND THE LAND OF CATHAY; AND
OF THE FRUITS THERE; AND OF TWENTY-TWO KINGS ENCLOSED WITHIN THE
MOUNTAINS


NOW shall I say you, suingly, of countries and isles that be beyond
the countries that I have spoken of.

Wherefore I say you, in passing by the land of Cathay toward the
high Ind and toward Bacharia, men pass by a kingdom that men clepe
Caldilhe, that is a full fair country.

And there groweth a manner of fruit, as though it were gourds.  And
when they be ripe, men cut them a-two, and men find within a little
beast, in flesh, in bone, and blood, as though it were a little
lamb without wool.  And men eat both the fruit and the beast.  And
that is a great marvel.  Of that fruit I have eaten, although it
were wonderful, but that I know well that God is marvellous in his
works.  And, natheles, I told them of as great a marvel to them,
that is amongst us, and that was of the Bernakes.  For I told them
that in our country were trees that bear a fruit that become birds
flying, and those that fell in the water live, and they that fall
on the earth die anon, and they be right good to man's meat.  And
hereof had they as great marvel, that some of them trowed it were
an impossible thing to be.

In that country be long apples of good savour, whereof be more than
an hundred in a cluster, and as many in another; and they have
great long leaves and large, of two foot long or more.  And in that
country, and in other countries thereabout, grow many trees that
bear clove-gylofres and nutmegs, and great nuts of Ind, and of
Canell and of many other spices.  And there be vines that bear so
great grapes, that a strong man should have enough to do for to
bear one cluster with all the grapes.

In that same region be the mountains of Caspian that men crepe Uber
in the country.  Between those mountains the Jews of ten lineages
be enclosed, that men clepe Goth and Magoth and they may not go out
on no side.  There were enclosed twenty-two kings with their
people, that dwelled between the mountains of Scythia.  There King
Alexander chased them between those mountains, and there he thought
for to enclose them through work of his men.  But when he saw that
he might not do it, ne bring it to an end, he prayed to God of
nature that he would perform that that he had begun.  And all were
it so, that he was a paynim and not worthy to be heard, yet God of
his grace closed the mountains together, so that they dwell there
all fast locked and enclosed with high mountains all about, save
only on one side, and on that side is the sea of Caspian.

Now may some men ask, since that the sea is on that one side,
wherefore go they not out on the sea side, for to go where that
them liketh?

But to this question, I shall answer; that sea of Caspian goeth out
by land under the mountains, and runneth by the desert at one side
of the country, and after it stretcheth unto the ends of Persia,
and although it be clept a sea, it is no sea, ne it toucheth to
none other sea, but it is a lake, the greatest of the world; and
though they would put them into that sea, they ne wist never where
that they should arrive; and also they can no language but only
their own, that no man knoweth but they; and therefore may they not
go out.

And also ye shall understand, that the Jews have no proper land of
their own for to dwell in, in all the world, but only that land
between the mountains.  And yet they yield tribute for that land to
the Queen of Amazonia, the which that maketh them to be kept in
close full diligently, that they shall not go out on no side but by
the coast of their land; for their land marcheth to those
mountains.

And often it hath befallen, that some of the Jews have gone up the
mountains and avaled down to the valleys.  But great number of folk
ne may not do so, for the mountains be so high and so straight up,
that they must abide there, maugre their might.  For they may not
go out, but by a little issue that was made by strength of men, and
it lasteth well a four great mile.

And after, is there yet a land all desert, where men may find no
water, neither for digging ne for none other thing.  Wherefore men
may not dwell in that place, so is it full of dragons, of serpents
and of other venomous beasts, that no man dare not pass, but if it
be strong winter.  And that strait passage men clepe in that
country Clyron.  And that is the passage that the Queen of Amazonia
maketh to be kept.  And though it happen some of them by fortune to
go out, they can no manner of language but Hebrew, so that they
cannot speak to the people.

And yet, natheles, men say they shall go out in the time of anti-
Christ, and that they shall make great slaughter of Christian men.
And therefore all the Jews that dwell in all lands learn always to
speak Hebrew, in hope, that when the other Jews shall go out, that
they may understand their speech, and to lead them into Christendom
for to destroy the Christian people.  For the Jews say that they
know well by their prophecies, that they of Caspia shall go out,
and spread throughout all the world, and that the Christian men
shall be under their subjection, as long as they have been in
subjection of them.

And if that you will wit how that they shall find their way, after
that I have heard say I shall tell you.

In the time of anti-Christ a fox shall make there his train, and
mine an hole where King Alexander let make the gates; and so long
he shall mine and pierce the earth, till that he shall pass through
towards that folk.  And when they see the fox, they shall have
great marvel of him, because that they saw never such a beast.  For
of all other beasts they have enclosed amongst them, save only the
fox.  And then they shall chase him and pursue him so strait, till
that he come to the same place that he came from.  And then they
shall dig and mine so strongly, till that they find the gates that
King Alexander let make of great stones, and passing huge, well
cemented and made strong for the mastery.  And those gates they
shall break, and so go out by finding of that issue.

From that land go men toward the land of Bacharia, where be full
evil folk and full cruel.  In that land be trees that bear wool, as
though it were of sheep, whereof men make clothes and all things
that may be made of wool.

In that country be many hippotaynes that dwell some-time in the
water and sometime on the land.  And they be half man and half
horse, as I have said before.  And they eat men when they may take
them.

And there be rivers of waters that be full bitter, three sithes
more than is the water of the sea.

In that country be many griffins, more plenty than in any other
country.  Some men say that they have the body upward as an eagle
and beneath as a lion; and truly they say sooth, that they be of
that shape.  But one griffin hath the body more great and is more
strong than eight lions, of such lions as be on this half, and more
great and stronger than an hundred eagles such as we have amongst
us.  For one griffin there will bear, flying to his nest, a great
horse, if he may find him at the point, or two oxen yoked together
as they go at the plough.  For he hath his talons so long and so
large and great upon his feet, as though they were horns of great
oxen or of bugles or of kine, so that men make cups of them to
drink of.  And of their ribs and of the pens of their wings, men
make bows, full strong, to shoot with arrows and quarrels.

From thence go men by many journeys through the land of Prester
John, the great Emperor of Ind.  And men clepe his realm the isle
of Pentexoire.



CHAPTER XXX



OF THE ROYAL ESTATE OF PRESTER JOHN.  AND OF A RICH MAN THAT MADE A
MARVELLOUS CASTLE AND CLEPED IT PARADISE; AND OF HIS SUBTLETY


THIS emperor, Prester John, holds full great land, and hath many
full noble cities and good towns in his realm, and many great
diverse isles and large.  For all the country of Ind is devised in
isles for the great floods that come from Paradise, that depart all
the land in many parts.  And also in the sea he hath full many
isles.  And the best city in the Isle of Pentexoire is Nyse, that
is a full royal city and a noble, and full rich.

This Prester John hath under him many kings and many isles and many
diverse folk of diverse conditions.  And this land is full good and
rich, but not so rich as is the land of the great Chan.  For the
merchants come not thither so commonly for to buy merchandises, as
they do in the land of the great Chan, for it is too far to travel
to.  And on that other part, in the Isle of Cathay, men find all
manner thing that is need to man - cloths of gold, of silk, of
spicery and all manner avoirdupois.  And therefore, albeit that men
have greater cheap in the Isle of Prester John, natheles, men dread
the long way and the great perils in the sea in those parts.

For in many places of the sea be great rocks of stones of the
adamant, that of his proper nature draweth iron to him.  And
therefore there pass no ships that have either bonds or nails of
iron within them.  And if there do, anon the rocks of the adamants
draw them to them, that never they may go thence.  I myself have
seen afar in that sea, as though it had been a great isle full of
tree, and buscaylle, full of thorns and briars, great plenty.  And
the shipmen told us, that all that was of ships that were drawn
thither by the adamants, for the iron that was in them.  And of the
rotten-ness, and other thing that was within the ships, grew such
buscaylle, and thorns and briars and green grass, and such manner
of thing; and of the masts and the sail-yards; it seemed a great
wood or a grove.  And such rocks be in many places thereabout.  And
therefore dare not the merchants pass there, but if they know well
the passages, or else that they have good lodesmen.

And also they dread the long way.  And therefore they go to Cathay,
for it is more nigh.  And yet it is not so nigh, but that men must
be travelling by sea and land, eleven months or twelve, from Genoa
or from Venice, or he come to Cathay.  And yet is the land of
Prester John more far by many dreadful journeys.

And the merchants pass by the kingdom of Persia, and go to a city
that is Clept Hermes, for Hermes the philosopher founded it.  And
after that they pass an arm of the sea, and then they go to another
city that is clept Golbache.  And there they find merchandises, and
of popinjays, as great plenty as men find here of geese.  And if
they will pass further, they may go sikerly enough.  In that
country is but little wheat or barley, and therefore they eat rice
and honey and milk and cheese and fruit.

This Emperor Prester John taketh always to his wife the daughter of
the great Chan; and the great Chan also, in the same wise, the
daughter of Prester John.  For these two be the greatest lords
under the firmament.

In the land of Prester John be many diverse things and many
precious stones, so great and so large, that men make of them
vessels, as platters, dishes and cups.  And many other marvels be
there, that it were too cumbrous and too long to put it in
scripture of books; but of the principal isles and of his estate
and of his law, I shall tell you some part.

This Emperor Prester John is Christian, and a great part of his
country also.  But yet, they have not all the articles of our faith
as we have.  They believe well in the Father, in the Son and in the
Holy Ghost.  And they be full devout and right true one to another.
And they set not by no barretts, ne by cautels, nor of no deceits.

And he hath under him seventy-two provinces, and in every province
is a king.  And these kings have kings under them, and all be
tributaries to Prester John.  And he hath in his lordships many
great marvels.

For in his country is the sea that men clepe the Gravelly Sea, that
is all gravel and sand, without any drop of water, and it ebbeth
and floweth in great waves as other seas do, and it is never still
ne in peace, in no manner season.  And no man may pass that sea by
navy, ne by no manner of craft, and therefore may no man know what
land is beyond that sea.  And albeit that it have no water, yet men
find therein and on the banks full good fish of other manner of
kind and shape, than men find in any other sea, and they be of
right good taste and delicious to man's meat.

And a three journeys long from that sea be great mountains, out of
the which goeth out a great flood that cometh out of Paradise.  And
it is full of precious stones, without any drop of water, and it
runneth through the desert on that one side, so that it maketh the
sea gravelly; and it beareth into that sea, and there it endeth.
And that flome runneth, also, three days in the week and bringeth
with him great stones and the rocks also therewith, and that great
plenty.  And anon, as they be entered into the Gravelly Sea, they
be seen no more, but lost for evermore.  And in those three days
that that river runneth, no man dare enter into it; but in the
other days men dare enter well enough.

Also beyond that flome, more upward to the deserts, is a great
plain all gravelly, between the mountains.  And in that plain,
every day at the sun-rising, begin to grow small trees, and they
grow till mid-day, bearing fruit; but no man dare take of that
fruit, for it is a thing of faerie.  And after mid-day, they
decrease and enter again into the earth, so that at the going down
of the sun they appear no more.  And so they do, every day.  And
that is a great marvel.

In that desert be many wild men, that be hideous to look on; for
they be horned, and they speak nought, but they grunt, as pigs.
And there is also great plenty of wild hounds.  And there be many
popinjays, that they clepe psittakes their language.  And they
speak of their proper nature, and salute men that go through the
deserts, and speak to them as apertly as though it were a man.  And
they that speak well have a large tongue, and have five toes upon a
foot.  And there be also of another manner, that have but three
toes upon a foot, and they speak not, or but little, for they can
not but cry.

This Emperor Prester John when he goeth into battle against any
other lord, he hath no banners borne before him; but he hath three
crosses of gold, fine, great and high, full of precious stones, and
every of those crosses be set in a chariot, full richly arrayed.
And for to keep every cross, be ordained 10,000 men of arms and
more than 100,000 men on foot, in manner as men would keep a
standard in our countries, when that we be in land of war.  And
this number of folk is without the principal host and without wings
ordained for the battle.  And when he hath no war, but rideth with
a privy meinie, then he hath borne before him but one cross of
tree, without painting and without gold or silver or precious
stones, in remembrance that Jesu Christ suffered death upon a cross
of tree.  And he hath borne before him also a platter of gold full
of earth, in token that his noblesse and his might and his flesh
shall turn to earth.  And he hath borne before him also a vessel of
silver, full of noble jewels of gold full rich and of precious
stones, in token of his lordship and of his noblesse and of his
might.

He dwelleth commonly in the city of Susa.  And there is his
principal palace, that is so rich and so noble, that no man will
trow it by estimation, but he had seen it.  And above the chief
tower of the palace be two round pommels of gold, and in everych of
them be two carbuncles great and large, that shine full bright upon
the night.  And the principal gates of his palace be of precious
stone that men clepe sardonyx, and the border and the bars be of
ivory.  And the windows of the halls and chambers be of crystal.
And the tables whereon men eat, some be of emeralds, some of
amethyst, and some of gold, full of precious stones; and the
pillars that bear up the tables be of the same precious stones.
And the degrees to go up to his throne, where he sitteth at the
meat, one is of onyx, another is of crystal, and another of jasper
green, another of amethyst, another of sardine, another of
cornelian, and the seventh, that he setteth on his feet, is of
chrysolite.  And all these degrees be bordered with fine gold, with
the tother precious stones, set with great pearls orient.  And the
sides of the siege of his throne be of emeralds, and bordered with
gold full nobly, and dubbed with other precious stones and great
pearls.  And all the pillars in his chamber be of fine gold with
precious stones, and with many carbuncles, that give great light
upon the night to all people.  And albeit that the carbuncles give
light right enough, natheles, at all times burneth a vessel of
crystal full of balm, for to give good smell and odour to the
emperor, and to void away all wicked airs and corruptions.  And the
form of his bed is of fine sapphires, bended with gold, for to make
him sleep well and to refrain him from lechery; for he will not lie
with his wives, but four sithes in the year, after the four
seasons, and that is only for to engender children.

He hath also a full fair palace and a noble at the city of Nyse,
where that he dwelleth, when him best liketh; but the air is not so
attempre, as it is at the city of Susa.

And ye shall understand, that in all his country nor in the
countries there all about, men eat not but once in the day, as they
do in the court of the great Chan.  And so they eat every day in
his court, more than 30,000 persons, without goers and comers.  But
the 30,000 persons of his country, ne of the country of the great
Chan, ne spend not so much good as do 12,000 of our country.

This Emperor Prester John hath evermore seven kings with him to
serve him, and they depart their service by certain months.  And
with these kings serve always seventy-two dukes and three hundred
and sixty earls.  And all the days of the year, there eat in his
household and in his court, twelve archbishops and twenty bishops.
And the patriarch of Saint Thomas is there as is the pope here.
And the archbishops and the bishops and the abbots in that country
be all kings.  And everych of these great lords know well enough
the attendance of their service.  The one is master of his
household, another is his chamberlain, another serveth him of a
dish, another of the cup, another is steward, another is marshal,
another is prince of his arms, and thus is he full nobly and
royally served.  And his land dureth in very breadth four month's
journeys, and in length out of measure, that is to say, all isles
under earth that we suppose to be under us.

Beside the isle of Pentexoire, that is the land of Prester John, is
a eat isle, long and broad, that men clepe Mistorak; and it is in
the lordship of Prester John.  In that isle is great plenty of
goods.

There was dwelling, sometime, a rich man; and it is not long since;
and men clept him Gatholonabes.  And he was full of cautels and of
subtle deceits.  And he had a full fair castle and a strong in a
mountain, so strong and so noble, that no man could devise a fairer
ne stronger.  And he had let mure all the mountain about with a
strong wall and a fair.  And within those walls he had the fairest
garden that any man might behold.  And therein were trees bearing
all manner of fruits, that any man could devise.  And therein were
also all manner virtuous herbs of good smell, and all other herbs
also that bear fair flowers.  And he had also in that garden many
fair wells; and beside those wells he had let make fair halls and
fair chambers, depainted all with gold and azure; and there were in
that place many diverse things, and many diverse stories:  and of
beasts, and of birds that sung full delectably and moved by craft,
that it seemed that they were quick.  And he had also in his garden
all manner of fowls and of beasts that any man might think on, for
to have play or sport to behold them.

And he had also, in that place, the fairest damsels that might be
found, under the age of fifteen years, and the fairest young
striplings that men might get, of that same age.  And all they were
clothed in cloths of gold, full richly.  And he said that those
were angels.

And he had also let make three wells, fair and noble and all
environed with stone of jasper, of crystal, diapered with gold, and
set with precious stones and great orient pearls.  And he had made
a conduit under earth, so that the three wells, at his list, one
should run milk, another wine and another honey.  And that place he
clept Paradise.

And when that any good knight, that was hardy and noble, came to
see this royalty, he would lead him into his paradise, and show him
these wonderful things to his disport, and the marvellous and
delicious song of diverse birds, and the fair damsels, and the fair
wells of milk, of wine and of honey, plenteously running.  And he
would let make divers instruments of music to sound in an high
tower, so merrily, that it was joy for to hear; and no man should
see the craft thereof.  And those, he said, were angels of God, and
that place was Paradise, that God had behight to his friends,
saying, DABO VOBIS TERRAM FLUENTEM LACTE ET MELLE.  And then would
he make them to drink of certain drink, whereof anon they should be
drunk.  And then would them think greater delight than they had
before.  And then would he say to them, that if they would die for
him and for his love, that after their death they should come to
his paradise; and they should be of the age of those damosels, and
they should play with them, and yet be maidens.  And after that yet
should he put them in a fairer paradise, where that they should see
God of nature visibly, in his majesty and in his bliss.  And then
would he shew them his intent, and say them, that if they would go
slay such a lord, or such a man that was his enemy or contrarious
to his list, that they should not dread to do it and for to be
slain therefore themselves.  For after their death, he would put
them into another paradise, that was an hundred-fold fairer than
any of the tother; and there should they dwell with the most
fairest damosels that might be, and play with them ever-more.

And thus went many diverse lusty bachelors for to slay great lords
in diverse countries, that were his enemies, and made themselves to
be slain, in hope to have that paradise.  And thus, often-time, he
was revenged of his enemies by his subtle deceits and false
cautels.

And when the worthy men of the country had perceived this subtle
falsehood of this Gatholonabes, they assembled them with force, and
assailed his castle, and slew him, and destroyed all the fair
places and all the nobilities of that paradise.  The place of the
wells and of the walls and of many other things be yet apertly
seen, but the riches is voided clean.  And it is not long gone,
since that place was destroyed.



CHAPTER XXXI



OF THE DEVIL'S HEAD IN THE VALLEY PERILOUS.  AND OF THE CUSTOMS OF
FOLK IN DIVERSE ISLES THAT BE ABOUT IN THE LORDSHIP OF PRESTER JOHN


BESIDE that Isle of Mistorak upon the left side nigh to the river
of Pison is a marvellous thing.  There is a vale between the
mountains, that dureth nigh a four mile.  And some men clepe it the
Vale Enchanted, some clepe it the Vale of Devils, and some clepe it
the Vale Perilous.  In that vale hear men often-time great tempests
and thunders, and great murmurs and noises, all days and nights,
and great noise, as it were sound of tabors and of nakers and of
trumps, as though it were of a great feast.  This vale is all full
of devils, and hath been always.  And men say there, that it is one
of the entries of hell.  In that vale is great plenty of gold and
silver.  Wherefore many misbelieving men, and many Christian men
also, go in oftentime for to have of the treasure that there is;
but few come again, and namely of the misbelieving men, ne of the
Christian men neither, for anon they be strangled of devils.

And in mid place of that vale, under a rock, is an head and the
visage of a devil bodily, full horrible and dreadful to see, and it
sheweth not but the head, to the shoulders.  But there is no man in
the world so hardy, Christian man ne other, but that he would be
adread to behold it, and that it would seem him to die for dread,
so is it hideous for to behold.  For he beholdeth every man so
sharply with dreadful eyen, that be evermore moving and sparkling
as fire, and changeth and stirreth so often in diverse manner, with
so horrible countenance, that no man dare not neighen towards him.
And from him cometh out smoke and stinking fire and so much
abomination, that unnethe no man may there endure.

But the good Christian men, that be stable in the faith, enter well
without peril.  For they will first shrive them and mark them with
the token of the holy cross, so that the fiends ne have no power
over them.  But albeit that they be without peril, yet, natheles,
ne be they not without dread, when that they see the devils visibly
and bodily all about them, that make full many diverse assaults and
menaces, in air and in earth, and aghast them with strokes of
thunder-blasts and of tempests.  And the most dread is, that God
will take vengeance then of that that men have misdone against his
will.

And ye shall understand, that when my fellows and I were in that
vale, we were in great thought, whether that we durst put our
bodies in adventure, to go in or not, in the protection of God.
And some of our fellows accorded to enter, and some not.  So there
were with us two worthy men, friars minors, that were of Lombardy,
that said, that if any man would enter they would go in with us.
And when they had said so, upon the gracious trust of God and of
them, we let sing mass, and made every man to be shriven and
houseled.  And then we entered fourteen persons; but at our going
out we were but nine.  And so we wist never, whether that our
fellows were lost, or else turned again for dread.  But we saw them
never after; and those were two men of Greece, and three of Spain.
And our other fellows that would not go in with us, they went by
another coast to be before us; and so they were.

And thus we passed that perilous vale, and found therein gold and
silver, and precious stones and rich jewels, great plenty, both
here and there, as us seemed.  But whether that it was, as us
seemed, I wot never.  For I touched none, because that the devils
be so subtle to make a thing to seem otherwise than it is, for to
deceive mankind.  And therefore I touched none, and also because
that I would not be put out of my devotion; for I was more devout
then, than ever I was before or after, and all for the dread of
fiends that I saw in diverse figures, and also for the great
multitude of dead bodies, that I saw there lying by the way, by all
the vale, as though there had been a battle between two kings, and
the mightiest of the country, and that the greater part had been
discomfited and slain.  And I trow, that unnethe should any country
have so much people within him, as lay slain in that vale as us
thought, the which was an hideous sight to see.  And I marvelled
much, that there were so many, and the bodies all whole without
rotting.  But I trow, that fiends made them seem to be so whole
without rotting.  But that might not be to mine advice that so many
should have entered so newly, ne so many newly slain, with out
stinking and rotting.  And many of them were in habit of Christian
men, but I trow well, that it were of such that went in for
covetise of the treasure that was there, and had overmuch
feebleness in the faith; so that their hearts ne might not endure
in the belief for dread.  And therefore were we the more devout a
great deal.  And yet we were cast down, and beaten down many times
to the hard earth by winds and thunders and tempests.  But evermore
God of his grace holp us.  And so we passed that perilous vale
without peril and without encumbrance, thanked be Almighty God.

After this, beyond the vale, is a great isle, where the folk be
great giants of twenty-eight foot long, or of thirty foot long.
And they have no clothing but of skins of beasts that they hang
upon them.  And they eat no bread, but all raw flesh; and they
drink milk of beasts, for they have plenty of all bestial.  And
they have no houses to lie in.  And they eat more gladly man's
flesh than any other flesh.  Into that isle dare no man gladly
enter.  And if they see a ship and men therein, anon they enter
into the sea for to take them.

And men said us, that in an isle beyond that were giants of greater
stature, some of forty-five foot, or of fifty foot long, and, as
some men say, some of fifty cubits long.  But I saw none of those,
for I had no lust to go to those parts, because that no man cometh
neither into that isle ne into the other, but if he be devoured
anon.  And among those giants be sheep as great as oxen here, and
they bear great wool and rough.  Of the sheep I have seen many
times.  And men have seen, many times, those giants take men in the
sea out of their ships, and brought them to land, two in one hand
and two in another, eating them going, all raw and all quick.

Another isle is there toward the north, in the sea Ocean, where
that be full cruel and full evil women of nature.  And they have
precious stones in their eyen.  And they be of that kind, that if
they behold any man with wrath, they slay him anon with the
beholding, as doth the basilisk.

Another isle is there, full fair and good and great, and full of
people, where the custom is such, that the first night that they be
married, they make another man to lie by their wives for to have
their maidenhead:  and therefore they take great hire and great
thank.  And there be certain men in every town that serve of none
other thing; and they clepe them cadeberiz, that is to say, the
fools of wanhope.  For they of the country hold it so great a thing
and so perilous for to have the maidenhead of a woman, that them
seemeth that they that have first the maidenhead putteth him in
adventure of his life.  And if the husband find his wife maiden
that other next night after that she should have been lain by of
the man that is assigned therefore, peradventure for drunkenness or
for some other cause, the husband shall plain upon him that he hath
not done his devoir, in such cruel wise as though the officers
would have slain him.  But after the first night that they be lain
by, they keep them so straitly that they be not so hardy to speak
with no man.  And I asked them the cause why that they held such
custom:  and they said me, that of old time men had been dead for
deflowering of maidens, that had serpents in their bodies that
stung men upon their yards, that they died anon:  and therefore
they held that customs to make other men ordained therefore to lie
by their wives, for dread of death, and to assay the passage by
another [rather] than for to put them in that adventure.

After that is another isle where that women make great sorrow when
their children be y-born.  And when they die, they make great feast
and great joy and revel, and then they cast them into a great fire
burning.  And those that love well their husbands, if their
husbands be dead, they cast them also in the fire with their
children, and burn them.  And they say that the fire shall cleanse
them of all filths and of all vices, and they shall go pured and
clean into another world to their husbands, and they shall lead
their children with them.  And the cause why that they weep, when
their children be born is this; for when they come into this world,
they come to labour, sorrow and heaviness.  And why they make joy
and gladness at their dying is because that, as they say, then they
go to Paradise where the rivers run milk and honey, where that men
see them in joy and in abundance of goods, without sorrow and
labour.

In that isle men make their king evermore by election, and they ne
choose him not for no noblesse nor for no riches, but such one as
is of good manners and of good conditions, and therewithal
rightfull, and also that he be of great age, and that he have no
children.  In that isle men be full rightfull and they do rightfull
judgments in every cause both of rich and poor, small and great,
after the quantity of the trespass that is mis-done.  And the king
may not doom no man to death without assent of his barons and other
men wise of counsel, and that all the court accord thereto.  And if
the king himself do any homicide or any crime, as to slay a man, or
any such case, he shall die there for.  But he shall not be slain
as another man; but men shall defend, in pain of death, that no man
be so hardy to make him company ne to speak with him, ne that no
man give him, ne sell him, ne serve him, neither of meat ne of
drink; and so shall he die in mischief.  They spare no man that
hath trespassed, neither for love, ne for favour ne for riches, ne
for noblesse; but that he shall have after that he hath done.

Beyond that isle is another isle, where is great multitude of folk.
And they will not, for no thing, eat flesh of hares, ne of hens, ne
of geese; and yet they bring forth enough, for to see them and to
behold them only; but they eat flesh of all other beasts, and drink
milk.  In that country they take their daughters and their sisters
to their wives, and their other kinswomen.  And if there be ten men
or twelve men or more dwelling in an house, the wife of everych of
them shall be common to them all that dwell in that house; so that
every man may lie with whom he will of them on one night, and with
another, another night.  And if she have any child, she may give it
to what man that she list, that hath companied with her, so that no
man knoweth there whether the child be his or another's.  And if
any man say to them, that they nourish other men's children, they
answer that so do over men theirs.

In that country and by all Ind be great plenty of cockodrills, that
is a manner of a long serpent, as I have said before.  And in the
night they dwell in the water, and on the day upon the land, in
rocks and in caves.  And they eat no meat in all the winter, but
they lie as in a dream, as do the serpents.  These serpents slay
men, and they eat them weeping; and when they eat they move the
over jaw, and not the nether jaw, and they have no tongue.

In that country and in many other beyond that, and also in many on
this half, men put in work the seed of cotton, and they sow it
every year.  And then groweth it in small trees, that bear cotton.
And so do men every year, so that there is plenty of cotton at all
times.  Item; in this isle and in many other, there is a manner of
wood, hard and strong.  Whoso covereth the coals of that wood under
the ashes thereof, the coals will dwell and abide all quick, a year
or more.  And that tree hath many leaves, as the juniper hath.  And
there be also many trees, that of nature they will never burn, ne
rot in no manner.  And there be nut trees, that bear nuts as great
as a man's head.

There also be many beasts, that be clept orafles.  In Arabia, they
be clept gerfaunts.  That is a beast, pomely or spotted, that is
but a little more high than is a steed, but he hath the neck a
twenty cubits long; and his croup and his tail is as of an hart;
and he may look over a great high house.  And there be also in that
country many camles; that is a little beast as a goat, that is
wild, and he liveth by the air and eateth nought, ne drinketh
nought, at no time.  And he changeth his colour often-time, for men
see him often sithes, now in one colour and now in another colour;
and he may change him into all manner colours that him list, save
only into red and white.  There be also in that country passing
great serpents, some of six score foot long, and they be of diverse
colours, as rayed, red, green, and yellow, blue and black, and all
speckled.  And there be others that have crests upon their heads,
and they go upon their feet, upright, and they be well a four
fathom great, or more, and they dwell always in rocks or in
mountains, and they have alway the throat open, of whence they drop
venom always.  And there be also wild swine of many colours, as
great as be oxen in our country, and they be all spotted, as be
young fawns.  And there be also urchins, as great as wild swine
here; we clepe them Porcz de Spine.  And there be lions all white,
great and mighty.  And there be also of other beasts, as great and
more greater than is a destrier, and men clepe them Loerancs; and
some men clepe them odenthos; and they have a black head and three
long horns trenchant in the front, sharp as a sword, and the body
is slender; and he is a full felonious beast, and he chaseth and
slayeth the elephant.  There be also many other beasts, full wicked
and cruel, that be not mickle more than a bear, and they have the
head like a boar, and they have six feet, and on every foot two
large claws, trenchant; and the body is like a bear, and the tail
as a lion.  And there be also mice as great as hounds, and yellow
mice as great as ravens.  And there be geese, all red, three sithes
more great than ours here, and they have the head, the neck and the
breast all black.

And many other diverse beasts be in those countries, and elsewhere
there-about, and many diverse birds also, of the which it were too
long for to tell you.  And therefore, I pass over at this time.



CHAPTER XXXII



OF THE GOODNESS OF THE FOLK OF THE ISLE OF BRAGMAN.  OF KING
ALEXANDER.  AND WHEREFORE THE EMPEROR OF IND IS CLEPT PRESTER JOHN


AND beyond that isle is another isle, great and good and plenteous,
where that be good folk and true, and of good living after their
belief and of good faith.  And albeit that they be not christened,
ne have no perfect law, yet, natheles, of kindly law they be full
of all virtue, and they eschew all vices and all malices and all
sins.  For they be not proud, ne covetous, ne envious, ne wrathful,
ne gluttons, ne lecherous.  Ne they do to any man otherwise than
they would that other men did to them, and in this point they
fulfil the ten commandments of God, and give no charge of avoir, ne
of riches.  And they lie not, ne they swear not for none occasion,
but they say simply, yea and nay; for they say, he that sweareth
will deceive his neighbour, and therefore, all that they do, they
do it without oath.

And men clepe that isle the Isle of Bragman, and some men clepe it
the Land of Faith.  And through that land runneth a great river
that is clept Thebe.  And, in general, all the men of those isles
and of all the marches thereabout be more true than in any other
countries thereabout, and more rightfull than others in all things.
In that isle, is no thief, ne murderer, ne common woman, ne poor
beggar, ne never was man slain in that country.  And they be so
chaste, and lead so good life, as that they were religious men, and
they fast all days.  And because they be so true and so rightfull,
and so full of all good conditions, they were never grieved with
tempests, ne with thunder, ne with light, ne with hail, ne with
pestilence, ne with war, ne with hunger, ne with none other
tribulation, as we be, many times, amongst us, for our sins.
Wherefore, it seemeth well, that God loveth them and is pleased
with their creaunce for their good deeds.  They believe well in
God, that made all things, and him they worship.  And they prize
none earthly riches; and so they be all rightfull.  And they live
full ordinately, and so soberly in meat and drink, that they live
right long.  And the most part of them die without sickness, when
nature faileth them, for eld.

And it befell in King Alexander's time, that he purposed him to
conquer that isle and to make them to hold of him.  And when they
of the country heard it, they sent messengers to him with letters,
that said thus; What may be enough to that man to whom all the
world is insufficient?  Thou shalt find nothing in us, that may
cause thee to war against us.  For we have no riches, ne none we
covet, and all the goods of our country be in common.  Our meat,
that we sustain withal our bodies, is our riches.  And, instead of
treasure of gold and silver, we make our treasure of accord and
peace, and for to love every man other.  And for to apparel with
our bodies we use a silly little clout for to wrap in our carrion.
Our wives ne be not arrayed for to make no man pleasance, but only
convenable array for to eschew folly.  When men pain them to array
the body for to make it seem fairer than God made it, they do great
sin.  For man should not devise ne ask greater beauty, than God
hath ordained man to be at his birth.  The earth ministereth to us
two things, - our livelihood, that cometh of the earth that we live
by, and our sepulture after our death.  We have been in perpetual
peace till now, that thou come to disinherit us.  And also we have
a king, not only for to do justice to every man, for he shall find
no forfeit among us; but for to keep noblesse, and for to shew that
we be obeissant, we have a king.  For justice ne hath not among us
no place, for we do to no man otherwise than we desire that men do
to us.  So that righteousness ne vengeance have nought to do among
us.  So that nothing thou may take from us, but our good peace,
that always hath dured among us.

And when King Alexander had read these letters, he thought that he
should do great sin, for to trouble them.  And then he sent them
sureties, that they should not be afeard of him, and that they
should keep their good manners and their good peace, as they had
used before, of custom.  And so he let them alone.

Another isle there is, that men clepe Oxidrate, and another isle,
that men clepe Gynosophe, where there is also good folk, and full
of good faith.  And they hold, for the most part, the good
conditions and customs and good manners, as men of the country
abovesaid; but they go all naked.

Into that isle entered King Alexander, to see the manner.  And when
he saw their great faith, and their truth that was amongst them, he
said that he would not grieve them, and bade them ask of him what
that they would have of him, riches or anything else, and they
should have it, with good will.  And they answered, that he was
rich enough that had meat and drink to sustain the body with, for
the riches of this world, that is transitory, is not worth; but if
it were in his power to make them immortal, thereof would they pray
him, and thank him.  And Alexander answered them that it was not in
his power to do it, because he was mortal, as they were.  And then
they asked him why he was so proud and so fierce, and so busy for
to put all the world under his subjection, right as thou were a
God, and hast no term of this life, neither day ne hour, and
willest to have all the world at thy commandment, that shall leave
thee without fail, or thou leave it.  And right as it hath been to
other men before thee, right so it shall be to other after thee.
And from hence shalt thou bear nothing; but as thou were born
naked, right so all naked shall thy body be turned into earth that
thou were made of.  Wherefore thou shouldest think and impress it
in thy mind, that nothing is immortal, but only God, that made the
thing.  By the which answer Alexander was greatly astonished and
abashed, and all confused and departed from them.

And albeit that these folk have not the articles of our faith as we
have, natheles, for their good faith natural, and for their good
intent, I trow fully, that God loveth them, and that God take their
service to gree, right as he did of Job, that was a paynim, and
held him for his true servant.  And therefore, albeit that there be
many diverse laws in the world, yet I trow, that God loveth always
them that love him, and serve him meekly in truth, and namely them
that despise the vain glory of this world, as this folk do and as
Job did also.

And therefore said our Lord by the mouth of Hosea the prophet,
PONAM EIS MULTIPLICES LEGES MEAS; and also in another place, QUI
TOTUM ORBEM SUBDIT SUIS LEGIBUS.  And also our Lord saith in the
Gospel, ALIAS OVES HABEO, QUE NON SUNT EX HOC OVILI, that is to
say, that he had other servants than those that be under Christian
law.  And to that accordeth the avision that Saint Peter saw at
Jaffa, how the angel came from heaven, and brought before him
diverse beasts, as serpents and other creeping beasts of the earth,
and of other also, great plenty, and bade him take and eat.  And
Saint Peter answered; I eat never, quoth he, of unclean beasts.
And then said the angel, NON DICAS IMMUNDA, QUE DEUS MUNDAVIT.  And
that was in token that no man should have in despite none earthly
man for their diverse laws, for we know not whom God loveth, ne
whom God hateth.  And for that example, when men say, DE PROFUNDIS,
they say it in common and in general, with the Christian, PRO
ANIMABUS OMNIUM DEFUNCTORUM, PRO QUIBUS SIT ORANDUM.

And therefore say I of this folk, that be so true and so faithful,
that God loveth them.  For he hath amongst them many of the
prophets, and alway hath had.  And in those isles, they prophesied
the Incarnation of Lord Jesu Christ, how he should be born of a
maiden, three thousand year or more or our Lord was born of the
Virgin Mary.  And they believe well it, the Incarnation, and that
full perfectly, but they know not the manner, how he suffered his
passion and death for us.

And beyond these isles there is another isle that is clept Pytan.
The folk of that country ne till not, ne labour not the earth, for
they eat no manner thing.  And they be of good colour and of fair
shape, after their greatness.  But the small be as dwarfs, but not
so little as be the Pigmies.  These men live by the smell of wild
apples.  And when they go any far way, they bear the apples with
them; for if they had lost the savour of the apples, they should
die anon.  They ne be not full reasonable, but they be simple and
bestial.

After that is another isle, where the folk be all skinned rough
hair, as a rough beast, save only the face and the palm of the
hand.  These folk go as well under the water of the sea, as they do
above the land all dry.  And they eat both flesh and fish all raw.
In this isle is a great river that is well a two mile and an half
of breadth that is clept Beaumare.

And from that river a fifteen journeys in length, going by the
deserts of the tother side of the river - whoso might go it, for I
was not there, but it was told us of them of the country, that
within those deserts were the trees of the sun and of the moon,
that spake to King Alexander, and warned him of his death.  And men
say that the folk that keep those trees, and eat of the fruit and
of the balm that groweth there, live well four hundred year or five
hundred year, by virtue of the fruit and of the balm.  For men say
that balm groweth there in great plenty and nowhere else, save only
at Babylon, as I have told you before.  We would have gone toward
the trees full gladly if we had might.  But I trow that 100,000 men
of arms might not pass those deserts safely, for the great
multitude of wild beasts and of great dragons and of great serpents
that there be, that slay and devour all that come anent them.  In
that country be many white elephants without number, and of
unicorns and of lions of many manners, and many of such beasts that
I have told before, and of many other hideous beasts without
number.

Many other isles there be in the land of Prester John, and many
great marvels, that were too long to tell all, both of his riches
and of his noblesse and of the great plenty also of precious stones
that he hath.  I trow that ye know well enough, and have heard say,
wherefore this emperor is clept Prester John.  But, natheles, for
them that know not, I shall say you the cause.

It was sometime an emperor there, that was a worthy and a full
noble prince, that had Christian knights in his company, as he hath
that is now.  So it befell, that he had great list for to see the
service in the church among Christian men.  And then dured
Christendom beyond the sea, all Turkey, Syria, Tartary, Jerusalem,
Palestine, Arabia, Aleppo and all the land of Egypt.  And so it
befell that this emperor came with a Christian knight with him into
a church in Egypt.  And it was the Saturday in Whitsun-week.  And
the bishop made orders.  And he beheld, and listened the service
full tentively.  And he asked the Christian knight what men of
degree they should be that the prelate had before him.  And the
knight answered and said that they should be priests.  And then the
emperor said that he would no longer be clept king ne emperor, but
priest, and that he would have the name of the first priest that
went out of the church, and his name was John.  And so ever-more
sithens, he is clept Prester John.

In his land be many Christian men of good faith and of good law,
and namely of them of the same country, and have commonly their
priests, that sing the Mass, and make the sacrament of the altar,
of bread, right as the Greeks do; but they say not so many things
at the Mass as men do here.  For they say not but only that that
the apostles said, as our Lord taught them, right as Saint Peter
and Saint Thomas and the other apostles sung the Mass, saying the
PATER NOSTER and the words of the sacrament.  But we have many more
additions that divers popes have made, that they ne know not of.



CHAPTER XXXIII



OF THE HILLS OF GOLD THAT PISMIRES KEEP.  AND OF THE FOUR FLOODS
THAT COME FROM PARADISE TERRESTRIAL


TOWARD the east part of Prester John's land is an isle good and
great, that men clepe Taprobane, that is full noble and full
fructuous.  And the king thereof is full rich, and is under the
obeissance of Prester John.  And always there they make their king
by election.  In that isle be two summers and two winters, and men
harvest the corn twice a year.  And in all the seasons of the year
be the gardens flourished.  There dwell good folk and reasonable,
and many Christian men amongst them, that be so rich that they wit
not what to do with their goods.  Of old time, when men passed from
the land of Prester John unto that isle, men made ordinance for to
pass by ship, twenty-three days, or more; but now men pass by ship
in seven days.  And men may see the bottom of the sea in many
places, for it is not full deep.

Beside that isle, toward the east, be two other isles.  And men
clepe that one Orille, and that other Argyte, of the which all the
land is mine of gold and silver.  And those isles be right where
that the Red Sea departeth from the sea ocean.  And in those isles
men see there no stars so clearly as in other places.  For there
appear no stars, but only one clear star that men clepe Canapos.
And there is not the moon seen in all the lunation, save only the
second quarter.

In the isle also of this Taprobane be great hills of gold, that
pismires keep full diligently.  And they fine the pured gold, and
cast away the un-pured.  And these pismires be great as hounds, so
that no man dare come to those hills for the pismires would assail
them and devour them anon.  So that no man may get of that gold,
but by great sleight.  And therefore when it is great heat, the
pismires rest them in the earth, from prime of the day into noon.
And then the folk of the country take camels, dromedaries, and
horses and other beasts, and go thither, and charge them in all
haste that they may; and after that, they flee away in all haste
that the beasts may go, or the pismires come out of the earth.  And
in other times, when it is not so hot, and that the pismires ne
rest them not in the earth, then they get gold by this subtlety.
They take mares that have young colts or foals, and lay upon the
mares void vessels made there-for; and they be all open above, and
hanging low to the earth.  And then they send forth those mares for
to pasture about those hills, and with-hold the foals with them at
home.  And when the pismires see those vessels, they leap in anon:
and they have this kind that they let nothing be empty among them,
but anon they fill it, be it what manner of thing that it be; and
so they fill those vessels with gold.  And when that the folk
suppose that the vessels be full, they put forth anon the young
foals, and make them to neigh after their dams.  And then anon the
mares return towards their foals with their charges of gold.  And
then men discharges them, and get gold enough by this subtlety.
For the pismires will suffer beasts to go and pasture amongst them,
but no man in no wise.

And beyond the land and the isles and the deserts of Prester John's
lordship, in going straight toward the east, men find nothing but
mountains and rocks, full great.  And there is the dark region,
where no man may see, neither by day ne by night, as they of the
country say.  And that desert and that place of darkness dure from
this coast unto Paradise terrestrial, where that Adam, our formest
father, and Eve were put, that dwelled there but little while:  and
that is towards the east at the beginning of the earth.  But that
is not that east that we clepe our east, on this half, where the
sun riseth to us.  For when the sun is east in those parts towards
Paradise terrestrial, it is then midnight in our parts on this
half, for the roundness of the earth, of the which I have touched
to you of before.  For our Lord God made the earth all round in the
mid place of the firmament.  And there as mountains and hills be
and valleys, that is not but only of Noah's flood, that wasted the
soft ground and the tender, and fell down into valleys, and the
hard earth and the rocks abide mountains, when the soft earth and
tender waxed nesh through the water, and fell and became valleys.

Of Paradise ne can I not speak properly.  For I was not there.  It
is far beyond.  And that forthinketh me.  And also I was not
worthy.  But as I have heard say of wise men beyond, I shall tell
you with good will.

Paradise terrestrial, as wise men say, is the highest place of
earth, that is in all the world.  And it is so high that it
toucheth nigh to the circle of the moon, there as the moon maketh
her turn; for she is so high that the flood of Noah ne might not
come to her, that would have covered all the earth of the world all
about and above and beneath, save Paradise only alone.  And this
Paradise is enclosed all about with a wall, and men wit not whereof
it is; for the walls be covered all over with moss, as it seemeth.
And it seemeth not that the wall is stone of nature, ne of none
other thing that the wall is.  And that wall stretcheth from the
south to the north, and it hath not but one entry that is closed
with fire, burning; so that no man that is mortal ne dare not
enter.

And in the most high place of Paradise, even in the middle place,
is a well that casteth out the four floods that run by divers
lands.  Of the which, the first is clept Pison, or Ganges, that is
all one; and it runneth throughout Ind or Emlak, in the which river
be many precious stones, and much of lignum aloes and much gravel
of gold.  And that other river is clept Nilus or Gison, that goeth
by Ethiopia and after by Egypt.  And that other is clept Tigris,
that runneth by Assyria and by Armenia the great.  And that other
is clept Euphrates, that runneth also by Media and Armenia and by
Persia.  And men there beyond say, that all the sweet waters of the
world, above and beneath, take their beginning of the well of
Paradise, and out of that well all waters come and go.

The first river is clept Pison, that is to say in their language
Assembly; for many other rivers meet them there, and go into that
river.  And some men clepe it Ganges, for a king that was in Ind,
that hight Gangeres, and that it ran throughout his land.  And that
water [is] in some place clear, and in some place troubled, in some
place hot, and in some place cold.

The second river is clept Nilus or Gison; for it is always trouble;
and Gison, in the language of Ethiopia, is to say, trouble, and in
the language of Egypt also.

The third river, that is dept Tigris, is as much for to say as,
fast-running; for he runneth more fast than any of the tother; and
also there is a beast, that is clept tigris, that is fast-running.

The fourth river is clept Euphrates, that is to say, well-bearing;
for there grow many goods upon that river, as corns, fruits and
other goods enough plenty.

And ye shall understand that no man that is mortal ne may not
approach to that Paradise.  For by land no man may go for wild
beasts that be in the deserts, and for the high mountains and great
huge rocks that no man may pass by, for the dark places that be
there, and that many.  And by the rivers may no man go.  For the
water runneth so rudely and so sharply, because that it cometh down
so outrageously from the high places above, that it runneth in so
great waves, that no ship may not row ne sail against it.  And the
water roareth so, and maketh so huge noise and so great tempest,
that no man may hear other in the ship, though he cried with all
the craft that he could in the highest voice that he might.  Many
great lords have assayed with great will, many times, for to pass
by those rivers towards Paradise, with full great companies.  But
they might not speed in their voyage.  And many died for weariness
of rowing against those strong waves.  And many of them became
blind, and many deaf, for the noise of the water.  And some were
perished and lost within the waves.  So that no mortal man may
approach to that place, without special grace of God, so that of
that place I can say you no more; and therefore, I shall hold me
still, and return to that, that I have seen.



CHAPTER XXXIV



OF THE CUSTOMS OF KINGS AND OTHER THAT DWELL IN THE ISLES COASTING
TO PRESTER JOHN'S LAND.  AND OF THE WORSHIP THAT THE SON DOTH TO
THE FATHER WHEN HE IS DEAD


FROM those isles that I have spoken of before, in the Land of
Prester John, that be under earth as to us that be on this half,
and of other isles that be more further beyond, whoso will, pursue
them for to come again right to the parts that he came from, and so
environ all earth.  But what for the isles, what for the sea, and
what for strong rowing, few folk assay for to pass that passage;
albeit that men might do it well, that might be of power to dress
them thereto, as I have said you before.  And therefore men return
from those isles abovesaid by other isles, coasting from the land
of Prester John.

And then come men in returning to an isle that is clept Casson.
And that isle hath well sixty journeys in length, and more than
fifty in breadth.  This is the best isle and the best kingdom that
is in all those parts, out-taken Cathay.  And if the merchants used
as much that country as they do Cathay, it would be better than
Cathay in a short while.  This country is full well inhabited, and
so full of cities and of good towns inhabited with people, that
when a man goeth out of one city, men see another city even before
them; and that is what part that a man go, in all that country.  In
that isle is great plenty of all goods for to live with, and of all
manner of spices.  And there be great forests of chestnuts.  The
king of that isle is full rich and full mighty, and, natheles, he
holds his land of the great Chan, and is obeissant to him.  For it
is one of the twelve provinces that the great Chan hath under him
without his proper land, and without other less isles that he hath;
for he hath full many.

From that kingdom come men, in returning, to another isle that is
clept Rybothe, and it is also under the great Chan.  That is a full
good country, and full plenteous of all goods and of wines and
fruit and all other riches.  And the folk of that country have no
houses, but they dwell and lie all under tents made of black fern,
by all the country.  And the principal city and the most royal is
all walled with black stone and white.  And all the streets also be
pathed of the same stones.  In that city is no man so hardy to shed
blood of any man, ne of no beast, for the reverence of an idol that
is worshipped there.  And in that isle dwelleth the pope of their
law, that they clepe Lobassy.  This Lobassy giveth all the
benefices, and all other dignities and all other things that belong
to the idol.  And all those that hold anything of their churches,
religious and other, obey to him, as men do here to the Pope of
Rome.

In that isle they have a custom by all the country, that when the
father is dead of any man, and the son list to do great worship to
his father, he sendeth to all his friends and to all his kin, and
for religious men and priests, and for minstrels also, great
plenty.  And then men bear the dead body unto a great hill with
great joy and solemnity.  And when they have brought it thither,
the chief prelate smiteth off the head, and layeth it upon a great
platter of gold and of silver, if so [he] be a rich man.  And then
he taketh the head to the son.  And then the son and his other kin
sing and say many orisons.  And then the priests and the religious
men smite all the body of the dead man in pieces.  And then they
say certain orisons.  And the fowls of ravine of all the country
about know the custom of long time before, [and] come flying above
in the air; as eagles, gledes, ravens and other fowls of ravine,
that eat flesh.  And then the priests cast the gobbets of the flesh
and then the fowls, each of them, taketh that he may, and goeth a
little thence and eateth it; and so they do whilst any piece
lasteth of the dead body.

And after that, as priests amongst us sing for the dead, SUBVENITE
SANCTI DEI, ETC., right so the priests sing with high voice in
their language; Behold how so worthy a man and how good a man this
was, that the angels of God come for to seek him and for to bring
him into Paradise.  And then seemeth it to the son, that he is
highly worshipped, when that many birds and fowls and ravens come
and eat his father; and he that hath most number of fowls is most
worshipped.

And then the son bringeth home with him all his kin, and his
friends, and all the others to his house, and maketh them a great
feast.  And then all his friends make their vaunt and their
dalliance, how the fowls came thither, here five, here six, here
ten, and there twenty, and so forth; and they rejoice them hugely
for to speak thereof.  And when they be at meat, the son let bring
forth the head of his father, and thereof he giveth of the flesh to
his most special friends, instead of ENTRE MESSE, or a SUKKARKE.
And of the brain pan, he letteth make a cup, and thereof drinketh
he and his other friends also, with great devotion, in remembrance
of the holy man, that the angels of God have eaten.  And that cup
the son shall keep to drink of all his life-time, in remembrance of
his father.

From that land, in returning by ten journeys throughout the land of
the great Chan, is another good isle and a great kingdom, where the
king is full rich and mighty.

And amongst the rich men of his country is a passing rich man, that
is no prince, ne duke, ne earl, but he hath more that hold of him
lands and other lordships, for he is more rich.  For he hath, every
year, of annual rent 300,000 horses charged with corn of diverse
grains and of rice.  And so he leadeth a full noble life and a
delicate, after the custom of the country.  For he hath, every day,
fifty fair damosels, all maidens, that serve him evermore at his
meat, and for to lie by him o' night, and for to do with them that
is to his pleasance.  And when he is at table, they bring him his
meat at every time, five and five together; and in bringing their
service they sing a song.  And after that, they cut his meat, and
put it in his mouth; for he toucheth nothing, ne handleth nought,
but holdeth evermore his hands before him upon the table.  For he
hath so long nails, that he may take nothing, ne handle nothing.
For the noblesse of that country is to have long nails, and to make
them grow always to be as long as men may.  And there be many in
that country, that have their nails so long, that they environ all
the hand.  And that is a great noblesse.  And the noblesse of the
women is for to have small feet and little.  And therefore anon as
they be born, they let bind their feet so strait, that they may not
grow half as nature would.  And this is the noblesse of the women
there to have small feet and little.  And always these damosels,
that I spake of before, sing all the time that this rich man
eateth.  And when that he eateth no more of his first course, then
other five and five of fair damsels bring him his second course,
always singing as they did before.  And so they do continually
every day to the end of his meat.  And in this manner he leadeth
his life.  And so did they before him, that were his ancestors.
And so shall they that come after him, without doing of any deeds
of arms, but live evermore thus in ease, as a. swine that is fed in
sty for to be made fat.  He hath a full fair palace and full rich,
where that he dwelleth in, of the which the walls be, in circuit,
two mile.  And he hath within many fair gardens, and many fair
halls and chambers; and the pavement of his halls and chambers be
of gold and silver.  And in the mid place of one of his gardens is
a little mountain, where there is a little meadow.  And in that
meadow is a little toothill with towers and pinnacles, all of gold.
And in that little toothill will he sit often-time, for to take the
air and to disport him.  For the place is made for nothing else,
but only for his disport.

From that country men come by the land of the great Chan also, that
I have spoken of before.

And ye shall understand, that of all these countries, and of all
these isles, and of all the diverse folk, that I have spoken of
before, and of diverse laws, and of diverse beliefs that they have,
yet is there none of them all but that they have some reason within
them and understanding, but if it be the fewer, and that have
certain articles of our faith and some good points of our belief,
and that they believe in God, that formed all things and made the
world, and clepe him God of Nature; after that the prophet saith,
ET METUENT EUM OMNES FINES TERRAE, and also in another place, OMNES
GENTES SERVIENT EI, that is to say, 'All folk shall serve him.'

But yet they cannot speak perfectly (for there is no man to teach
them), but only that they can devise by their natural wit.  For
they have no knowledge of the Son, ne of the Holy Ghost.  But they
can all speak of the Bible, and namely of Genesis, of the prophet's
saws and of the books of Moses.  And they say well, that the
creatures that they worship ne be no gods; but they worship them
for the virtue that is in them, that may not be but only by the
grace of God.  And of simulacres and of idols, they say, that there
be no folk, but that they have simulacres.  And that they say, for
we Christian men have images, as of our Lady and of other saints
that we worship; not the images of tree or of stone, but the
saints, in whose name they be made after.  For right as the books
and the scripture of them teach the clerks how and in what manner
they shall believe, right so the images and the paintings teach the
lewd folk to worship the saints and to have them in their mind, in
whose names that the images be made after.  They say also, that the
angels of God speak to them in those idols, and that they do many
great miracles.  And they say sooth, that there is an angel within
them.  For there be two manner of angels, a good and an evil, as
the Greeks say, Cacho and Calo.  This Cacho is the wicked angel,
and Calo is the good angel.  But the tother is not the good angel,
but the wicked angel that is within the idols to deceive them and
for to maintain them in their error.

There be many other divers countries and many other marvels beyond,
that I have not seen.  Wherefore, of them I cannot speak properly
to tell you the manner of them.  And also in the countries where I
have been, be many more diversities of many wonderful things than I
make mention of; for it were too long thing to devise you the
manner.  And therefore, that that I have devised you of certain
countries, that I have spoken of before, I beseech your worthy and
excellent noblesse, that it suffice to you at this time.  For if
that I devised you all that is beyond the sea, another man,
peradventure, that would pain him and travail his body for to go
into those marches for to ensearch those countries, might be blamed
by my words in rehearsing many strange things; for he might not say
nothing of new, in the which the hearers might have either solace,
or disport, or lust, or liking in the hearing.  For men say always,
that new things and new tidings be pleasant to hear.  Wherefore I
will hold me still, without any more rehearsing of diversities or
of marvels that be beyond, to that intent and end, that whoso will
go into those countries, he shall find enough to speak of, that I
have not touched of in no wise.

And ye shall understand, if it like you, that at mine home-coming,
I came to Rome, and shewed my life to our holy father the pope, and
was assoiled of all that lay in my conscience, of many a diverse
grievous point; as men must needs that be in company, dwelling
amongst so many a diverse folk of diverse sect and of belief, as I
have been.

And amongst all I shewed him this treatise, that I had made after
information of men that knew of things that I had not seen myself,
and also of marvels and customs that I had seen myself, as far as
God would give me grace; and besought his holy fatherhood, that my
book might be examined and corrected by advice of his wise and
discreet council.  And our holy father, of his special grace,
remitted my book to be examined and proved by the advice of his
said counsel.  By the which my book was proved for true, insomuch,
that they shewed me a book, that my book was examined by, that
comprehended full much more, by an hundred part, by the which the
MAPPA MUNDI was made after.  And so my book (albeit that many men
ne list not to give credence to nothing, but to that that they see
with their eye, ne be the author ne the person never so true) is
affirmed and proved by our holy father, in manner and form as I
have said.

And I, John Mandevile, knight, abovesaid (although I be unworthy),
that departed from our countries and passed the sea, the year of
grace a thousand three hundred and twenty two, that have passed
many lands and many isles and countries, and searched many full
strange places, and have been in many a full good honourable
company, and at many a fair deed of arms (albeit that I did none
myself, for mine unable insuffisance), now I am come home, maugre
myself, to rest, for gouts artetykes that me distrain, that define
the end of my labour; against my will (God knoweth).

And thus, taking solace in my wretched rest, recording the time
passed, I have fulfilled these things, and put them written in this
book, as it would come into my mind, the year of grace a thousand
three hundred and fifty six, in the thirty-fourth year, that I
departed from our countries.

Wherefore, I pray to all the readers and hearers of this book, if
it please them, that they would pray to God for me; and I shall
pray for them.  And all those that say for me a PATER NOSTER, with
an AVE MARIA, that God forgive me my sins, I make them partners,
and grant them part of all the good pilgrimages and of all the good
deeds that I have done, if any be to his pleasance; and not only of
those, but of all that ever I shall do unto my life's end.  And I
beseech Almighty God, from whom all goodness and grace cometh from,
that he vouchsafe of his excellent mercy and abundant grace, to
fulfil their souls with inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in making
defence of all their ghostly enemies here in earth, to their
salvation both of body and soul; to worship and thanking of him,
that is three and one, without beginning and without ending; that
is without quality, good, without quantity, great; that in all
places is present, and all things containing; the which that no
goodness may amend, ne none evil impair; that in perfect Trinity
liveth and reigneth God, by all worlds, and by all times!

AMEN!  AMEN!  AMEN!

[HERE ENDETH THE BOOK OF JOHN MANDEVILLE.]





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext:  The Travels of Sir John Mandeville

