Project Gutenberg's Etext of Tracks of a Rolling Stone, by Coke


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Tracks of a Rolling Stone

by Henry J. Coke

March, 1996  [Etext #488]


Project Gutenberg's Etext of Tracks of a Rolling Stone, by Coke
*****This file should be named trlst10.txt or trlst10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, trlst11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, trlst10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois
     Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Tracks of a Rolling Stone by Henry J. Coke
Scanned and proofed by David Price 
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk
Second proofing by Margaret Price 





Tracks of a Rolling Stone




PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.


THE First Edition of this book was written, from beginning to 
end, in the short space of five months, without the aid of 
diary or notes, beyond those cited as such from a former 
work.

The Author, having no expectation that his reminiscences 
would be received with the kind indulgence of which this 
Second Edition is the proof, with diffidence ventured to tell 
so many tales connected with his own unimportant life as he 
has done.  Emboldened by the reception his 'Tracks' have met 
with, he now adds a few stories which he trusts may further 
amuse its readers.

June 1905.




CHAPTER I



WE know more of the early days of the Pyramids or of ancient 
Babylon than we do of our own.  The Stone age, the dragons of 
the prime, are not more remote from us than is our earliest 
childhood.  It is not so long ago for any of us; and yet, our 
memories of it are but veiled spectres wandering in the mazes 
of some foregone existence.

Are we really trailing clouds of glory from afar?  Or are our 
'forgettings' of the outer Eden only?  Or, setting poetry 
aside, are they perhaps the quickening germs of all past 
heredity - an epitome of our race and its descent?  At any 
rate THEN, if ever, our lives are such stuff as dreams are 
made of.  There is no connected story of events, thoughts, 
acts, or feelings.  We try in vain to re-collect; but the 
secrets of the grave are not more inviolable, - for the 
beginnings, like the endings, of life are lost in darkness.

It is very difficult to affix a date to any relic of that dim 
past.  We may have a distinct remembrance of some pleasure, 
some pain, some fright, some accident, but the vivid does not 
help us to chronicle with accuracy.  A year or two makes a 
vast difference in our ability.  We can remember well enough 
when we donned the 'CAUDA VIRILIS,' but not when we left off 
petticoats.

The first remembrance to which I can correctly tack a date is 
the death of George IV.  I was between three and four years 
old.  My recollection of the fact is perfectly distinct - 
distinct by its association with other facts, then far more 
weighty to me than the death of a king.

I was watching with rapture, for the first time, the spinning 
of a peg-top by one of the grooms in the stable yard, when 
the coachman, who had just driven my mother home, announced 
the historic news.  In a few minutes four or five servants - 
maids and men - came running to the stables to learn 
particulars, and the peg-top, to my sorrow, had to be 
abandoned for gossip and flirtation.  We were a long way from 
street criers - indeed, quite out of town.  My father's house 
was in Kensington, a little further west than the present 
museum.  It was completely surrounded by fields and hedges.  
I mention the fact merely to show to what age definite memory 
can be authentically assigned.  Doubtless we have much 
earlier remembrances, though we must reckon these by days, or 
by months at the outside.  The relativity of the reckoning 
would seem to make Time indeed a 'Form of Thought.'

Two or three reminiscences of my childhood have stuck to me; 
some of them on account of their comicality.  I was taken to 
a children's ball at St. James's Palace.  In my mind's eye I 
have but one distinct vision of it.  I cannot see the crowd - 
there was nothing to distinguish that from what I have so 
often seen since; nor the court dresses, nor the soldiers 
even, who always attract a child's attention in the streets; 
but I see a raised dais on which were two thrones.  William 
IV. sat on one, Queen Adelaide on the other.  I cannot say 
whether we were marched past in turn, or how I came there.  
But I remember the look of the king in his naval uniform.  I 
remember his white kerseymere breeches, and pink silk 
stockings, and buckled shoes.  He took me between his knees, 
and asked, 'Well, what are you going to be, my little man?'

'A sailor,' said I, with brazen simplicity.

'Going to avenge the death of Nelson - eh?  Fond o' sugar-
plums?'

'Ye-es,' said I, taking a mental inventory of stars and 
anchor buttons.

Upon this, he fetched from the depths of his waistcoat pocket 
a capacious gold box, and opened it with a tap, as though he 
were about to offer me a pinch of snuff.  'There's for you,' 
said he.

I helped myself, unawed by the situation, and with my small 
fist clutching the bonbons, was passed on to Queen Adelaide.  
She gave me a kiss, for form's sake, I thought; and I 
scuttled back to my mother.

But here followed the shocking part of the ENFANT TERRIBLE'S 
adventure.  Not quite sure of Her Majesty's identity - I had 
never heard there was a Queen - I naively asked my mother, in 
a very audible stage-whisper, 'Who is the old lady with - ?'  
My mother dragged me off the instant she had made her 
curtsey.  She had a quick sense of humour; and, judging from 
her laughter, when she told her story to another lady in the 
supper room, I fancied I had said or done something very 
funny.  I was rather disconcerted at being seriously 
admonished, and told I must never again comment upon the 
breath of ladies who condescended to kiss, or to speak to, 
me.

While we lived at Kensington, Lord Anglesey used often to pay 
my mother a visit.  She had told me the story of the battle 
of Waterloo, in which my Uncle George - 6th Lord Albemarle - 
had taken part; and related how Lord Anglesey had lost a leg 
there, and how one of his legs was made of cork.  Lord 
Anglesey was a great dandy.  The cut of the Paget hat was an 
heirloom for the next generation or two, and the gallant 
Marquis' boots and tightly-strapped trousers were patterns of 
polish and precision.  The limp was perceptible; but of which 
leg, was, in spite of careful investigation, beyond my 
diagnosis.  His presence provoked my curiosity, till one fine 
day it became too strong for resistance.  While he was busily 
engaged in conversation with my mother, I, watching for the 
chance, sidled up to his chair, and as soon as he looked 
away, rammed my heel on to his toes.  They were his toes.  
And considering the jump and the oath which instantly 
responded to my test, I am persuaded they were abnormally 
tender ones.  They might have been made of corns, certainly 
not of cork.

Another discovery I made about this period was, for me at 
least, a 'record':  it happened at Quidenham - my grandfather 
the 4th Lord Albemarle's place.

Some excursion was afoot, which needed an early breakfast.  
When this was half over, one married couple were missing.  My 
grandfather called me to him (I was playing with another 
small boy in one of the window bays).  'Go and tell Lady 
Maria, with my love,' said he, 'that we shall start in half 
an hour.  Stop, stop a minute.  Be sure you knock at the 
door.'  I obeyed orders - I knocked at the door, but failed 
to wait for an answer.  I entered without it.  And what did I 
behold?  Lady Maria was still in bed; and by the side of Lady 
M. was, very naturally, Lady M.'s husband, also in bed and 
fast asleep.  At first I could hardly believe my senses.  It 
was within the range of my experience that boys of my age 
occasionally slept in the same bed.  But that a grown up man 
should sleep in the same bed with his wife was quite beyond 
my notion of the fitness of things.  I was so staggered, so 
long in taking in this astounding novelty, that I could not 
at first deliver my grandfathers message.  The moment I had 
done so, I rushed back to the breakfast room, and in a loud 
voice proclaimed to the company what I had seen.  My tale 
produced all the effect I had anticipated, but mainly in the 
shape of amusement.  One wag - my uncle Henry Keppel - asked 
for details, gravely declaring he could hardly credit my 
statement.  Every one, however, seemed convinced by the 
circumstantial nature of my evidence when I positively 
asserted that their heads were not even at opposite ends of 
the bed, but side by side upon the same pillow.

A still greater soldier than Lord Anglesey used to come to 
Holkham every year, a great favourite of my father's; this 
was Lord Lynedoch.  My earliest recollections of him owe 
their vividness to three accidents - in the logical sense of 
the term:  his silky milk-white locks, his Spanish servant 
who wore earrings - and whom, by the way, I used to confound 
with Courvoisier, often there at the same time with his 
master Lord William Russell, for the murder of whom he was 
hanged, as all the world knows - and his fox terrier Nettle, 
which, as a special favour, I was allowed to feed with 
Abernethy biscuits.

He was at Longford, my present home, on a visit to my father 
in 1835, when, one evening after dinner, the two old 
gentlemen - no one else being present but myself - sitting in 
armchairs over the fire, finishing their bottle of port, Lord 
Lynedoch told the wonderful story of his adventures during 
the siege of Mantua by the French, in 1796.  For brevity's 
sake, it were better perhaps to give the outline in the words 
of Alison.  'It was high time the Imperialists should advance 
to the relief of this fortress, which was now reduced to the 
last extremity from want of provisions.  At a council of war 
held in the end of December, it was decided that it was 
indispensable that instant intelligence should be sent to 
Alvinzi of their desperate situation.  An English officer, 
attached to the garrison, volunteered to perform the perilous 
mission, which he executed with equal courage and success.  
He set out, disguised as a peasant, from Mantua on December 
29, at nightfall in the midst of a deep fall of snow, eluded 
the vigilance of the French patrols, and, after surmounting a 
thousand hardships and dangers, arrived at the headquarters 
of Alvinzi, at Bassano, on January 4, the day after the 
conferences at Vicenza were broken up.

'Great destinies awaited this enterprising officer.  He was 
Colonel Graham, afterwards victor at Barrosa, and the first 
British general who planted the English standard on the soil 
of France.'

This bare skeleton of the event was endued 'with sense and 
soul' by the narrator.  The 'hardships and dangers' thrilled 
one's young nerves.  Their two salient features were ice 
perils, and the no less imminent one of being captured and 
shot as a spy.  The crossing of the rivers stands out 
prominently in my recollection.  All the bridges were of 
course guarded, and he had two at least within the enemy's 
lines to get over - those of the Mincio and of the Adige.  
Probably the lagunes surrounding the invested fortress would 
be his worst difficulty.  The Adige he described as beset 
with a two-fold risk - the avoidance of the bridges, which 
courted suspicion, and the thin ice and only partially frozen 
river, which had to be traversed in the dark.  The vigour, 
the zest with which the wiry veteran 'shoulder'd his crutch 
and show'd how fields were won' was not a thing to be 
forgotten.

Lord Lynedoch lived to a great age, and it was from his house 
at Cardington, in Bedfordshire, that my brother Leicester 
married his first wife, Miss Whitbread, in 1843.  That was 
the last time I saw him.

Perhaps the following is not out of place here, although it 
is connected with more serious thoughts:

Though neither my father nor my mother were more pious than 
their neighbours, we children were brought up religiously.  
From infancy we were taught to repeat night and morning the 
Lord's Prayer, and invoke blessings on our parents.  It was 
instilled into us by constant repetition that God did not 
love naughty children - our naughtiness being for the most 
part the original sin of disobedience, rooted in the love of 
forbidden fruit in all its forms of allurement.  Moses 
himself could not have believed more faithfully in the direct 
and immediate intervention of an avenging God.  The pain in 
one's stomach incident to unripe gooseberries, no less than 
the consequent black dose, or the personal chastisement of a 
responsible and apprehensive nurse, were but the just 
visitations of an offended Deity.

Whether my religious proclivities were more pronounced than 
those of other children I cannot say, but certainly, as a 
child, I was in the habit of appealing to Omnipotence to 
gratify every ardent desire.

There were peacocks in the pleasure grounds at Holkham, and I 
had an aesthetic love for their gorgeous plumes.  As I hunted 
under and amongst the shrubs, I secretly prayed that my 
search might be rewarded.  Nor had I a doubt, when 
successful, that my prayer had been granted by a beneficent 
Providence.

Let no one smile at this infantine credulity, for is it not 
the basis of that religious trust which helps so many of us 
to support the sorrows to which our stoicism is unequal?  Who 
that might be tempted thoughtlessly to laugh at the child 
does not sometimes sustain the hope of finding his 'plumes' 
by appeals akin to those of his childhood?  Which of us could 
not quote a hundred instances of such a soothing delusion - 
if delusion it be?  I speak not of saints, but of sinners:  
of the countless hosts who aspire to this world's happiness; 
of the dying who would live, of the suffering who would die, 
of the poor who would be rich, of the aggrieved who seek 
vengeance, of the ugly who would be beautiful, of the old who 
would appear young, of the guilty who would not be found out, 
and of the lover who would possess.  Ah! the lover.  Here 
possibility is a negligible element.  Consequences are of no 
consequence.  Passion must be served.  When could a miracle 
be more pertinent?

It is just fifty years ago now; it was during the Indian 
Mutiny.  A lady friend of mine did me the honour to make me 
her confidant.  She paid the same compliment to many - most 
of her friends; and the friends (as is their wont) confided 
in one another.  Poor thing! her case was a sad one.  Whose 
case is not?  She was, by her own account, in the forty-
second year of her virginity; and it may be added, 
parenthetically, an honest fourteen stone in weight.

She was in love with a hero of Lucknow.  It cannot be said 
that she knew him only by his well-earned fame.  She had seen 
him, had even sat by him at dinner.  He was young, he was 
handsome.  It was love at sight, accentuated by much 
meditation - 'obsessions [peradventure] des images 
genetiques.'  She told me (and her other confidants, of 
course) that she prayed day and night that this distinguished 
officer, this handsome officer, might return her passion.  
And her letters to me (and to other confidants) invariably 
ended with the entreaty that I (and her other, &c.) would 
offer up a similar prayer on her behalf.  Alas! poor soul, 
poor body!  I should say, the distinguished officer, together 
with the invoked Providence, remained equally insensible to 
her supplications.  The lady rests in peace.  The soldier, 
though a veteran, still exults in war.

But why do I cite this single instance?  Are there not 
millions of such entreaties addressed to Heaven on this, and 
on every day?  What difference is there, in spirit, between 
them and the child's prayer for his feather?  Is there 
anything great or small in the eye of Omniscience?  Or is it 
not our thinking only that makes it so?



CHAPTER II



SOON after I was seven years old, I went to what was then, 
and is still, one of the most favoured of preparatory schools 
- Temple Grove - at East Sheen, then kept by Dr. Pinkney.  I 
was taken thither from Holkham by a great friend of my 
father's, General Sir Ronald Ferguson, whose statue now 
adorns one of the niches in the facade of Wellington College.  
The school contained about 120 boys; but I cannot name any 
one of the lot who afterwards achieved distinction.  There 
were three Macaulays there, nephews of the historian - Aulay, 
Kenneth, and Hector.  But I have lost sight of all.

Temple Grove was a typical private school of that period.  
The type is familiar to everyone in its photograph as 
Dotheboys Hall.  The progress of the last century in many 
directions is great indeed; but in few is it greater than in 
the comfort and the cleanliness of our modern schools.  The 
luxury enjoyed by the present boy is a constant source of 
astonishment to us grandfathers.  We were half starved, we 
were exceedingly dirty, we were systematically bullied, and 
we were flogged and caned as though the master's pleasure was 
in inverse ratio to ours.  The inscription on the threshold 
should have been 'Cave canem.'

We began our day as at Dotheboys Hall with two large 
spoonfuls of sulphur and treacle.  After an hour's lessons we 
breakfasted on one bowl of milk - 'Skyblue' we called it - 
and one hunch of buttered bread, unbuttered at discretion.  
Our dinner began with pudding - generally rice - to save the 
butcher's bill.  Then mutton - which was quite capable of 
taking care of itself.  Our only other meal was a basin of 
'Skyblue' and bread as before.

As to cleanliness, I never had a bath, never bathed (at the 
school) during the two years I was there.  On Saturday 
nights, before bed, our feet were washed by the housemaids, 
in tubs round which half a dozen of us sat at a time.  Woe to 
the last comers! for the water was never changed.  How we 
survived the food, or rather the want of it, is a marvel.  
Fortunately for me, I used to discover, when I got into bed, 
a thickly buttered crust under my pillow.  I believed, I 
never quite made sure, (for the act was not admissible), that 
my good fairy was a fiery-haired lassie (we called her 
'Carrots,' though I had my doubts as to this being her 
Christian name) who hailed from Norfolk.  I see her now:  her 
jolly, round, shining face, her extensive mouth, her ample 
person.  I recall, with more pleasure than I then endured, 
the cordial hugs she surreptitiously bestowed upon me when we 
met by accident in the passages.  Kind, affectionate 
'Carrots'!  Thy heart was as bounteous as thy bosom.  May the 
tenderness of both have met with their earthly deserts; and 
mayest thou have shared to the full the pleasures thou wast 
ever ready to impart!

There were no railways in those times.  It amuses me to see 
people nowadays travelling by coach, for pleasure.  How many 
lives must have been shortened by long winter journeys in 
those horrible coaches.  The inside passengers were hardly 
better off than the outside.  The corpulent and heavy 
occupied the scanty space allotted to the weak and small - 
crushed them, slept on them, snored over them, and 
monopolised the straw which was supposed to keep their feet 
warm.

A pachydermatous old lady would insist upon an open window.  
A wheezy consumptive invalid would insist on a closed one.  
Everybody's legs were in their own, and in every other 
body's, way.  So that when the distance was great and time 
precious, people avoided coaching, and remained where they 
were.

For this reason, if a short holiday was given - less than a 
week say - Norfolk was too far off; and I was not permitted 
to spend it at Holkham.  I generally went to Charles Fox's at 
Addison Road, or to Holland House.  Lord Holland was a great 
friend of my father's; but, if Creevey is to be trusted - 
which, as a rule, my recollection of him would permit me to 
doubt, though perhaps not in this instance - Lord Holland did 
not go to Holkham because of my father's dislike to Lady 
Holland.

I speak here of my introduction to Holland House, for 
although Lady Holland was then in the zenith of her 
ascendency, (it was she who was the Cabinet Minister, not her 
too amiable husband,) although Holland House was then the 
resort of all the potentates of Whig statecraft, and Whig 
literature, and Whig wit, in the persons of Lord Grey, 
Brougham, Jeffrey, Macaulay, Sydney Smith, and others, it was 
not till eight or ten years later that I knew, when I met 
them there, who and what her Ladyship's brilliant satellites 
were.  I shall not return to Lady Holland, so I will say a 
parting word of her forthwith.

The woman who corresponded with Buonaparte, and consoled the 
prisoner of St. Helena with black currant jam, was no 
ordinary personage.  Most people, I fancy, were afraid of 
her.  Her stature, her voice, her beard, were obtrusive marks 
of her masculine attributes.  It is questionable whether her 
amity or her enmity was most to be dreaded.  She liked those 
best whom she could most easily tyrannise over.  Those in the 
other category might possibly keep aloof.  For my part I 
feared her patronage.  I remember when I was about seventeen 
- a self-conscious hobbledehoy - Mr. Ellice took me to one of 
her large receptions.  She received her guests from a sort of 
elevated dais.  When I came up - very shy - to make my 
salute, she asked me how old I was.  'Seventeen,' was the 
answer.  'That means next birthday,' she grunted.  'Come and 
give me a kiss, my dear.'  I, a man! - a man whose voice was 
(sometimes) as gruff as hers! - a man who was beginning to 
shave for a moustache!  Oh! the indignity of it!

But it was not Lady Holland, or her court, that concerned me 
in my school days, it was Holland Park, or the extensive 
grounds about Charles Fox's house (there were no other houses 
at Addison Road then), that I loved to roam in.  It was the 
birds'-nesting; it was the golden carp I used to fish for on 
the sly with a pin; the shying at the swans, the hunt for 
cockchafers, the freedom of mischief generally, and the 
excellent food - which I was so much in need of - that made 
the holiday delightful.

Some years later, when dining at Holland House, I happened to 
sit near the hostess.  It was a large dinner party.  Lord 
Holland, in his bath-chair (he nearly always had the gout), 
sat at the far end of the table a long way off.  But my lady 
kept an eye on him, for she had caught him drinking 
champagne.  She beckoned to the groom of the chambers, who 
stood behind her; and in a gruff and angry voice shouted:  
'Go to my Lord.  Take away his wine, and tell him if he 
drinks any more you have my orders to wheel him into the next 
room.'  If this was a joke it was certainly a practical one.  
And yet affection was behind it.  There's a tender place in 
every heart.

Like all despots, she was subject to fits of cowardice - 
especially, it was said, with regard to a future state, which 
she professed to disbelieve in.  Mr. Ellice told me that 
once, in some country house, while a fearful storm was 
raging, and the claps of thunder made the windows rattle, 
Lady Holland was so terrified that she changed dresses with 
her maid, and hid herself in the cellar.  Whether the story 
be a calumny or not, it is at least characteristic.

After all, it was mainly due to her that Holland House became 
the focus of all that was brilliant in Europe.  In the 
memoirs of her father - Sydney Smith - Mrs. Austin writes:  
'The world has rarely seen, and will rarely, if ever, see 
again all that was to be found within the walls of Holland 
House.  Genius and merit, in whatever rank of life, became a 
passport there; and all that was choicest and rarest in 
Europe seemed attracted to that spot as their natural soil.'

Did we learn much at Temple Grove?  Let others answer for 
themselves.  Acquaintance with the classics was the staple of 
a liberal education in those times.  Temple Grove was the 
ATRIUM to Eton, and gerund-grinding was its RAISON D'ETRE.  
Before I was nine years old I daresay I could repeat - 
parrot, that is - several hundreds of lines of the AEneid.  
This, and some elementary arithmetic, geography, and drawing, 
which last I took to kindly, were dearly paid for by many 
tears, and by temporarily impaired health.  It was due to my 
pallid cheeks that I was removed.  It was due to the 
following six months - summer months - of a happy life that 
my health was completely restored.



CHAPTER III



MR. EDWARD ELLICE, who constantly figures in the memoirs of 
the last century as 'Bear Ellice' (an outrageous misnomer, by 
the way), and who later on married my mother, was the chief 
controller of my youthful destiny.  His first wife was a 
sister of the Lord Grey of Reform Bill fame, in whose 
Government he filled the office of War Minister.  In many 
respects Mr. Ellice was a notable man.  He possessed shrewd 
intelligence, much force of character, and an autocratic 
spirit - to which he owed his sobriquet.  His kindness of 
heart, his powers of conversation, with striking personality 
and ample wealth, combined to make him popular.  His house in 
Arlington Street, and his shooting lodge at Glen Quoich, were 
famous for the number of eminent men who were his frequent 
guests.

Mr. Ellice's position as a minister, and his habitual 
residence in Paris, had brought him in touch with the leading 
statesmen of France.  He was intimately acquainted with Louis 
Philippe, with Talleyrand, with Guizot, with Thiers, and most 
of the French men and French women whose names were bruited 
in the early part of the nineteenth century.

When I was taken from Temple Grove, I was placed, by the 
advice and arrangement of Mr. Ellice, under the charge of a 
French family, which had fallen into decay - through the 
change of dynasty.  The Marquis de Coubrier had been Master 
of the Horse to Charles X.  His widow - an old lady between 
seventy and eighty - with three maiden daughters, all 
advanced in years, lived upon the remnant of their estates in 
a small village called Larue, close to Bourg-la-Reine, which, 
it may be remembered, was occupied by the Prussians during 
the siege of Paris.  There was a chateau, the former seat of 
the family; and, adjoining it, in the same grounds, a pretty 
and commodious cottage.  The first was let as a country house 
to some wealthy Parisians; the cottage was occupied by the 
Marquise and her three daughters.

The personal appearances of each of these four elderly 
ladies, their distinct idiosyncrasies, and their former high 
position as members of a now moribund nobility, left a 
lasting impression on my memory.  One might expect, perhaps, 
from such a prelude, to find in the old Marquise traces of 
stately demeanour, or a regretted superiority.  Nothing of 
the kind.  She herself was a short, square-built woman, with 
large head and strong features, framed in a mob cap, with a 
broad frill which flopped over her tortoise-shell spectacles.  
She wore a black bombazine gown, and list slippers.  When in 
the garden, where she was always busy in the summer-time, she 
put on wooden sabots over her slippers.

Despite this homely exterior, she herself was a 'lady' in 
every sense of the word.  Her manner was dignified and 
courteous to everyone.  To her daughters and to myself she 
was gentle and affectionate.  Her voice was sympathetic, 
almost musical.  I never saw her temper ruffled.  I never 
heard her allude to her antecedents.

The daughters were as unlike their mother as they were to one 
another.  Adele, the eldest, was very stout, with a profusion 
of grey ringlets.  She spoke English fluently.  I gathered, 
from her mysterious nods and tosses of the head, (to be sure, 
her head wagged a little of its own accord, the ringlets too, 
like lambs' tails,) that she had had an AFFAIRE DE COEUR with 
an Englishman, and that the perfidious islander had removed 
from the Continent with her misplaced affections.  She was a 
trifle bitter, I thought - for I applied her insinuations to 
myself - against Englishmen generally.  But, though cynical 
in theory, she was perfectly amiable in practice.  She 
superintended the menage and spent the rest of her life in 
making paper flowers.  I should hardly have known they were 
flowers, never having seen their prototypes in nature.  She 
assured me, however, that they were beautiful copies - 
undoubtedly she believed them to be so.

Henriette, the youngest, had been the beauty of the family.  
This I had to take her own word for, since here again there 
was much room for imagination and faith.  She was a confirmed 
invalid, and, poor thing! showed every symptom of it.  She 
rarely left her room except for meals; and although it was 
summer when I was there, she never moved without her 
chauffrette.  She seemed to live for the sake of patent 
medicines and her chauffrette; she was always swallowing the 
one, and feeding the other.

The middle daughter was Aglae.  Mademoiselle Aglae took 
charge - I may say, possession - of me.  She was tall, gaunt, 
and bony, with a sharp aquiline nose, pomegranate cheek-
bones, and large saffron teeth ever much in evidence.  Her 
speciality, as I soon discovered, was sentiment.  Like her 
sisters, she had had her 'affaires' in the plural.  A Greek 
prince, so far as I could make out, was the last of her 
adorers.  But I sometimes got into scrapes by mixing up the 
Greek prince with a Polish count, and then confounding either 
one or both with a Hungarian pianoforte player.

Without formulating my deductions, I came instinctively to 
the conclusion that 'En fait d'amour,' as Figaro puts it, 
'trop n'est pas meme assez.'  From Miss Aglae's point of view 
a lover was a lover.  As to the superiority of one over 
another, this was - nay, is - purely subjective.  'We receive 
but what we give.'  And, from what Mademoiselle then told me, 
I cannot but infer that she had given without stint.

Be that as it may, nothing could be more kind than her care 
of me.  She tucked me up at night, and used to send for me in 
the morning before she rose, to partake of her CAFE-AU-LAIT.  
In return for her indulgences, I would 'make eyes' such as I 
had seen Auguste, the young man-servant, cast at Rose the 
cook.  I would present her with little scraps which I copied 
in roundhand from a volume of French poems.  Once I drew, and 
coloured with red ink, two hearts pierced with an arrow, a 
copious pool of red ink beneath, emblematic of both the 
quality and quantity of my passion.  This work of art 
produced so deep a sigh that I abstained thenceforth from 
repeating such sanguinary endearments.

Not the least interesting part of the family was the 
servants.  I say 'family,' for a French family, unlike an 
English one, includes its domestics; wherein our neighbours 
have the advantage over us.  In the British establishment the 
household is but too often thought of and treated as 
furniture.  I was as fond of Rose the cook and maid-of-all-
work as I was of anyone in the house.  She showed me how to 
peel potatoes, break eggs, and make POT-AU-FEU.  She made me 
little delicacies in pastry - swans with split almonds for 
wings, comic little pigs with cloves in their eyes - for all 
of which my affection and my liver duly acknowledged receipt 
in full.  She taught me more provincial pronunciation and bad 
grammar than ever I could unlearn.  She was very intelligent, 
and radiant with good humour.  One peculiarity especially 
took my fancy - the yellow bandana in which she enveloped her 
head.  I was always wondering whether she was born without 
hair - there was none to be seen.  This puzzled me so that 
one day I consulted Auguste, who was my chief companion.  He 
was quite indignant, and declared with warmth that Mam'selle 
Rose had the most beautiful hair he had ever beheld.  He 
flushed even with enthusiasm.  If it hadn't been for his 
manner, I should have asked him how he knew.  But somehow I 
felt the subject was a delicate one.

How incessantly they worked, Auguste and Rose, and how 
cheerfully they worked!  One could hear her singing, and him 
whistling, at it all day.  Yet they seemed to have abundant 
leisure to exchange a deal of pleasantry and harmless banter.  
Auguste was a Swiss, and a bigoted Protestant, and never lost 
an opportunity of holding forth on the superiority of the 
reformed religion.  If he thought the family were out of 
hearing, he would grow very animated and declamatory.  But 
Rose, who also had hopes, though perhaps faint, for my 
salvation, would suddenly rush into the room with the carpet 
broom, and drive him out, with threats of Miss Aglae, and the 
broomstick.

The gardener, Monsieur Benoit, was also a great favourite of 
mine, and I of his, for I was never tired of listening to his 
wonderful adventures.  He had, so he informed me, been a 
soldier in the GRANDE ARMEE.  He enthralled me with hair-
raising accounts of his exploits:  how, when leading a 
storming party - he was always the leader - one dark and 
terrible night, the vivid and incessant lightning betrayed 
them by the flashing of their bayonets; and how in a few 
minutes they were mowed down by MITRAILLE.  He had led 
forlorn hopes, and performed deeds of astounding prowess.  
How many Life-guardsmen he had annihilated:  'Ah! ben oui!' 
he was afraid to say.  He had been personally noticed by 'Le 
p'tit caporal.'  There were many, whose deeds were not to 
compare with his, who had been made princes and mareschals.  
PARBLEU! but his luck was bad.  'Pas d'chance! pas d'chance!  
Mo'sieu Henri.'  As Monsieur Benoit recorded his feats, and 
witnessed my unbounded admiration, his voice would grow more 
and more sepulchral, till it dropped to a hoarse and scarcely 
audible whisper.

I was a little bewildered one day when, having breathlessly 
repeated some of his heroic deeds to the Marquise, she with a 
quiet smile assured me that 'ce petit bon-homme,' as she 
called him, had for a short time been a drummer in the 
National Guard, but had never been a soldier.  This was a 
blow to me; moreover, I was troubled by the composure of the 
Marquise.  Monsieur Benoit had actually been telling me what 
was not true.  Was it, then, possible that grown-up people 
acquired the privilege of fibbing with impunity?  I wondered 
whether this right would eventually become mine!

At Bourg-la-Reine there is, or was, a large school.  Three 
days in the week I had to join one of the classes there; on 
the other three one of the ushers came up to Larue for a 
couple of hours of private tuition.  At the school itself I 
did not learn very much, except that boys everywhere are 
pretty similar, especially in the badness of their manners.  
I also learnt that shrugging the shoulders while exhibiting 
the palms of the hands, and smiting oneself vehemently on the 
chest, are indispensable elements of the French idiom.  The 
indiscriminate use of the word 'parfaitement' I also noticed 
to be essential when at a loss for either language or ideas, 
and have made valuable use of it ever since.

Monsieur Vincent, my tutor, was a most good-natured and 
patient teacher.  I incline, however, to think that I taught 
him more English than he taught me French.  He certainly 
worked hard at his lessons.  He read English aloud to me, and 
made me correct his pronunciation.  The mental agony this 
caused me makes me hot to think of still.  I had never heard 
his kind of Franco-English before.  To my ignorance it was 
the most comic language in the world.  There were some words 
which, in spite of my endeavours, he persisted in pronouncing 
in his own way.  I have since got quite used to the most of 
them, and their only effect is to remind me of my own rash 
ventures in a foreign tongue.  There are one or two words 
which recall the pain it gave me to control my emotions.  He 
would produce his penknife, for instance; and, contemplating 
it with a despondent air, would declare it to be the most 
difficult word in the English language to pronounce.  'Ow you 
say 'im?'  'Penknife,' I explained.  He would bid me write it 
down; then having spelt it, he would, with much effort, and a 
sound like sneezing - oh! the pain I endured! - slowly repeat 
'Penkneef.'  I gave it up at last; and he was gratified with 
his success.  As my explosion generally occurred about five 
minutes afterwards, Monsieur Vincent failed to connect cause 
and effect.  When we parted he gave me a neatly bound copy of 
La Bruyere as a prize - for his own proficiency, I presume.  
Many a pleasant half-hour have I since spent with the witty 
classic.

Except the controversial harangues of the zealot Auguste, my 
religious teaching was neglected on week days.  On Sundays, 
if fine, I was taken to a Protestant church in Paris; not 
infrequently to the Embassy.  I did not enjoy this at all.  I 
could have done very well without it.  I liked the drive, 
which took about an hour each way.  Occasionally Aglae and I 
went in the Bourg-la-Reine coucou.  But Mr. Ellice had 
arranged that a carriage should be hired for me.  Probably he 
was not unmindful of the convenience of the old ladies.  They 
were not.  The carriage was always filled.  Even Mademoiselle 
Henriette managed to go sometimes - aided by a little patent 
medicine, and when it was too hot for the chauffrette.  If 
she was unable, a friend in the neighbourhood was offered a 
seat; and I had to sit bodkin, or on Mademoiselle Aglae's 
lap.  I hated the 'friend'; for, secretly, I felt the 
carriage was mine, though of course I never had the bad taste 
to say so.

They went to Mass, and I was allowed to go with them, in 
addition to my church, as a special favour.  I liked the 
music, the display of candles, the smell of the incense, and 
the dresses of the priests; and wondered whether when 
undressed - unrobed, that is - they were funny old gentlemen 
like Monsieur le Cure at Larue, and took such a prodigious 
quantity of snuff up their noses and under their finger-
nails.  The ladies did a good deal of shopping, and we 
finished off at the Flower Market by the Madeleine, where I, 
through the agency of Mademoiselle Aglae, bought plants for 
'Maman.'  This gave 'Maman' UN PLAISIR INOUI, and me too; for 
the dear old lady always presented me with a stick of barley-
sugar in return.  As I never possessed a sou (Miss Aglae kept 
account of all my expenses and disbursements) I was strongly 
in favour of buying plants for 'Maman.'

I loved the garden.  It was such a beautiful garden; so 
beautifully kept by Monsieur Benoit, and withered old Mere 
Michele, who did the weeding and helped Rose once a week in 
the laundry.  There were such pretty trellises, covered with 
roses and clematis; such masses of bright flowers and sweet 
mignonette; such tidy gravel walks and clipped box edges; 
such floods of sunshine; so many butterflies and lizards 
basking in it; the birds singing with excess of joy.  I used 
to fancy they sang in gratitude to the dear old Marquise, who 
never forgot them in the winter snows.

What a quaint but charming picture she was amidst this 
quietude, - she who had lived through the Reign of Terror:  
her mob cap, garden apron, and big gloves; a trowel in one 
hand, a watering-pot in the other; potting and unpotting; so 
busy, seemingly so happy.  She loved to have me with her, and 
let me do the watering.  What a pleasure that was!  The 
scores of little jets from the perforated rose, the gushing 
sound, the freshness and the sparkle, the gratitude of the 
plants, to say nothing of one's own wet legs.  'Maman' did 
not approve of my watering my own legs.  But if the watering-
pot was too big for me how could I help it?  By and by a 
small one painted red within and green outside was discovered 
in Bourg-la-Reine, and I was happy ever afterwards.

Much of my time was spent with the children and nurses of the 
family which occupied the chateau.  The costume of the head 
nurse with her high Normandy cap (would that I had a female 
pen for details) invariably suggested to me that she would 
make any English showman's fortune, if he could only exhibit 
her stuffed.  At the cottage they called her 'La Grosse 
Normande.'  Not knowing her by any other name, I always so 
addressed her.  She was not very quick-witted, but I think 
she a little resented my familiarity, and retaliated by 
comparisons between her compatriots and mine, always in a 
tone derogatory to the latter.  She informed me as a matter 
of history, patent to all nurses, that the English race were 
notoriously bow-legged; and that this was due to the vicious 
practice of allowing children to use their legs before the 
gristle had become bone.  Being of an inquiring turn of mind, 
I listened with awe to this physiological revelation, and 
with chastened and depressed spirits made a mental note of 
our national calamity.  Privately I fancied that the mottled 
and spasmodic legs of Achille - whom she carried in her arms 
- or at least so much of the infant Pelides' legs as were not 
enveloped in a napkin, gave every promise of refuting her 
generalisation.

One of my amusements was to set brick traps for small birds.  
At Holkham in the winter time, by baiting with a few grains 
of corn, I and my brothers used, in this way, to capture 
robins, hedge-sparrows, and tits.  Not far from the chateau 
was a large osier bed, resorted to by flocks of the common 
sparrow.  Here I set my traps.  But it being summer time, and 
(as I complained when twitted with want of success) French 
birds being too stupid to know what the traps were for, I 
never caught a feather.  Now this osier bed was a favourite 
game covert for the sportsmen of the chateau; and what was my 
delight and astonishment when one morning I found a dead hare 
with its head under the fallen brick of my trap.  How 
triumphantly I dragged it home, and showed it to Rose and 
Auguste, - who more than the rest had 'mocked themselves' of 
my traps, and then carried it in my arms, all bloody as it 
was (I could not make out how both its hind legs were broken) 
into the salon to show it to the old Marquise.  Mademoiselle 
Henriette, who was there, gave a little scream (for effect) 
at sight of the blood.  Everybody was pleased.  But when I 
overheard Rose's SOTTO VOCE to the Marquise:  'Comme ils sont 
gentils!' I indignantly retorted that 'it wasn't kind of the 
hare at all:  it was entirely due to my skill in setting the 
traps.  They would catch anything that put its head into 
them.  Just you try.'

How severe are the shocks of early disillusionment!  It was 
not until long after the hare was skinned, roasted, served as 
CIVET and as PUREE that I discovered the truth.  I was not at 
all grateful to the gentlemen of the chateau whose dupe I had 
been; was even wrath with my dear old 'Maman' for treating 
them with extra courtesy for their kindness to her PETIT 
CHERI.

That was a happy summer.  After it was ended, and it was time 
for me to return to England and begin my education for the 
Navy I never again set eyes on Larue, or that charming nest 
of old ladies who had done their utmost to spoil me.  Many 
and many a time have I been to Paris, but nothing could tempt 
me to visit Larue.  So it is with me.  Often have I 
questioned the truth of the NESSUN MAGGIOR DOLORE than the 
memory of happy times in the midst of sorry ones.  The 
thought of happiness, it would seem, should surely make us 
happier, and yet - not of happiness for ever lost.  And are 
not the deepening shades of our declining sun deepened by 
youth's contrast?  Whatever our sweetest songs may tell us 
of, we are the sadder for our sweetest memories.  The grass 
can never be as green again to eyes grown watery.  The lambs 
that skipped when we did were long since served as mutton.  
And if


Die Fusse tragen mich so muthig nicht empor
Die hohen Stufen die ich kindisch ubersprang,


why, I will take the fact for granted.  My youth is fled, my 
friends are dead.  The daisies and the snows whiten by turns 
the grave of him or her - the dearest I have loved.  Shall I 
make a pilgrimage to that sepulchre?  Drop futile tears upon 
it?  Will they warm what is no more?  I for one have not the 
heart for that.  Happily life has something else for us to 
do.  Happily 'tis best to do it.



CHAPTER IV



THE passage from the romantic to the realistic, from the 
chimerical to the actual, from the child's poetic 
interpretation of life to life's practical version of itself, 
is too gradual to be noticed while the process is going on.  
It is only in the retrospect we see the change.  There is 
still, for yet another stage, the same and even greater 
receptivity, - delight in new experiences, in gratified 
curiosity, in sensuous enjoyment, in the exercise of growing 
faculties.  But the belief in the impossible and the bliss of 
ignorance are seen, when looking back, to have assumed almost 
abruptly a cruder state of maturer dulness.  Between the 
public schoolboy and the child there is an essential 
difference; and this in a boy's case is largely due, I fancy, 
to the diminished influence of woman, and the increased 
influence of men.

With me, certainly, the rough usage I was ere long to undergo 
materially modified my view of things in general.  In 1838, 
when I was eleven years old, my uncle, Henry Keppel, the 
future Admiral of the Fleet, but then a dashing young 
commander, took me (as he mentions in his Autobiography) to 
the Naval Academy at Gosport.  The very afternoon of my 
admittance - as an illustration of the above remarks - I had 
three fights with three different boys.  After that the 'new 
boy' was left to his own devices, - QUA 'new boy,' that is; 
as an ordinary small boy, I had my share.  I have spoken of 
the starvation at Dr. Pinkney's; here it was the terrible 
bullying that left its impress on me - literally its mark, 
for I still bear the scar upon my hand.

Most boys, I presume, know the toy called a whirligig, made 
by stringing a button on a loop of thread, the twisting and 
untwisting of which by approaching and separating the hands 
causes the button to revolve.  Upon this design, and by 
substituting a jagged disk of slate for the button, the 
senior 'Bull-dogs' (we were all called 'Burney's bull-dogs') 
constructed a very simple instrument of torture.  One big boy 
spun the whirligig, while another held the small boy's palm 
till the sharp slate-edge gashed it.  The wound was severe.  
For many years a long white cicatrice recorded the fact in my 
right hand.  The ordeal was, I fancy, unique - a prerogative 
of the naval 'bull-dogs.'  The other torture was, in those 
days, not unknown to public schools.  It was to hold a boy's 
back and breech as near to a hot fire as his clothes would 
bear without burning.  I have an indistinct recollection of a 
boy at one of our largest public schools being thus exposed, 
and left tied to chairs while his companions were at church.  
When church was over the boy was found - roasted.

By the advice of a chum I submitted to the scorching without 
a howl, and thus obtained immunity, and admission to the 
roasting guild for the future.  What, however, served me 
best, in all matters of this kind, was that as soon as I was 
twelve years old my name was entered on the books of the 
'Britannia,' then flag-ship in Portsmouth Harbour, and though 
I remained at the Academy, I always wore the uniform of a 
volunteer of the first class, now called a naval cadet.  The 
uniform was respected, and the wearer shared the benefit.

During the winter of 1839-40 I joined H.M.S. 'Blonde,' a 46-
gun frigate commanded by Captain Bouchier, afterwards Sir 
Thomas, whose portrait is now in the National Portrait 
Gallery.  He had seen much service, and had been flag-captain 
to Nelson's Hardy.  In the middle of that winter we sailed 
for China, where troubles had arisen anent the opium trade.

What would the cadet of the present day think of the 
treatment we small boys had to put up with sixty or seventy 
years ago?  Promotion depended almost entirely on interest.  
The service was entered at twelve or thirteen.  After two 
years at sea, if the boy passed his examination, he mounted 
the white patch, and became a midshipman.  At the end of four 
years more he had to pass a double examination, - one for 
seamanship before a board of captains, and another for 
navigation at the Naval College.  He then became a master's 
mate, and had to serve for three years as such before he was 
eligible for promotion to a lieutenancy.  Unless an officer 
had family interest he often stuck there, and as often had to 
serve under one more favoured, who was not born when he 
himself was getting stale.

Naturally enough these old hands were jealous of the 
fortunate youngsters, and, unless exceptionally amiable, 
would show them little mercy.

We left Portsmouth in December 1839.  It was bitter winter.  
The day we sailed, such was the severity of the gale and 
snowstorm, that we had to put back and anchor at St. Helens 
in the Isle of Wight.  The next night we were at sea.  It 
happened to be my middle watch.  I had to turn out of my 
hammock at twelve to walk the deck till four in the morning.  
Walk! I could not stand.  Blinded with snow, drenched by the 
seas, frozen with cold, home sick and sea sick beyond 
description, my opinion of the Royal Navy - as a profession - 
was, in the course of these four hours, seriously subverted.  
Long before the watch ended.  I was reeling about more asleep 
than awake; every now and then brought to my senses by 
breaking my shins against the carronade slides; or, if I sat 
down upon one of them to rest, by a playful whack with a 
rope's end from one of the crusty old mates aforesaid, who 
perhaps anticipated in my poor little personality the 
arrogance of a possible commanding officer.  Oh! those cruel 
night watches!  But the hard training must have been a useful 
tonic too.  One got accustomed to it by degrees; and hence, 
indifferent to exposure, to bad food, to kicks and cuffs, to 
calls of duty, to subordination, and to all that constitutes 
discipline.

Luckily for me, the midshipman of my watch, Jack Johnson, was 
a trump, and a smart officer to boot.  He was six years older 
than I, and, though thoroughly good-natured, was formidable 
enough from his strength and determination to have his will 
respected.  He became my patron and protector.  Rightly, or 
wrongly I am afraid, he always took my part, made excuses for 
me to the officer of our watch if I were caught napping under 
the half-deck, or otherwise neglecting my duty.  Sometimes he 
would even take the blame for this upon himself, and give me 
a 'wigging' in private, which was my severest punishment.  He 
taught me the ropes, and explained the elements of 
seamanship.  If it was very cold at night he would make me 
wear his own comforter, and, in short, took care of me in 
every possible way.  Poor Jack! I never had a better friend; 
and I loved him then, God knows.  He was one of those whose 
advancement depended on himself.  I doubt whether he would 
ever have been promoted but for an accident which I shall 
speak of presently.

When we got into warm latitudes we were taught not only to 
knot and splice, but to take in and set the mizzen royal.  
There were four of us boys, and in all weathers at last we 
were practised aloft until we were as active and as smart as 
any of the ship's lads, even in dirty weather or in sudden 
squalls.

We had a capital naval instructor for lessons in navigation, 
and the quartermaster of the watch taught us how to handle 
the wheel and con.

These quartermasters - there was one to each of the three 
watches - were picked men who had been captains of tops or 
boatswains' mates.  They were much older than any of the 
crew.  Our three in the 'Blonde' had all seen service in the 
French and Spanish wars.  One, a tall, handsome old fellow, 
had been a smuggler; and many a fight with, or narrow escape 
from, the coast-guard he had to tell of.  The other two had 
been badly wounded.  Old Jimmy Bartlett of my watch had a 
hole in his chest half an inch deep from a boarding pike.  He 
had also lost a finger, and a bullet had passed through his 
cheek.  One of his fights was in the 'Amethyst' frigate when, 
under Sir Michael Seymour, she captured the 'Niemen' in 1809.  
Often in the calm tropical nights, when the helm could take 
care of itself almost, he would spin me a yarn about hot 
actions, cutting-outs, press-gangings, and perils which he 
had gone through, or - what was all one to me - had invented.

From England to China round the Cape was a long voyage before 
there was a steamer in the Navy.  It is impossible to 
describe the charm of one's first acquaintance with tropical 
vegetation after the tedious monotony unbroken by any event 
but an occasional flogging or a man overboard.  The islands 
seemed afloat in an atmosphere of blue; their jungles rooting 
in the water's edge.  The strange birds in the daytime, the 
flocks of parrots, the din of every kind of life, the flying 
foxes at night, the fragrant and spicy odours, captivate the 
senses.  How delicious, too, the fresh fruits brought off by 
the Malays in their scooped-out logs, one's first taste of 
bananas, juicy shaddocks, mangoes, and custard apples - after 
months of salt junk, disgusting salt pork, and biscuit all 
dust and weevils.  The water is so crystal-clear it seems as 
though one could lay one's hands on strange coloured fish and 
coral beds at any depth.  This, indeed, was 'kissing the lips 
of unexpected change.'  It was a first kiss moreover.  The 
tropics now have ceased to remind me even of this spell of 
novelty and wonder.



CHAPTER V



THE first time I 'smelt powder' was at Amoy.  The 'Blonde' 
carried out Lord Palmerston's letter to the Chinese 
Government.  Never was there a more iniquitous war than 
England then provoked with China to force upon her the opium 
trade with India in spite of the harm which the Chinese 
authorities believed that opium did to their people.

Even Macaulay advocated this shameful imposition.  China had 
to submit, and pay into the bargain four and a half millions 
sterling to prove themselves in the wrong.  Part of this went 
as prize money.  My share of it - the DOUCEUR for a middy's 
participation in the crime - was exactly 100L.

To return to Amoy.  When off the mouth of the Canton river we 
had taken on board an interpreter named Thom.  What our 
instructions were I know not; I can only tell what happened.  
Our entry into Amoy harbour caused an immediate commotion on 
land.  As soon as we dropped anchor, about half a mile from 
the shore, a number of troops, with eight or ten field-
pieces, took up their position on the beach, evidently 
resolved to prevent our landing.  We hoisted a flag of truce, 
at the same time cleared the decks for action, and dropped a 
kedge astern so as to moor the ship broadside to the forts 
and invested shore.  The officer of my watch, the late Sir 
Frederick Nicholson, together with the interpreter, were 
ordered to land and communicate with the chief mandarin.  To 
carry out this as inoffensively as possible, Nicholson took 
the jolly-boat, manned by four lads only.  As it was my 
watch, I had charge of the boat.  A napkin or towel served 
for a flag of truce.  But long before we reached the shore, 
several mandarins came down to the water's edge waving their 
swords and shouting angrily to warn us off.  Mr. Thom, who 
understood what they said, was frightened out of his wits, 
assuring us we should all be sawed in half if we attempted to 
land.  Sir Frederick was not the man to disobey orders even 
on such a penalty; he, however, took the precaution - a very 
wise one as it happened - to reverse the boat, and back her 
in stern foremost.

No sooner did the keel grate on the shingle than a score of 
soldiers rushed down to seize us.  Before they could do so we 
had shoved off.  The shore was very steep.  In a moment we 
were in deep water, and our lads pulling for dear life.  Then 
came a storm of bullets from matchlocks and jingals and the 
bigger guns, fortunately just too high to hit us.  One bullet 
only struck the back-board, but did no harm.  What, however, 
seemed a greater danger was the fire from the ship.  Ere we 
were halfway back broadside after broadside was fired over 
our heads into the poor devils massed along the beach.  This 
was kept up until not a living Chinaman was to be seen.

I may mention here a curious instance of cowardice.  One of 
our men, a ship's painter, soon after the firing began and 
was returned by the fort's guns, which in truth were quite 
harmless, jumped overboard and drowned himself.  I have seen 
men's courage tried under fire, and in many other ways since; 
yet I have never known but one case similar to this, when a 
friend of my own, a rich and prosperous man, shot himself to 
avoid death!  So that there are men like 'Monsieur 
Grenouille, qui se cachait dans l'eau pour eviter la pluie.'  
Often have I seen timid and nervous men, who were thought to 
be cowards, get so excited in action that their timidity has 
turned to rashness.  In truth 'on est souvent ferme par 
faiblesse, et audacieux par timidite.'

Partly for this reason, and partly because I look upon it as 
a remnant of our predatory antecedents and of animal 
pugnacity, I have no extravagant admiration for mere 
combativeness or physical courage.  Honoured and rewarded as 
one of the noblest of manly attributes, it is one of the 
commonest of qualities, - one which there is not a mammal, a 
bird, a fish, or an insect even, that does not share with us.  
Such is the esteem in which it is held, such the ignominy 
which punishes the want of it, that the most cautious and the 
most timid by nature will rather face the uncertain risks of 
a fight than the certain infamy of imputed cowardice.

Is it likely that courage should be rare under such 
circumstances, especially amongst professional fighters, who 
in England at least have chosen their trade?  That there are 
poltroons, and plenty of them, amongst our soldiers and 
sailors, I do not dispute.  But with the fear of shame on one 
hand, the hope of reward on the other, the merest dastard 
will fight like a wild beast, when his blood is up.  The 
extraordinary merit of his conduct is not so obvious to the 
peaceful thinker.  I speak not of such heroism as that of the 
Japanese, - their deeds will henceforth be bracketed with 
those of Leonidas and his three hundred, who died for a like 
cause.  With the Japanese, as it was with the Spartans, every 
man is a patriot; nor is the proportionate force of their 
barbaric invaders altogether dissimilar.

Is then the Victoria Cross an error?  To say so would be an 
outrage in this age of militarism.  And what would all the 
Queens of Beauty think, from Sir Wilfred Ivanhoe's days to 
ours, if mighty warriors ceased to poke each other in the 
ribs, and send one another's souls untimely to the 'viewless 
shades,' for the sake of their 'doux yeux?'  Ah! who knows 
how many a mutilation, how many a life, has been the price of 
that requital?  Ye gentle creatures who swoon at the sight of 
blood, is it not the hero who lets most of it that finds most 
favour in your eyes?  Possibly it may be to the heroes of 
moral courage that some distant age will award its choicest 
decorations.  As it is, the courage that seeks the rewards of 
Fame seems to me about on a par with the virtue that invests 
in Heaven.

Though an anachronism as regards this stage of my career, I 
cannot resist a little episode which pleasantly illustrates 
moral courage, or chivalry at least, combined with physical 
bravery.

In December, 1899, I was a passenger on board a Norddeutscher 
Lloyd on my way to Ceylon.  The steamer was crowded with 
Germans; there were comparatively few English.  Things had 
been going very badly with us in the Transvaal, and the 
telegrams both at Port Said and at Suez supplemented the 
previous ill-news.  At the latter place we heard of the 
catastrophe at Magersfontein, of poor Wauchope's death, and 
of the disaster to the Highland Light Infantry.  The moment 
it became known the Germans threw their caps into the air, 
and yelled as if it were they who had defeated us.

Amongst the steerage passengers was a Major - in the English 
army - returning from leave to rejoin his regiment at 
Colombo.  If one might judge by his choice of a second-class 
fare, and by his much worn apparel, he was what one would 
call a professional soldier.  He was a tall, powerfully-
built, handsome man, with a weather-beaten determined face, 
and keen eye.  I was so taken with his looks that I often 
went to the fore part of the ship on the chance of getting a 
word with him.  But he was either shy or proud, certainly 
reserved; and always addressed me as 'Sir,' which was not 
encouraging.

That same evening, after dinner in the steerage cabin, a 
German got up and, beginning with some offensive allusions to 
the British army, proposed the health of General Cronje and 
the heroic Boers.  This was received with deafening 'Hochs.'  
To cap the enthusiasm up jumped another German, and proposed 
'ungluck - bad luck to all Englanders and to their Queen.'  
This also was cordially toasted.  When the ceremony was ended 
and silence restored, my reserved friend calmly rose, tapped 
the table with the handle of his knife (another steerage 
passenger - an Australian - told me what happened), took his 
watch from his pocket, and slowly said:  'It is just six 
minutes to eight.  If the person who proposed the last toast 
has not made a satisfactory apology to me before the hand of 
my watch points to the hour, I will thrash him till he does.  
I am an officer in the English army, and always keep my 
word.'  A small band of Australians was in the cabin.  One 
and all of them applauded this laconic speech.  It was 
probably due in part to these that the offender did not wait 
till the six minutes had expired.

Next day I congratulated my reserved friend.  He was reticent 
as usual.  All I could get out of him was, 'I never allow a 
lady to be insulted in my presence, sir.'  It was his Queen, 
not his cloth, that had roused the virility in this quiet 
man.

Let us turn to another aspect of the deeds of war.  About 
daylight on the morning following our bombardment, it being 
my morning watch, I was ordered to take the surgeon and 
assistant surgeon ashore.  There were many corpses, but no 
living or wounded to be seen.  One object only dwells 
visually in my memory.

At least a quarter of a mile from the dead soldiers, a stray 
shell had killed a grey-bearded old man and a young woman.  
They were side by side.  The woman was still in her teens and 
pretty.  She lay upon her back.  Blood was oozing from her 
side.  A swarm of flies were buzzing in and out of her open 
mouth.  Her little deformed feet, cased in the high-heeled 
and embroidered tiny shoes, extended far beyond her 
petticoats.  It was these feet that interested the men of 
science.  They are now, I believe, in a jar of spirits at 
Haslar hospital.  At least, my friend the assistant surgeon 
told me, as we returned to the ship, that that was their 
ultimate destination.  The mutilated body, as I turned from 
it with sickening horror, left a picture on my youthful mind 
not easily to be effaced.

After this we joined the rest of the squadron:  the 
'Melville' (a three-decker, Sir W. Parker's flagship), the 
'Blenheim,' the 'Druid,' the 'Calliope,' and several 18-gun 
brigs.  We took Hong Kong, Chusan, Ningpo, Canton, and 
returned to take Amoy.  One or two incidents only in the 
several engagements seem worth recording.

We have all of us supped full with horrors this last year or 
so, and I have no thought of adding to the surfeit.  But 
sometimes common accidents appear exceptional, if they befall 
ourselves, or those with whom we are intimate.  If the 
sufferer has any special identity, we speculate on his 
peculiar way of bearing his misfortune; and are thus led on 
to place ourselves in his position, and imagine ourselves the 
sufferers.

Major Daniel, the senior marine officer of the 'Blonde,' was 
a reserved and taciturn man.  He was quiet and gentlemanlike, 
always very neat in his dress; rather severe, still kind to 
his men.  His aloofness was in no wise due to lack of ideas, 
nor, I should say, to pride - unless, perhaps, it were the 
pride which some men feel in suppressing all emotion by 
habitual restraint of manner.  Whether his SANGFROID was 
constitutional, or that nobler kind of courage which feels 
and masters timidity and the sense of danger, none could 
tell.  Certain it is he was as calm and self-possessed in 
action as in repose.  He was so courteous one fancied he 
would almost have apologised to his foe before he 
remorselessly ran him through.

On our second visit to Amoy, a year or more after the first, 
we met with a warmer reception.  The place was much more 
strongly fortified, and the ship was several-times hulled.  
We were at very close quarters, as it is necessary to pass 
under high ground as the harbour is entered.  Those who had 
the option, excepting our gallant old captain, naturally kept 
under shelter of the bulwarks and hammock nettings.  Not so 
Major Daniel.  He stood in the open gangway watching the 
effect of the shells, as though he were looking at a game of 
billiards.  While thus occupied a round shot struck him full 
in the face, and simply left him headless.

Another accident, partly due to an ignorance of dynamics, 
happened at the taking of Canton.  The whole of the naval 
brigade was commanded by Sir Thomas Bouchier.  Our men were 
lying under the ridge of a hill protected from the guns on 
the city walls.  Fully exposed to the fire, which was pretty 
hot, 'old Tommy' as we called him, paced to and fro with 
contemptuous indifference, stopping occasionally to spy the 
enemy with his long ship's telescope.  A number of 
bluejackets, in reserve, were stationed about half a mile 
further off at the bottom of the protecting hill.  They were 
completely screened from the fire by some buildings of the 
suburbs abutting upon the slope.  Those in front were 
watching the cannon-balls which had struck the crest and were 
rolling as it were by mere force of gravitation down the 
hillside.  Some jokes were made about football, when suddenly 
a smart and popular young officer - Fox, first lieutenant of 
one of the brigs - jumped out at one of these spent balls, 
which looked as though it might have been picked up by the 
hands, and gave it a kick.  It took his foot off just above 
the ankle.  There was no surgeon at hand, and he was bleeding 
to death before one could be found.  Sir Thomas had come down 
the hill, and seeing the wounded officer on the ground with a 
group around him, said in passing, 'Well, Fox, this is a bad 
job, but it will make up the pair of epaulets, which is 
something.'

'Yes sir,' said the dying man feebly, 'but without a pair of 
legs.'  Half an hour later he was dead.

I have spoken lightly of courage, as if, by implication, I 
myself possessed it.  Let me make a confession.  From my soul 
I pity the man who is or has been such a miserable coward as 
I was in my infancy, and up to this youthful period of my 
life.  No fear of bullets or bayonets could ever equal mine.  
It was the fear of ghosts.  As a child, I think that at times 
when shut up for punishment, in a dark cellar for instance, I 
must have nearly gone out of my mind with this appalling 
terror.

Once when we were lying just below Whampo, the captain took 
nearly every officer and nearly the whole ship's crew on a 
punitive expedition up the Canton river.  They were away 
about a week.  I was left behind, dangerously ill with fever 
and ague.  In his absence, Sir Thomas had had me put into his 
cabin, where I lay quite alone day and night, seeing hardly 
anyone save the surgeon and the captain's steward, who was 
himself a shadow, pretty nigh.  Never shall I forget my 
mental sufferings at night.  In vain may one attempt to 
describe what one then goes through; only the victims know 
what that is.  My ghost - the ghost of the Whampo Reach - the 
ghost of those sultry and miasmal nights, had no shape, no 
vaporous form; it was nothing but a presence, a vague 
amorphous dread.  It may have floated with the swollen and 
putrid corpses which hourly came bobbing down the stream, but 
it never appeared; for there was nothing to appear.  Still it 
might appear.  I expected every instant through the night to 
see it in some inconceivable form.  I expected it to touch 
me.  It neither stalked upon the deck, nor hovered in the 
dark, nor moved, nor rested anywhere.  And yet it was there 
about me, - where, I knew not.  On every side I was 
threatened.  I feared it most behind the head of my cot, 
because I could not see it if it were so.

This, it will be said, is the description of a nightmare.  
Exactly so.  My agony of fright was a nightmare; but a 
nightmare when every sense was strained with wakefulness, 
when all the powers of imagination were concentrated to 
paralyse my shattered reason.

The experience here spoken of is so common in some form or 
other that we may well pause to consider it.  What is the 
meaning of this fear of ghosts? - how do we come by it?  It 
may be thought that its cradle is our own, that we are 
purposely frightened in early childhood to keep us calm and 
quiet.  But I do not believe that nurses' stories would 
excite dread of the unknown if the unknown were not already 
known.  The susceptibility to this particular terror is there 
before the terror is created.  A little reflection will 
convince us that we must look far deeper for the solution of 
a mystery inseparable from another, which is of the last 
importance to all of us.



CHAPTER VI



THE belief in phantoms, ghosts, or spirits, has frequently 
been discussed in connection with speculations on the origin 
of religion.  According to Mr. Spencer ('Principles of 
Sociology') 'the first traceable conception of a supernatural 
being is the conception of a ghost.'  Even Fetichism is 'an 
extension of the ghost theory.'  The soul of the Fetich 'in 
common with supernatural agents at large, is originally the 
double of a dead man.'  How do we get this notion - 'the 
double of a dead man?'  Through dreams.  In the Old Testament 
we are told:  'God came to' Abimelech, Laban, Solomon, and 
others 'in a dream'; also that 'the angel of the Lord' 
appeared to Joseph 'in a dream.'  That is to say, these men 
dreamed that God came to them.  So the savage, who dreams of 
his dead acquaintance, believes he has been visited by the 
dead man's spirit.  This belief in ghosts is confirmed, Mr. 
Spencer argues, by other phenomena.  The savage who faints 
from the effect of a wound sustained in fight looks just like 
the dead man beside him.  The spirit of the wounded man 
returns after a long or short period of absence:  why should 
the spirit of the other not do likewise?  If reanimation 
follows comatose states, why should it not follow death?  
Insensibility is but an affair of time.  All the modes of 
preserving the dead, in the remotest ages, evince the belief 
in casual separation of body and soul, and of their possible 
reunion.

Take another theory.  Comte tells us there is a primary 
tendency in man 'to transfer the sense of his own nature, in 
the radical explanation of all phenomena whatever.'  Writing 
in the same key, Schopenhauer calls man 'a metaphysical 
animal.'  He is speaking of the need man feels of a theory, 
in regard to the riddle of existence, which forces itself 
upon his notice; 'a need arising from the consciousness that 
behind the physical in the world, there is a metaphysical 
something permanent as the foundation of constant change.'  
Though not here alluding to the ghost theory, this bears 
indirectly on the conception, as I shall proceed to show.

We need not entangle ourselves in the vexed question of 
innate ideas, nor inquire whether the principle of casuality 
is, as Kant supposed, like space and time, a form of 
intuition given A PRIORI.  That every change has a cause must 
necessarily (without being thus formulated) be one of the 
initial beliefs of conscious beings far lower in the scale 
than man, whether derived solely from experience or 
otherwise.  The reed that shakes is obviously shaken by the 
wind.  But the riddle of the wind also forces itself into 
notice; and man explains this by transferring to the wind 
'the sense of his own nature.'  Thunderstorms, volcanic 
disturbances, ocean waves, running streams, the motions of 
the heavenly bodies, had to be accounted for as involving 
change.  And the natural - the primitive - explanation was by 
reference to life, analogous, if not similar, to our own.  
Here then, it seems to me, we have the true origin of the 
belief in ghosts.

Take an illustration which supports this view.  While sitting 
in my garden the other day a puff of wind blew a lady's 
parasol across the lawn.  It rolled away close to a dog lying 
quietly in the sun.  The dog looked at it for a moment, but 
seeing nothing to account for its movements, barked 
nervously, put its tail between its legs, and ran away, 
turning occasionally to watch and again bark, with every sign 
of fear.

This was animism.  The dog must have accounted for the 
eccentric behaviour of the parasol by endowing it with an 
uncanny spirit.  The horse that shies at inanimate objects by 
the roadside, and will sometimes dash itself against a tree 
or a wall, is actuated by a similar superstition.  Is there 
any essential difference between this belief of the dog or 
horse and the belief of primitive man?  I maintain that an 
intuitive animistic tendency (which Mr. Spencer repudiates), 
and not dreams, lies at the root of all spiritualism.  Would 
Mr. Spencer have had us believe that the dog's fear of the 
rolling parasol was a logical deduction from its canine 
dreams?  This would scarcely elucidate the problem.  The dog 
and the horse share apparently Schopenhauer's metaphysical 
propensity with man.

The familiar aphorism of Statius:  PRIMUS IN ORBE DEOS FECIT 
TIMOR, points to the relation of animism first to the belief 
in ghosts, thence to Polytheism, and ultimately to 
Monotheism.  I must apologise to those of the transcendental 
school who, like Max Muller for instance (Introduction to the 
'Science of Religion'), hold that we have 'a primitive 
intuition of God'; which, after all, the professor derives, 
like many others, from the 'yearning for something that 
neither sense nor reason can supply'; and from the assumption 
that 'there was in the heart of man from the very first a 
feeling of incompleteness, of weakness, of dependency, &c.'  
All this, I take it, is due to the aspirations of a much 
later creature than the 'Pithecanthropus erectus,' to whom we 
here refer.

Probably spirits and ghosts were originally of an evil kind.  
Sir John Lubbock ('The Origin of Civilisation') says:  'The 
baying of the dog to the moon is as much an act of worship as 
some ceremonies which have been so described by travellers.'  
I think he would admit that fear is the origin of the 
worship.  In his essay on 'Superstition,' Hume writes:  
'Weakness, fear, melancholy, together with ignorance, are the 
true sources of superstition.'  Also 'in such a state of 
mind, infinite unknown evils are dreaded from unknown 
agents.'

Man's impotence to resist the forces of nature, and their 
terrible ability to injure him, would inspire a sense of 
terror; which in turn would give rise to the twofold notion 
of omnipotence and malignity.  The savage of the present day 
lives in perpetual fear of evil spirits; and the 
superstitious dread, which I and most others have suffered, 
is inherited from our savage ancestry.  How much further back 
we must seek it may be left to the sage philosophers of the 
future.



CHAPTER VII



THE next winter we lay for a couple of months off Chinhai, 
which we had stormed, blockading the mouth of the Ningpo 
river.  Here, I regret to think, I committed an act which has 
often haunted my conscience as a crime; although I had 
frequently promised the captain of a gun a glass of grog to 
let me have a shot, and was mightily pleased if death and 
destruction rewarded my aim.

Off Chinhai, lorchers and fast sailing junks laden with 
merchandise would try to run the blockade before daylight.  
And it sometimes happened that we youngsters had a long chase 
in a cutter to overhaul them.  This meant getting back to a 
nine or ten o'clock breakfast at the end of the morning's 
watch; equivalent to five or six hours' duty on an empty 
stomach.

One cold morning I had a hard job to stop a small junk.  The 
men were sweating at their oars like galley slaves, and 
muttering curses at the apparent futility of their labour.  I 
had fired a couple of shots from a 'brown Bess' - the musket 
of the day - through the fugitive's sails; and fearing 
punishment if I let her escape, I next aimed at the boat 
herself.  Down came the mainsail in a crack.  When I boarded 
our capture, I found I had put a bullet through the thigh of 
the man at the tiller.  Boys are not much troubled with 
scruples about bloodguiltiness, and not unfrequently are very 
cruel, for cruelty as a rule (with exceptions) mostly 
proceeds from thoughtlessness.  But when I realised what I 
had done, and heard the wretched man groan, I was seized with 
remorse for what, at a more hardened stage, I should have 
excused on the score of duty.

It was during this blockade that the accident, which I have 
already alluded to, befell my dear protector, Jack Johnson.

One night, during his and my middle watch, the forecastle 
sentries hailed a large sampan, like a Thames barge, drifting 
down stream and threatening to foul us.  Sir Frederick 
Nicholson, the officer of the watch, ordered Johnson to take 
the cutter and tow her clear.

I begged leave to go with him.  Sir Frederick refused, for he 
at once suspected mischief.  The sampan was reached and 
diverted just before she swung athwart our bows.  But 
scarcely was this achieved, when an explosion took place.  My 
friend was knocked over, and one or two of the men fell back 
into the cutter.  This is what had happened:  Johnson finding 
no one in the sampan, cautiously raised one of the deck 
hatches with a boat-hook before he left the cutter.  The mine 
(for such it proved) was so arranged that examination of this 
kind drew a lighted match on to the magazine, which instantly 
exploded.

Poor Jack! what was my horror when we got him on board!  
Every trace of his handsome features was gone.  He was alive, 
and that seemed to be all.  In a few minutes his head and 
face swelled so that all was a round black charred ball.  One 
could hardly see where the eyes were, buried beneath the 
powder-ingrained and incrusted flesh.

For weeks, at night, I used to sit on a chest near his 
hammock, listening for his slightest movement, too happy if 
he called me for something I could get him.  In time he 
recovered, and was invalided home, and I lost my dear 
companion and protector.  A couple of years afterwards I had 
the happiness to dine with him on board another ship in 
Portsmouth, no longer in the midshipman's berth, but in the 
wardroom.

Twice during this war, the 'Blonde' was caught in a typhoon.  
The first time was in waters now famous, but then unknown, 
the Gulf of Liau-tung, in full sight of China's great wall.  
We were twenty-four hours battened down, and under storm 
staysails.  The 'Blenheim,' with Captain Elliott our 
plenipotentiary on board, was with us, and the one 
circumstance left in my memory is the sight of a line-of-
battle ship rolling and pitching so that one caught sight of 
the whole of her keel from stem to stern as if she had been a 
fishing smack.  We had been wintering in the Yellow Sea, and 
at the time I speak of were on a foraging expedition round 
the Liau-tung peninsula.  Those who have followed the events 
of the Japanese war will have noticed on the map, not far 
north of Ta-lien-wan in the Korean Bay, three groups of 
islands.  So little was the geography of these parts then 
known, that they had no place on our charts.  On this very 
occasion, one group was named after Captain Elliott, one was 
called the Bouchier Islands, and the other the Blonde 
Islands.  The first surveying of the two latter groups, and 
the placing of them upon the map, was done by our naval 
instructor, and he always took me with him as his assistant.

Our second typhoon was while we were at anchor in Hong Kong 
harbour.  Those who have knowledge only of the gales, however 
violent, of our latitudes, have no conception of what wind-
force can mount to.  To be the toy of it is enough to fill 
the stoutest heart with awe.  The harbour was full of 
transports, merchant ships, opium clippers, besides four or 
five men-of-war, and a steamer belonging to the East India 
Company - the first steamship I had ever seen.

The coming of a typhoon is well known to the natives at least 
twenty-four hours beforehand, and every preparation is made 
for it.  Boats are dragged far up the beach; buildings even 
are fortified for resistance.  Every ship had laid out its 
anchors, lowered its yards, and housed its topmasts.  We had 
both bowers down, with cables paid out to extreme length.  
The danger was either in drifting on shore or, what was more 
imminent, collision.  When once the tornado struck us there 
was nothing more to be done; no men could have worked on 
deck.  The seas broke by tons over all; boats beached as 
described were lifted from the ground, and hurled, in some 
instances, over the houses.  The air was darkened by the 
spray.

But terrible as was the raging of wind and water, far more 
awful was the vain struggle for life of the human beings who 
succumbed to it.  In a short time almost all the ships except 
the men-of-war, which were better provided with anchors, 
began to drift from their moorings.  Then wreck followed 
wreck.  I do not think the 'Blonde' moved; but from first to 
last we were threatened with the additional weight and strain 
of a drifting vessel.  Had we been so hampered our anchorage 
must have given way.  As a single example of the force of a 
typhoon, the 'Phlegethon' with three anchors down, and 
engines working at full speed, was blown past us out of the 
harbour.

One tragic incident I witnessed, which happened within a few 
fathoms of the 'Blonde.'  An opium clipper had drifted 
athwart the bow of a large merchantman, which in turn was 
almost foul of us.  In less than five minutes the clipper 
sank.  One man alone reappeared on the surface.  He was so 
close, that from where I was holding on and crouching under 
the lee of the mainmast I could see the expression of his 
face.  He was a splendidly built man, and his strength and 
activity must have been prodigious.  He clung to the cable of 
the merchantman, which he had managed to clasp.  As the 
vessel reared between the seas he gained a few feet before he 
was again submerged.  At last he reached the hawse-hole.  Had 
he hoped, in spite of his knowledge, to find it large enough 
to admit his body?  He must have known the truth; and yet he 
struggled on.  Did he hope that, when thus within arms' 
length of men in safety, some pitying hand would be stretched 
out to rescue him, - a rope's end perhaps flung out to haul 
him inboard?  Vain desperate hope!  He looked upwards:  an 
imploring look.  Would Heaven be more compassionate than man?  
A mountain of sea towered above his head; and when again the 
bow was visible, the man was gone for ever.

Before taking leave of my seafaring days, I must say one word 
about corporal punishment.  Sir Thomas Bouchier was a good 
sailor, a gallant officer, and a kind-hearted man; but he was 
one of the old school.  Discipline was his watchword, and he 
endeavoured to maintain it by severity.  I dare say that, on 
an average, there was a man flogged as often as once a month 
during the first two years the 'Blonde' was in commission.  A 
flogging on board a man-of-war with a 'cat,' the nine tails 
of which were knotted, and the lashes of which were slowly 
delivered, up to the four dozen, at the full swing of the 
arm, and at the extremity of lash and handle, was very severe 
punishment.  Each knot brought blood, and the shock of the 
blow knocked the breath out of a man with an involuntary 
'Ugh!' however stoically he bore the pain.

I have seen many a bad man flogged for unpardonable conduct, 
and many a good man for a glass of grog too much.  My firm 
conviction is that the bad man was very little the better; 
the good man very much the worse.  The good man felt the 
disgrace, and was branded for life.  His self-esteem was 
permanently maimed, and he rarely held up his head or did his 
best again.  Besides which, - and this is true of all 
punishment - any sense of injustice destroys respect for the 
punisher.  Still I am no sentimentalist; I have a contempt 
for, and even a dread of, sentimentalism.  For boy 
housebreakers, and for ruffians who commit criminal assaults, 
the rod or the lash is the only treatment.

A comic piece of insubordination on my part recurs to me in 
connection with flogging.  About the year 1840 or 1841, a 
midshipman on the Pacific station was flogged.  I think the 
ship was the 'Peak.'  The event created some sensation, and 
was brought before Parliament.  Two frigates were sent out to 
furnish a quorum of post-captains to try the responsible 
commander.  The verdict of the court-martial was a severe 
reprimand.  This was, of course, nuts to every midshipman in 
the service.

Shortly after it became known I got into a scrape for 
laughing at, and disobeying the orders of, our first-
lieutenant, - the head of the executive on board a frigate.  
As a matter of fact, the orders were ridiculous, for the said 
officer was tipsy.  Nevertheless, I was reported, and had up 
before the captain.  'Old Tommy' was, or affected to be, very 
angry.  I am afraid I was very 'cheeky.'  Whereupon Sir 
Thomas did lose his temper, and threatened to send for the 
boatswain to tie me up and give me a dozen, - not on the 
back, but where the back leaves off.  Undismayed by the 
threat, and mindful of the episode of the 'Peak' (?) I looked 
the old gentleman in the face, and shrilly piped out, 'It's 
as much as your commission is worth, sir.'  In spite of his 
previous wrath, he was so taken aback by my impudence that he 
burst out laughing, and, to hide it, kicked me out of the 
cabin.

After another severe attack of fever, and during a long 
convalescence, I was laid up at Macao, where I enjoyed the 
hospitality of Messrs. Dent and of Messrs. Jardine and 
Matheson.  Thence I was invalided home, and took my passage 
to Bombay in one of the big East India tea-ships.  As I was 
being carried up the side in the arms of one of the boatmen, 
I overheard another exclaim:  'Poor little beggar.  He'll 
never see land again!'

The only other passenger was Colonel Frederick Cotton, of the 
Madras Engineers, one of a distinguished family.  He, too, 
had been through the China campaign, and had also broken 
down.  We touched at Manila, Batavia, Singapore, and several 
other ports in the Malay Archipelago, to take in cargo.  
While that was going on, Cotton, the captain, and I made 
excursions inland.  Altogether I had a most pleasant time of 
it till we reached Bombay.

My health was now re-established; and after a couple of weeks 
at Bombay, where I lived in a merchant's house, Cotton took 
me to Poonah and Ahmadnagar; in both of which places I stayed 
with his friends, and messed with the regiments.  Here a copy 
of the 'Times' was put into my hands; and I saw a notice of 
the death of my father.

After a fortnight's quarantine at La Valetta, where two young 
Englishmen - one an Oxford man - shared the same rooms in the 
fort with me, we three returned to England; and (I suppose 
few living people can say the same) travelled from Naples to 
Calais before there was a single railway on the Continent.

At the end of two months' leave in England I was appointed to 
the 'Caledonia,' flagship at Plymouth.  Sir Thomas Bouchier 
had written to the Admiral, Sir Edward Codrington, of 
Navarino fame (whose daughter Sir Thomas afterwards married), 
giving me 'a character.'  Sir Edward sent for me, and was 
most kind.  He told me I was to go to the Pacific in the 
first ship that left for South America, which would probably 
be in a week or two; and he gave me a letter to his friend, 
Admiral Thomas, who commanded on that station.

About this time, and for a year or two later, the relations 
between England and America were severely strained by what 
was called 'the Oregon question.'  The dispute was concerning 
the right of ownership of the mouth of the Columbia river, 
and of Vancouver's Island.  The President as well as the 
American people took the matter up very warmly; and much 
discretion was needed to avert the outbreak of hostilities.

In Sir Edward's letter, which he read out and gave to me 
open, he requested Admiral Thomas to put me into any ship 
'that was likely to see service'; and quoted a word or two 
from my dear old captain Sir Thomas, which would probably 
have given me a lift.

The prospect before me was brilliant.  What could be more 
delectable than the chance of a war?  My fancy pictured all 
sorts of opportunities, turned to the best account, - my 
seniors disposed of, and myself, with a pair of epaulets, 
commanding the smartest brig in the service.

Alack-a-day! what a climb down from such high flights my life 
has been.  The ship in which I was to have sailed to the west 
was suddenly countermanded to the east.  She was to leave for 
China the following week, and I was already appointed to her, 
not even as a 'super.'

My courage and my ambition were wrecked at a blow.  The 
notion of returning for another three years to China, where 
all was now peaceful and stale to me, the excitement of the 
war at an end, every port reminding me of my old comrades, 
visions of renewed fevers and horrible food, - were more than 
I could stand.

I instantly made up my mind to leave the Navy.  It was a 
wilful, and perhaps a too hasty, impulse.  But I am impulsive 
by nature; and now that my father was dead, I fancied myself 
to a certain extent my own master.  I knew moreover, by my 
father's will, that I should not be dependent upon a 
profession.  Knowledge of such a fact has been the ruin of 
many a better man than I.  I have no virtuous superstitions 
in favour of poverty - quite the reverse - but I am convinced 
that the rich man, who has never had to earn his position or 
his living, is more to be pitied and less respected than the 
poor man whose comforts certainly, if not his bread, have 
depended on his own exertions.

My mother had a strong will of her own, and I could not guess 
what line she might take.  I also apprehended the opposition 
of my guardians.  On the whole, I opined a woman's heart 
would be the most suitable for an appeal AD MISERICORDIAM.  
So I pulled out the agony stop, and worked the pedals of 
despair with all the anguish at my command.

'It was easy enough for her to REVEL IN LUXURY and consign me 
to a life worse than a CONVICT'S.  But how would SHE like to 
live on SALT JUNK, to keep NIGHT WATCHES, to have to cut up 
her blankets for PONCHOS (I knew she had never heard the 
word, and that it would tell accordingly), to save her from 
being FROZEN TO DEATH?  How would SHE like to be mast-headed 
when a ship was rolling gunwale under?  As to the wishes of 
my guardians, were THEIR FEELINGS to be considered before 
mine?  I should like to see Lord Rosebery or Lord Spencer in 
my place!  They'd very soon wish they had a mother who &c. 
&c.'

When my letter was finished I got leave to go ashore to post 
it.  Feeling utterly miserable, I had my hair cut; and, 
rendered perfectly reckless by my appearance, I consented to 
have what was left of it tightly curled with a pair of tongs.  
I cannot say that I shared in any sensible degree the 
pleasure which this operation seemed to give to the artist.  
But when I got back to the ship the sight of my adornment 
kept my messmates in an uproar for the rest of the afternoon.

Whether the touching appeal to my mother produced tears, or 
of what kind, matters little; it effectually determined my 
career.  Before my new ship sailed for China, I was home 
again, and in full possession of my coveted freedom as a 
civilian.



CHAPTER VIII



IT was settled that after a course of three years at a 
private tutor's I was to go to Cambridge.  The life I had led 
for the past three years was not the best training for the 
fellow-pupil of lads of fifteen or sixteen who had just left 
school.  They were much more ready to follow my lead than I 
theirs, especially as mine was always in the pursuit of 
pleasure.

I was first sent to Mr. B.'s, about a couple of miles from 
Alnwick.  Before my time, Alnwick itself was considered out 
of bounds.  But as nearly half the sin in this world consists 
in being found out, my companions and I managed never to 
commit any in this direction.

We generally returned from the town with a bottle of some 
noxious compound called 'port' in our pockets, which was 
served out in our 'study' at night, while I read aloud the 
instructive adventures of Mr. Thomas Jones.  We were, of 
course, supposed to employ these late hours in preparing our 
work for the morrow.  One boy only protested that, under the 
combined seductions of the port and Miss Molly Seagrim, he 
could never make his verses scan.

Another of our recreations was poaching.  From my earliest 
days I was taught to shoot, myself and my brothers being each 
provided with his little single-barrelled flint and steel 
'Joe Manton.'  At - we were surrounded by grouse moors on one 
side, and by well-preserved coverts on the other.  The grouse 
I used to shoot in the evening while they fed amongst the 
corn stooks; for pheasants and hares, I used to get the other 
pupils to walk through the woods, while I with a gun walked 
outside.  Scouts were posted to look out for keepers.

Did our tutor know?  Of course he knew.  But think of the 
saving in the butcher's bill!  Besides which, Mr. B. was 
otherwise preoccupied; he was in love with Mrs. B.  I say 'in 
love,' for although I could not be sure of it then, (having 
no direct experience of the AMANTIUM IRAE,) subsequent 
observation has persuaded me that their perpetual quarrels 
could mean nothing else.  This was exceedingly favourable to 
the independence of Mr. B.'s pupils.  But when asked by Mr. 
Ellice how I was getting on, I was forced in candour to admit 
that I was in a fair way to forget all I ever knew.

By the advice of Lord Spencer I was next placed under the 
tuition of one of the minor canons of Ely.  The Bishop of Ely 
- Dr. Allen - had been Lord Spencer's tutor, hence his 
elevation to the see.  The Dean - Dr. Peacock, of algebraic 
and Trinity College fame - was good enough to promise 'to 
keep an eye' on me.  Lord Spencer himself took me to Ely; and 
there I remained for two years.  They were two very important 
years of my life.  Having no fellow pupil to beguile me, I 
was the more industrious.  But it was not from the better 
acquaintance with ancient literature that I mainly benefited, 
- it was from my initiation to modern thought.  I was a 
constant guest at the Deanery; where I frequently met such 
men as Sedgwick, Airey the Astronomer-Royal, Selwyn, Phelps 
the Master of Sydney, Canon Heaviside the master of 
Haileybury, and many other friends of the Dean's, 
distinguished in science, literature, and art.  Here I heard 
discussed opinions on these subjects by some of their leading 
representatives.  Naturally, as many of them were Churchmen, 
conversation often turned on the bearing of modern science, 
of geology especially if Sedgwick were of the party, upon 
Mosaic cosmogony, or Biblical exegesis generally.

The knowledge of these learned men, the lucidity with which 
they expressed their views, and the earnestness with which 
they defended them, captivated my attention, and opened to me 
a new world of surpassing interest and gravity.

What startled me most was the spirit in which a man of 
Sedgwick's intellectual power protested against the possible 
encroachments of his own branch of science upon the orthodox 
tenets of the Church.  Just about this time an anonymous book 
appeared, which, though long since forgotten, caused no 
slight disturbance amongst dogmatic theologians.  The 
tendency of this book, 'Vestiges of the Creation,' was, or 
was then held to be, antagonistic to the arguments from 
design.  Familiar as we now are with the theory of evolution, 
such a work as the 'Vestiges' would no more stir the ODIUM 
THEOLOGICUM than Franklin's kite.  Sedgwick, however, 
attacked it with a vehemence and a rancour that would 
certainly have roasted its author had the professor held the 
office of Grand Inquisitor.

Though incapable of forming any opinion as to the scientific 
merits of such a book, or of Hugh Miller's writings, which he 
also attacked upon purely religious grounds, I was staggered 
by the fact that the Bible could possibly be impeached, or 
that it was not profanity to defend it even.  Was it not the 
'Word of God'?  And if so, how could any theories of 
creation, any historical, any philological researches, shake 
its eternal truth?

Day and night I pondered over this new revelation.  I bought 
the books - the wicked books - which nobody ought to read.  
The INDEX EXPURGATORIUS became my guide for books to be 
digested.  I laid hands on every heretical work I could hear 
of.  By chance I made the acquaintance of a young man who, 
together with his family, were Unitarians.  I got, and 
devoured, Channing's works.  I found a splendid copy of 
Voltaire in the Holkham library, and hunted through the 
endless volumes, till I came to the 'Dialogues 
Philosophiques.'  The world is too busy, fortunately, to 
disturb its peace with such profane satire, such withering 
sarcasm as flashes through an 'entretien' like that between 
'Frere Rigolet' and 'L'Empereur de la Chine.'  Every French 
man of letters knows it by heart; but it would wound our 
English susceptibilities were I to cite it here.  Then, too, 
the impious paraphrase of the Athanasian Creed, with its 
terrible climax, from the converting Jesuit:  'Or vous voyez 
bien . . . qu'un homme qui ne croit pas cette histoire doit 
etre brule dans ce monde ci, et dans l'autre.'  To which 
'L'Empereur' replies:  'Ca c'est clair comme le jour.'

Could an ignorant youth, fevered with curiosity and the first 
goadings of the questioning spirit, resist such logic, such 
scorn, such scathing wit, as he met with here?

Then followed Rousseau; 'Emile' became my favourite.  
Froude's 'Nemesis of Faith' I read, and many other books of a 
like tendency.  Passive obedience, blind submission to 
authority, was never one of my virtues, and once my faith was 
shattered, I knew not where to stop - what to doubt, what to 
believe.  If the injunction to 'prove all things' was 
anything more than an empty apophthegm, inquiry, in St. 
Paul's eyes at any rate, could not be sacrilege.

It was not happiness I sought, - not peace of mind at least; 
for assuredly my thirst for knowledge, for truth, brought me 
anything but peace.  I never was more restless, or, at times, 
more unhappy.  Shallow, indeed, must be the soul that can 
lightly sever itself from beliefs which lie at the roots of 
our moral, intellectual, and emotional being, sanctified too 
by associations of our earliest love and reverence.  I used 
to wander about the fields, and sit for hours in sequestered 
spots, longing for some friend, some confidant to take 
counsel with.  I knew no such friend.  I did not dare to 
speak of my misgivings to others.  In spite of my earnest 
desire for guidance, for more light, the strong grip of 
childhood's influences was impossible to shake off.  I could 
not rid my conscience of the sin of doubt.

It is this difficulty, this primary dependence on others, 
which develops into the child's first religion, that 
perpetuates the infantile character of human creeds; and, 
what is worse, generates the hideous bigotry which justifies 
that sad reflection of Lucretius:  'Tantum Religio potuit 
suadere malorum!'



CHAPTER IX



TO turn again to narrative, and to far less serious thoughts.  
The last eighteen months before I went to Cambridge, I was 
placed, or rather placed myself, under the tuition of Mr. 
Robert Collyer, rector of Warham, a living close to Holkham 
in the gift of my brother Leicester.  Between my Ely tutor 
and myself there was but little sympathy.  He was a man of 
much refinement, but with not much indulgence for such 
aberrant proclivities as mine.  Without my knowledge, he 
wrote to Mr. Ellice lamenting my secret recusancy, and its 
moral dangers.  Mr. Ellice came expressly from London, and 
stayed a night at Ely.  He dined with us in the cloisters, 
and had a long private conversation with my tutor, and, 
before he left, with me.  I indignantly resented the 
clandestine representations of Mr. S., and, without a word to 
Mr. Ellice or to anyone else, wrote next day to Mr. Collyer 
to beg him to take me in at Warham, and make what he could of 
me, before I went to Cambridge.  It may here be said that Mr. 
Collyer had been my father's chaplain, and had lived at 
Holkham for several years as family tutor to my brothers and 
myself, as we in turn left the nursery.  Mr. Collyer, upon 
receipt of my letter, referred the matter to Mr. Ellice; with 
his approval I was duly installed at Warham.  Before 
describing my time there, I must tell of an incident which 
came near to affecting me in a rather important way.

My mother lived at Longford in Derbyshire, an old place, now 
my home, which had come into the Coke family in James I.'s 
reign, through the marriage of a son of Chief Justice Coke's 
with the heiress of the De Langfords, an ancient family from 
that time extinct.  While staying there during my summer 
holidays, my mother confided to me that she had had an offer 
of marriage from Mr. Motteux, the owner of considerable 
estates in Norfolk, including two houses - Beachamwell and 
Sandringham.  Mr. Motteux - 'Johnny Motteux,' as he was 
called - was, like Tristram Shandy's father, the son of a 
wealthy 'Turkey merchant,' which, until better informed, I 
always took to mean a dealer in poultry.  'Johnny,' like 
another man of some notoriety, whom I well remember in my 
younger days - Mr. Creevey - had access to many large houses 
such as Holkham; not, like Creevey, for the sake of his 
scandalous tongue, but for the sake of his wealth.  He had no 
(known) relatives; and big people, who had younger sons to 
provide for, were quite willing that one of them should be 
his heir.  Johnny Motteux was an epicure with the best of 
CHEFS.  His capons came from Paris, his salmon from 
Christchurch, and his Strasburg pies were made to order.  One 
of these he always brought with him as a present to my 
mother, who used to say, 'Mr. Motteux evidently thinks the 
nearest way to my heart is down my throat.'

A couple of years after my father's death, Motteux wrote to 
my mother proposing marriage, and, to enhance his personal 
attractions, (in figure and dress he was a duplicate of the 
immortal Pickwick,) stated that he had made his will and had 
bequeathed Sandringham to me, adding that, should he die 
without issue, I was to inherit the remainder of his estates.

Rather to my surprise, my mother handed the letter to me with 
evident signs of embarrassment and distress.  My first 
exclamation was:  'How jolly!  The shooting's first rate, and 
the old boy is over seventy, if he's a day.'

My mother apparently did not see it in this light.  She 
clearly, to my disappointments did not care for the shooting; 
and my exultation only brought tears into her eyes.

'Why, mother,' I exclaimed, 'what's up?  Don't you - don't 
you care for Johnny Motteux?'

She confessed that she did not.

'Then why don't you tell him so, and not bother about his 
beastly letter?'

'If I refuse him you will lose Sandringham.'

'But he says here he has already left it to me.'

'He will alter his will.'

'Let him!' cried I, flying out at such prospective meanness.  
'Just you tell him you don't care a rap for him or for 
Sandringham either.'

In more lady-like terms she acted in accordance with my 
advice; and, it may be added, not long afterwards married Mr. 
Ellice.

Mr. Motteux's first love, or one of them, had been Lady 
Cowper, then Lady Palmerston.  Lady Palmerston's youngest son 
was Mr. Spencer Cowper.  Mr. Motteux died a year or two after 
the above event.  He made a codicil to his will, and left 
Sandringham and all his property to Mr. Spencer Cowper.  Mr. 
Spencer Cowper was a young gentleman of costly habits.  
Indeed, he bore the slightly modified name of 'Expensive 
Cowper.'  As an attache at Paris he was famous for his 
patronage of dramatic art - or artistes rather; the votaries 
of Terpsichore were especially indebted to his liberality.  
At the time of Mr. Motteux's demise, he was attached to the 
Embassy at St. Petersburg.  Mr. Motteux's solicitors wrote 
immediately to inform him of his accession to their late 
client's wealth.  It being one of Mr. Cowper's maxims never 
to read lawyers' letters, (he was in daily receipt of more 
than he could attend to,) he flung this one unread into the 
fire; and only learnt his mistake through the congratulations 
of his family.

The Prince Consort happened about this time to be in quest of 
a suitable country seat for his present Majesty; and 
Sandringham, through the adroit negotiations of Lord 
Palmerston, became the property of the Prince of Wales.  The 
soul of the 'Turkey merchant,' we cannot doubt, will repose 
in peace.

The worthy rector of Warham St. Mary's was an oddity 
deserving of passing notice.  Outwardly he was no Adonis.  
His plain features and shock head of foxy hair, his 
antiquated and neglected garb, his copious jabot - much 
affected by the clergy of those days - were becoming 
investitures of the inward man.  His temper was inflammatory, 
sometimes leading to excesses, which I am sure he rued in 
mental sackcloth and ashes.  But visitors at Holkham (unaware 
of the excellent motives and moral courage which inspired his 
conduct) were not a little amazed at the austerity with which 
he obeyed the dictates of his conscience.

For example, one Sunday evening after dinner, when the 
drawing-room was filled with guests, who more or less 
preserved the decorum which etiquette demands in the presence 
of royalty, (the Duke of Sussex was of the party,) Charles 
Fox and Lady Anson, great-grandmother of the present Lord 
Lichfield, happened to be playing at chess.  When the 
irascible dominie beheld them he pushed his way through the 
bystanders, swept the pieces from the board, and, with 
rigorous impartiality, denounced these impious desecrators of 
the Sabbath eve.

As an example of his fidelity as a librarian, Mr. Panizzi 
used to relate with much glee how, whenever he was at 
Holkham, Mr. Collyer dogged him like a detective.  One day, 
not wishing to detain the reverend gentleman while he himself 
spent the forenoon in the manuscript library, (where not only 
the ancient manuscripts, but the most valuable of the printed 
books, are kept under lock and key,) he considerately begged 
Mr. Collyer to leave him to his researches.  The dominie 
replied 'that he knew his duty, and did not mean to neglect 
it.'  He did not lose sight of Mr. Panizzi.

The notion that he - the great custodian of the nation's 
literary treasures - would snip out and pocket the title-page 
of the folio edition of Shakespeare, or of the Coverdale 
Bible, tickled Mr. Panizzi's fancy vastly.

In spite, however, of our rector's fiery temperament, or 
perhaps in consequence of it, he was remarkably susceptible 
to the charms of beauty.  We were constantly invited to 
dinner and garden parties in the neighbourhood; nor was the 
good rector slow to return the compliment.  It must be 
confessed that the pupil shared to the full the 
impressibility of the tutor; and, as it happened, unknown to 
both, the two were in one case rivals.

As the young lady afterwards occupied a very distinguished 
position in Oxford society, it can only be said that she was 
celebrated for her many attractions.  She was then sixteen, 
and the younger of her suitors but two years older.  As far 
as age was concerned, nothing could be more compatible.  Nor 
in the matter of mutual inclination was there any disparity 
whatever.  What, then, was the pupil's dismay when, after a 
dinner party at the rectory, and the company had left, the 
tutor, in a frantic state of excitement, seized the pupil by 
both hands, and exclaimed:  'She has accepted me!'

'Accepted you?' I asked.  'Who has accepted you?'

'Who?  Why, Miss -, of course!  Who else do you suppose would 
accept me?'

'No one,' said I, with doleful sincerity.  'But did you 
propose to her?  Did she understand what you said to her?  
Did she deliberately and seriously say "Yes?"'

'Yes, yes, yes,' and his disordered jabot and touzled hair 
echoed the fatal word.

'O Smintheus of the silver bow!' I groaned.  'It is the 
woman's part to create delusions, and - destroy them!  To 
think of it! after all that has passed between us these  - 
these three weeks, next Monday!  "Once and for ever."  Did 
ever woman use such words before?  And I - believed them!'  
'Did you speak to the mother?' I asked in a fit of 
desperation.

'There was no time for that.  Mrs. - was in the carriage, and 
I didn't pop [the odious word!] till I was helping her on 
with her cloak.  The cloak, you see, made it less awkward.  
My offer was a sort of OBITER DICTUM - a by-the-way, as it 
were.'

'To the carriage, yes.  But wasn't she taken by surprise?'

'Not a bit of it.  Bless you! they always know.  She 
pretended not to understand, but that's a way they have.'

'And when you explained?'

'There wasn't time for more.  She laughed, and sprang into 
the carriage.'

'And that was all?'

'All! would you have had her spring into my arms?'

'God forbid!  You will have to face the mother to-morrow,' 
said I, recovering rapidly from my despondency.

'Face?  Well, I shall have to call upon Mrs. -, if that's 
what you mean.  A mere matter of form.  I shall go over after 
lunch.  But it needn't interfere with your work.  You can go 
on with the "Anabasis" till I come back.  And remember - 
NEANISKOS is not a proper name, ha! ha! ha!  The quadratics 
will keep till the evening.'  He was merry over his 
prospects, and I was not altogether otherwise.

But there was no Xenophon, no algebra, that day!  Dire was 
the distress of my poor dominie when he found the mother as 
much bewildered as the daughter was frightened, by the 
mistake.  'She,' the daughter, 'had never for a moment 
imagined, &c., &c.'

My tutor was not long disheartened by such caprices - so he 
deemed them, as Miss Jemima's (she had a prettier name, you 
may be sure), and I did my best (it cost me little now) to 
encourage his fondest hopes.  I proposed that we should drink 
the health of the future mistress of Warham in tea, which he 
cheerfully acceded to, all the more readily, that it gave him 
an opportunity to vent one of his old college jokes.  'Yes, 
yes,' said he, with a laugh, 'there's nothing like tea.  TE 
VENIENTE DIE, TE DECEDENTE CANEBAM.'  Such sallies of 
innocent playfulness often smoothed his path in life.  He 
took a genuine pleasure in his own jokes.  Some men do.  One 
day I dropped a pot of marmalade on a new carpet, and should 
certainly have been reprimanded for carelessness, had it not 
occurred to him to exclaim:  'JAM SATIS TERRIS!' and then 
laugh immoderately at his wit.

That there are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of 
it, was a maxim he acted upon, if he never heard it. Within a 
month of the above incident he proposed to another lady upon 
the sole grounds that, when playing a game of chess, an 
exchange of pieces being contemplated, she innocently, but 
incautiously, observed, 'If you take me, I will take you.'  
He referred the matter next day to my ripe judgment.  As I 
had no partiality for the lady in question, I strongly 
advised him to accept so obvious a challenge, and go down on 
his knees to her at once.  I laid stress on the knees, as the 
accepted form of declaration, both in novels and on the 
stage.

In this case the beloved object, who was not embarrassed by 
excess of amiability, promptly desired him, when he urged his 
suit, 'not to make a fool of himself.'

My tutor's peculiarities, however, were not confined to his 
endeavours to meet with a lady rectoress.  He sometimes 
surprised his hearers with the originality of his abstruse 
theories.  One morning he called me into the stable yard to 
join in consultation with his gardener as to the advisability 
of killing a pig.  There were two, and it was not easy to 
decide which was the fitter for the butcher.  The rector 
selected one, I the other, and the gardener, who had nurtured 
both from their tenderest age, pleaded that they should be 
allowed to 'put on another score.'  The point was warmly 
argued all round.

'The black sow,' said I (they were both sows, you must know) 
- 'The black sow had a litter of ten last time, and the white 
one only six.  Ergo, if history repeats itself, as I have 
heard you say, you should keep the black, and sacrifice the 
white.'

'But,' objected the rector, 'that was the white's first 
litter, and the black's second.  Why shouldn't the white do 
as well as the black next time?'

'And better, your reverence,' chimed in the gardener.  'The 
number don't allays depend on the sow, do it?'

'That is neither here nor there,' returned the rector.

'Well,' said the gardener, who stood to his guns, 'if your 
reverence is right, as no doubt you will be, that'll make 
just twenty little pigs for the butcher, come Michaelmas.'

'We can't kill 'em before they are born,' said the rector.

'That's true, your reverence.  But it comes to the same 
thing.'

'Not to the pigs,' retorted the rector.

'To your reverence, I means.'

'A pig at the butcher's,' I suggested, 'is worth a dozen 
unborn.'

'No one can deny it,' said the rector, as he fingered the 
small change in his breeches pocket; and pointing with the 
other hand to the broad back of the black sow, exclaimed, 
'This is the one, DUPLEX AGITUR PER LUMBOS SPINA!  She's got 
a back like an alderman's chin.'

'EPICURI DE GREGE PORCUS,' I assented, and the fate of the 
black sow was sealed.

Next day an express came from Holkham, to say that Lady 
Leicester had given birth to a daughter.  My tutor jumped out 
of his chair to hand me the note.  'Did I not anticipate the 
event'? he cried.  'What a wonderful world we live in!  
Unconsciously I made room for the infant by sacrificing the 
life of that pig.'  As I never heard him allude to the 
doctrine of Pythagoras, as he had no leaning to Buddhism, 
and, as I am sure he knew nothing of the correlation of 
forces, it must be admitted that the conception was an 
original one.

Be this as it may, Mr. Collyer was an upright and 
conscientious man.  I owe him much, and respect his memory.  
He died at an advanced age, an honorary canon, and - a 
bachelor.

Another portrait hangs amongst the many in my memory's 
picture gallery.  It is that of his successor to the 
vicarage, the chaplaincy, and the librarianship, at Holkham - 
Mr. Alexander Napier - at this time, and until his death 
fifty years later, one of my closest and most cherished 
friends.  Alexander Napier was the son of Macvey Napier, 
first editor of the 'Edinburgh Review.'  Thus, associated 
with many eminent men of letters, he also did some good 
literary work of his own.  He edited Isaac Barrow's works for 
the University of Cambridge, also Boswell's 'Johnson,' and 
gave various other proofs of his talents and his scholarship.  
He was the most delightful of companions; liberal-minded in 
the highest degree; full of quaint humour and quick sympathy; 
an excellent parish priest, - looking upon Christianity as a 
life and not a dogma; beloved by all, for he had a kind 
thought and a kind word for every needy or sick being in his 
parish.

With such qualities, the man always predominated over the 
priest.  Hence his large-hearted charity and indulgence for 
the faults - nay, crimes - of others.  Yet, if taken aback by 
an outrage, or an act of gross stupidity, which even the 
perpetrator himself had to suffer for, he would momentarily 
lose his patience, and rap out an objurgation that would 
stagger the straiter-laced gentlemen of his own cloth, or an 
outsider who knew less of him than - the recording angel.

A fellow undergraduate of Napier's told me a characteristic 
anecdote of his impetuosity.  Both were Trinity men, and had 
been keeping high jinks at a supper party at Caius.  The 
friend suddenly pointed to the clock, reminding Napier they 
had but five minutes to get into college before Trinity gates 
were closed.  'D-n the clock!' shouted Napier, and snatching 
up the sugar basin (it was not EAU SUCREE they were 
drinking), incontinently flung it at the face of the 
offending timepiece.

This youthful vivacity did not desert him in later years.  An 
old college friend - also a Scotchman - had become Bishop of 
Edinburgh.  Napier paid him a visit (he described it to me 
himself).  They talked of books, they talked of politics, 
they talked of English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, of 
Brougham, Horner, Wilson, Macaulay, Jeffrey, of Carlyle's 
dealings with Napier's father - 'Nosey,' as Carlyle calls 
him.  They chatted into the small hours of the night, as boon 
companions, and as what Bacon calls 'full' men, are wont.  
The claret, once so famous in the 'land of cakes,' had given 
place to toddy; its flow was in due measure to the flow of 
soul.  But all that ends is short - the old friends had spent 
their last evening together.  Yes, their last, perhaps.  It 
was bed-time, and quoth Napier to his lordship, 'I tell you 
what it is, Bishop, I am na fou', but I'll be hanged if I 
haven't got two left legs.'

'I see something odd about them,' says his lordship.  'We'd 
better go to bed.'

Who the bishop was I do not know, but I'll answer for it he 
was one of the right sort.

In 1846 I became an undergraduate of Trinity College, 
Cambridge.  I do not envy the man (though, of course, one 
ought) whose college days are not the happiest to look back 
upon.  One should hope that however profitably a young man 
spends his time at the University, it is but the preparation 
for something better.  But happiness and utility are not 
necessarily concomitant; and even when an undergraduate's 
course is least employed for its intended purpose (as, alas! 
mine was) - for happiness, certainly not pure, but simple, 
give me life at a University,

Heaven forbid that any youth should be corrupted by my 
confession!  But surely there are some pleasures pertaining 
to this unique epoch that are harmless in themselves, and are 
certainly not to be met with at any other.  These are the 
first years of comparative freedom, of manhood, of 
responsibility.  The novelty, the freshness of every 
pleasure, the unsatiated appetite for enjoyment, the animal 
vigour, the ignorance of care, the heedlessness of, or 
rather, the implicit faith in, the morrow, the absence of 
mistrust or suspicion, the frank surrender to generous 
impulses, the readiness to accept appearances for realities - 
to believe in every profession or exhibition of good will, to 
rush into the arms of every friendship, to lay bare one's 
tenderest secrets, to listen eagerly to the revelations which 
make us all akin, to offer one's time, one's energies, one's 
purse, one's heart, without a selfish afterthought - these, I 
say, are the priceless pleasures, never to be repeated, of 
healthful average youth.

What has after-success, honour, wealth, fame, or, power - 
burdened, as they always are, with ambitions, blunders, 
jealousies, cares, regrets, and failing health - to match 
with this enjoyment of the young, the bright, the bygone, 
hour?  The wisdom of the worldly teacher - at least, the 
CARPE DIEM - was practised here before the injunction was 
ever thought of.  DU BIST SO SCHON was the unuttered 
invocation, while the VERWEILE DOCH was deemed unneedful.

Little, I am ashamed to own, did I add either to my small 
classical or mathematical attainments.  But I made 
friendships - lifelong friendships, that I would not barter 
for the best of academical prizes.

Amongst my associates or acquaintances, two or three of whom 
have since become known - were the last Lord Derby, Sir 
William Harcourt, the late Lord Stanley of Alderley, Latimer 
Neville, late Master of Magdalen, Lord Calthorpe, of racing 
fame, with whom I afterwards crossed the Rocky Mountains, the 
last Lord Durham, my cousin, Sir Augustus Stephenson, ex-
solicitor to the Treasury, Julian Fane, whose lyrics were 
edited by Lord Lytton, and my life-long friend Charles 
Barrington, private secretary to Lord Palmerston and to Lord 
John Russell.

But the most intimate of them was George Cayley, son of the 
member for the East Riding of Yorkshire.  Cayley was a young 
man of much promise.  In his second year he won the 
University prize poem with his 'Balder,' and soon after 
published some other poems, and a novel, which met with 
merited oblivion.  But it was as a talker that he shone.  His 
quick intelligence, his ready wit, his command of language, 
made his conversation always lively, and sometimes brilliant.  
For several years after I left Cambridge I lived with him in 
his father's house in Dean's Yard, and thus made the 
acquaintance of some celebrities whom his fascinating and 
versatile talents attracted thither.  As I shall return to 
this later on, I will merely mention here the names of such 
men as Thackeray, Tennyson, Frederick Locker, Stirling of 
Keir, Tom Taylor the dramatist, Millais, Leighton, and others 
of lesser note.  Cayley was a member of, and regular 
attendant at, the Cosmopolitan Club; where he met Dickens, 
Foster, Shirley Brooks, John Leech, Dicky Doyle, and the wits 
of the day; many of whom occasionally formed part of our 
charming coterie in the house I shared with his father.

Speaking of Tom Taylor reminds me of a good turn he once did 
me in my college examination at Cambridge.  Whewell was then 
Master of Trinity.  One of the subjects I had to take up was 
either the 'Amicitia' or the 'Senectute' (I forget which).  
Whewell, more formidable and alarming than ever, opened the 
book at hazard, and set me on to construe.  I broke down.  He 
turned over the page; again I stuck fast.  The truth is, I 
had hardly looked at my lesson, - trusting to my recollection 
of parts of it to carry me through, if lucky, with the whole.

'What's your name, sir?' was the Master's gruff inquiry.  He 
did not catch it.  But Tom Taylor - also an examiner - 
sitting next to him, repeated my reply, with the addition, 
'Just returned from China, where he served as a midshipman in 
the late war.'  He then took the book out of Whewell's hands, 
and giving it to me closed, said good-naturedly:  'Let us 
have another try, Mr. Coke.'  The chance was not thrown away; 
I turned to a part I knew, and rattled off as if my first 
examiner had been to blame, not I.



CHAPTER X



BEFORE dropping the curtain on my college days I must relate 
a little adventure which is amusing as an illustration of my 
reverend friend Napier's enthusiastic spontaneity.  My own 
share in the farce is a subordinate matter.

During the Christmas party at Holkham I had 'fallen in love,' 
as the phrase goes, with a young lady whose uncle (she had 
neither father nor mother) had rented a place in the 
neighbourhood.  At the end of his visit he invited me to 
shoot there the following week.  For what else had I paid him 
assiduous attention, and listened like an angel to the 
interminable history of his gout?  I went; and before I left, 
proposed to, and was accepted by, the young lady.  I was 
still at Cambridge, not of age, and had but moderate means.  
As for the maiden, 'my face is my fortune' she might have 
said.  The aunt, therefore, very properly pooh-poohed the 
whole affair, and declined to entertain the possibility of an 
engagement; the elderly gentleman got a bad attack of gout; 
and every wire of communication being cut, not an obstacle 
was wanting to render persistence the sweetest of miseries.

Napier was my confessor, and became as keen to circumvent the 
'old she-dragon,' so he called her, as I was.  Frequent and 
long were our consultations, but they generally ended in 
suggestions and schemes so preposterous, that the only result 
was an immoderate fit of laughter on both sides.  At length 
it came to this (the proposition was not mine):  we were to 
hire a post chaise and drive to the inn at G-.  I was to 
write a note to the young lady requesting her to meet me at 
some trysting place.  The note was to state that a clergyman 
would accompany me, who was ready and willing to unite us 
there and then in holy matrimony; that I would bring the 
licence in my pocket; that after the marriage we could confer 
as to ways and means; and that - she could leave the REST to 
me.

No enterprise was ever more merrily conceived, or more 
seriously undertaken.  (Please to remember that my friend was 
not so very much older than I; and, in other respects, was 
quite as juvenile.)

Whatever was to come of it, the drive was worth the venture.  
The number of possible and impossible contingencies provided 
for kept us occupied by the hour.  Furnished with a well-
filled luncheon basket, we regaled ourselves and fortified 
our courage; while our hilarity increased as we neared, or 
imagined that we neared, the climax.  Unanimously we repeated 
Dr. Johnson's exclamation in a post chaise:  'Life has not 
many things better than this.'

But where were we?  Our watches told us that we had been two 
hours covering a distance of eleven miles.

'Hi!  Hullo!  Stop!' shouted Napier.  In those days post 
horses were ridden, not driven; and about all we could see of 
the post boy was what Mistress Tabitha Bramble saw of 
Humphrey Clinker.  'Where the dickens have we got to now?'

'Don't know, I'm sure, sir,' says the boy; 'never was in 
these 'ere parts afore.'

'Why,' shouts the vicar, after a survey of the landscape, 'if 
I can see a church by daylight, that's Blakeney steeple; and 
we are only three miles from where we started.'

Sure enough it was so.  There was nothing for it but to stop 
at the nearest house, give the horses a rest and a feed, and 
make a fresh start, - better informed as to our topography.

It was past four on that summer afternoon when we reached our 
destination.  The plan of campaign was cut and dried.  I 
called for writing materials, and indicted my epistle as 
agreed upon.

'To whom are you telling her to address the answer?' asked my 
accomplice.  'We're INCOG. you know.  It won't do for either 
of us to be known.'

'Certainly not,' said I.  'What shall it be?  White? Black? 
Brown? or Green?'

'Try Browne with an E,' said he.  'The E gives an 
aristocratic flavour.  We can't afford to risk our 
respectability.'

The note sealed, I rang the bell for the landlord, desired 
him to send it up to the hall and tell the messenger to wait 
for an answer.

As our host was leaving the room he turned round, with his 
hand on the door, and said:

'Beggin' your pardon, Mr. Cook, would you and Mr. Napeer 
please to take dinner here?  I've soom beatiful lamb chops, 
and you could have a ducklin' and some nice young peas to 
your second course.  The post-boy says the 'osses is pretty 
nigh done up; but by the time - '

'How did you know our names?' asked my companion.

'Law sir!  The post-boy, he told me.  But, beggin' your 
pardon, Mr. Napeer, my daughter, she lives in Holkham 
willage; and I've heard you preach afore now.'

'Let's have the dinner by all means,' said I.

'If the Bishop sequesters my living,' cried Napier, with 
solemnity, 'I'll summon the landlord for defamation of 
character.  But time's up.  You must make for the boat-house, 
which is on the other side of the park.  I'll go with you to 
the head of the lake.'

We had not gone far, when we heard the sound of an 
approaching vehicle.  What did we see but an open carriage, 
with two ladies in it, not a hundred yards behind us.

'The aunt! by all that's - !'

What -  I never heard; for, before the sentence was 
completed, the speaker's long legs were scampering out of 
sight in the direction of a clump of trees, I following as 
hard as I could go.

As the carriage drove past, my Friar Lawrence was lying in a 
ditch, while I was behind an oak.  We were near enough to 
discern the niece, and consequently we feared to be 
recognised.  The situation was neither dignified nor 
romantic.  My friend was sanguine, though big ardour was 
slightly damped by the ditch water.  I doubted the expediency 
of trying the boat-house, but he urged the risk of her 
disappointment, which made the attempt imperative.

The padre returned to the inn to dry himself, and, in due 
course, I rejoined him.  He met me with the answer to my 
note.  'The boat-house,' it declared, 'was out of the 
question.  But so, of course, was the POSSIBILITY of CHANGE.  
We must put our trust in PROVIDENCE.  Time could make NO 
difference in OUR case, whatever it might do with OTHERS.  
SHE, at any rate, could wait for YEARS.'  Upon the whole the 
result was comforting - especially as the 'years' dispensed 
with the necessity of any immediate step more desperate than 
dinner.  This we enjoyed like men who had earned it; and long 
before I deposited my dear friar in his cell both of us were 
snoring in our respective corners of the chaise.

A word or two will complete this romantic episode.  The next 
long vacation I spent in London, bent, needless to say, on a 
happy issue to my engagement.  How simple, in the retrospect, 
is the frustration of our hopes!  I had not been a week in 
town, had only danced once with my FIANCEE, when, one day, 
taking a tennis lesson from the great Barre, a forced ball 
grazed the frame of my racket, and broke a blood vessel in my 
eye.

For five weeks I was shut up in a dark room.  It was two more 
before I again met my charmer.  She did not tell me, but her 
man did, that their wedding day was fixed for the 10th of the 
following month; and he 'hoped they would have the pleasure 
of seeing me at the breakfast!'  [I made the following note 
of the fact:  N.B. - A woman's tears may cost her nothing; 
but her smiles may be expensive.]

I must, however, do the young lady the justice to state that, 
though her future husband was no great things as a 'man,' as 
she afterwards discovered, he was the heir to a peerage and 
great wealth.  Both he and she, like most of my collaborators 
in this world, have long since passed into the other.

The fashions of bygone days have always an interest for the 
living:  the greater perhaps the less remote.  We like to 
think of our ancestors of two or three generations off - the 
heroes and heroines of Jane Austen, in their pantaloons and 
high-waisted, short-skirted frocks, their pigtails and 
powdered hair, their sandalled shoes, and Hessian boots.  Our 
near connection with them entrances our self-esteem.  Their 
prim manners, their affected bows and courtesies, the 'dear 
Mr. So-and-So' of the wife to her husband, the 'Sir' and 
'Madam' of the children to their parents, make us wonder 
whether their flesh and blood were ever as warm as ours; or 
whether they were a race of prigs and puppets?

My memory carries me back to the remnants of these lost 
externals - that which is lost was nothing more; the men and 
women were every whit as human as ourselves.  My half-sisters 
wore turbans with birds-of-paradise in them.  My mother wore 
gigot sleeves; but objected to my father's pigtail, so cut it 
off.  But my father powdered his head, and kept to his knee-
breeches to the last; so did all elderly gentlemen, when I 
was a boy.  For the matter of that, I saw an old fellow with 
a pigtail walking in the Park as late as 1845.  He, no doubt, 
was an ultra-conservative.

Fashions change so imperceptibly that it is difficult for the 
historian to assign their initiatory date.  Does the young 
dandy of to-day want to know when white ties came into vogue? 
- he knows that his great-grandfather wore a white neckcloth, 
and takes it for granted, may be, that his grandfather did so 
too.  Not a bit of it.  The young Englander of the Coningsby 
type - the Count d'Orsays of my youth, scorned the white tie 
alike of their fathers and their sons.  At dinner-parties or 
at balls, they adorned themselves in satin scarfs, with a 
jewelled pin or chained pair of pins stuck in them.  I well 
remember the rebellion - the protest against effeminacy - 
which the white tie called forth amongst some of us upon its 
first invasion on evening dress.  The women were in favour of 
it, and, of course, carried the day; but not without a 
struggle.  One night at Holkham - we were a large party, I 
daresay at least fifty at dinner - the men came down in black 
scarfs, the women in white 'chokers.'  To make the contest 
complete, these all sat on one side of the table, and we men 
on the other.  The battle was not renewed; both factions 
surrendered.  But the women, as usual, got their way, and - 
their men.

For my part I could never endure the original white 
neckcloth.  It was stiffly starched, and wound twice round 
the neck; so I abjured it for the rest of my days; now and 
then I got the credit of being a coxcomb - not for my pains, 
but for my comfort.  Once, when dining at the Viceregal Lodge 
at Dublin, I was 'pulled up' by an aide-de-camp for my 
unbecoming attire; but I stuck to my colours, and was none 
the worse.  Another time my offence called forth a touch of 
good nature on the part of a great man, which I hardly know 
how to speak of without writing me down an ass.  It was at a 
crowded party at Cambridge House.  (Let me plead my youth; I 
was but two-and-twenty.)  Stars and garters were scarcely a 
distinction.  White ties were then as imperative as shoes and 
stockings; I was there in a black one.  My candid friends 
suggested withdrawal, my relations cut me assiduously, 
strangers by my side whispered at me aloud, women turned 
their shoulders to me; and my only prayer was that my 
accursed tie would strangle me on the spot.  One pair of 
sharp eyes, however, noticed my ignominy, and their owner was 
moved by compassion for my sufferings.  As I was slinking 
away, Lord Palmerston, with a BONHOMIE peculiarly his own, 
came up to me; and with a shake of the hand and hearty 
manner, asked after my brother Leicester, and when he was 
going to bring me into Parliament? - ending with a smile:  
'Where are you off to in such a hurry?'  That is the sort of 
tact that makes a party leader.  I went to bed a proud, 
instead of a humiliated, man; ready, if ever I had the 
chance, to vote that black was white, should he but state it 
was so.

Beards and moustache came into fashion after the Crimean war.  
It would have been an outrage to wear them before that time.  
When I came home from my travels across the Rocky Mountains 
in 1851, I was still unshaven.  Meeting my younger brother - 
a fashionable guardsman - in St. James's Street, he 
exclaimed, with horror and disgust at my barbarity, 'I 
suppose you mean to cut off that thing!'

Smoking, as indulged in now, was quite out of the question 
half a century ago.  A man would as soon have thought of 
making a call in his dressing-gown as of strolling about the 
West End with a cigar in his mouth.  The first whom I ever 
saw smoke a cigarette at a dining-table after dinner was the 
King; some forty years ago, or more perhaps.  One of the many 
social benefits we owe to his present Majesty.



CHAPTER XI.



DURING my blindness I was hospitably housed in Eaten Place by 
Mr. Whitbread, the head of the renowned firm.  After my 
recovery I had the good fortune to meet there Lady Morgan, 
the once famous authoress of the 'Wild Irish Girl.'  She 
still bore traces of her former comeliness, and had probably 
lost little of her sparkling vivacity.  She was known to like 
the company of young people, as she said they made her feel 
young; so, being the youngest of the party, I had the honour 
of sitting next her at dinner.  When I recall her 
conversation and her pleasing manners, I can well understand 
the homage paid both abroad and at home to the bright genius 
of the Irish actor's daughter.

We talked a good deal about Byron and Lady Caroline Lamb.  
This arose out of my saying I had been reading 'Glenarvon,' 
in which Lady Caroline gives Byron's letters to herself as 
Glenarvon's letters to the heroine.  Lady Morgan had been the 
confidante of Lady Caroline, had seen many of Byron's 
letters, and possessed many of her friend's - full of details 
of the extraordinary intercourse which had existed between 
the two.

Lady Morgan evidently did not believe (in spite of Lady 
Caroline's mad passion for the poet) that the liaison ever 
reached the ultimate stage contemplated by her lover.  This 
opinion was strengthened by Lady Caroline's undoubted 
attachment to her husband - William Lamb, afterwards Lord 
Melbourne - who seems to have submitted to his wife's 
vagaries with his habitual stoicism and good humour.

Both Byron and Lady Caroline had violent tempers, and were 
always quarrelling.  This led to the final rupture, when, 
according to my informant, the poet's conduct was outrageous.  
He sent her some insulting lines, which Lady Morgan quoted.  
The only one I remember is:


Thou false to him, thou fiend to me!


Among other amusing anecdotes she told was one of Disraeli.  
She had met him (I forget where), soon after his first 
success as the youthful author of 'Vivian Grey.'  He was 
naturally made much of, but rather in the Bohemian world than 
by such queens of society as Lady Holland or Lady Jersey.  
'And faith!' she added, with the piquante accent which 
excitement evoked, 'he took the full shine out of his janius.  
And how do ye think he was dressed?  In a black velvet jacket 
and suit to match, with a red sash round his waist, in which 
was stuck a dagger with a richly jew'lled sheath and handle.'

The only analogous instance of self-confidence that I can 
call to mind was Garibaldi's costume at a huge reception at 
Stafford House.  The ELITE of society was there, in diamonds, 
ribbons, and stars, to meet him.  Garibaldi's uppermost and 
outermost garment was a red flannel shirt, nothing more nor 
less.

The crowd jostled and swayed around him.  To get out of the 
way of it, I retreated to the deserted picture gallery.  The 
only person there was one who interested me more than the 
scarlet patriot, Bulwer-Lytton the First.  He was sauntering 
to and fro with his hands behind his back, looking dingy in 
his black satin scarf, and dejected.  Was he envying the 
Italian hero the obsequious reverence paid to his miner's 
shirt?  (Nine tenths of the men, and still more of the women 
there, knew nothing of the wearer, or his cause, beyond 
that.)  Was he thinking of similar honours which had been 
lavished upon himself when HIS star was in the zenith?  Was 
he muttering to himself the usual consolation of the 'have-
beens' - VANITAS VANITATUM?  Or what new fiction, what old 
love, was flitting through that versatile and fantastic 
brain?  Poor Bulwer!  He had written the best novel, the best 
play, and had made the most eloquent parliamentary oration of 
any man of his day.  But, like another celebrated statesman 
who has lately passed away, he strutted his hour and will 
soon be forgotten - 'Quand on broute sa gloire en herbe de 
son vivant, on ne la recolte pas en epis apres sa mort.'  The 
'Masses,' so courted by the one, however blatant, are not the 
arbiters of immortal fame.

To go back a few years before I met Lady Morgan:  when my 
mother was living at 18 Arlington Street, Sydney Smith used 
to be a constant visitor there.  One day he called just as we 
were going to lunch.  He had been very ill, and would not eat 
anything.  My mother suggested the wing of a chicken.

'My dear lady,' said he, 'it was only yesterday that my 
doctor positively refused my request for the wing of a 
butterfly.'

Another time when he was making a call I came to the door 
before it was opened.  When the footman answered the bell, 
'Is Lady Leicester at home?' he asked.

'No, sir,' was the answer.

'That's a good job,' he exclaimed, but with a heartiness that 
fairly took Jeames' breath away.

As Sydney's face was perfectly impassive, I never felt quite 
sure whether this was for the benefit of myself or of the 
astounded footman; or whether it was the genuine expression 
of an absent mind.  He was a great friend of my mother's, and 
of Mr. Ellice's, but his fits of abstraction were notorious.

He himself records the fact.  'I knocked at a door in London, 
asked, "Is Mrs. B- at home?"  "Yes, sir; pray what name shall 
I say?"  I looked at the man's face astonished.  What name? 
what name? aye, that is the question.  What is my name?  I 
had no more idea who I was than if I had never existed.  I 
did not know whether I was a dissenter or a layman.  I felt 
as dull as Sternhold and Hopkins.  At last, to my great 
relief, it flashed across me that I was Sydney Smith.'

In the summer of the year 1848 Napier and I stayed a couple 
of nights with Captain Marryat at Langham, near Blakeney.  He 
used constantly to come over to Holkham to watch our cricket 
matches.  His house was a glorified cottage, very comfortable 
and prettily decorated.  The dining and sitting-rooms were 
hung with the original water-colour drawings - mostly by 
Stanfield, I think - which illustrated his minor works.  
Trophies from all parts of the world garnished the walls.  
The only inmates beside us two were his son, a strange, but 
clever young man with considerable artistic abilities, and 
his talented daughter, Miss Florence, since so well known to 
novel readers.

Often as I had spoken to Marryat, I never could quite make 
him out.  Now that I was his guest his habitual reserve 
disappeared, and despite his failing health he was geniality 
itself.  Even this I did not fully understand at first.  At 
the dinner-table his amusement seemed, I won't say to make a 
'butt' of me - his banter was too good-natured for that - but 
he treated me as Dr. Primrose treated his son after the 
bushel-of-green-spectacles bargain.  He invented the most 
wonderful stories, and told them with imperturbable 
sedateness.  Finding a credulous listener in me, he drew all 
the more freely upon his invention.  When, however, he 
gravely asserted that Jonas was not the only man who had 
spent three days and three nights in a whale's belly, but 
that he himself had caught a whale with a man inside it who 
had lived there for more than a year on blubber, which, he 
declared, was better than turtle soup, it was impossible to 
resist the fooling, and not forget that one was the Moses of 
the extravaganza.

In the evening he proposed that his son and daughter and I 
should act a charade.  Napier was the audience, and Marryat 
himself the orchestra - that is, he played on his fiddle such 
tunes as a ship's fiddler or piper plays to the heaving of 
the anchor, or for hoisting in cargo.  Everyone was in 
romping spirits, and notwithstanding the cheery Captain's 
signs of fatigue and worn looks, which he evidently strove to 
conceal, the evening had all the freshness and spirit of an 
impromptu pleasure.

When I left, Marryat gave me his violin, with some sad words 
about his not being likely to play upon it more.  Perhaps he 
knew better than we how prophetically he was speaking.  
Barely three weeks afterwards I learnt that the humorous 
creator of 'Midshipman Easy' would never make us laugh again.

In 1846 Lord John Russell succeeded Sir Robert Peel as 
premier.  At the General Election, a brother of mine was the 
Liberal candidate for the seat in East Norfolk.  He was 
returned; but was threatened with defeat through an 
occurrence in which I was innocently involved.

The largest landowner in this division of the county, next to 
my brother Leicester, was Lord Hastings - great-grandfather 
of the present lord.  On the occasion I am referring to, he 
was a guest at Holkham, where a large party was then 
assembled.  Leicester was particularly anxious to be civil to 
his powerful neighbour; and desired the members of his family 
to show him every attention.  The little lord was an 
exceedingly punctilious man:  as scrupulously dapper in 
manner as he was in dress.  Nothing could be more courteous, 
more smiling, than his habitual demeanour; but his bite was 
worse than his bark, and nobody knew which candidate his 
agents had instructions to support in the coming contest.  It 
was quite on the cards that the secret order would turn the 
scales.

One evening after dinner, when the ladies had left us, the 
men were drawn together and settled down to their wine.  It 
was before the days of cigarettes, and claret was plentifully 
imbibed.  I happened to be seated next to Lord Hastings on 
his left; on the other side of him was Spencer Lyttelton, 
uncle of our Colonial Secretary.  Spencer Lyttelton was a 
notable character.  He had much of the talents and amiability 
of his distinguished family; but he was eccentric, 
exceedingly comic, and dangerously addicted to practical 
jokes.  One of these he now played upon the spruce and 
vigilant little potentate whom it was our special aim to win.

As the decanters circulated from right to left, Spencer 
filled himself a bumper, and passed the bottles on.  Lord 
Hastings followed suit.  I, unfortunately, was speaking to 
Lyttelton behind Lord Hastings's back, and as he turned and 
pushed the wine to me, the incorrigible joker, catching sight 
of the handkerchief sticking out of my lord's coat-tail, 
quick as thought drew it open and emptied his full glass into 
the gaping pocket.  A few minutes later Lord Hastings, who 
took snuff, discovered what had happened.  He held the 
dripping cloth up for inspection, and with perfect urbanity 
deposited it on his dessert plate.

Leicester looked furious, but said nothing till we joined the 
ladies.  He first spoke to Hastings, and then to me.  What 
passed between the two I do not know.  To me, he said:  
'Hastings tells me it was you who poured the claret into his 
pocket.  This will lose the election.  After to-morrow, I 
shall want your room.'  Of course, the culprit confessed; and 
my brother got the support we hoped for.  Thus it was that 
the political interests of several thousands of electors 
depended on a glass of wine.



CHAPTER XII



I HAD completed my second year at the University, when, in 
October 1848, just as I was about to return to Cambridge 
after the long vacation, an old friend - William Grey, the 
youngest of the ex-Prime-Minister's sons - called on me at my 
London lodgings.  He was attached to the Vienna Embassy, 
where his uncle, Lord Ponsonby, was then ambassador.  Shortly 
before this there had been serious insurrections both in 
Paris, Vienna, and Berlin.

Many may still be living who remember how Louis Philippe fled 
to England; how the infection spread over this country; how 
25,000 Chartists met on Kennington Common; how the upper and 
middle classes of London were enrolled as special constables, 
with the future Emperor of the French amongst them; how the 
promptitude of the Iron Duke saved London, at least, from the 
fate of the French and Austrian capitals.

This, however, was not till the following spring.  Up to 
October, no overt defiance of the Austrian Government had yet 
asserted itself; but the imminence of an outbreak was the 
anxious thought of the hour.  The hot heads of Germany, 
France, and England were more than meditating - they were 
threatening, and preparing for, a European revolution.  
Bloody battles were to be fought; kings and emperors were to 
be dethroned and decapitated; mobs were to take the place of 
parliaments; the leaders of the 'people' - I.E. the stump 
orators - were to rule the world; property was to be divided 
and subdivided down to the shirt on a man's - a rich man's - 
back; and every 'po'r' man was to have his own, and - 
somebody else's.  This was the divine law of Nature, 
according to the gospels of Saint Jean Jacques and Mr. 
Feargus O'Connor.  We were all naked under our clothes, which 
clearly proved our equality.  This was the simple, the 
beautiful programme; once carried out, peace, fraternal and 
eternal peace, would reign - till it ended, and the earthly 
Paradise would be an accomplished fact.

I was an ultra-Radical - a younger-son Radical - in those 
days.  I was quite ready to share with my elder brother; I 
had no prejudice in favour of my superiors; I had often 
dreamed of becoming a leader of the 'people' - a stump 
orator, I.E. - with the handsome emoluments of ministerial 
office.

William Grey came to say good-bye.  He was suddenly recalled 
in consequence of the insurrection.  'It is a most critical 
state of affairs,' he said.  'A revolution may break out all 
over the Continent at any moment.  There's no saying where it 
may end.  We are on the eve of a new epoch in the history of 
Europe.  I wouldn't miss it on any account.'

'Most interesting! most interesting!' I exclaimed.  'How I 
wish I were going with you!'

'Come,' said he, with engaging brevity.

'How can I?  I'm just going back to Cambridge.'

'You are of age, aren't you?'

I nodded.

'And your own master?  Come; you'll never have such a chance 
again.'

'When do you start?'

'To-morrow morning early.'

'But it is too late to get a passport.'

'Not a bit of it.  I have to go to the Foreign Office for my 
despatches.  Dine with me to-night at my mother's - nobody 
else - and I'll bring your passport in my pocket.'

'So be it, then.  Billy Whistle [the irreverend nickname we 
undergraduates gave the Master of Trinity] will rusticate me 
to a certainty.  It can't be helped.  The cause is sacred.  
I'll meet you at Lady Grey's to-night.'

We reached our destination at daylight on October 9.  We had 
already heard, while changing carriages at Breslau station, 
that the revolution had broken out at Vienna, that the rails 
were torn up, the Bahn-hof burnt, the military defeated and 
driven from the town.  William Grey's official papers, aided 
by his fluent German, enabled us to pass the barriers, and 
find our way into the city.  He went straight to the Embassy, 
and sent me on to the 'Erzherzog Carl' in the Karnthner Thor 
Strasse, at that time the best hotel in Vienna.  It being 
still nearly dark, candles were burning in every window by 
order of the insurgents.

The preceding day had been an eventful one.  The 
proletariats, headed by the students, had sacked the arsenal, 
the troops having made but slight resistance.  They then 
marched to the War Office and demanded the person of the War 
Minister, Count Latour, who was most unpopular on account of 
his known appeal to Jellachich, the Ban of Croatia, to 
assist, if required, in putting down the disturbances.  Some 
sharp fighting here took place.  The rioters defeated the 
small body of soldiers on the spot, captured two guns, and 
took possession of the building.  The unfortunate minister 
was found in one of the upper garrets of the palace.  The 
ruffians dragged him from his place of concealment, and 
barbarously murdered him.  They then flung his body from the 
window, and in a few minutes it was hanging from a lamp-post 
above the heads of the infuriated and yelling mob.

In 1848 the inner city of Vienna was enclosed within a broad 
and lofty bastion, fosse, and glacis.  These were levelled in 
1857.  As soon as the troops were expelled, cannon were 
placed on the Bastei so as to command the approaches from 
without.  The tunnelled gateways were built up, and 
barricades erected across every principal thoroughfare.  
Immediately after these events Ferdinand I. abdicated in 
favour of the present Emperor Francis Joseph, who retired 
with the Court to Schobrunn.  Foreigners at once took flight, 
and the hotels were emptied.  The only person left in the 
'Archduke Charles' beside myself was Mr. Bowen, afterwards 
Sir George, Governor of New Zealand, with whom I was glad to 
fraternise.

These humble pages do not aspire to the dignity of History; 
but a few words as to what took place are needful for the 
writer's purposes.  The garrison in Vienna had been 
comparatively small; and as the National Guard had joined the 
students and proletariats, it was deemed advisable by the 
Government to await the arrival of reinforcements under 
Prince Windischgratz, who, together with a strong body of 
Servians and Croats under Jellachich, might overawe the 
insurgents; or, if not, recapture the city without 
unnecessary bloodshed.  The rebels were buoyed up by hopes of 
support from the Hungarians under Kossuth.  But in this they 
were disappointed.  In less than three weeks from the day of 
the outbreak the city was beleaguered.  Fighting began 
outside the town on the 24th.  On the 25th the soldiers 
occupied the Wieden and Nussdorf suburbs.  Next day the 
Gemeinderath (Municipal Council) sent a PARLEMENTAR to treat 
with Windischgratz.  The terms were rejected, and the city 
was taken by storm on October 30.

A few days before the bombardment, the Austrian commander 
gave the usual notice to the Ambassadors to quit the town.  
This they accordingly did.  Before leaving, Lord Ponsonby 
kindly sent his private secretary, Mr. George Samuel, to warn 
me and invite me to join him at Schonbrunn.  I politely 
elected to stay and take my chance.  After the attack on the 
suburbs began I had reason to regret the decision.  The 
hotels were entered by patrols, and all efficient waiters 
KOMMANDIERE'D to work at the barricades, or carry arms.  On 
the fourth day I settled to change sides.  The constant 
banging of big guns, and rattle of musketry, with the 
impossibility of getting either air or exercise without the 
risk of being indefinitely deprived of both, was becoming 
less amusing than I had counted on.  I was already provided 
with a PASSIERSCHEIN, which franked me inside the town, and 
up to the insurgents' outposts.  The difficulty was how to 
cross the neutral ground and the two opposing lines.  Broad 
daylight was the safest time for the purpose; the officious 
sentry is not then so apt to shoot his friend.  With much 
stalking and dodging I made a bolt; and, notwithstanding 
violent gesticulations and threats, got myself safely seized 
and hurried before the nearest commanding officer.

He happened to be a general or a colonel.  He was a fierce 
looking, stout old gentleman with a very red face, all the 
redder for his huge white moustache and well-filled white 
uniform.  He began by fuming and blustering as if about to 
order me to summary execution.  He spoke so fast, it was not 
easy to follow him.  Probably my amateur German was as 
puzzling to him.  The PASSIERSCHEIN, which I produced, was 
not in my favour; unfortunately I had forgotten my Foreign 
Office passport.  What further added to his suspicion was his 
inability to comprehend why I had not availed myself of the 
notice, duly given to all foreigners, to leave the city 
before active hostilities began.  How anyone, who had the 
choice, could be fool enough to stay and be shelled or 
bayoneted, was (from his point of view) no proof of 
respectability.  I assured him he was mistaken if he thought 
I had a predilection for either of these alternatives.

'It was just because I desired to avoid both that I had 
sought, not without risk, the protection I was so sure of 
finding at the hands of a great and gallant soldier.'

'Dummes Zeug! dummes Zeug!' (stuff o' nonsense), he puffed.  
But a peppery man's good humour is often as near the surface 
as his bad.  I detected a pleasant sparkle in his eye.

'Pardon me, Excellenz,' said I, 'my presence here is the best 
proof of my sincerity.'

'That,' said he sharply, 'is what every rascal might plead 
when caught with a rebel's pass in his pocket.  Geleitsbriefe 
fur Schurken sind Steckbriefe fur die Gerechtigkeit.'  (Safe-
conduct passes for knaves are writs of capias to honest men.)

I answered:  'But an English gentleman is not a knave; and no 
one knows the difference better than your Excellenz.'  The 
term 'Schurken' (knaves) had stirred my fire; and though I 
made a deferential bow, I looked as indignant as I felt.

'Well, well,' he said pacifically, 'you may go about your 
business.  But SEHEN SIE, young man, take my advice, don't 
satisfy your curiosity at the cost of a broken head.  Dazu 
gehoren Kerle die eigens geschaffen sind.'  As much as to 
say:  'Leave halters to those who are born to be hanged.'  
Indeed, the old fellow looked as if he had enjoyed life too 
well to appreciate parting with it gratuitously.

I had nothing with me save the clothes on my back.  When I 
should again have access to the 'Erzherzcg Carl' was 
impossible to surmise.  The only decent inn I knew of outside 
the walls was the 'Golden Lamm,' on the suburb side of the 
Donau Canal, close to the Ferdinand bridge which faces the 
Rothen Thurm Thor.  Here I entered, and found it occupied by 
a company of Nassau JAGERS.  A barricade was thrown up across 
the street leading to the bridge.  Behind it were two guns.  
One end of the barricade abutted on the 'Golden Lamm.'  With 
the exception of the soldiers, the inn seemed to be deserted; 
and I wanted both food and lodging.  The upper floor was full 
of JAGERS.  The front windows over-looked the Bastei.  These 
were now blocked with mattresses, to protect the men from 
bullets.  The distance from the ramparts was not more than 
150 yards, and woe to the student or the fat grocer, in his 
National Guard uniform, who showed his head above the walls.  
While I was in the attics a gun above the city gate fired at 
the battery below.  I ran down a few minutes later to see the 
result.  One artilleryman had been killed.  He was already 
laid under the gun-carriage, his head covered with a cloak.

The storming took place a day or two afterwards.  One of the 
principal points of resistance had been at the bottom of the 
Jagerzeile.  The insurgents had a battery of several guns 
here; and the handsome houses at the corners facing the 
Prater had been loop-holed and filled with students.  I 
walked round the town after all was over, and was especially 
impressed with the horrors I witnessed.  The beautiful 
houses, with their gorgeous furniture, were a mass of smoking 
ruins.  Not a soul was to be seen, not even a prowling thief.  
I picked my way into one or two of them without hindrance.  
Here and there were a heap of bodies, some burnt to cinders, 
some with their clothes still smouldering.  The smell of the 
roasted flesh was a disgusting association for a long time to 
come.  But the whole was sickening to look at, and still more 
so, if possible, to reflect upon; for this was the price 
which so often has been, so often will be, paid for the 
alluring dream of liberty, and for the pursuit of that 
mischievous will-o'-the-wisp - jealous Equality.



CHAPTER XIII



VIENNA in the early part of the last century was looked upon 
as the gayest capital in Europe.  Even the frightful 
convulsion it had passed through only checked for a while its 
chronic pursuit of pleasure.  The cynical philosopher might 
be tempted to contrast this not infrequent accessory of 
paternal rule with the purity and contentment so fondly 
expected from a democracy - or shall we say a demagoguey?  
The cherished hopes of the so-called patriots had been 
crushed; and many were the worse for the struggle.  But the 
majority naturally subsided into their customary vocations - 
beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, music, dancing, and play-going.

The Vienna of 1848 was the Vienna described by Madame de 
Stael in 1810:  'Dans ce pays, l'on traite les plaisirs comme 
les devoirs. . . . Vous verrez des hommes et des femmes 
executer gravement, l'un vis-a-vis de l'autre, les pas d'un 
menuet dont ils sont impose l'amusement, . . . comme s'il 
[the couple] dansait pour l'acquit de sa conscience.'

Every theatre and place of amusement was soon re-opened.  
There was an excellent opera; Strauss - the original - 
presided over weekly balls and concerts.  For my part, being 
extremely fond of music, I worked industriously at the 
violin, also at German.  My German master, Herr Mauthner by 
name, was a little hump-backed Jew, who seemed to know every 
man and woman (especially woman) worth knowing in Vienna.  
Through him I made the acquaintance of several families of 
the middle class, - amongst them that of a veteran musician 
who had been Beethoven's favourite flute-player.  As my 
veneration for Beethoven was unbounded, I listened with awe 
to every trifling incident relating to the great master.  I 
fear the conviction left on my mind was that my idol, though 
transcendent amongst musicians, was a bear amongst men.  
Pride (according to his ancient associate) was his strong 
point.  This he vindicated by excessive rudeness to everyone 
whose social position was above his own.  Even those that did 
him a good turn were suspected of patronising.  Condescension 
was a prerogative confined to himself.  In this respect, to 
be sure, there was nothing singular.

At the house of the old flutist we played family quartets, - 
he, the father, taking the first violin part on his flute, I 
the second, the son the 'cello, and his daughter the piano.  
It was an atmosphere of music that we all inhaled; and my 
happiness on these occasions would have been unalloyed, had 
not the young lady - a damsel of six-and-forty - insisted on 
poisoning me (out of compliment to my English tastes) with a 
bitter decoction she was pleased to call tea.  This delicate 
attention, I must say, proved an effectual souvenir till we 
met again - I dreaded it.

Now and then I dined at the Embassy.  One night I met there 
Prince Paul Esterhazy, so distinguished by his diamonds when 
Austrian Ambassador at the coronation of Queen Victoria.  He 
talked to me of the Holkham sheep-shearing gatherings, at 
which from 200 to 300 guests sat down to dinner every day, 
including crowned heads, and celebrities from both sides of 
the Atlantic.  He had twice assisted at these in my father's 
time.  He also spoke of the shooting; and promised, if I 
would visit him in Hungary, he would show me as good sport as 
had ever seen in Norfolk.  He invited Mr. Magenis - the 
Secretary of Legation - to accompany me.

The following week we two hired a BRITZCKA, and posted to 
Eisenstadt.  The lordly grandeur of this last of the feudal 
princes manifested itself soon after we crossed the Hungarian 
frontier.  The first sign of it was the livery and badge worn 
by the postillions.  Posting houses, horses and roads, were 
all the property of His Transparency.

Eisenstadt itself, though not his principal seat, is a large 
palace - three sides of a triangle.  One wing is the 
residence, that opposite the barrack, (he had his own 
troops,) and the connecting base part museum and part 
concert-hall.  This last was sanctified by the spirit of 
Joseph Haydn, for so many years Kapellmeister to the 
Esterhazy family.  The conductor's stand and his spinet 
remained intact.  Even the stools and desks in the orchestra 
(so the Prince assured me) were ancient.  The very dust was 
sacred.  Sitting alone in the dim space, one could fancy the 
great little man still there, in his snuff-coloured coat and 
ruffles, half buried (as on state occasions) in his 'ALLONGE 
PERUCKE.'  A tap of his magic wand starts into life his 
quaint old-fashioned band, and the powder flies from their 
wigs.  Soft, distant, ghostly harmonies of the Surprise 
Symphony float among the rafters; and now, as in a dream, we 
are listening to - nay, beholding - the glorious process of 
Creation; till suddenly the mighty chord is struck, and we 
are startled from our trance by the burst of myriad voices 
echoing the command and its fulfilment, 'Let there be light:  
and there was light.'

Only a family party was assembled in the house.  A Baron 
something, and a Graf something - both relations, - and the 
son, afterwards Ambassador at St. Petersburg during the 
Crimean War.  The latter was married to Lady Sarah Villiers, 
who was also there.  It is amusing to think that the 
beautiful daughter of the proud Lady Jersey should be looked 
upon by the Austrians as somewhat of a MESALLIANCE for one of 
the chiefs of their nobility.  Certain it is that the young 
Princess was received by them, till they knew her, with more 
condescension than enthusiasm.

An air of feudal magnificence pervaded the palace:  spacious 
reception-rooms hung with armour and trophies of the chase; 
numbers of domestics in epauletted and belaced, but ill-
fitting, liveries; the prodigal supply and nationality of the 
comestibles - wild boar with marmalade, venison and game of 
all sorts with excellent 'Eingemachtes' and 'Mehlspeisen' 
galore - a feast for a Gamache or a Gargantua.  But then, all 
save three, remember, were Germans - and Germans!  Noteworthy 
was the delicious Chateau Y'quem, of which the Prince 
declared he had a monopoly - meaning the best, I presume.  
After dinner the son, his brother-in-law, and I, smoked our 
meerschaums and played pools of ECARTE in the young Prince's 
room.  Magenis, who was much our senior, had his rubber 
downstairs with the elders.

The life was pleasant enough, but there was one little 
medieval peculiarity which almost made one look for retainers 
in goat-skins and rushes on the floor, - there was not a bath 
(except the Princess's) in the palace!  It was with 
difficulty that my English servant foraged a tub from the 
kitchen or the laundry.  As to other sanitary arrangements, 
they were what they doubtless had been in the days of Almos 
and his son, the mighty Arped.  In keeping with these 
venerable customs, I had a sentry at the door of my 
apartments; to protect me, belike, from the ghosts of 
predatory barons and marauders.

During the week we had two days' shooting; one in the 
coverts, quite equal to anything of the kind in England, the 
other at wild boar.  For the latter, a tract of the 
Carpathian Mountains had been driven for some days before 
into a wood of about a hundred acres.  At certain points 
there were sheltered stands, raised four or five feet from 
the ground, so that the sportsmen had a commanding view of 
the broad alley or clearing in front of him, across which the 
stags or boar were driven by an army of beaters.

I had my own double-barrelled rifle; but besides this, a man 
with a rack on his back bearing three rifles of the prince's, 
a loader, and a FORSTER, with a hunting knife or short sword 
to despatch the wounded quarry.  Out of the first rush of 
pigs that went by I knocked over two; and, in my keenness, 
jumped out of the stand with the FORSTER who ran to finish 
them off.  I was immediately collared and brought back; and 
as far as I could make out, was taken for a lunatic, or at 
least for a 'duffer,' for my rash attempt to approach unarmed 
a wounded tusker.  When we all met at the end of the day, the 
bag of the five guns was forty-five wild boars.  The biggest 
- and he was a monster - fell to the rifle of the Prince, as 
was of course intended.

The old man took me home in his carriage.  It was a beautiful 
drive.  One's idea of an English park - even such a park as 
Windsor's - dwindled into that of a pleasure ground, when 
compared with the boundless territory we drove through.  To 
be sure, it was no more a park than is the New Forest; but it 
had all the character of the best English scenery - miles of 
fine turf, dotted with clumps of splendid trees, and gigantic 
oaks standing alone in their majesty.  Now and then a herd of 
red deer were startled in some sequestered glade; but no 
cattle, no sheep, no sign of domestic care.  Struck with the 
charm of this primeval wilderness, I made some remark about 
the richness of the pasture, and wondered there were no sheep 
to be seen.  'There,' said the old man, with a touch of 
pride, as he pointed to the blue range of the Carpathians; 
'that is my farm.  I will tell you.  All the celebrities of 
the day who were interested in farming used to meet at 
Holkham for what was called the sheep-shearing.  I once told 
your father I had more shepherds on my farm than there were 
sheep on his.'



CHAPTER XIV



IT WAS with a sorry heart that I bade farewell to my Vienna 
friends, my musical comrades, the Legation hospitalities, and 
my faithful little Israelite.  But the colt frisks over the 
pasture from sheer superfluity of energy; and between one's 
second and third decades instinctive restlessness - 
spontaneous movement - is the law of one's being.  'Tis then 
that 'Hope builds as fast as knowledge can destroy.'  The 
enjoyment we abandon is never so sweet as that we seek.  
'Pleasure never is at home.'  Happiness means action for its 
own sake, change, incessant change.

I sought and found it in Bavaria, Bohemia, Russia, all over 
Germany, and dropped anchor one day in Cracow; a week 
afterwards in Warsaw.  These were out-of-the-way places then; 
there were no tourists in those days; I did not meet a single 
compatriot either in the Polish or Russian town.

At Warsaw I had an adventure not unlike that which befell me 
at Vienna.  The whole of Europe, remember, was in a state of 
political ferment.  Poland was at least as ready to rise 
against its oppressor then as now; and the police was 
proportionately strict and arbitrary.  An army corps was 
encamped on the right bank of the Vistula, ready for expected 
emergencies.  Under these circumstances, passports, as may be 
supposed, were carefully inspected; except in those of 
British subjects, the person of the bearer was described - 
his height, the colour of his hair (if he had any), or any 
mark that distinguished him.

In my passport, after my name, was added 'ET SON DOMESTIQUE.'  
The inspector who examined it at the frontier pointed to 
this, and, in indifferent German, asked me where that 
individual was.  I replied that I had sent him with my 
baggage to Dresden, to await my arrival there.  A 
consultation thereupon took place with another official, in a 
language I did not understand; and to my dismay I was 
informed that I was - in custody.  The small portmanteau I 
had with me, together with my despatch-box, was seized; the 
latter contained a quantity of letters and my journal.  Money 
only was I permitted to retain.

Quite by the way, but adding greatly to my discomfort, was 
the fact that since leaving Prague, where I had relinquished 
everything I could dispense with, I had had much night 
travelling amongst native passengers, who so valued 
cleanliness that they economised it with religious care.  By 
the time I reached Warsaw, I may say, without metonymy, that 
I was itching (all over) for a bath and a change of linen.  
My irritation, indeed, was at its height.  But there was no 
appeal; and on my arrival I was haled before the authorities.

Again, their head was a general officer, though not the least 
like my portly friend at Vienna.  His business was to sit in 
judgment upon delinquents such as I.  He was a spare, austere 
man, surrounded by a sharp-looking aide-de-camp, several 
clerks in uniform, and two or three men in mufti, whom I took 
to be detectives.  The inspector who arrested me was present 
with my open despatch-box and journal.  The journal he handed 
to the aide, who began at once to look it through while his 
chief was disposing of another case.

To be suspected and dragged before this tribunal was, for the 
time being (as I afterwards learnt) almost tantamount to 
condemnation.  As soon as the General had sentenced my 
predecessor, I was accosted as a self-convicted criminal.  
Fortunately he spoke French like a Frenchman; and, as it 
presently appeared, a few words of English.

'What country do you belong to?' he asked, as if the question 
was but a matter of form, put for decency's sake - a mere 
prelude to committal.

'England, of course; you can see that by my passport.'  I was 
determined to fence him with his own weapons.  Indeed, in 
those innocent days of my youth, I enjoyed a genuine British 
contempt for foreigners - in the lump - which, after all, is 
about as impartial a sentiment as its converse, that one's 
own country is always in the wrong.

'Where did you get it?' (with a face of stone).

PRISONER (NAIVELY): 'Where did I get it?  I do not follow 
you.'  (Don't forget, please, that said prisoner's apparel 
was unvaleted, his hands unwashed, his linen unchanged, his 
hair unkempt, and his face unshaven).

GENERAL (stonily): '"Where did you get it?" was my question.'

PRISONER (quietly): 'From Lord Palmerston.'

GENERAL (glancing at that Minister's signature): 'It says 
here, "et son domestique" - you have no domestique.'

PRISONER (calmly): 'Pardon me, I have a domestic.'

GENERAL (with severity), 'Where is he?'

PRISONER: 'At Dresden by this time, I hope.'

GENERAL (receiving journal from aide-de-camp, who points to a 
certain page): 'You state here you were caught by the 
Austrians in a pretended escape from the Viennese insurgents; 
and add, "They evidently took me for a spy" [returning 
journal to aide].  What is your explanation of this?'

PRISONER (shrugging shoulders disdainfully): 'In the first 
place, the word "pretended" is not in my journal.  In the 
second, although of course it does not follow, if one takes 
another person for a man of sagacity or a gentleman - it does 
not follow that he is either - still, when - '

GENERAL (with signs of impatience): 'I have here a 
PASSIERSCHEIN, found amongst your papers and signed by the 
rebels.  They would not have given you this, had you not been 
on friendly terms with them.  You will be detained until I 
have further particulars.'

PRISONER (angrily): 'I will assist you, through Her Britannic 
Majesty's Consul, with whom I claim the right to communicate.  
I beg to inform you that I am neither a spy nor a socialist, 
but the son of an English peer' (heaven help the relevancy!).  
'An Englishman has yet to learn that Lord Palmerston's 
signature is to be set at naught and treated with contumacy.'

The General beckoned to the inspector to put an end to the 
proceedings.  But the aide, who had been studying the 
journal, again placed it in his chief's hands.  A colloquy 
ensued, in which I overheard the name of Lord Ponsonby.  The 
enemy seemed to waver, so I charged with a renewed request to 
see the English Consul.  A pause; then some remarks in 
Russian from the aide; then the GENERAL (in suaver tones): 
'The English Consul, I find, is absent on a month's leave.  
If what you state is true, you acted unadvisedly in not 
having your passport altered and REVISE when you parted with 
your servant.  How long do you wish to remain here?'

Said I, 'Vous avez bien raison, Monsieur.  Je suis evidemment 
dans mon tort.  Ma visite a Varsovie etait une aberration.  
As to my stay, je suis deja tout ce qu'il y a de plus ennuye.  
I have seen enough of Warsaw to last for the rest of my 
days.'

Eventually my portmanteau and despatch-box were restored to 
me; and I took up my quarters in the filthiest inn (there was 
no better, I believe) that it was ever my misfortune to lodge 
at.  It was ancient, dark, dirty, and dismal.  My sitting-
room (I had a cupboard besides to sleep in) had but one 
window, looking into a gloomy courtyard.  The furniture 
consisted of two wooden chairs and a spavined horsehair sofa.  
The ceiling was low and lamp-blacked; the stained paper fell 
in strips from the sweating walls; fortunately there was no 
carpet; but if anything could have added to the occupier's 
depression it was the sight of his own distorted features in 
a shattered glass, which seemed to watch him like a detective 
and take notes of his movements - a real Russian mirror.

But the resources of one-and-twenty are not easily daunted, 
even by the presence of the CIMEX LECTULARIUS or the PULEX 
IRRITANS.  I inquired for a LAQUAIS DE PLACE, - some human 
being to consort with was the most pressing of immediate 
wants.  As luck would have it, the very article was in the 
dreary courtyard, lurking spider-like for the innocent 
traveller just arrived.  Elective affinity brought us at once 
to friendly intercourse.  He was of the Hebrew race, as the 
larger half of the Warsaw population still are.  He was a 
typical Jew (all Jews are typical), though all are not so 
thin as was Beninsky.  His eyes were sunk in sockets deepened 
by the sharpness of his bird-of-prey beak; a single corkscrew 
ringlet dropped tearfully down each cheek; and his one front 
tooth seemed sometimes in his upper, sometimes in his lower 
jaw.  His skull-cap and his gabardine might have been 
heirlooms from the Patriarch Jacob; and his poor hands seemed 
made for clawing.  But there was a humble and contrite spirit 
in his sad eyes.  The history of his race was written in 
them; but it was modern history that one read in their 
hopeless and appealing look.

His cringing manner and his soft voice (we conversed in 
German) touched my heart.  I have always had a liking for the 
Jews.  Who shall reckon how much some of us owe them!  They 
have always interested me as a peculiar people - admitting 
sometimes, as in poor Beninsky's case, of purifying, no 
doubt; yet, if occasionally zealous (and who is not?) of 
interested works - cent. per cent. works, often - yes, more 
often than we Christians - zealous of good works, of open-
handed, large-hearted munificence, of charity in its 
democratic and noblest sense.  Shame upon the nations which 
despise and persecute them for faults which they, the 
persecutors, have begotten!  Shame on those who have extorted 
both their money and their teeth!  I think if I were a Jew I 
should chuckle to see my shekels furnish all the wars in 
which Christians cut one another's Christian weasands.

And who has not a tenderness for the 'beautiful and well-
favoured' Rachels, and the 'tender-eyed' Leahs, and the 
tricksy little Zilpahs, and the Rebekahs, from the wife of 
Isaac of Gerar to the daughter of Isaac of York?  Who would 
not love to sit with Jessica where moonlight sleeps, and 
watch the patines of bright gold reflected in her heavenly 
orbs?  I once knew a Jessica, a Polish Jessica, who - but 
that was in Vienna, more than half a century ago.

Beninsky's orbs brightened visibly when I bade him break his 
fast at my high tea.  I ordered everything they had in the 
house I think, - a cold Pomeranian GANSEBRUST, a garlicky 
WURST, and GERAUCHERTE LACHS.  I had a packet of my own 
Fortnum and Mason's Souchong; and when the stove gave out its 
glow, and the samovar its music, Beninsky's gratitude and his 
hunger passed the limits of restraint.  Late into the night 
we smoked our meerschaums.

When I spoke of the Russians, he got up nervously to see the 
door was shut, and whispered with bated breath.  What a 
relief it was to him to meet a man to whom he could pour out 
his griefs, his double griefs, as Pole and Israelite.  Before 
we parted I made him put the remains of the sausage (!) and 
the goose-breast under his petticoats.  I bade him come to me 
in the morning and show me all that was worth seeing in 
Warsaw.  When he left, with tears in his eyes, I was consoled 
to think that for one night at any rate he and his GANSEBRUST 
and sausage would rest peacefully in Abraham's bosom.  What 
Abraham would say to the sausage I did not ask; nor perhaps 
did my poor Beninsky.



CHAPTER XV



THE remainder of the year '49 has left me nothing to tell.  
For me, it was the inane life of that draff of Society - the 
young man-about-town:  the tailor's, the haberdasher's, the 
bootmaker's, and trinket-maker's, young man; the dancing and 
'hell'-frequenting young man; the young man of the 'Cider 
Cellars' and Piccadilly saloons; the valiant dove-slayer, the 
park-lounger, the young lady's young man - who puts his hat 
into mourning, and turns up his trousers because - because 
the other young man does ditto, ditto.

I had a share in the Guards' omnibus box at Covent Garden, 
with the privilege attached of going behind the scenes.  Ah! 
that was a real pleasure.  To listen night after night to 
Grisi and Mario, Alboni and Lablache, Viardot and Ronconi, 
Persiani and Tamburini, - and Jenny Lind too, though she was 
at the other house.  And what an orchestra was Costa's - with 
Sainton leader, and Lindley and old Dragonetti, who together 
but alone, accompanied the RECITATIVE with their harmonious 
chords on 'cello and double-bass.  Is singing a lost art?  Or 
is that but a TEMPORIS ACTI question?  We who heard those now 
silent voices fancy there are none to match them nowadays.  
Certainly there are no dancers like Taglioni, and Cerito, and 
Fanny Elsler, and Carlotta Grisi.

After the opera and the ball, one finished the night at 
Vauxhall or Ranelagh; then as gay, and exactly the same, as 
they were when Miss Becky Sharpe and fat Jos supped there 
only five-and-thirty years before.

Except at the Opera, and the Philharmonic, and Exeter Hall, 
one rarely heard good music.  Monsieur Jullien, that prince 
of musical mountebanks - the 'Prince of Waterloo,' as John 
Ella called him, was the first to popularise classical music 
at his promenade concerts, by tentatively introducing a 
single movement of a symphony here and there in the programme 
of his quadrilles and waltzes and music-hall songs.

Mr. Ella, too, furthered the movement with his Musical Union 
and quartett parties at Willis's Rooms, where Sainton and 
Cooper led alternately, and the incomparable Piatti and Hill 
made up the four.  Here Ernst, Sivori, Vieuxtemps, and 
Bottesini, and Mesdames Schumann, Dulcken, Arabella Goddard, 
and all the famous virtuosi played their solos.

Great was the stimulus thus given by Ella's energy and 
enthusiasm.  As a proof of what he had to contend with, and 
what he triumphed over, Halle's 'Life' may be quoted, where 
it says:  'When Mr. Ella asked me [this was in 1848] what I 
wished to play, and heard that it was one of Beethoven's 
pianoforte sonatas, he exclaimed "Impossible!" and 
endeavoured to demonstrate that they were not works to be 
played in public.'  What seven-league boots the world has 
stridden in within the memory of living men!

John Ella himself led the second violins in Costa's band, and 
had begun life (so I have been told) as a pastry-cook.  I 
knew both him and the wonderful little Frenchman 'at home.'  
According to both, in their different ways, Beethoven and 
Mozart would have been lost to fame but for their heroic 
efforts to save them.

I used occasionally to play with Ella at the house of a lady 
who gave musical parties.  He was always attuned to the 
highest pitch, - most good-natured, but most excitable where 
music was to the fore.  We were rehearsing a quintett, the 
pianoforte part of which was played by the young lady of the 
house - a very pretty girl, and not a bad musician, but 
nervous to the point of hysteria.  Ella himself was in a 
hypercritical state; nothing would go smoothly; and the piano 
was always (according to him) the peccant instrument.  Again 
and again he made us restart the movement.  There were a good 
many friends of the family invited to this last rehearsal, 
which made it worse for the poor girl, who was obviously on 
the brink of a breakdown.  Presently Ella again jumped off 
his chair, and shouted:  'Not E flat!  There's no E flat 
there; E natural!  E natural!  I never in my life knew a 
young lady so prolific of flats as you.'  There was a pause, 
then a giggle, then an explosion; and then the poor girl, 
bursting into tears, rushed out of the room.

It was at Ella's house that I first heard Joachim, then about 
sixteen, I suppose.  He had not yet performed in London.  All 
the musical celebrities were present to hear the youthful 
prodigy.  Two quartetts were played, Ernst leading one and 
Joachim the other.  After it was over, everyone was 
enraptured, but no one more so than Ernst, who unhesitatingly 
predicted the fame which the great artist has so eminently 
achieved.

One more amusing little story belongs to my experiences of 
these days.  Having two brothers and a brother-in-law in the 
Guards, I used to dine often at the Tower, or the Bank, or 
St. James's.  At the Bank of England there is always at night 
an officer's guard.  There is no mess, as the officer is 
alone.  But the Bank provides dinner for two, in case the 
officer should invite a friend.  On the occasion I speak of, 
my brother-in-law, Sir Archibald Macdonald, was on duty.  The 
soup and fish were excellent, but we were young and hungry, 
and the usual leg of mutton was always a dish to be looked 
forward to.

When its cover was removed by the waiter we looked in vain; 
there was plenty of gravy, but no mutton.  Our surprise was 
even greater than our dismay, for the waiter swore 'So 'elp 
his gawd' that he saw the cook put the leg on the dish, and 
that he himself put the cover on the leg.  'And what did you 
do with it then?' questioned my host.  'Nothing, S'Archibald.  
Brought it straight in 'ere.'  'Do you mean to tell me it was 
never out of your hands between this and the kitchen?'  
'Never, but for the moment I put it down outside the door to 
change the plates.'  'And was there nobody in the passage?'  
'Not a soul, except the sentry.'  'I see,' said my host, who 
was a quick-witted man.  'Send the sergeant here.'  The 
sergeant came.  The facts were related, and the order given 
to parade the entire guard, sentry included, in the passage.

The sentry was interrogated first.  'No, he had not seen 
nobody in the passage.'  'No one had touched the dish?'  
'Nobody as ever he seed.'  Then came the orders:  'Attention.  
Ground arms.  Take off your bear-skins.'  And the truth - 
I.E., the missing leg - was at once revealed; the sentry had 
popped it into his shako.  For long after that day, when the 
guard either for the Tower or Bank marched through the 
streets, the little blackguard boys used to run beside it and 
cry, 'Who stole the leg o' mutton?'



CHAPTER XVI



PROBABLY the most important historical event of the year '49 
was the discovery of gold in California, or rather, the great 
Western Exodus in pursuit of it.  A restless desire possessed 
me to see something of America, especially of the Far West.  
I had an hereditary love of sport, and had read and heard 
wonderful tales of bison, and grisly bears, and wapitis.  No 
books had so fascinated me, when a boy, as the 'Deer-slayer,' 
the 'Pathfinder,' and the beloved 'Last of the Mohicans.'  
Here then was a new field for adventure.  I would go to 
California, and hunt my way across the continent.  Ruxton's 
'Life in the Far West' inspired a belief in self-reliance and 
independence only rivalled by Robinson Crusoe.  If I could 
not find a companion, I would go alone.  Little did I dream 
of the fortune which was in store for me, or how nearly I 
missed carrying out the scheme so wildly contemplated, or 
indeed, any scheme at all.

The only friend I could meet with both willing and able to 
join me was the last Lord Durham.  He could not undertake to 
go to California; but he had been to New York during his 
father's reign in Canada, and liked the idea of revisiting 
the States.  He proposed that we should spend the winter in 
the West Indies, and after some buffalo-shooting on the 
plains, return to England in the autumn.

The notion of the West Indies gave rise to an off-shoot.  
Both Durham and I were members of the old Garrick, then but a 
small club in Covent Garden.  Amongst our mutual friends was 
Andrew Arcedeckne - pronounced Archdeacon - a character to 
whom attaches a peculiar literary interest, of which anon.  
Arcedeckne - Archy, as he was commonly called - was about a 
couple of years older than we were.  He was the owner of 
Glevering Hall, Suffolk, and nephew of Lord Huntingfield.  
These particulars, as well as those of his person, are note-
worthy, as it will soon appear.

Archy - 'Merry Andrew,' as I used to call him, - owned one of 
the finest estates in Jamaica - Golden Grove.  When he heard 
of our intended trip, he at once volunteered to go with us.  
He had never seen Golden Grove, but had often wished to visit 
it.  Thus it came to pass that we three secured our cabins in 
one of the West India mailers, and left England in December 
1849.

To return to our little Suffolk squire.  The description of 
his figure, as before said, is all-important, though the 
world is familiar with it, as drawn by the pencil of a master 
caricaturist.  Arcedeckne was about five feet three inches, 
round as a cask, with a small singularly round face and head, 
closely cropped hair, and large soft eyes, - in a word, so 
like a seal, that he was as often called 'Phoca' as Archy.

Do you recognise the portrait?  Do you need the help of 
'Glevering Hall' (how curious the suggestion!).  And would 
you not like to hear him talk?  Here is a specimen in his 
best manner.  Surely it must have been taken down by a 
shorthand writer, or a phonograph:

MR. HARRY FOKER LOQUITUR: 'He inquired for Rincer and the 
cold in his nose, told Mrs. Rincer a riddle, asked Miss 
Rincer when she would be prepared to marry him, and paid his 
compliments to Miss Brett, another young lady in the bar, all 
in a minute of time, and with a liveliness and facetiousness 
which set all these young ladies in a giggle.  "Have a drop, 
Pen:  it's recommended by the faculty, &c.  Give the young 
one a glass, R., and score it up to yours truly."'

I fancy the great man who recorded these words was more 
afraid of Mr. Harry PHOCA than of any other man in the 
Garrick Club - possibly for the reason that honest Harry was 
not the least bit afraid of him.  The shy, the proud, the 
sensitive satirist would steal quietly into the room, 
avoiding notice as though he wished himself invisible.  Phoca 
would be warming his back at the fire, and calling for a 
glass of 'Foker's own.'  Seeing the giant enter, he would 
advance a step or two, with a couple of extended fingers, and 
exclaim, quite affably, 'Ha! Mr. Thackry! litary cove!  Glad 
to see you, sir.  How's Major Dobbings?' and likely enough 
would turn to the waiter, and bid him, 'Give this gent a 
glass of the same, and score it up to yours truly!'  We have 
his biographer's word for it, that he would have winked at 
the Duke of Wellington, with just as little scruple.

Yes, Andrew Arcedeckne was the original of Harry Foker; and, 
from the cut of his clothes to his family connection, and to 
the comicality, the simplicity, the sweetness of temper 
(though hardly doing justice to the loveableness of the 
little man), the famous caricature fits him to a T.

The night before we left London we had a convivial dinner at 
the Garrick - we three travellers, with Albert Smith, his 
brother, and John Leech.  It was a merry party, to which all 
contributed good fellowship and innocent jokes.  The latest 
arrival at the Zoo was the first hippopotamus that had 
reached England, - a present from the Khedive.  Someone 
wondered how it had been caught.  I suggested a trout-fly; 
which so tickled John Leech's fancy that he promised to draw 
it for next week's 'Punch.'  Albert Smith went with us to 
Southampton to see us off.

On our way to Jamaica we stopped a night at Barbadoes to 
coal.  Here I had the honour of making the acquaintance of 
the renowned Caroline Lee! - Miss Car'line, as the negroes 
called her.  She was so pleased at the assurance that her 
friend Mr. Peter Simple had spread her fame all the world 
over, that she made us a bowl of the most delicious iced 
sangaree; and speedily got up a 'dignity ball' for our 
entertainment.  She was rather too much of an armful to dance 
with herself, but there was no lack of dark beauties, (not a 
white woman or white man except ourselves in the room.)  We 
danced pretty nearly from daylight to daylight.  The blending 
of rigid propriety, of the severest 'dignity,' with the 
sudden guffaw and outburst of wildest spirits and comic 
humour, is beyond description, and is only to be met with 
amongst these ebullient children of the sun.

On our arrival at Golden Grove, there was a great turn-out of 
the natives to welcome their young lord and 'massa.'  Archy 
was touched and amused by their frantic loyalty.  But their 
mode of exhibiting it was not so entirely to his taste.  Not 
only the young, but the old women wanted to hug him.  'Eigh!  
Dat you, Massa?  Dat you, sar? Me no believe him.  Out o' de 
way, you trash!  Eigh! me too much pleased like devil.' The 
one constant and spontaneous ejaculation was, 'Yah! Massa too 
muchy handsome!  Garamighty!  Buckra berry fat!'  The latter 
attribute was the source of genuine admiration; but the 
object of it hardly appreciated its recognition, and waved 
off his subjects with a mixture of impatience and alarm.

We had scarcely been a week at Golden Grove, when my two 
companions and Durham's servant were down with yellow fever.  
Being 'salted,' perhaps, I escaped scot-free, so helped 
Archy's valet and Mr. Forbes, his factor, to nurse and to 
carry out professional orders.  As we were thirty miles from 
Kingston the doctor could only come every other day.  The 
responsibility, therefore, of attending three patients 
smitten with so deadly a disease was no light matter.  The 
factor seemed to think discretion the better part of valour, 
and that Jamaica rum was the best specific for keeping his 
up.  All physicians were SANGRADOS in those days, and when 
the Kingston doctor decided upon bleeding, the hysterical 
state of the darky girls (we had no men in the bungalow 
except Durham's and Archy's servants) rendered them worse 
than useless.  It fell to me, therefore, to hold the basin 
while Archy's man was attending to his master.

Durham, who had nerves of steel, bore his lot with the grim 
stoicism which marked his character.  But at one time the 
doctor considered his state so serious that he thought his 
lordship's family should be informed of it.  Accordingly I 
wrote to the last Lord Grey, his uncle and guardian, stating 
that there was little hope of his recovery.  Poor Phoca was 
at once tragic and comic.  His medicine had to be 
administered every, two hours.  Each time, he begged and 
prayed in lacrymose tones to be let off.  It was doing him no 
good.  He might as well be allowed to die in peace.  If we 
would only spare him the beastliness this once, on his honour 
he would take it next time 'like a man.'  We were inexorable, 
of course, and treated him exactly as one treats a child.

At last the crisis was over.  Wonderful to relate, all three 
began to recover.  During their convalescence, I amused 
myself by shooting alligators in the mangrove swamps at 
Holland Bay, which was within half an hour's ride of the 
bungalow.  It was curious sport.  The great saurians would 
lie motionless in the pools amidst the snake-like tangle of 
mangrove roots.  They would float with just their eyes and 
noses out of water, but so still that, without a glass, 
(which I had not,) it was difficult to distinguish their 
heads from the countless roots and rotten logs around them.  
If one fired by mistake, the sport was spoiled for an hour to 
come.

I used to sit watching patiently for one of them to show 
itself, or for something to disturb the glassy surface of the 
dark waters.  Overhead the foliage was so dense that the heat 
was not oppressive.  All Nature seemed asleep.  The deathlike 
stillness was rarely broken by the faintest sound, - though 
unseen life, amidst the heat and moisture, was teeming 
everywhere; life feeding upon life.  For what purpose?  To 
what end?  Is this a primary law of Nature?  Does cannibalism 
prevail in Mars?  Sometimes a mocking-bird would pipe its 
weird notes, deepening silence by the contrast.  But besides 
pestilent mosquitos, the only living things in sight were 
humming-birds of every hue, some no bigger than a butterfly, 
fluttering over the blossoms of the orchids, or darting from 
flower to flower like flashes of prismatic rays.

I killed several alligators; but one day, while stalking what 
seemed to be an unusual monster, narrowly escaped an 
accident.  Under the excitement, my eye was so intently fixed 
upon the object, that I rather felt than saw my way.  
Presently over I went, just managed to save my rifle, and, to 
my amazement, found I had set my foot on a sleeping reptile.  
Fortunately the brute was as much astonished as I was, and 
plunged with a splash into the adjacent pool.

A Cambridge friend, Mr. Walter Shirley, owned an estate at 
Trelawny, on the other side of Jamaica; while the invalids 
were recovering, I paid him a visit; and was initiated into 
the mysteries of cane-growing and sugar-making.  As the great 
split between the Northern and Southern States on the 
question of slavery was pending, the life, condition, and 
treatment of the negro was of the greatest interest.  Mr. 
Shirley was a gentleman of exceptional ability, and full of 
valuable information on these subjects.  He passed me on to 
other plantations; and I made the complete round of the 
island before returning to my comrades at Golden Grove.  A 
few weeks afterwards I stayed with a Spanish gentleman, the 
Marquis d'Iznaga, who owned six large sugar plantations in 
Cuba; and rode with his son from Casilda to Cienfuegos, from 
which port I got a steamer to the Havana.  The ride afforded 
abundant opportunities of comparing the slave with the free 
negro.  But, as I have written on the subject elsewhere, I 
will pass to matters more entertaining.



CHAPTER XVII



ON my arrival at the Havana I found that Durham, who was 
still an invalid, had taken up his quarters at Mr. 
Crauford's, the Consul-General.  Phoca, who was nearly well 
again, was at the hotel, the only one in the town.  And who 
should I meet there but my old Cambridge ally, Fred, the last 
Lord Calthorpe.  This event was a fruitful one, - it 
determined the plans of both of us for a year or more to 
come.

Fred - as I shall henceforth call him - had just returned 
from a hunting expedition in Texas, with another sportsman 
whom he had accidentally met there.  This gentleman 
ultimately became of even more importance to me than my old 
friend.  I purposely abstain from giving either his name or 
his profession, for reasons which will become obvious enough 
by-and-by; the outward man may be described.  He stood well 
over six  feet in his socks; his frame and limbs were those 
of a gladiator; he could crush a horseshoe in one hand; he 
had a small head with a bull-neck, purely Grecian features, 
thick curly hair with crisp beard and silky moustache.  He so 
closely resembled a marble Hercules that (as he must have a 
name) we will call him Samson.

Before Fred stumbled upon him, he had spent a winter camping 
out in the snows of Canada, bear and elk shooting.  He was 
six years or so older than either of us - I.E. about eight-
and-twenty.

As to Fred Calthorpe, it would be difficult to find a more 
'manly' man.  He was unacquainted with fear.  Yet his 
courage, though sometimes reckless, was by no means of the 
brute kind.  He did not run risks unless he thought the gain 
would compensate them; and no one was more capable of 
weighing consequences than he.  His temper was admirable, his 
spirits excellent; and for any enterprise where danger and 
hardship were to be encountered few men could have been 
better qualified.  By the end of a week these two had agreed 
to accompany me across the Rocky Mountains.

Before leaving the Havana, I witnessed an event which, though 
disgusting in itself, gives rise to serious reflections.  
Every thoughtful reader is conversant enough with them; if, 
therefore, he should find them out of place or trite, apology 
is needless, as he will pass them by without the asking.

The circumstance referred to is a public execution.  Mr. 
Sydney Smith, the vice-consul, informed me that a criminal 
was to be garrotted on the following morning; and asked me 
whether I cared to look over the prison and see the man in 
his cell that afternoon.  We went together.  The poor wretch 
bore the stamp of innate brutality.  His crime was the most 
revolting that a human being is capable of - the violation 
and murder of a mere child.  When we were first admitted he 
was sullen, merely glaring at us; but, hearing the warder 
describe his crime, he became furiously abusive, and worked 
himself into such a passion that, had he not been chained to 
the wall, he would certainly have attacked us.

At half-past six next morning I went with Mr. Smith to the 
Campo del Marte, the principal square.  The crowd had already 
assembled, and the tops of the houses were thronged with 
spectators.  The women, dressed as if for a bull-fight or a 
ball, occupied the front seats.  By squeezing and pushing we 
contrived to get within eight or nine yards of the machine, 
where I had not long been before the procession was seen 
moving up the Passeo.  A few mounted troops were in front to 
clear the road; behind them came the Host, with a number of 
priests and the prisoner on foot, dressed in white; a large 
guard brought up the rear.  The soldiers formed an open 
square.  The executioner, the culprit, and one priest 
ascended the steps of the platform.

The garrotte is a short stout post, at the top of which is an 
iron crook, just wide enough to admit the neck of a man 
seated in a chair beneath it.  Through the post, parallel 
with the crook, is the loop of a rope, whose ends are 
fastened to a bar held by the executioner.  The loop, being 
round the throat of the victim, is so powerfully tightened 
from behind by half a turn of the bar, that an extra twist 
would sever a man's head from his body.

The murderer showed no signs of fear; he quietly seated 
himself, but got up again to adjust the chair and make 
himself comfortable!  The executioner then arranged the rope 
round his neck, tied his legs and his arms, and retired 
behind the post.  At a word or a look from the priest the 
wrench was turned.  For a single instant the limbs of the 
victim were convulsed, and all was over.

No exclamation, no whisper of horror escaped from the lookers 
on.  Such a scene was too familiar to excite any feeling but 
morbid curiosity; and, had the execution taken place at the 
usual spot instead of in the town, few would have given 
themselves the trouble to attend it.

It is impossible to see or even to think of what is here 
described without gravely meditating on its suggestions.  Is 
capital punishment justifiable?  This is the question I 
purpose to consider in the following chapter.



CHAPTER XVIII



ALL punishments or penal remedies for crime, except capital 
punishment, may be considered from two points of view:  
First, as they regard Society; secondly, as they regard the 
offender.

Where capital punishment is resorted to, the sole end in view 
is the protection of Society.  The malefactor being put to 
death, there can be no thought of his amendment.  And so far 
as this particular criminal is concerned, Society is 
henceforth in safety.

But (looking to the individual), as equal security could be 
obtained by his imprisonment for life, the extreme measure of 
putting him to death needs justification.  This is found in 
the assumption that death being the severest of all 
punishments now permissible, no other penalty is so 
efficacious in preventing the crime or crimes for which it is 
inflicted.  Is the assumption borne out by facts, or by 
inference?

For facts we naturally turn to statistics.  Switzerland 
abolished capital punishment in 1874; but cases of 
premeditated murder having largely increased during the next 
five years, it was restored by Federal legislation in 1879.  
Still there is nothing conclusive to be inferred from this 
fact.  We must seek for guidance elsewhere.

Reverting to the above assumption, we must ask:  First, Is 
the death punishment the severest of all evils, and to what 
extent does the fear of it act as a preventive?  Secondly, Is 
it true that no other punishment would serve as powerfully in 
preventing murder by intimidation?

Is punishment by death the most dreaded of all evils?  'This 
assertion,' says Bentham, 'is true with respect to the 
majority of mankind; it is not true with respect to the 
greatest criminals.'  It is pretty certain that a malefactor 
steeped in crime, living in extreme want, misery and 
apprehension, must, if he reflects at all, contemplate a 
violent end as an imminent possibility.  He has no better 
future before him, and may easily come to look upon death 
with brutal insensibility and defiance.  The indifference 
exhibited by the garrotted man getting up to adjust his chair 
is probably common amongst criminals of his type.

Again, take such a crime as that of the Cuban's:  the passion 
which leads to it is the fiercest and most ungovernable which 
man is subject to.  Sexual jealousy also is one of the most 
frequent causes of murder.  So violent is this passion that 
the victim of it is often quite prepared to sacrifice life 
rather than forego indulgence, or allow another to supplant 
him; both men and women will gloat over the murder of a 
rival, and gladly accept death as its penalty, rather than 
survive the possession of the desired object by another.

Further, in addition to those who yield to fits of passion, 
there is a class whose criminal promptings are hereditary:  a 
large number of unfortunates of whom it may almost be said 
that they were destined to commit crimes.  'It is unhappily a 
fact,' says Mr. Francis Galton ('Inquiries into Human 
Faculty'), 'that fairly distinct types of criminals breeding 
true to their kind have become established.'  And he gives 
extraordinary examples, which fully bear out his affirmation.  
We may safely say that, in a very large number of cases, the 
worst crimes are perpetrated by beings for whom the death 
penalty has no preventive terrors.

But it is otherwise with the majority.  Death itself, apart 
from punitive aspects, is a greater evil to those for whom 
life has greater attractions.  Besides this, the permanent 
disgrace of capital punishment, the lasting injury to the 
criminal's family and to all who are dear to him, must be far 
more cogent incentives to self-control than the mere fear of 
ceasing to live.

With the criminal and most degraded class - with those who 
are actuated by violent passions and hereditary taints, the 
class by which most murders are committed - the death 
punishment would seem to be useless as an intimidation or an 
example.

With the majority it is more than probable that it exercises 
a strong and beneficial influence.  As no mere social 
distinction can eradicate innate instincts, there must be a 
large proportion of the majority, the better-to-do, who are 
both occasionally and habitually subject to criminal 
propensities, and who shall say how many of these are 
restrained from the worst of crimes by fear of capital 
punishment and its consequences?

On these grounds, if they be not fallacious, the retention of 
capital punishment may be justified.

Secondly.  Is the assumption tenable that no other penalty 
makes so strong an impression or is so pre-eminently 
exemplary?  Bentham thus answers the question:  'It appears 
to me that the contemplation of perpetual imprisonment, 
accompanied with hard labour and occasional solitary 
confinement, would produce a deeper impression on the minds 
of persons in whom it is more eminently desirable that that 
impression should be produced than even death itself. . . . 
All that renders death less formidable to them renders 
laborious restraint proportionably more irksome.'  There is 
doubtless a certain measure of truth in these remarks.  But 
Bentham is here speaking of the degraded class; and is it 
likely that such would reflect seriously upon what they never 
see and only know by hearsay?  Think how feeble are their 
powers of imagination and reflection, how little they would 
be impressed by such additional seventies as 'occasional 
solitary confinement,' the occurrence and the effects of 
which would be known to no one outside the jail.

As to the 'majority,' the higher classes, the fact that men 
are often imprisoned for offences - political and others - 
which they are proud to suffer for, would always attenuate 
the ignominy attached to 'imprisonment.'  And were this the 
only penalty for all crimes, for first-class misdemeanants 
and for the most atrocious of criminals alike, the 
distinction would not be very finely drawn by the interested; 
at the most, the severest treatment as an alternative to 
capital punishment would always savour of extenuating 
circumstances.

There remain two other points of view from which the question 
has to be considered:  one is what may be called the 
Vindictive, the other, directly opposed to it, the 
Sentimental argument.  The first may be dismissed with a word 
or two.  In civilised countries torture is for ever 
abrogated; and with it, let us hope, the idea of judicial 
vengeance.

The LEX TALIONIS - the Levitic law - 'Eye for eye, tooth for 
tooth,' is befitting only for savages.  Unfortunately the 
Christian religion still promulgates and passionately clings 
to the belief in Hell as a place or state of everlasting 
torment - that is to say, of eternal torture inflicted for no 
ultimate end save that of implacable vengeance.  Of all the 
miserable superstitions ever hatched by the brain of man 
this, as indicative of its barbarous origin, is the most 
degrading.  As an ordinance ascribed to a Being worshipped as 
just and beneficent, it is blasphemous.

The Sentimental argument, like all arguments based upon 
feeling rather than reason, though not without merit, is 
fraught with mischief which far outweighs it.  There are 
always a number of people in the world who refer to their 
feelings as the highest human tribunal.  When the reasoning 
faculty is not very strong, the process of ratiocination 
irksome, and the issue perhaps unacceptable, this course 
affords a convenient solution to many a complicated problem.  
It commends itself, moreover, to those who adopt it, by the 
sense of chivalry which it involves.  There is something 
generous and noble, albeit quixotic, in siding with the weak, 
even if they be in the wrong.  There is something charitable 
in the judgment, 'Oh! poor creature, think of his adverse 
circumstances, his ignorance, his temptation.  Let us be 
merciful and forgiving.'  In practice, however, this often 
leads astray.  Thus in most cases, even where premeditated 
murder is proved to the hilt, the sympathy of the 
sentimentalist is invariably with the murderer, to the 
complete oblivion of the victim's family.

Bentham, speaking of the humanity plea, thus words its 
argument:  'Attend not to the sophistries of reason, which 
often deceive, but be governed by your hearts, which will 
always lead you right.  I reject without hesitation the 
punishment you propose:  it violates natural feelings, it 
harrows up the susceptible mind, it is tyrannical and cruel.'  
Such is the language of your sentimental orators.

'But abolish any one penal law merely because it is repugnant 
to the feelings of a humane heart, and, if consistent, you 
abolish the whole penal code.  There is not one of its 
provisions that does not, in a more or less painful degree, 
wound the sensibility.'

As this writer elsewhere observes:  'It is only a virtue when 
justice has done its work, &c.  Before this, to forgive 
injuries is to invite their perpetration - is to be, not the 
friend, but the enemy of society.  What could wickedness 
desire more than an arrangement by which offences should be 
always followed by pardon?'

Sentiment is the ULTIMA RATIO FEMINARUM, and of men whose 
natures are of the epicene gender.  It is a luxury we must 
forego in the face of the stern duties which evil compels us 
to encounter.

There is only one other argument against capital punishment 
that is worth considering.

The objection so strenuously pleaded by Dickens in his 
letters to the 'Times' - viz. the brutalising effects upon 
the degraded crowds which witnessed public executions - is no 
longer apposite.  But it may still be urged with no little 
force that the extreme severity of the sentence induces all 
concerned in the conviction of the accused to shirk the 
responsibility.  Informers, prosecutors, witnesses, judges, 
and jurymen are, as a rule, liable to reluctance as to the 
performance of their respective parts in the melancholy 
drama.'  The consequence is that 'the benefit of the doubt,' 
while salving the consciences of these servants of the law, 
not unfrequently turns a real criminal loose upon society; 
whereas, had any other penalty than death been feasible, the 
same person would have been found guilty.

Much might be said on either side, but on the whole it would 
seem wisest to leave things - in this country - as they are; 
and, for one, I am inclined to the belief that,


Mercy murders, pardoning those that kill.




CHAPTER XIX



WE were nearly six weeks in the Havana, being detained by 
Lord Durham's illness.  I provided myself with a capital 
Spanish master, and made the most of him.  This, as it turned 
out, proved very useful to me in the course of my future 
travels.  About the middle of March we left for Charlestown 
in the steamer ISABEL, and thence on to New York.  On the 
passage to Charlestown, we were amused one evening by the 
tricks of a conjuror.  I had seen the man and his wife 
perform at the Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly.  She was called the 
'Mysterious Lady.'  The papers were full of speculations as 
to the nature of the mystery.  It was the town talk and 
excitement of the season.

This was the trick.  The lady sat in the corner of a large 
room, facing the wall, with her eyes bandaged.  The company 
were seated as far as possible from her.  Anyone was invited 
to write a few words on a slip of paper, and hand it to the 
man, who walked amongst the spectators.  He would simply say 
to the woman 'What has the gentleman (or lady) written upon 
this paper?'  Without hesitation she would reply correctly.  
The man was always the medium.  One person requested her, 
through the man, to read the number on his watch, the figures 
being, as they always are, very minute.  The man repeated the 
question:  'What is the number on this watch?'  The woman, 
without hesitation, gave it correctly.  A friend at my side, 
a young Guardsman, took a cameo ring from his finger, and 
asked for a description of the figures in relief.  There was 
a pause.  The woman was evidently perplexed.  She confessed 
at last that she was unable to answer.  The spectators 
murmured.  My friend began to laugh.  The conjuror's bread 
was at stake, but he was equal to the occasion.  He at once 
explained to the company that the cameo represented 'Leeder 
and the Swan in a hambigious position, which the lady didn't 
profess to know nothing about.'  This apology, needless to 
say, completely re-established the lady's character.

Well, recognising my friend of the Egyptian Hall, I reminded 
him of the incident.  He remembered it perfectly; and we fell 
to chatting about the wonderful success of the 'mystery,' and 
about his and the lady's professional career.  He had begun 
life when a boy as a street acrobat, had become a street 
conjuror, had married the 'mysterious lady' out of the 'saw-
dust,' as he expressed it - meaning out of a travelling 
circus.  After that, 'things had gone 'ard' with them.  They 
had exhausted their resources in every sense.  One night, 
lying awake, and straining their brains to devise some means 
of subsistence, his wife suddenly exclaimed, 'How would it be 
if we were to try so and so?' explaining the trick just 
described.  His answer was:  'Oh! that's too silly.  They'd 
see through it directly.'  This was all I could get out of 
him:  this, and the fact that the trick, first and last, had 
made them fairly comfortable for the rest of their days.

Now mark what follows, for it is the gist and moral of my 
little story about this conjuror, and about two other miracle 
workers whom I have to speak of presently.

Once upon a time, I was discussing with an acquaintance the 
not unfamiliar question of Immortality.  I professed 
Agnosticism - strongly impregnated with incredulity.  My 
friend had no misgivings, no doubts on the subject whatever.  
Absolute certainty is the prerogative of the orthodox.  He 
had taken University honours, and was a man of high position 
at the Bar.  I was curious to learn upon what grounds such an 
one based his belief.  His answer was:  'Upon the phenomena 
of electro-biology, and the psychic phenomena of mesmerism.'  
His 'first convictions were established by the manifestations 
of the soul as displayed through a woman called "The 
Mysterious Lady," who, &c., &c.'

When we have done with our thaumaturgist on board the ISABEL, 
I will give another instance, precisely similar to this, of 
the simple origin of religious beliefs.

The steamer was pretty full; and the conjuror begged me to 
obtain the patronage of my noble friend and the rest of our 
party for an entertainment he proposed to give that evening.  
This was easily secured, and a goodly sum was raised by 
dollar tickets.  The sleight-of-hand was excellent.  But the 
special performance of the evening deserves description in 
full.  It was that of a whist-playing dog.  Three passengers 
- one of us taking a hand - played as in dummy whist, dummy's 
hand being spread in a long row upon the deck of the saloon 
cabin.  The conjuror, as did the other passengers, walked 
about behind the players, and saw all the players' hands, but 
not a word was spoken.  The dog played dummy's hand.  When it 
came to his turn he trotted backwards and forwards, smelling 
each card that had been dealt to him.  He sometimes 
hesitated, then comically shaking his head, would leave it to 
smell another.  The conjuror stood behind the dog's partner, 
and never went near the animal.  There was no table - the 
cards were thrown on the deck.  They were dealt by the 
players; the conjuror never touched them.  When the dog's 
mind was made up, he took his card in his mouth and laid it 
on the others.  His play was infallible.  He and his partner 
won the rubber with ease.

Now, to those ignorant of the solution, this must, I think, 
seem inexplicable.  How was collusion managed between the 
animal and its master?  One of the conditions insisted upon 
by the master himself was silence.  He certainly never broke 
it.  I bought the trick - must I confess it? for twenty 
dollars.  How transparent most things are when - seen 
through!  When the dog smelt at the right card, the conjuror, 
who saw all four hands, and had his own in his pocket, 
clicked his thumb-nail against a finger-nail.  The dog alone 
could hear it, and played the card accordingly.

The other story:  A few years after my return to England, a 
great friend called upon me, and, in an excited state, 
described a SEANCE he had had with a woman who possessed the 
power of 'invoking' spirits.  These spirits had correctly 
replied to questions, the answers to which were only known to 
himself.  The woman was an American.  I am sorry to say I 
have forgotten her name, but I think she was the first of her 
tribe to visit this country.  As in the case spoken of, my 
friend was much affected by the results of the SEANCE.  He 
was a well-educated and intelligent man.  Born to wealth, he 
had led a somewhat wildish life in his youth.  Henceforth he 
became more serious, and eventually turned Roman Catholic.  
He entreated me to see the woman, which I did.

I wrote to ask for an appointment.  She lived in Charlotte 
Street, Fitzroy Square; but on the day after the morrow she 
was to change her lodgings to Queen Anne Street, where she 
would receive me at 11 A.M.  I was punctual to a minute, and 
was shown into an ordinary furnished room.  The maid informed 
me that Mrs. - had not yet arrived from Charlotte Street, but 
she was sure to come before long, as she had an engagement 
(so she said) with a gentleman.

Nothing could have suited me better.  I immediately set to 
work to examine the room and the furniture with the greatest 
care.  I looked under and moved the sofa, tables, and 
armchairs.  I looked behind the curtains, under the rug, and 
up the chimney.  I could discover nothing.  There was not the 
vestige of a spirit anywhere.  At last the medium entered - a 
plain, middle-aged matron with nothing the least spiritual 
about her.  She seated herself opposite to me at the round 
table in the centre of the room, and demurely asked what I 
wanted.  'To communicate with the spirits,' I replied.  She 
did not know whether that was possible.  It depended upon the 
person who sought them.  She would ask the spirits whether 
they would confer with me.  Whereupon she put the question:  
'Will the spirits converse with this gentleman?'  At all 
events, thought I, the term 'gentleman' applies to the next 
world, which is a comfort.  She listened for the answer.  
Presently three distinct raps on the table signified assent.  
She then took from her reticule a card whereon were printed 
the alphabet, and numerals up to 10.  The letters were 
separated by transverse lines.  She gave me a pencil with 
these instructions:  I was to think, not utter, my question, 
and then put the pencil on each of the letters in succession.  
When the letters were touched which spelt the answer, the 
spirits would rap, and the words could be written down.

My friend had told me this much, so I came prepared.  I began 
by politely begging the lady to move away from the table at 
which we were seated, and take a chair in the furthest corner 
of the room.  She indignantly complied, asking if I suspected 
her.  I replied that 'all ladies were dangerous, when they 
were charming,' which put us on the best of terms.  I placed 
my hat so as to intercept her view of my operations, and thus 
pursued them.

Thinking the matter over beforehand, I concluded that when 
the questioner, of either sex, was young, love would very 
probably be the topic; the flesh, not the spirit, would be 
the predominant interest.  Being an ingenuous young man of 
the average sort, and desperately in love with Susan, let us 
say, I should naturally assist the supernatural being, if at 
a loss, to understand that the one thing wanted was 
information about Susan.  I therefore mentally asked the 
question:  'Who is the most lovely angel without wings, and 
with the means of sitting down?' and proceeded to pass the 
pencil over the letters, pausing nowhere.  I now and then got 
a doubtful rap on or under the table, - how delivered I know 
not - but signifying nothing.  It was clear the spirits 
needed a cue.  I put the pencil on the letter S, and kept it 
there.  I got a tentative rap.  I passed at once to U.  I got 
a more confident rap.  Then to S. Rap, rap, without 
hesitation.  A and N were assented to almost before I touched 
them.  Susan was an angel - the angel.  What more logical 
proof could I have of the immortality of the soul?

Mrs. - asked me whether I was satisfied.  I said it was 
miraculous; so much so indeed, that I could hardly believe 
the miracle, until corroborated by another.  Would the 
spirits be kind enough to suspend this pencil in the air?  
'Oh! that was nonsense.  The spirits never lent themselves to 
mere frivolity.'  'I beg the spirits' pardon, I am sure,' 
said I.  'I have heard that they often move heavy tables.  I 
thought perhaps the pencil would save them trouble.  Will 
they move this round table up to this little one?'  I had, be 
it observed, when alone, moved and changed the relative 
positions of both tables; and had determined to make this my 
crucial test.  To my astonishment, Mrs. - replied that she 
could not say whether they would or not.  She would ask them.  
She did so, and the spirits rapped 'Yes.'

I drew my chair aside.  The woman remained seated in the 
corner.  I watched everything.  Nothing happened.  After a 
while, I took out my watch, and said:  'I fear the spirits do 
not intend to keep their word.  I have an appointment twenty 
minutes hence, and can only give them ten minutes more.'  She 
calmly replied she had nothing to do with it.  I had heard 
what the spirits said.  I had better wait a little longer.  
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the table gave 
a distinct crack, as if about to start.  The medium instantly 
called my attention to it.  I jumped out of my seat, passed 
between the two tables, when of a sudden the large table 
moved in the direction of the smaller one, and did not stop 
till it had pushed the little one over.  I make no comments.  
No explanation to me is conceivable.  I simply narrate what 
happened as accurately as I am able.

One other case deserves to be added to the above.  I have 
connected both of the foregoing with religious persuasions.  
The SEANCE I am about to speak of was for the express purpose 
of bringing a brokenhearted and widowed mother into 
communication with the soul of her only son - a young artist 
of genius whom I had known, and who had died about a year 
before.  The occasion was, of course, a solemn one.  The 
interest of it was enhanced by the presence of the great 
apostle of Spiritualism - Sir William Crookes.  The medium 
was Miss Kate Fox, again an American.  The SEANCE took place 
in the house of a very old friend of mine, the late Dr. 
George Bird.  He had spiritualistic tendencies, but was 
supremely honest and single-minded; utterly incapable of 
connivance with deception of any kind.  As far as I know, the 
medium had never been in the room before.  The company 
present were Dr. Bird's intimate friend Sir William Crookes - 
future President of the Royal Society - Miss Bird, Dr. Bird's 
daughter, and her husband - Mr. Ionides - and Mrs. -, the 
mother of the young artist.  The room, a large one, was 
darkened; the last light being extinguished after we had 
taken our places round the dining-table.  We were strenuously 
enjoined to hold one another's hands.  Unless we did so the 
SEANCE would fail.

Before entering the room, I secretly arranged with Mr. 
Ionides, who shared my scepticism, that we should sit side by 
side; and so each have one hand free.  It is not necessary to 
relate what passed between the unhappy mother and the medium, 
suffice it to say that she put questions to her son; and the 
medium interpreted the rappings which came in reply.  These, 
I believe, were all the poor lady could wish for.  To the 
rest of us, the astounding events of the SEANCE were the dim 
lights, accompanied by faint sounds of an accordion, which 
floated about the room over our heads.  And now comes, to me, 
the strangest part of the whole performance.  All the while I 
kept my right arm extended under the table, moving my hand to 
and fro.  Presently it touched something.  I make a grab, and 
caught, but could not hold for an instant, another hand.  It 
was on the side away from Mr. Ionides.  I said nothing, 
except to him, and the SEANCE was immediately broken up.

It may be thought by some that this narration is a biassed 
one.  But those acquainted with the charlatanry in these days 
of what is called 'Christian Science,' and know the extent to 
which crass ignorance and predisposed credulity can be duped 
by childish delusions, may have some 'idea how acute was the 
spirit-rapping epidemic some forty or fifty years ago.  'At 
this moment,' writes Froude, in 'Fraser's Magazine,' 1863, 
'we are beset with reports of conversations with spirits, of 
tables miraculously lifted, of hands projecting out of the 
world of shadows into this mortal life.  An unusually able, 
accomplished person, accustomed to deal with common-sense 
facts, a celebrated political economist, and notorious for 
business-like habits, assured this writer that a certain 
mesmerist, who was my informer's intimate friend, had raised 
a dead girl to life.'  Can we wonder that miracles are still 
believed in?  Ah! no.  The need, the dire need, of them 
remains, and will remain with us for ever.



CHAPTER XX



WE must move on; we have a long and rough journey before us.  
Durham had old friends in New York, Fred Calthorpe had 
letters to Colonel Fremont, who was then a candidate for the 
Presidency, and who had discovered the South Pass; and Mr. 
Ellice had given me a letter to John Jacob Astor - THE 
American millionaire of that day.  We were thus well provided 
with introductions; and nothing could exceed the kindness and 
hospitality of our American friends.

But time was precious.  It was already mid May, and we had 
everything to get - wagons, horses, men, mules, and 
provisions.  So that we were anxious not to waste a day, but 
hurry on to St. Louis as fast as we could.  Durham was too 
ill to go with us.  Phoca had never intended to do so.  Fred, 
Samson, and I, took leave of our companions, and travelling 
via the Hudson to Albany, Buffalo, down Lake Erie, and across 
to Chicago, we reached St. Louis in about eight days.  As a 
single illustration of what this meant before railroads, 
Samson and I, having to stop a day at Chicago, hired a buggy 
and drove into the neighbouring woods, or wilderness, to hunt 
for wild turkeys.

Our outfit, the whole of which we got at St. Louis, consisted 
of two heavy wagons, nine mules, and eight horses.  We hired 
eight men, on the nominal understanding that they were to go 
with us as far as the Rocky Mountains on a hunting 
expedition.  In reality all seven of them, before joining us, 
had separately decided to go to California.

Having published in 1852 an account of our journey, entitled 
'A Ride over the Rocky Mountains,' I shall not repeat the 
story, but merely give a summary of the undertaking, with a 
few of the more striking incidents to show what travelling 
across unknown America entailed fifty or sixty years ago.

A steamer took us up the Missouri to Omaha.  Here we 
disembarked on the confines of occupied territory.  From near 
this point, where the Platte river empties into the Missouri, 
to the mouth of the Columbia, on the Pacific - which we 
ultimately reached - is at least 1,500 miles as the crow 
flies; for us (as we had to follow watercourses and avoid 
impassable ridges) it was very much more.  Some five-and-
forty miles from our starting-place we passed a small village 
called Savannah.  Between it and Vancouver there was not a 
single white man's abode, with the exception of three trading 
stations - mere mud buildings - Fort Laramie, Fort Hall, and 
Fort Boise.

The vast prairies on this side of the Rocky Mountains were 
grazed by herds of countless bison, wapiti, antelope, and 
deer of various species.  These were hunted by moving tribes 
of Indians - Pawnees, Omahaws, Cheyennes, Ponkaws, Sioux, &c.  
On the Pacific side of the great range, a due west course - 
which ours was as near as we could keep it - lay across a 
huge rocky desert of volcanic debris, where hardly any 
vegetation was to be met with, save artemisia - a species of 
wormwood - scanty blades of gramma grass, and occasional 
osiers by river-banks.  The rivers themselves often ran 
through canons or gulches, so deep that one might travel for 
days within a hundred feet of water yet perish (some of our 
animals did so) for the want of a drop to drink.  Game was 
here very scarce - a few antelope, wolves, and abundance of 
rattlesnakes, were nearly the only living things we saw.  The 
Indians were mainly fishers of the Shoshone - or Great Snake 
River - tribe, feeding mostly on salmon, which they speared 
with marvellous dexterity; and Root-diggers, who live upon 
wild roots.  When hard put to it, however, in winter, the 
latter miserable creatures certainly, if not the former, 
devoured their own children.  There was no map of the 
country.  It was entirely unexplored; in fact, Bancroft the 
American historian, in his description of the Indian tribes, 
quotes my account of the Root-diggers; which shows how little 
was known of this region up to this date.  I carried a small 
compass fastened round my neck.  That and the stars (we 
travelled by night when in the vicinity of Indians) were my 
only guides for hundreds of dreary miles.

Such then was the task we had set ourselves to grapple with.  
As with life itself, nothing but the magic powers of youth 
and ignorance could have cajoled us to face it with heedless 
confidence and eager zest.  These conditions given, with 
health - the one essential of all enjoyment - added, the 
first escape from civilised restraint, the first survey of 
primordial nature as seen in the boundless expanse of the 
open prairie, the habitat of wild men and wild animals, - 
exhilarate one with emotions akin to the schoolboy's rapture 
in the playground, and the thoughtful man's contemplation of 
the stars.  Freedom and change, space and the possibilities 
of the unknown, these are constant elements of our day-
dreams; now and then actual life dangles visions of them 
before our eyes, alas! only to teach us that the aspirations 
which they inspire are, for the most part, illusory.

Brief indeed, in our case, were the pleasures of novelty.  
For the first few days the business was a continuous picnic 
for all hands.  It was a pleasure to be obliged to help to 
set up the tents, to cut wood, to fetch water, to harness the 
mules, and work exactly as the paid men worked.  The equality 
in this respect - that everything each wanted done had to be 
done with his own hands - was perfect; and never, from first 
to last, even when starvation left me bare strength to lift 
the saddle on to my horse, did I regret the necessity, or 
desire to be dependent on another man.  But the bloom soon 
wore off the plum; and the pleasure consisted not in doing 
but in resting when the work was done.

For the reason already stated, a sample only of the daily 
labour will be given.  It may be as well first to bestow a 
few words upon the men; for, in the long run, our fellow 
beings are the powerful factors, for good or ill, in all our 
worldly enterprises.

We had two ordinary mule-drivers - Potter and Morris, a 
little acrobat out of a travelling circus, a METIF or half-
breed Indian named Jim, two French Canadians - Nelson and 
Louis (the latter spoke French only); Jacob, a Pennsylvanian 
auctioneer whose language was a mixture of Dutch, Yankee, and 
German; and (after we reached Fort Laramie) another Nelson - 
'William' as I shall call him - who offered his services 
gratis if we would allow him to go with us to California.

Jacob the Dutch Yankee was the most intelligent and the most 
useful of the lot, and was unanimously elected cook for the 
party.  The Canadian Nelson was a hard-working good young 
fellow, with a passionate temper.  Louis was a hunter by 
profession, Gallic to the tip of his moustache - fond of 
slapping his breast and telling of the mighty deeds of NOUS 
AUTRES EN HAUT.  Jim, the half-breed was Indian by nature - 
idle, silent, treacherous, but a crafty hunter.  William 
deserves special mention, not from any idiosyncrasy of the 
man, but because he was concerned soon after he joined us in 
the most disastrous of my adventures throughout the 
expedition.

To look at, William Nelson might have sat for the portrait of 
Leatherstocking.  He was a tall gaunt man who had spent his 
youth bringing rafts of timber down the Wabash river, from 
Fort Wayne to Maumee, in Ohio.  For the last six years (he 
was three-and-thirty) he had been trapping musk rats and 
beaver, and dealing in pelts generally.  At the time of our 
meeting he was engaged to a Miss Mary something - the 
daughter of an English immigrant, who would not consent to 
the marriage until William was better off.  He was now bound 
for California, where he hoped to make the required fortune.  
The poor fellow was very sentimental about his Mary; but, 
despite his weatherbeaten face, hardy-looking frame, and his 
'longue carabine,' he was scarcely the hero which, no doubt, 
Miss Mary took him for.

Yes, the novelty soon wore off.  We had necessaries enough to 
last to California.  We also had enough unnecessaries to 
bring us to grief in a couple of weeks.  Our wagons were 
loaded to the roof.  And seeing there was no road nor so much 
as a track, that there were frequent swamps and small rivers 
to be crossed, that our Comanche mules were wilder than the 
Indians who had owned them, it may easily be believed that 
our rate of progress did not average more than six or seven 
miles a day; sometimes it took from dawn to dusk to cross a 
stream by ferrying our packages, and emptied wagons, on such 
rafts as could be extemporised.  Before the end of a 
fortnight, both wagons were shattered, wheels smashed, and 
axles irreparable.  The men, who were as refractory as the 
other animals, helped themselves to provisions, tobacco and 
whisky, at their own sweet will, and treated our 
remonstrances with resentment and contempt.

Heroic measures were exigent.  The wagons were broken up and 
converted into pack saddles.  Both tents, masses of 
provisions, 100 lbs. of lead for bullets, kegs of powder, 
warm clothing, mackintoshes, waterproof sheeting, tarpaulins, 
medicine chest, and bags of sugar, were flung aside to waste 
their sweetness on the desert soil.  Not one of us had ever 
packed a saddle before; and certainly not one of the mules 
had ever carried, or to all appearances, ever meant to carry, 
a pack.  It was a fight between man and beast every day - 
twice a day indeed, for we halted to rest and feed, and had 
to unpack and repack our remaining impedimenta in payment for 
the indulgence.

Let me cite a page from my diary.  It is a fair specimen of 
scores of similar entries.

'JUNE 24TH. - My morning watch.  Up at 1 A.M.  Roused the men 
at 3.30.  Off at 7.30.  Rained hard all day.  Packs slipped 
or kicked off eighteen times before halt.  Men grumbling.  
Nelson and Jim both too ill to work.  When adjusting pack, 
Nelson and Louis had a desperate quarrel.  Nelson drew his 
knife and nearly stabbed Louis.  I snatched a pistol out of 
my holster, and threatened to shoot Nelson unless he shut up.  
Fred, of course, laughed obstreperously at the notion of my 
committing murder, which spoilt the dramatic effect.

'Oh! these devils of mules!  After repacking, they rolled, 
they kicked and bucked, they screamed and bit, as though we 
were all in Hell, and didn't know it.  It took four men to 
pack each one; and the moment their heads were loosed, away 
they went into the river, over the hills, and across country 
as hard as they could lay legs to ground.  It was a cheerful 
sight! - the flour and biscuit stuff swimming about in the 
stream, the hams in a ditch full of mud, the trailed pots and 
pans bumping and rattling on the ground until they were as 
shapeless as old wide-awakes.  And, worst of all, the pack-
saddles, which had delayed us a week to make - nothing now 
but a bundle of splinters.

'25TH. - What a night!  A fearful storm broke over us.  All 
round was like a lake.  Fred and I sat, back to back, perched 
on a flour bag till daylight, with no covering but our 
shooting jackets, our feet in a pool, and bodies streaming 
like cascades.  Repeated lightning seemed to strike the 
ground within a few yards of us.  The animals, wild with 
terror, stampeded in all directions.  In the morning, lo and 
behold!  Samson on his back in the water, insensibly drunk.  
At first I thought he was dead; but he was only dead drunk.  
We can't move till he can, unless we bequeath him to the 
wolves, which are plentiful.  This is the third time he has 
served us the same trick.  I took the liberty to ram my heel 
through the whisky keg (we have kept a small one for 
emergencies) and put it empty under his head for a pillow.'

There were plenty of days and nights to match these, but 
there were worse in store for us.

One evening, travelling along the North Platte river, before 
reaching Laramie, we overtook a Mormon family on their way to 
Salt Lake city.  They had a light covered wagon with hardly 
anything in it but a small supply of flour and bacon.  It was 
drawn by four oxen and two cows.  Four milch cows were 
driven.  The man's name was Blazzard - a Yorkshireman from 
the Wolds, whose speech was that of Learoyd.  He had only his 
wife and a very pretty daughter of sixteen or seventeen with 
him.  We asked him how he became a Mormon.  He answered:  
'From conviction,' and entreated us to be baptized in the 
true faith at his hands.  The offer was tempting, for the 
pretty little milkmaid might have become one of one's wives 
on the spot.  In truth the sweet nymph urged conversion more 
persuasively than her papa - though with what views who shall 
say?  The old farmer's acquaintance with the Bible was 
remarkable.  He quoted it at every sentence, and was eloquent 
upon the subject of the meaning and the origin of the word 
'Bible.'  He assured us the name was given to the Holy Book 
from the circumstance of its contents having passed a synod 
of prophets, just as an Act of Parliament passes the House of 
Commons - BY BILL.  Hence its title.  It was this historical 
fact that guaranteed the authenticity of the sacred volume.  
There are various reasons for believing - this is one of 
them.

The next day, being Sunday, was spent in sleep.  In the 
afternoon I helped the Yorkshire lassie to herd her cattle, 
which had strayed a long distance amongst the rank herbage by 
the banks of the Platte.  The heat was intense, well over 120 
in the sun; and the mosquitos rose in clouds at every step in 
the wet grass.  It was an easy job for me, on my little grey, 
to gallop after the cows and drive them home, (it would have 
been a wearisome one for her,) and she was very grateful, and 
played Dorothea to my Hermann.  None of our party wore any 
upper clothing except a flannel shirt; I had cut off the 
sleeves of mine at the elbow.  This was better for rough 
work, but the broiling sun had raised big blisters on my arms 
and throat which were very painful.  When we got back to 
camp, Dorothea laved the burns for me with cool milk.  Ah! 
she was very pretty; and, what 'blackguard'  Heine, as 
Carlyle dubs him, would have called 'naive schmutzig.'  When 
we parted next morning I thought with a sigh that before the 
autumn was over, she would be in the seraglio of Mr. Brigham 
Young; who, Artemus Ward used to say, was 'the most married 
man he ever knew.'



CHAPTER XXI



SPORT had been the final cause of my trip to America - sport 
and the love of adventure.  As the bison - buffalo, as they 
are called - are now extinct, except in preserved districts, 
a few words about them as they then were may interest game 
hunters of the present day.

No description could convey an adequate conception of the 
numbers in which they congregated.  The admirable 
illustrations in Catlin's great work on the North American 
Indians, afford the best idea to those who have never seen 
the wonderful sight itself.  The districts they frequented 
were vast sandy uplands sparsely covered with the tufty 
buffalo or gramma grass.  These regions were always within 
reach of the water-courses; to which morning and evening the 
herds descended by paths, after the manner of sheep or cattle 
in a pasture.  Never shall I forget the first time I 
witnessed the extraordinary event of the evening drink.  
Seeing the black masses galloping down towards the river, by 
the banks of which our party were travelling, we halted some 
hundred yards short of the tracks.  To have been caught 
amongst the animals would have been destruction; for, do what 
they would to get out of one's way, the weight of the 
thousands pushing on would have crushed anything that impeded 
them.  On the occasion I refer to we approached to within 
safe distance, and fired into them till the ammunition in our 
pouches was expended.

As examples of our sporting exploits, three days taken almost 
at random will suffice.  The season was so far advanced that, 
unless we were to winter at Fort Laramie, it was necessary to 
keep going.  It was therefore agreed that whoever left the 
line of march - that is, the vicinity of the North Platte - 
for the purpose of hunting should take his chance of catching 
up the rest of the party, who were to push on as speedily as 
possible.  On two of the days which I am about to record this 
rule nearly brought me into trouble.  I quote from my 
journal:

'Left camp to hunt by self.  Got a shot at some deer lying in 
long grass on banks of a stream.  While stalking, I could 
hardly see or breathe for mosquitos; they were in my eyes, 
nose, and mouth.  Steady aim was impossible; and, to my 
disgust, I missed the easiest of shots.  The neck and flanks 
of my little grey are as red as if painted.  He is weak from 
loss of blood.  Fred's head is now so swollen he cannot wear 
his hard hat; his eyes are bunged up, and his face is comic 
to look at.  Several deer and antelopes; but ground too 
level, and game too wild to let one near.  Hardly caring what 
direction I took, followed outskirts of large wood, four or 
five miles away from the river.  Saw a good many summer 
lodges; but knew, by the quantity of game, that the Indians 
had deserted them.  In the afternoon came suddenly upon deer; 
and singling out one of the youngest fawns, tried to run it 
down.  The country being very rough, I found it hard work to 
keep between it and the wood.  First, my hat blew off; then a 
pistol jumped out of the holster; but I was too near to give 
up, - meaning to return for these things afterwards.  Two or 
three times I ran right over the fawn, which bleated in the 
most piteous manner, but always escaped the death-blow from 
the grey's hoofs.  By degrees we edged nearer to the thicket, 
when the fawn darted down the side of a bluff, and was lost 
in the long grass and brushwood, I followed at full speed; 
but, unable to arrest the impetus of the horse, we dashed 
headlong into the thick scrub, and were both thrown with 
violence to the ground.  I was none the worse; but the poor 
beast had badly hurt his shoulder, and for the time was dead 
lame.

'For an hour at least I hunted, for my pistol.  It was much 
more to me than my hat.  It was a huge horse pistol, that 
threw an ounce ball of exactly the calibre of my double 
rifle.  I had shot several buffaloes with it, by riding close 
to them in a chase; and when in danger of Indians I loaded it 
with slugs.  At last I found it.  It was getting late; and I 
didn't rightly know where I was.  I made for the low country.  
But as we camped last night at least two miles from the 
river, on account of the swamps, the difficulty was to find 
the tracks.  The poor little grey and I hunted for it in 
vain.  The wet ground was too wet, the dry ground too hard, 
to show the tracks in the now imperfect light.

'The situation was a disagreeable one:  it might be two or 
three days before I again fell in with my friends.  I had not 
touched food since the early morning, and was rather done.  
To return to the high ground was to give up for the night; 
but that meant another day behind the cavalcade, with 
diminished chance of overtaking it.  Through the dusk I saw 
what I fancied was something moving on a mound ahead of me 
which arose out of the surrounding swamp.  I spurred on, but 
only to find the putrid carcase of a buffalo, with a wolf 
supping on it.  The brute was gorged, and looked as sleek as 
"die schone Frau Giermund"; but, unlike Isegrim's spouse, she 
was free to escape, for she wasn't worth a bullet.  I was so 
famished, that I examined the carcase with the hope of 
finding a cut that would last for a day or two; my nose 
wouldn't have it.  I plodded on, the water up to the saddle-
girths.  The mosquitos swarmed in millions, and the poor 
little grey could hardly get one leg before the other.  I, 
too, was so feverish that, ignorant of bacteria, I filled my 
round hat with the filthy stagnant water, and drank it at a 
draught.

'At last I made for higher ground.  It was too dark to hunt 
for tracks, so I began to look out for a level bed.  Suddenly 
my beast, who jogged along with his nose to the ground, gave 
a loud neigh.  We had struck the trail.  I threw the reins on 
his neck, and left matters to his superior instincts.  In 
less than half an hour the joyful light of a camp fire 
gladdened my eyes.  Fred told me he had halted as soon as he 
was able, not on my account only, but because he, too, had 
had a severe fall, and was suffering great pain from a 
bruised knee.'

Here is an ordinary example of buffalo shooting:

'JULY 2ND. - Fresh meat much wanted.  With Jim the half-breed 
to the hills.  No sooner on high ground than we sighted game.  
As far as eye could reach, right away to the horizon, the 
plain was black with buffaloes, a truly astonishing sight.  
Jim was used to it.  I stopped to spy them with amazement.  
The nearest were not more than half a mile off, so we 
picketed our horses under the sky line; and choosing the 
hollows, walked on till crawling became expedient.  As is 
their wont, the outsiders were posted on bluffs or knolls in 
a commanding position; these were old bulls.  To my 
inexperience, our chance of getting a shot seemed small; for 
we had to cross the dipping ground under the brow whereon the 
sentinels were lying.  Three extra difficulties beset us - 
the prairie dogs (a marmot, so called from its dog-like bark 
when disturbed) were all round us, and bolted into their 
holes like rabbits directly they saw us coming; two big grey 
wolves, the regular camp followers of a herd, were prowling 
about in a direct line between us and the bulls; lastly, the 
cows, though up and feeding, were inconveniently out of 
reach.  (The meat of the young cow is much preferred to that 
of the bull.)  Jim, however, was confident.  I followed my 
leader to a wink.  The only instruction I didn't like when we 
started crawling on the hot sand was "Look out for 
rattlesnakes."

'The wolves stopped, examined us suspiciously, then quietly 
trotted off.  What with this and the alarm of the prairie 
dogs, an old bull, a patriarch of the tribe, jumped up and 
walked with majestic paces to the top of the knoll.  We lay 
flat on our faces, till he, satisfied with the result of his 
scrutiny, resumed his recumbent posture; but with his head 
turned straight towards us.  Jim, to my surprise, stealthily 
crawled on.  In another minute or two we had gained a point 
whence we could see through the grass without being seen.  
Here we rested to recover breath.  Meanwhile, three or four 
young cows fed to within sixty or seventy yards of us.  
Unluckily we both selected the same animal, and both fired at 
the same moment.  Off went the lot helter skelter, all save 
the old bull, who roared out his rage and trotted up close to 
our hiding place.

'"Look out for a bolt," whispered Jim, "but don't show 
yourself nohow till I tell you."

'For a minute or two the suspense was exciting.  One hardly 
dared to breathe.  But his majesty saw us not, and turned 
again to his wives.  We instantly reloaded; and the startled 
herd, which had only moved a few yards, gave us the chance of 
a second shot.  The first cow had fallen dead almost where 
she stood.  The second we found at the foot of the hill, also 
with two bullet wounds behind the shoulder.  The tongues, 
humps, and tender loins, with some other choice morsels, were 
soon cut off and packed, and we returned to camp with a grand 
supply of beef for Jacob's larder.



CHAPTER XXII



AT the risk of being tedious, I will tell of one more day's 
buffalo hunting, to show the vicissitudes of this kind of 
sport.  Before doing so we will glance at another important 
feature of prairie life, a camp of Sioux Indians.

One evening, after halting on the banks of the Platte, we 
heard distant sounds of tomtoms on the other side of the 
river.  Jim, the half-breed, and Louis differed as to the 
tribe, and hence the friendliness or hostility, of our 
neighbours.  Louis advised saddling up and putting the night 
between us; he regaled us to boot with a few blood-curdling 
tales of Indian tortures, and of NOUS AUTRES EN HAUT.  Jim 
treated these with scorn, and declared he knew by the 'tunes' 
(!) that the pow-wow was Sioux.  Just now, he asserted, the 
Sioux were friendly, and this 'village' was on its way to 
Fort Laramie to barter 'robes' (buffalo skins) for blankets 
and ammunition.  He was quite willing to go over and talk to 
them if we had no objection.

Fred, ever ready for adventure, would have joined him in a 
minute; but the river, which was running strong, was full of 
nasty currents, and his injured knee disabled him from 
swimming.  No one else seemed tempted; so, following Jim's 
example, I stripped to my flannel shirt and moccasins, and 
crossed the river, which was easier to get into than out of, 
and soon reached the 'village.'  Jim was right, - they were 
Sioux, and friendly.  They offered us a pipe of kinik (the 
dried bark of the red willow), and jabbered away with their 
kinsman, who seemed almost more at home with them than with 
us.

Seeing one of their 'braves' with three fresh scalps at his 
belt, I asked for the history of them.  In Sioux gutturals 
the story was a long one.  Jim's translation amounted to 
this:  The scalps were 'lifted' from two Crows and a Ponkaw.  
The Crows, it appeared, were the Sioux' natural enemies 
'anyhow,' for they occasionally hunted on each other's 
ranges.  But the Ponkaw, whom he would not otherwise have 
injured, was casually met by him on a horse which the Sioux 
recognised for a white man's.  Upon being questioned how he 
came by it, the Ponkaw simply replied that it was his own.  
Whereupon the Sioux called him a liar; and proved it by 
sending an arrow through his body.

I didn't quite see it.  But then, strictly speaking, I am no 
collector of scalps.  To preserve my own, I kept the hair on 
it as short as a tooth-brush.

Before we left, our hosts fed us on raw buffalo meat.  This, 
cut in slices, and dried crisp in the sun, is excellent.  
Their lodges were very comfortable, most of them large enough 
to hold a dozen people.  The ground inside was covered with 
buffalo robes; and the sewn skins, spread tight upon the 
converging poles, formed a tent stout enough to defy all 
weathers.  In winter the lodge can be entirely closed; and 
when a fire is kindled in the centre, the smoke escaping at a 
small hole where the poles join, the snugness is complete.

At the entrance of one of these lodges I watched a squaw and 
her child prepare a meal.  When the fuel was collected, a fat 
puppy, playing with the child, was seized by the squaw, and 
knocked on the throat - not head - with a stick.  The puppy 
was then returned, kicking, to the tender mercies of the 
infant; who exerted its small might to add to the animal's 
miseries, while the mother fed the fire and filled a kettle 
for the stew.  The puppy, much more alive than dead, was held 
by the hind leg over the flames as long as the squaw's 
fingers could stand them.  She then let it fall on the 
embers, where it struggled and squealed horribly, and would 
have wriggled off, but for the little savage, who took good 
care to provide for the satisfactory singeing of its 
playmate.

Considering the length of its lineage, how remarkably hale 
and well preserved is our own barbarity!

We may now take our last look at the buffaloes, for we shall 
see them no more.  Again I quote my journal:

'JULY 5TH. - Men sulky because they have nothing to eat but 
rancid ham, and biscuit dust which has been so often soaked 
that it is mouldy and sour.  They are a dainty lot!  Samson 
and I left camp early with the hopes of getting meat.  While 
he was shooting prairie dogs his horse made off, and cost me 
nearly an hour's riding to catch.  Then, accidentally letting 
go of my mustang, he too escaped; and I had to run him down 
with the other.  Towards evening, spied a small band of 
buffaloes, which we approached by leading our horses up a 
hollow.  They got our wind, however, and were gone before we 
were aware of it.  They were all young, and so fast, it took 
a twenty minutes' gallop to come up with them.  Samson's 
horse put his foot in a hole, and the cropper they both got 
gave the band a long start, as it became a stern chase, and 
no heading off.

'At length I managed to separate one from the herd by firing 
my pistol into the "brown," and then devoted my efforts to 
him alone.  Once or twice he turned and glared savagely 
through his mane.  When quite isolated he pulled up short, so 
did I. We were about sixty yards apart.  I flung the reins 
upon the neck of the mustang, who was too blown to stir, and 
handling my rifle, waited for the bull to move so that I 
might see something more than the great shaggy front, which 
screened his body.  But he stood his ground, tossing up the 
sand with his hoofs.  Presently, instead of turning tail, he 
put his head down, and bellowing with rage, came at me as 
hard as he could tear.  I had but a moment for decision, - to 
dig spurs into the mustang, or risk the shot.  I chose the 
latter; paused till I was sure of his neck, and fired when he 
was almost under me.  In an instant I was sent flying; and 
the mustang was on his back with all four legs in the air.

'The bull was probably as much astonished as we were.  His 
charge had carried him about thirty yards, at most, beyond 
us.  There he now stood; facing me, pawing the ground and 
snorting as before.  Badly wounded I knew him to be, - that 
was the worst of it; especially as my rifle, with its 
remaining loaded barrel, lay right between us.  To hesitate 
for a second only, was to lose the game.  There was no time 
to think of bruises; I crawled, eyes on him, straight for my 
weapon:  got it - it was already cocked, and the stock 
unbroken - raised my knee for a rest.  We were only twenty 
yards apart (the shot meant death for one of the two), and 
just catching a glimpse of his shoulder-blade, I pulled.  I 
could hear the thud of the heavy bullet, and - what was 
sweeter music - the ugh! of the fatal groan.  The beast 
dropped on his knees, and a gush of blood spurted from his 
nostrils.

'But the wild devil of a mustang? that was my first thought 
now.  Whenever one dismounted, it was necessary to loosen his 
long lariat, and let it trail on the ground.  Without this 
there was no chance of catching him.  I saw at once what had 
happened:  by the greatest good fortune, at the last moment, 
he must have made an instinctive start, which probably saved 
his life, and mine too.  The bull's horns had just missed his 
entrails and my leg, - we were broadside on to the charge, - 
and had caught him in the thigh, below the hip.  There was a 
big hole, and he was bleeding plentifully.  For all that, he 
wouldn't let me catch him.  He could go faster on three legs 
than I on two.

'It was getting dark, I had not touched food since starting, 
nor had I wetted my lips.  My thirst was now intolerable.  
The travelling rule, about keeping on, was an ugly incubus.  
Samson would go his own ways - he had sense enough for that - 
but how, when, where, was I to quench my thirst?  Oh! for the 
tip of Lazarus' finger - or for choice, a bottle of Bass - to 
cool my tongue!  Then too, whither would the mustang stray in 
the night if I rested or fell asleep?  Again and again I 
tried to stalk him by the starlight.  Twice I got hold of his 
tail, but he broke away.  If I drove him down to the river 
banks the chance of catching him would be no better, and I 
should lose the dry ground to rest on.

'It was about as unpleasant a night as I had yet passed.  
Every now and then I sat down, and dropped off to sleep from 
sheer exhaustion.  Every time this happened I dreamed of 
sparkling drinks; then woke with a start to a lively sense of 
the reality, and anxious searches for the mustang.

'Directly the day dawned I drove the animal, now very stiff, 
straight down for the Platte.  He wanted water fully as much 
as his master; and when we sighted it he needed no more 
driving.  Such a hurry was he in that, in his rush for the 
river, he got bogged in the muddy swamp at its edge.  I 
seized my chance, and had him fast in a minute.  We both 
plunged into the stream; I, clothes and all, and drank, and 
drank, and drank.'

That evening I caught up the cavalcade.

How curious it is to look back upon such experiences from a 
different stage of life's journey!  How would it have fared 
with me had my rifle exploded with the fall? it was knocked 
out of my hands at full cock.  How if the stock had been 
broken?  It had been thrown at least ten yards.  How if the 
horn had entered my thigh instead of the horse's?  How if I 
had fractured a limb, or had been stunned, or the bull had 
charged again while I was creeping up to him?  Any one, or 
more than one, of these contingencies were more likely to 
happen than not.  But nothing did happen, save - the best.

Not a thought of the kind ever crossed my mind, either at the 
time or afterwards.  Yet I was not a thoughtless man, only an 
average man.  Nine Englishmen out of ten with a love of sport 
- as most Englishmen are - would have done, and have felt, 
just as I did.  I was bruised and still; but so one is after 
a run with hounds.  I had had many a nastier fall hunting in 
Derbyshire.  The worst that could happen did not happen; but 
the worst never - well, so rarely does.  One might shoot 
oneself instead of the pigeon, or be caught picking forbidden 
fruit.  Narrow escapes are as good as broad ones.  The truth 
is, when we are young, and active, and healthy, whatever 
happens, of the pleasant or lucky kind, we accept as a matter 
of course.

Ah! youth! youth!  If we only knew when we were well off, 
when we were happy, when we possessed all that this world has 
to give!  If we but knew that love is only a matter of course 
so long as youth and its bounteous train is ours, we might 
perhaps make the most of it, and give up looking for - 
something better.  But what then?  Give up the 'something 
better'?  Give up pursuit, - the effort that makes us strong?  
'Give up the sweets of hope'?   No! 'tis better as it is, 
perhaps.  The kitten plays with its tail, and the nightingale 
sings; but they think no more of happiness than the rose-bud 
of its beauty.  May be happiness comes not of too much 
knowing, or too much thinking either.



CHAPTER XXIII



FORT LARAMIE was a military station and trading post 
combined.  It was a stone building in what they called a 
'compound' or open space, enclosed by a palisade.  When we 
arrived there, it was occupied by a troop of mounted riflemen 
under canvas, outside the compound.  The officers lived in 
the fort; and as we had letters to the Colonel - Somner - and 
to the Captain - Rhete, they were very kind and very useful 
to us.

We pitched our camp by the Laramie river, four miles from the 
fort.  Nearer than that there was not a blade of grass.  The 
cavalry horses and military mules needed all there was at 
hand.  Some of the mules we were allowed to buy, or exchange 
for our own.  We accordingly added six fresh ones to our 
cavalcade, and parted with two horses; which gave us a total 
of fifteen mules and six horses.  Government provisions were 
not to be had, so that we could not replenish our now 
impoverished stock.  This was a serious matter, as will be 
seen before long.  Nor was the evil lessened by my being laid 
up with a touch of fever - the effect, no doubt, of those 
drenches of stagnant water.  The regimental doctor was 
absent.  I could not be taken into the fort.  And, as we had 
no tent, and had thrown away almost everything but the 
clothes we wore, I had to rough it and take my chance.  Some 
relics of our medicine chest, together with a tough 
constitution, pulled me through.  But I was much weakened, 
and by no means fit for the work before us.  Fred did his 
best to persuade me from going further.  He confessed that he 
was utterly sick of the expedition; that his injured knee 
prevented him from hunting, or from being of any use in 
packing and camp work; that the men were a set of ruffians 
who did just as they chose - they grumbled at the hardships, 
yet helped themselves to the stores without restraint; that 
we had the Rocky Mountains yet to cross; after that, the 
country was unknown.  Colonel Somner had strongly advised us 
to turn back.  Forty of his men had tried two months ago to 
carry despatches to the regiment's headquarters in Oregon.  
Only five had got through; the rest had been killed and 
scalped.  Finally, that we had something like 1,200 miles to 
go, and were already in the middle of August.  It would be 
folly, obstinacy, madness, to attempt it.  He would stop and 
hunt where we were, as long as I liked; or he would go back 
with me.  He would hire fresh good men, and buy new horses; 
and, now that we knew the country, we could get to St. Louis 
before the end of September, and' - . There was no reasonable 
answer to be made.  I simply told him I had thought it over, 
and had decided to go on.  Like the plucky fellow and staunch 
friend that he was, he merely shrugged his shoulders, and 
quietly said, 'Very well.  So be it.'

Before leaving Fort Laramie a singular incident occurred, 
which must seem so improbable, that its narration may be 
taken for fiction.  It was, however, a fact.  There was 
plenty of game near our camping ground; and though the 
weather was very hot, one of the party usually took the 
trouble to bring in something to keep the pot supplied.  The 
sage hens, the buffalo or elk meat were handed over to Jacob, 
who made a stew with bacon and rice, enough for the evening 
meal and the morrow's breakfast.  After supper, when everyone 
had filled his stomach, the large kettle, covered with its 
lid, was taken off the fire, and this allowed to burn itself 
out.

For four or five mornings running the kettle was found nearly 
empty, and all hands had to put up with a cup of coffee and 
mouldy biscuit dust.  There was a good deal of 
unparliamentary language.  Everyone accused everyone else of 
filthy greediness.  It was disgusting that after eating all 
he could, a man hadn't the decency to wait till the morning.  
The pot had been full for supper, and, as every man could 
see, it was never half emptied - enough was always left for 
breakfast.  A resolution was accordingly passed that each 
should take his turn of an hour's watch at night, till the 
glutton was caught in the act.

My hour happened to be from 11 to 12 P.M.  I strongly 
suspected the thief to be an Indian, and loaded my big pistol 
with slugs on the chance.  It was a clear moonlight night.  I 
propped myself comfortably with a bag of hams; and concealed 
myself as well as I could in a bush of artemisia, which was 
very thick all round.  I had not long been on the look-out 
when a large grey wolf prowled slowly out of the bushes.  The 
night was bright as day; but every one of the men was sound 
asleep in a circle round the remains of the camp fire.  The 
wolf passed between them, hesitating as it almost touched a 
covering blanket.  Step by step it crept up to the kettle, 
took the handle of the lid between its jaws, lifted it off, 
placed it noiselessly on the ground, and devoured the savoury 
stew.

I could not fire, because of the men.  I dared not move, lest 
I should disturb the robber.  I was even afraid the click of 
cocking the pistol would startle him and prevent my getting a 
quiet shot.  But patience was rewarded.  When satiated, the 
brute retired as stealthily as he had advanced; and as he 
passed within seven or eight yards of me I let him have it.  
Great was my disappointment to see him scamper off.  How was 
it possible I could have missed him?  I must have fired over 
his back.  The men jumped to their feet and clutched their 
rifles; but, though astonished at my story, were soon at rest 
again.  After this the kettle was never robbed.  Four days 
later we were annoyed with such a stench that it was a 
question of shifting our quarters.  In hunting for the 
nuisance amongst the thicket of wormwood, the dead wolf was 
discovered not twenty yards from our centre.

The reader would not thank me for an account of the 
monotonous drudgery, the hardships, the quarrellings, which 
grew worse from day to day after we left Fort Laramie.  Fred 
and I were about the only two who were on speaking terms; we 
clung to each other, as a sort of forlorn security against 
coming disasters.  Gradually it was dawning on me that, under 
the existing circumstances, the fulfilment of my hopes would 
be (as Fred had predicted) an impossibility; and that to 
persist in the attempt to realise them was to court 
destruction.  As yet, I said nothing of this to him.  Perhaps 
I was ashamed to.  Perhaps I secretly acknowledged to myself 
that he had been wiser than I, and that my stubbornness was 
responsible for the life itself of every one of the party.

Doubtless thoughts akin to these must often have haunted the 
mind of my companion; but he never murmured; only uttered a 
hasty objurgation when troubles reached a climax, and 
invariably ended with a burst of cheery laughter which only 
the sulkiest could resist.  It was after a day of severe 
trials he proposed that we should go off by ourselves for a 
couple of nights in search of game, of which we were much in 
need.  The men were easily persuaded to halt and rest.  
Samson had become a sort of nonentity.  Dysentery had 
terribly reduced his strength, and with it such intelligence 
as he could boast of.  We started at daybreak, right glad to 
be alone together and away from the penal servitude to which 
we were condemned.  We made for the Sweetwater, not very far 
from the foot of the South Pass, where antelope and black-
tailed deer abounded.  We failed, however, to get near them - 
stalk after stalk miscarried.

Disappointed and tired, we were looking out for some snug 
little hollow where we could light a fire without its being 
seen by the Indians, when, just as we found what we wanted, 
an antelope trotted up to a brow to inspect us.  I had a 
fairly good shot at him and missed.  This disheartened us 
both.  Meat was the one thing we now sorely needed to save 
the rapidly diminishing supply of hams.  Fred said nothing, 
but I saw by his look how this trifling accident helped to 
depress him.  I was ready to cry with vexation.  My rifle was 
my pride, the stag of my life - my ALTER EGO.  It was never 
out of my hands; every day I practised at prairie dogs, at 
sage hens, at a mark even if there was no game.  A few days 
before we got to Laramie I had killed, right and left, two 
wild ducks, the second on the wing; and now, when so much 
depended on it, I could not hit a thing as big as a donkey.  
The fact is, I was the worse for illness.  I had constant 
returns of fever, with bad shivering fits, which did not 
improve the steadiness of one's hand.  However, we managed to 
get a supper.  While we were examining the spot where the 
antelope had stood, a leveret jumped up, and I knocked him 
over with my remaining barrel.  We fried him in the one tin 
plate we had brought with us, and thought it the most 
delicious dish we had had for weeks.

As we lay side by side, smoke curling peacefully from our 
pipes, we chatted far into the night, of other days - of 
Cambridge, of our college friends, of London, of the opera, 
of balls, of women - the last a fruitful subject - and of the 
future.  I was vastly amused at his sudden outburst as some 
start of one of the horses picketed close to us reminded us 
of the actual present.  'If ever I get out of this d-d mess,' 
he exclaimed, 'I'll never go anywhere without my own French 
cook.'  He kept his word, to the end of his life, I believe.

It was a delightful repose, a complete forgetting, for a 
night at any rate, of all impending care.  Each was cheered 
and strengthened for the work to come.  The spirit of 
enterprise, the love of adventure restored for the moment, 
believed itself a match for come what would.  The very 
animals seemed invigorated by the rest and the abundance of 
rich grass spreading as far as we could see.  The morning was 
bright and cool.  A delicious bath in the Sweetwater, a 
breakfast on fried ham and coffee, and once more in our 
saddles on the way back to camp, we felt (or fancied that we 
felt) prepared for anything.

That is just what we were not.  Samson and the men, meeting 
with no game where we had left them, had moved on that 
afternoon in search of better hunting grounds.  The result 
was that when we overtook them, we found five mules up to 
their necks in a muddy creek.  The packs were sunk to the 
bottom, and the animals nearly drowned or strangled.  Fred 
and I rushed to the rescue.  At once we cut the ropes which 
tied them together; and, setting the men to pull at tails or 
heads, succeeded at last in extricating them.

Our new-born vigour was nipped in the bud.  We were all 
drenched to the skin.  Two packs containing the miserable 
remains of our wardrobe, Fred's and mine, were lost.  The 
catastrophe produced a good deal of bad language and bad 
blood.  Translated into English it came to this:  'They had 
trusted to us, taking it for granted we knew what we were 
about.  What business had we to "boss" the party if we were 
as ignorant as the mules?  We had guaranteed to lead them 
through to California [!] and had brought them into this 
"almighty fix" to slave like niggers and to starve.' There 
was just truth enough in the Jeremiad to make it sting.  It 
would not have been prudent, nay, not very safe, to return 
curse for curse.  But the breaking point was reached at last.  
That night I, for one, had not much sleep.  I was soaked from 
head to foot, and had not a dry rag for a change.  Alternate 
fits of fever and rigor would alone have kept me awake; but 
renewed ponderings upon the situation and confirmed 
convictions of the peremptory necessity of breaking up the 
party, forced me to the conclusion that this was the right, 
the only, course to adopt.

For another twenty-four hours I brooded over my plans.  Two 
main difficulties confronted me:  the announcement to the 
men, who might mutiny; and the parting with Fred, which I 
dreaded far the most of the two.  Would he not think it 
treacherous to cast him off after the sacrifices he had made 
for me?  Implicitly we were as good as pledged to stand by 
each other to the last gasp.  Was it not mean and dastardly 
to run away from the battle because it was dangerous to fight 
it out?  Had friendship no claims superior to personal 
safety?  Was not my decision prompted by sheer selfishness?  
Could anything be said in its defence?

Yes; sentiment must yield to reason.  To go on was certain 
death for all.  It was not too late to return, for those who 
wished it.  And when I had demonstrated, as I could easily 
do, the impossibility of continuance, each one could decide 
for himself.  The men were as reckless as they were ignorant.  
However they might execrate us, we were still their natural 
leaders:  their blame, indeed, implied they felt it.  No 
sentimental argument could obscure this truth, and this 
conviction was decisive.

The next night and the day after were, from a moral point of 
view, the most trying perhaps, of the whole journey.  We had 
halted on a wide, open plain.  Due west of us in the far 
distance rose the snowy peaks of the mountains.  And the 
prairie on that side terminated in bluffs, rising gradually 
to higher spurs of the range.  When the packs were thrown 
off, and the men had turned, as usual, to help themselves to 
supper, I drew Fred aside and imparted my resolution to him.  
He listened to it calmly - much more so than I had expected.  
Yet it was easy to see by his unusual seriousness that he 
fully weighed the gravity of the purpose.  All he said at the 
time was, 'Let us talk it over after the men are asleep.'

We did so.  We placed our saddles side by side - they were 
our regular pillows - and, covering ourselves with the same 
blanket, well out of ear-shot, discussed the proposition from 
every practical aspect.  He now combated my scheme, as I 
always supposed he would, by laying stress upon our bond of 
friendship.  This was met on my part by the arguments already 
set forth.  He then proposed an amendment, which almost upset 
my decision.  'It is true,' he admitted, 'that we cannot get 
through as we are going now; the provisions will not hold out 
another month, and it is useless to attempt to control the 
men.  But there are two ways out of the difficulty:  we can 
reach Salt Lake City and winter there; or, if you are bent on 
going to California, why shouldn't we take Jacob and Nelson 
(the Canadian), pay off the rest of the brutes, and travel 
together, - us four?'

Whether 'das ewig Wirkende' that shapes our ends be 
beneficent or malignant is not easy to tell, till after the 
event.  Certain it is that sometimes we seem impelled by 
latent forces stronger than ourselves - if by self be meant 
one's will.  We cannot give a reason for all we do; the 
infinite chain of cause and effect, which has had no 
beginning and will have no end, is part of the reckoning, - 
with this, finite minds can never grapple.

It was destined (my stubbornness was none of my making) that 
I should remain obdurate.  Fred's last resource was an 
attempt to persuade me (he really believed:  I, too, thought 
it likely) that the men would show fight, annex beasts and 
provisions, and leave us to shift for ourselves.  There were 
six of them, armed as we were, to us three, or rather us two, 
for Samson was a negligible quantity.  'We shall see,' said 
I; and by degrees we dropped asleep.



CHAPTER XXIV



BEFORE the first streak of dawn I was up and off to hunt for 
the horses and mules, which were now allowed to roam in 
search of feed.  On my return, the men were afoot, taking it 
easy as usual.  Some artemisia bushes were ablaze for the 
morning's coffee.  No one but Fred had a suspicion of the 
coming crisis.  I waited till each one had lighted his pipe; 
then quietly requested the lot to gather the provision packs 
together, as it was desirable to take stock, and make some 
estimate of demand and supply.  Nothing loth, the men obeyed.  
'Now,' said I, 'turn all the hams out of their bags, and let 
us see how long they will last.'  When done:  'What!' I 
exclaimed, with well - feigned dismay, 'that's not all, 
surely?  There are not enough here to last a fortnight.  
Where are the rest?   No more?  Why, we shall starve.'  The 
men's faces fell; but never a murmur, nor a sound.  'Turn out 
the biscuit bags.  Here, spread these empty ham sacks, and 
pour the biscuit on to them.  Don't lose any of the dust.  We 
shall want every crumb, mouldy or not.'  The gloomy faces 
grew gloomier.  What's to be done?'  Silence.  'The first 
thing, as I think all will agree, is to divide what is left 
into nine equal shares - that's our number now - and let each 
one take his ninth part, to do what he likes with.  You 
yourselves shall portion out the shares, and then draw lots 
for choice.'

This presentation of the inevitable compelled submission.  
The whole, amounting to twelve light mule packs (it had been 
fifteen fairly heavy ones after our purchases at Fort 
Laramie), was still a goodly bulk to look at.  The nine 
peddling dividends, when seen singly, were not quite what the 
shareholders had anticipated.

Why were they still silent?  Why did they not rebel, and 
visit their wrath upon the directors?  Because they knew in 
their hearts that we had again and again predicted the 
catastrophe.  They knew we had warned them scores and scores 
of times of the consequences of their wilful and reckless 
improvidence.  They were stupefied, aghast, at the ruin they 
had brought upon themselves.  To turn upon us, to murder us, 
and divide our three portions between them, would have been 
suicidal.  In the first place, our situation was as desperate 
as theirs.  We should fight for our lives; and it was not 
certain, in fact it was improbable, that either Jacob or 
William would side against us.  Without our aid - they had 
not a compass among them - they were helpless.  The instinct 
of self-preservation bade them trust to our good will.

So far, then, the game was won.  Almost humbly they asked 
what we advised them to do.  The answer was prompt and 
decisive:  'Get back to Fort Laramie as fast as you can.'  
'But how?  Were they to walk?  They couldn't carry their 
packs.'  'Certainly not; we were English gentlemen, and would 
behave as such.  Each man should have his own mule; each, 
into the bargain, should receive his pay according to 
agreement.' They were agreeably surprised.  I then very 
strongly counselled them not to travel together.  Past 
experience proved how dangerous this must be.  To avoid the 
temptation, even the chance, of this happening, the surest 
and safest plan would be for each party to start separately, 
and not leave till the last was out of sight.  For my part I 
had resolved to go alone.

It was a melancholy day for everyone.  And to fill the cup of 
wretchedness to overflowing, the rain, beginning with a 
drizzle, ended with a downpour.  Consultations took place 
between men who had not spoken to one another for weeks.  
Fred offered to go on, at all events to Salt Lake City, if 
Nelson the Canadian and Jacob would go with him.  Both 
eagerly closed with the offer.  They would be so much nearer 
to the 'diggings,' and were, moreover, fond of their leader.  
Louis would go back to Fort Laramie.  Potter and Morris would 
cross the mountains, and strike south for the Mormon city if 
their provisions and mules threatened to give out.  William 
would try his luck alone in the same way.  And there remained 
no one but Samson, undecided and unprovided for.  The strong 
weak man sat on the ground in the steady rain, smoking pipe 
after pipe; watching first the preparations, then the 
departures, one after the other, at intervals of an hour or 
so.  First the singles, then the pair; then, late in the 
afternoon, Fred and his two henchmen.

It is needless to depict our separation.  I do not think 
either expected ever to see the other again.  Yet we parted 
after the manner of trueborn Britons, as if we should meet 
again in a day or two.  'Well, good-bye, old fellow.  Good 
luck.  What a beastly day, isn't it?'  But emotions are only 
partially suppressed by subduing their expression.  The 
hearts of both were full.

I watched the gradual disappearance of my dear friend, and 
thought with a sigh of my loss in Jacob and Nelson, the two 
best men of the band.  It was a comfort to reflect that they 
had joined Fred.  Jacob especially was full of resource; 
Nelson of energy and determination.  And the courage and cool 
judgment of Fred, and his presence of mind in emergencies, 
were all pledges for the safety of the trio.

As they vanished behind a distant bluff, I turned to the 
sodden wreck of the deserted camp, and began actively to pack 
my mules.  Samson seemed paralysed by imbecility.

'What had I better do?' he presently asked, gazing with dull 
eyes at his two mules and two horses.

'I don't care what you do.  It is nothing to me.  You had 
better pack your mules before it is dark, or you may lose 
them.'

'I may as well go with you, I think.  I don't care much about 
going back to Laramie.'

He looked miserable.  I was so.  I had held out under a long 
and heavy strain.  Parting with Fred had, for the moment, 
staggered my resolution.  I was sick at heart.  The thought 
of packing two mules twice a day, single-handed, weakened as 
I was by illness, appalled me.  And though ashamed of the 
perversity which had led me to fling away the better and 
accept the worse, I yielded.

'Very well then.  Make haste.  Get your traps together.  I'll 
look after the horses.'

It took more than an hour before the four mules were ready.  
Like a fool, I left Samson to tie the led horses in a string, 
while I did the same with the mules.  He started, leading the 
horses.  I followed with the mule train some minutes later.  
Our troubles soon began.  The two spare horses were nearly as 
wild as the mules.  I had not got far when I discerned 
through the rain a kicking and plunging and general 
entanglement of the lot ahead of me.  Samson had fastened the 
horses together with slip knots; and they were all doing 
their best to strangle one another and themselves.  To leave 
the mules was dangerous, yet two men were required to release 
the maddened horses.  At last the labour was accomplished; 
and once more the van pushed on with distinct instructions as 
to the line of march, it being now nearly dark.  The mules 
had naturally vanished in the gloom; and by the time I was 
again in my saddle, Samson was - I knew not where.  On and on 
I travelled, far into the night.  But failing to overtake my 
companion, and taking for granted that he had missed his way, 
I halted when I reached a stream, threw off the packs, let 
the animals loose, rolled myself in my blanket, and shut my 
eyes upon a trying day.

Nothing happens but the unexpected.  Daylight woke me.  
Samson, still in his rugs, was but a couple of hundred yards 
further up the stream.  In the afternoon of the third day we 
fell in with William.  He had cut himself a long willow wand 
and was fishing for trout, of which he had caught several in 
the upper reaches of the Sweetwater.  He threw down his rod, 
hastened to welcome our arrival, and at once begged leave to 
join us.  He was already sick of solitude.  He had come 
across Potter and Morris, who had left him that morning.  
They had been visited by wolves in the night, (I too had been 
awakened by their howlings,) and poor William did not relish 
the thought of the mountains alone, with his one little white 
mule - which he called 'Cream.'  He promised to do his utmost 
to help with the packing, and 'not cost us a cent.'  I did 
not tell him how my heart yearned towards him, and how 
miserably my courage had oozed away since we parted, but made 
a favour of his request, and granted it.  The gain, so long 
as it lasted, was incalculable.

The summit of the South Pass is between 8000 and 9000 feet 
above the level of the Gulf of Mexico.  The Pass itself is 
many miles broad, undulating on the surface, but not 
abruptly.  The peaks of the Wind River Chain, immediately to 
the north, are covered with snow; and as we gradually got 
into the misty atmosphere we felt the cold severely.  The 
lariats - made of raw hide - became rods of ice; and the poor 
animals, whose backs were masses of festering raws, suffered 
terribly from exposure.  It was interesting to come upon 
proofs of the 'divide' within a mile of the most elevated 
point in the pass.  From the Hudson to this spot, all waters 
had flowed eastward; now suddenly every little rivulet was 
making for the Pacific.

The descent is as gradual as the rise.  On the first day of 
it we lost two animals, a mule and Samson's spare horse.  The 
latter, never equal to the heavy weight of its owner, could 
go no further; and the dreadful state of the mule's back 
rendered packing a brutality.  Morris and Potter, who passed 
us a few days later, told us they had seen the horse dead, 
and partially eaten by wolves; the mule they had shot to put 
it out of its misery.

In due course we reached Fort Hall, a trading post of the 
Hudson's Bay Company, some 200 miles to the north-west of the 
South Pass.  Sir George Simpson, Chairman of that Company, 
had given me letters, which ensured the assistance of its 
servants.  It was indeed a rest and a luxury to spend a 
couple of idle days here, and revive one's dim recollection 
of fresh eggs and milk.  But we were already in September.  
Our animals were in a deplorable condition; and with the 
exception of a little flour, a small supply of dried meat, 
and a horse for Samson, Mr. Grant, the trader, had nothing to 
sell us.  He told us, moreover, that before we reached Fort 
Boise, their next station, 300 miles further on, we had to 
traverse a great rocky desert, where we might travel four-
and-twenty hours after leaving water, before we met with it 
again.  There was nothing for it but to press onwards.  It 
was too late now to cross the Sierra Nevada range, which lay 
between us and California; and with the miserable equipment 
left to us, it was all we could hope to do to reach Oregon 
before the passage of the Blue Mountains was blocked by the 
winter's snow.

Mr. Grant's warnings were verified to the foot of the letter.  
Great were our sufferings, and almost worse were those of the 
poor animals, from the want of water.  Then, too, unlike the 
desert of Sahara, where the pebbly sand affords a solid 
footing, the soil here is the calcined powder of volcanic 
debris, so fine that every step in it is up to one's ankles; 
while clouds of it rose, choking the nostrils, and covering 
one from head to heel.  Here is a passage from my journal:

'Road rocky in places, but generally deep in the finest 
floury sand.  A strong and biting wind blew dead in our 
teeth, smothering us in dust, which filled every pore.  
William presented such a ludicrous appearance that Samson and 
I went into fits over it.  An old felt hat, fastened on by a 
red cotton handkerchief, tied under his chin, partly hid his 
lantern-jawed visage; this, naturally of a dolorous cast, was 
screwed into wrinkled contortions by its efforts to resist 
the piercing gale.  The dust, as white as flour, had settled 
thick upon him, the extremity of his nasal organ being the 
only rosy spot left; its pearly drops lodged upon a chin 
almost as prominent.  His shoulders were shrugged to a level 
with his head, and his long legs dangled from the back of 
little "Cream" till they nearly touched the ground.'

We laughed at him, it is true, but he was so good-natured, so 
patient, so simple-minded, and, now and then, when he and I 
were alone, so sentimental and confidential about Mary, and 
the fortune he meant to bring her back, that I had a sort of 
maternal liking for him; and even a vicarious affection for 
Mary herself, the colour of whose eyes and hair - nay, whose 
weight avoirdupois - I was now accurately acquainted with.  
No, the honest fellow had not quite the grit of a 
'Leatherstocking.'

One night, when we had halted after dark, he went down to a 
gully (we were not then in the desert) to look for water for 
our tea.  Samson, armed with the hatchet, was chopping wood.  
I stayed to arrange the packs, and spread the blankets.  
Suddenly I heard a voice from the bottom of the ravine, 
crying out, 'Bring the guns for God's sake!  Make haste!  
Bring the guns!'  I rushed about in the dark, tumbling over 
the saddles, but could nowhere lay my hands on a rifle.  
Still the cry was for 'Guns!'  My own, a muzzle-loader, was 
discharged, but a rifle none the less.  Snatching up this, 
and one of my pistols, which, by the way, had fallen into the 
river a few hours before, I shouted for Samson, and ran 
headlong to the rescue.  Before I got to the bottom of the 
hill I heard groans, which sounded like the last of poor 
William.  I holloaed to know where he was, and was answered 
in a voice that discovered nothing worse than terror.

It appeared that he had met a grizzly bear drinking at the 
very spot where he was about to fill his can; that he had 
bolted, and the bear had pursued him; but that he had 
'cobbled the bar with rocks,' had hit it in the eye, or nose, 
he was not sure which, and thus narrowly escaped with his 
life.  I could not help laughing at his story, though an 
examination of the place next morning so far verified it, 
that his footprints and the bear's were clearly intermingled 
on the muddy shore of the stream.  To make up for his fright, 
he was extremely courageous when restored by tea and a pipe.  
'If we would follow the trail with him, he'd go right slick 
in for her anyhow.  If his rifle didn't shoot plum, he'd a 
bowie as 'ud rise her hide, and no mistake.  He'd be darn'd 
if he didn't make meat of that bar in the morning.'



CHAPTER XXV



WE were now steering by compass.  Our course was nearly 
north-west.  This we kept, as well as the formation of the 
country and the watercourses would permit.  After striking 
the great Shoshone, or Snake River, which eventually becomes 
the Columbia, we had to follow its banks in a southerly 
direction.  These are often supported by basaltic columns 
several hundred feet in height.  Where that was the case, 
though close to water, we suffered most from want of it.  And 
cold as were the nights - it was the middle of September - 
the sun was intensely hot.  Every day, every mile, we were 
hoping for a change - not merely for access to the water, but 
that we might again pursue our westerly course.  The scenery 
was sometimes very striking.  The river hereabouts varies 
from one hundred to nearly three hundred yards in width; 
sometimes rushing through narrow gorges, sometimes descending 
in continuous rapids, sometimes spread out in smooth shallow 
reaches.  It was for one of these that we were in search, for 
only at such points was the river passable.

It was night-time when we came to one of the great falls.  We 
were able here to get at water; and having halted through the 
day, on account of the heat, kept on while our animals were 
refreshed.  We had to ascend the banks again, and wind along 
the brink of the precipice.  From this the view was 
magnificent.  The moon shone brightly upon the dancing waves 
hundreds of feet below us, and upon the rapids which extended 
as far as we could see.  The deep shade of the high cliffs 
contrasted in its impenetrable darkness with the brilliancy 
of the silvery foam.  The vast plain which we overlooked, 
fading in the soft light, rose gradually into a low range of 
distant hills.  The incessant roar of the rapids, and the 
desert stillness of all else around, though they lulled one's 
senses, yet awed one with a feeling of insignificance and 
impotence in the presence of such ruthless force, amid such 
serene and cold indifference.  Unbidden, the consciousness 
was there, that for some of us the coming struggle with those 
mighty waters was fraught with life or death.

At last we came upon a broad stretch of the river which 
seemed to offer the possibilities we sought for.  Rather late 
in the afternoon we decided to cross here, notwithstanding 
William's strong reluctance to make the venture.  Part of his 
unwillingness was, I knew, due to apprehension, part to his 
love of fishing.  Ever since we came down upon the Snake 
River we had seen quantities of salmon.  He persisted in the 
belief that they were to be caught with the rod.  The day 
before, all three of us had waded into the river, and flogged 
it patiently for a couple of hours, while heavy fish were 
tumbling about above and below us.  We caught plenty of 
trout, but never pricked a salmon.  Here the broad reach was 
alive with them, and William begged hard to stop for the 
afternoon and pursue the gentle sport.  It was not to be.

The tactics were as usual.  Samson led the way, holding the 
lariat to which the two spare horses were attached.  In 
crossing streams the mules would always follow the horses.  
They were accordingly let loose, and left to do so.  William 
and I brought up the rear, driving before us any mule that 
lagged.  My journal records the sequel:

'At about equal distances from each other and the main land 
were two small islands.  The first of these we reached 
without trouble.  The second was also gained; but the packs 
were wetted, the current being exceedingly rapid.  The space 
remaining to be forded was at least two hundred yards; and 
the stream so strong that I was obliged to turn my mare's 
head up it to prevent her being carried off her legs.  While 
thus resting, William with difficulty, - the water being over 
his knees, - sidled up to me.  He wanted to know if I still 
meant to cross.  For all answer, I laughed at him.  In truth 
I had not the smallest misgiving.  Strong as was the current, 
the smooth rocky bottom gave a good foothold to the animals; 
and, judging by the great width of the river, there was no 
reason to suppose that its shallowness would not continue.

'We paused for a few minutes to observe Samson, who was now 
within forty or fifty yards of the opposite bank; and, as I 
concluded, past all danger.  Suddenly, to the astonishment of 
both of us, he and his horse and the led animals disappeared 
under water; the next instant they were struggling and 
swimming for the bank.  Tied together as they were, there was 
a deal of snorting and plunging; and Samson (with his 
habitual ingenuity) had fastened the lariat either to himself 
or his saddle; so that he was several times dragged under 
before they all got to the bank in safety.

'These events were watched by William with intense anxiety.  
With a pitiable look of terror he assured me he could not 
swim a yard; it was useless for him to try to cross; he would 
turn back, and find his way to Salt Lake City.

'"But," I remonstrated, "if you turn back, you will certainly 
starve; everything we possess is over there with the mules; 
your blanket, even your rifle, are with the packs.  It is 
impossible to get the mules back again.  Give little Cream 
her head, sit still in your saddle, and she'll carry you 
through that bit of deep water with ease."

'"I can live by fishing," he plaintively answered.  He still 
held his long rod, and the incongruity of it added to the 
pathos of his despair.  I reminded him of a bad river we had 
before crossed, and how his mule had swum it safely with him 
on her back.  I promised to keep close to him, and help him 
if need were, though I was confident if he left everything to 
Cream there would be no danger.  "Well, if he must, he must.  
But, if anything happened to him, would I write and tell 
Mary?  I knew her address; leastways, if I didn't, it was in 
his bag on the brown mule.  And tell her I done my best."

'The water was so clear one could see every crack in the rock 
beneath.  Fortunately, I took the precaution to strip to my 
shirt; fastened everything, even my socks, to the saddle; 
then advanced cautiously ahead of William to the brink of the 
chasm.  We were, in fact, upon the edge of a precipice.  One 
could see to an inch where the gulf began.  As my mare 
stepped into it I slipped off my saddle; when she rose I laid 
hold of her tail, and in two or three minutes should have 
been safe ashore.

'Looking back to see how it had fared with William, I at once 
perceived his danger.  He had clasped his mule tightly round 
the neck with his arms, and round the body with his long 
legs.  She was plunging violently to get rid of her load.  
Already the pair were forty or fifty yards below me.  
Instantly I turned and swam to his assistance.  The struggles 
of the mule rendered it dangerous to get at him.  When I did 
so he was partially dazed; his hold was relaxed.  Dragging 
him away from the hoofs of the animal, I begged him to put 
his hands on my shoulders or hips.  He was past any effort of 
the kind.  I do not think he heard me even.  He seemed hardly 
conscious of anything.  His long wet hair plastered over the 
face concealed his features.  Beyond stretching out his arms, 
like an infant imploring help, he made no effort to save 
himself.

'I seized him firmly by the collar, - unfortunately, with my 
right hand, leaving only my left to stem the torrent.  But 
how to keep his face out of the water?  At every stroke I was 
losing strength; we were being swept away, for him, to 
hopeless death.  At length I touched bottom, got both hands 
under his head, and held it above the surface.  He still 
breathed, still puffed the hair from his lips.  There was 
still a hope, if I could but maintain my footing.  But, alas! 
each instant I was losing ground - each instant I was driven 
back, foot by foot, towards the gulf.  The water, at first 
only up to my chest, was now up to my shoulders, now up to my 
neck.  My strength was gone.  My arms ached till they could 
bear no more.  They sank involuntarily.  William glided from 
my hands.  He fell like lead till his back lay stretched upon 
the rock.  His arms were spread out, so that his body formed 
a cross.  I paddled above it in the clear, smooth water, 
gazing at his familiar face, till two or three large bubbles 
burst upon the surface; then, hardly knowing what I was 
doing, floated mechanically from the trapper's grave.

. . . . . . .

'My turn was now to come.  At first, the right, or western, 
bank being within sixty or seventy yards, being also my 
proper goal, I struck out for it with mere eagerness to land 
as soon as possible.  The attempt proved unsuccessful.  Very 
well, then, I would take it quietly - not try to cross 
direct, but swim on gently, keeping my head that way.  By 
degrees I got within twenty yards of the bank, was counting 
joyfully on the rest which a few more strokes would bring me, 
when - wsh - came a current, and swept me right into the 
middle of the stream again.

'I began to be alarmed.  I must get out of this somehow or 
another; better on the wrong side than not at all.  So I let 
myself go, and made for the shore we had started from.

'Same fate.  When well over to the left bank I was carried 
out again.  What! was I too to be drowned?  It began to look 
like it.  I was getting cold, numb, exhausted.  And - listen!  
What is that distant sound?  Rapids?  Yes, rapids.  My 
flannel shirt stuck to, and impeded me; I would have it off.  
I got it over my head, but hadn't unbuttoned the studs - it 
stuck, partly over my head.  I tugged to tear it off.  Got a 
drop of water into my windpipe; was choking; tugged till I 
got the shirt right again.  Then tried floating on my back - 
to cough and get my breath.  Heard the rapids much louder.  
It was getting dark now.  The sun was setting in glorious red 
and gold.  I noticed this, noticed the salmon rolling like 
porpoises around me, and thought of William with his rod.  
Strangest of all, for I had not noticed her before, little 
Cream was still struggling for dear life not a hundred yards 
below me; sometimes sinking, sometimes reappearing, but on 
her way to join her master, as surely as I thought that I 
was.

'In my distress, the predominant thought was the loneliness 
of my fate, the loneliness of my body after death.  There was 
not a living thing to see me die.

'For the first time I felt, not fear, but loss of hope.  I 
could only beat the water with feeble and futile splashes.  I 
was completely at its mercy.  And - as we all then do - I 
prayed - prayed for strength, prayed that I might be spared.  
But my strength was gone.  My legs dropped powerless in the 
water.  I could but just keep my nose or mouth above it.  My 
legs sank, and my feet - touched bottom.

'In an instant, as if from an electric shock, a flush of 
energy suffused my brain and limbs.  I stood upright in an 
almost tranquil pool.  An eddy had lodged me on a sandbank.  
Between it and the land was scarcely twenty yards.  Through 
this gap the stream ran strong as ever.  I did not want to 
rest; I did not pause to think.  In I dashed; and a single 
spurt carried me to the shore.  I fell on my knees, and with 
a grateful heart poured out gratitude for my deliverance.

. . . . . . .

'I was on the wrong side, the side from which we started.  
The river was yet to cross.  I had not tasted food since our 
early meal.  How long I had been swimming I know not, but it 
was dark now, starlight at least.  The nights were bitterly 
cold, and my only clothing a wet flannel shirt.  And oh! the 
craving for companionship, someone to talk to - even Samson.  
This was a stronger need than warmth, or food, or clothing; 
so strong that it impelled me to try again.

'The poor sandy soil grew nothing but briars and small 
cactuses.  In the dark I kept treading on the little prickly 
plants, but I hurried on till I came in sight of Samson's 
fire.  I could see his huge form as it intercepted the 
comfortable blaze.  I pictured him making his tea, broiling 
some of William's trout, and spreading his things before the 
fire to dry.  I could see the animals moving around the glow.  
It was my home.  How I yearned for it!  How should I reach 
it, if ever?  In this frame of mind the attempt was 
irresistible.  I started as near as I could from opposite the 
two islands.  As on horseback, I got pretty easily to the 
first island.  Beyond this I was taken off my feet by the 
stream; and only with difficulty did I once more regain the 
land.

My next object was to communicate with Samson.  By putting 
both hands to my mouth and shouting with all my force I made 
him hear.  I could see him get up and come to the water's 
edge; though he could not see me, his stentorian voice 
reached me plainly.  His first words were:

'"Is that you, William?  Coke is drowned."

'I corrected him, and thus replied:

'"Do you remember a bend near some willows, where you wanted 
to cross yesterday?"

'"Yes."

'"About two hours higher up the river?"

'"I remember."

'"Would you know the place again?"

'"Yes."

'"Are you sure?

'"Yes, yes."

'"You will see me by daylight in the morning.  When I start, 
you will take my mare, my clothes, and some food; make for 
that place and wait till I come.  I will cross there."

'"All right."

'"Keep me in sight as long as you can.  Don't forget the 
food."

'It will be gathered from my words that definite instructions 
were deemed necessary; and the inference - at least it was 
mine - will follow, that if a mistake were possible Samson 
would avail himself of it.  The night was before me.  The 
river had yet to be crossed.  But, strange as it now seems to 
me, I had no misgivings!  My heart never failed me.  My 
prayer had been heard.  I had been saved.  How, I knew not.  
But this I knew, my trust was complete.  I record this as a 
curious psychological occurrence; for it supported me with 
unfailing energy through the severe trial which I had yet to 
undergo.'



CHAPTER XXVI



OUR experiences are little worth unless they teach us to 
reflect.  Let us then pause to consider this hourly 
experience of human beings - this remarkable efficacy of 
prayer.  There can hardly be a contemplative mind to which, 
with all its difficulties, the inquiry is not familiar.

To begin with, 'To pray is to expect a miracle.'  'Prayer in 
its very essence,' says a thoughtful writer, 'implies a 
belief in the possible intervention of a power which is above 
nature.'  How was it in my case?  What was the essence of my 
belief?  Nothing less than this:  that God would have 
permitted the laws of nature, ordained by His infinite wisdom 
to fulfil His omniscient designs and pursue their natural 
course in accordance with His will, had not my request 
persuaded Him to suspend those laws in my favour.

The very belief in His omniscience and omnipotence subverts 
the spirit of such a prayer.  It is on the perfection of God 
that Malebranche bases his argument that 'Dieu n'agit pas par 
des volontes particulieres.'  Yet every prayer affects to 
interfere with the divine purposes.

It may here be urged that the divine purposes are beyond our 
comprehension.  God's purposes may, in spite of the 
inconceivability, admit the efficacy of prayer as a link in 
the chain of causation; or, as Dr. Mozely holds, it may be 
that 'a miracle is not an anomaly or irregularity, but part 
of the system of the universe.'  We will not entangle 
ourselves in the abstruse metaphysical problem which such 
hypotheses involve, but turn for our answer to what we do 
know - to the history of this world, to the daily life of 
man.  If the sun rises on the evil as well as on the good, if 
the wicked 'become old, yea, are mighty in power,' still, the 
lightning, the plague, the falling chimney-pot, smite the 
good as well as the evil.  Even the dumb animal is not 
spared.  'If,' says Huxley, 'our ears were sharp enough to 
hear all the cries of pain that are uttered in the earth by 
man and beasts we should be deafened by one continuous 
scream.'  'If there are any marks at all of special design in 
creation,' writes John Stuart Mill, 'one of the things most 
evidently designed is that a large proportion of all animals 
should pass their existence in tormenting and devouring other 
animals.  They have been lavishly fitted out with the 
instruments for that purpose.'  Is it credible, then, that 
the Almighty Being who, as we assume, hears this continuous 
scream - animal-prayer, as we may call it - and not only pays 
no heed to it, but lavishly fits out animals with instruments 
for tormenting and devouring one another, that such a Being 
should suspend the laws of gravitation and physiology, should 
perform a miracle equal to that of arresting the sun - for 
all miracles are equipollent - simply to prolong the brief 
and useless existence of such a thing as man, of one man out 
of the myriads who shriek, and - shriek in vain?

To pray is to expect a miracle.  Then comes the further 
question:  Is this not to expect what never yet has happened?  
The only proof of any miracle is the interpretation the 
witness or witnesses put upon what they have seen.  
(Traditional miracles - miracles that others have been told, 
that others have seen - we need not trouble our heads about.)  
What that proof has been worth hitherto has been commented 
upon too often to need attention here.  Nor does the weakness 
of the evidence for miracles depend solely on the fact that 
it rests, in the first instance, on the senses, which may be 
deceived; or upon inference, which may be erroneous.  It is 
not merely that the infallibility of human testimony 
discredits the miracles of the past.  The impossibility that 
human knowledge, that science, can ever exhaust the 
possibilities of Nature, precludes the immediate reference to 
the Supernatural for all time.  It is pure sophistry to 
argue, as do Canon Row and other defenders of miracles, that 
'the laws of Nature are no more violated by the performance 
of a miracle than they are by the activities of a man.'  If 
these arguments of the special pleaders had any force at all, 
it would simply amount to this:  'The activities of man' 
being a part of nature, we have no evidence of a supernatural 
being, which is the sole RAISON D'ETRE of miracle.

Yet thousands of men in these days who admit the force of 
these objections continue, in spite of them, to pray.  
Huxley, the foremost of 'agnostics,' speaks with the utmost 
respect of his friend Charles Kingsley's conviction from 
experience of the efficacy of prayer.  And Huxley himself 
repeatedly assures us, in some form or other, that 'the 
possibilities of "may be" are to me infinite.'  The puzzle 
is, in truth, on a par with that most insolvable of all 
puzzles - Free Will or Determinism.  Reason and the instinct 
of conscience are in both cases irreconcilable.  We are 
conscious that we are always free to choose, though not to 
act; but reason will have it that this is a delusion.  There 
is no logical clue to the IMPASSE.  Still, reason 
notwithstanding, we take our freedom (within limits) for 
granted, and with like inconsequence we pray.

It must, I think, be admitted that the belief, delusive or 
warranted, is efficacious in itself.  Whether generated in 
the brain by the nerve centres, or whatever may be its 
origin, a force coincident with it is diffused throughout the 
nervous system, which converts the subject of it, just 
paralysed by despair, into a vigorous agent, or, if you will, 
automaton.

Now, those who admit this much argue, with no little force, 
that the efficacy of prayer is limited to its reaction upon 
ourselves.  Prayer, as already observed, implies belief in 
supernatural intervention.  Such belief is competent to beget 
hope, and with it courage, energy, and effort.  Suppose 
contrition and remorse induce the sufferer to pray for Divine 
aid and mercy, suppose suffering is the natural penalty of 
his or her own misdeeds, and suppose the contrition and the 
prayer lead to resistance of similar temptations, and hence 
to greater happiness, - can it be said that the power to 
resist temptation or endure the penalty are due to 
supernatural aid?  Or must we not infer that the fear of the 
consequences of vice or folly, together with an earnest 
desire and intention to amend, were adequate in themselves to 
account for the good results?

Reason compels us to the latter conclusion.  But what then?  
Would this prove prayer to be delusive?  Not necessarily.  
That the laws of Nature (as argued above) are not violated by 
miracle, is a mere perversion of the accepted meaning of 
'miracle,' an IGNORATIO ELENCHI.  But in the case of prayer 
that does not ask for the abrogation of Nature's laws, it 
ceases to be a miracle that we pray for or expect:  for are 
not the laws of the mind also laws of Nature?  And can we 
explain them any more than we can explain physical laws?  A 
psychologist can formulate the mental law of association, but 
he can no more explain it than Newton could explain the laws 
of attraction and repulsion which pervade the world of 
matter.  We do not know, we cannot know, what the conditions 
of our spiritual being are.  The state of mind induced by 
prayer may, in accordance with some mental law, be essential 
to certain modes of spiritual energy, specially conducive to 
the highest of all moral or spiritual results:  taken in this 
sense, prayer may ask, not the suspension, but the enactment, 
of some natural law.

Let it, however, be granted, for argument's sake, that the 
belief in the efficacy of prayer is delusive, and that the 
beneficial effects of the belief - the exalted state of mind, 
the enhanced power to endure suffering and resist temptation, 
the happiness inseparable from the assurance that God hears, 
and can and will befriend us - let it be granted that all 
this is due to sheer hallucination, is this an argument 
against prayer?  Surely not.  For, in the first place, the 
incontestable fact that belief does produce these effects is 
for us an ultimate fact as little capable of explanation as 
any physical law whatever; and may, therefore, for aught we 
know, or ever can know, be ordained by a Supreme Being.  
Secondly, all the beneficial effects, including happiness, 
are as real in themselves as if the belief were no delusion.

It may be said that a 'fool's paradise' is liable to be 
turned into a hell of disappointment; and that we pay the 
penalty of building happiness on false foundations.  This is 
true in a great measure; but it is absolutely without truth 
as regards our belief in prayer, for the simple reason that 
if death dispel the delusion, it at the same time dispels the 
deluded.  However great the mistake, it can never be found 
out.  But they who make it will have been the better and the 
happier while they lived.

For my part, though immeasurably preferring the pantheism of 
Goethe, or of Renan (without his pessimism), to the 
anthropomorphic God of the Israelites, or of their theosophic 
legatees, the Christians, however inconsistent, I still 
believe in prayer.  I should not pray that I may not die 'for 
want of breath'; nor for rain, while 'the wind was in the 
wrong quarter.'  My prayers would not be like those 
overheard, on his visit to Heaven, by Lucian's Menippus:  'O 
Jupiter, let me become a king!'  'O Jupiter, let my onions 
and my garlic thrive!'  'O Jupiter, let my father soon depart 
from hence!'  But when the workings of my moral nature were 
concerned, when I needed strength to bear the ills which 
could not be averted, or do what conscience said was right, 
then I should pray.  And, if I had done my best in the same 
direction, I should trust in the Unknowable for help.

Then too, is not gratitude to Heaven the best of prayers?  
Unhappy he who has never felt it!  Unhappier still, who has 
never had cause to feel it!

It may be deemed unwarrantable thus to draw the lines between 
what, for want of better terms, we call Material and 
Spiritual.  Still, reason is but the faculty of a very finite 
being; and, as in the enigma of the will, utterly incapable 
of solving any problems beyond those whose data are furnished 
by the senses.  Reason is essentially realistic.  Science is 
its domain.  But science demonstratively proves that things 
are not what they seem; their phenomenal existence is nothing 
else than their relation to our special intelligence.  We 
speak and think as if the discoveries of science were 
absolutely true, true in themselves, not relatively so for us 
only.  Yet, beings with senses entirely different from ours 
would have an entirely different science.  For them, our best 
established axioms would be inconceivable, would have no more 
meaning than that 'Abracadabra is a second intention.'

Science, supported by reason, assures us that the laws of 
nature - the laws of realistic phenomena - are never 
suspended at the prayers of man.  To this conclusion the 
educated world is now rapidly coming.  If, nevertheless, men 
thoroughly convinced of this still choose to believe in the 
efficacy of prayer, reason and science are incompetent to 
confute them.  The belief must be tried elsewhere, - it must 
be transferred to the tribunal of conscience, or to a 
metaphysical court, in which reason has no jurisdiction.

This by no means implies that reason, in its own province, is 
to yield to the 'feeling' which so many cite as the 
infallible authority for their 'convictions.'

We must not be asked to assent to contradictory propositions.  
We must not be asked to believe that injustice, cruelty, and 
implacable revenge, are not execrable because the Bible tells 
us they were habitually manifested by the tribal god of the 
Israelites.  The fables of man's fall and of the redemption 
are fraught with the grossest violation of our moral 
conscience, and will, in time, be repudiated accordingly.  It 
is idle to say, as the Church says, 'these are mysteries 
above our human reason.'  They are fictions, fabrications 
which modern research has traced to their sources, and which 
no unperverted mind would entertain for a moment.  Fanatical 
belief in the truth of such dogmas based upon 'feeling' have 
confronted all who have gone through the severe ordeal of 
doubt.  A couple of centuries ago, those who held them would 
have burnt alive those who did not.  Now, they have to 
console themselves with the comforting thought of the fire 
that shall never be quenched.  But even Job's patience could 
not stand the self-sufficiency of his pious reprovers.  The 
sceptic too may retort:  'No doubt but ye are the people, and 
wisdom shall die with you.'

Conviction of this kind is but the convenient substitute for 
knowledge laboriously won, for the patient pursuit of truth 
at all costs - a plea in short, for ignorance, indolence, 
incapacity, and the rancorous bigotry begotten of them.

The distinction is not a purely sentimental one - not a 
belief founded simply on emotion.  There is a physical world 
- the world as known to our senses, and there is a psychical 
world - the world of feeling, consciousness, thought, and 
moral life.

Granting, if it pleases you, that material phenomena may be 
the causes of mental phenomena, that 'la pensee est le 
produit du corps entier,' still the two cannot be thought of 
as one.  Until it can be proved that 'there is nothing in the 
world but matter, force, and necessity,' - which will never 
be, till we know how we lift our hands to our mouths, - there 
remains for us a world of mystery, which reason never can 
invade.

It is a pregnant thought of John Mill's, apropos of material 
and mental interdependence or identity, 'that the uniform 
coexistence of one fact with another does not make the one 
fact a part of the other, or the same with it.'

A few words of Renan's may help to support the argument.  'Ce 
qui revele le vrai Dieu, c'est le sentiment moral.  Si 
l'humanite n'etait qu'intelligente, elle serait athee.  Le 
devoir, le devouement, le sacrifice, toutes choses dont 
l'histoire est pleine, sont inexplicables sans Dieu.'  For 
all these we need help.  Is it foolishness to pray for it?  
Perhaps so.  Yet, perhaps not; for 'Tout est possible, meme 
Dieu.'

Whether possible, or impossible, this much is absolutely 
certain:  man must and will have a religion as long as this 
world lasts.  Let us not fear truth.  Criticism will change 
men's dogmas, but it will not change man's nature.



CHAPTER XXVII



MY confidence was restored, and with it my powers of 
endurance.  Sleep was out of the question.  The night was 
bright and frosty; and there was not heat enough in my body 
to dry my flannel shirt.  I made shift to pull up some briar 
bushes; and, piling them round me as a screen, got some 
little shelter from the light breeze.  For hours I lay 
watching Alpha Centauri - the double star of the Great Bear's 
pointers - dipping under the Polar star like the hour hand of 
a clock.  My thoughts, strange to say, ran little on the 
morrow; they dwelt almost solely upon William Nelson.  How 
far was I responsible, to what extent to blame, for leading 
him, against his will, to death?  I re-enacted the whole 
event.  Again he was in my hands, still breathing when I let 
him go, knowing, as I did so, that the deed consigned him 
living to his grave.  In this way I passed the night.

Just as the first streaks of the longed-for dawn broke in the 
East, I heard distant cries which sounded like the whoops of 
Indians.  Then they ceased, but presently began again much 
nearer than before.  There was no mistake about them now, - 
they were the yappings of a pack of wolves, clearly enough, 
upon our track of yesterday.  A few minutes more, and the 
light, though still dim, revealed their presence coming on at 
full gallop.  In vain I sought for stick or stone.  Even the 
river, though I took to it, would not save me if they meant 
mischief.  When they saw me they slackened their pace.  I did 
not move.  They then halted, and forming a half-moon some 
thirty yards off, squatted on their haunches, and began at 
intervals to throw up their heads and howl.

My chief hope was in the coming daylight.  They were less 
likely to attack a man then than in the dark.  I had often 
met one or two together when hunting; these had always 
bolted.  But I had never seen a pack before; and I knew a 
pack meant that they were after food.  All depended on their 
hunger.

When I kept still they got up, advanced a yard or two, then 
repeated their former game.  Every minute the light grew 
stronger; its warmer tints heralded the rising sun.  Seeing, 
however, that my passivity encouraged them, and convinced 
that a single step in retreat would bring the pack upon me, I 
determined in a moment of inspiration to run amuck, and trust 
to Providence for the consequences.  Flinging my arms wildly 
into the air, and frantically yelling with all my lungs, I 
dashed straight in for the lot of them.  They were, as I 
expected, taken by surprise.  They jumped to their feet and 
turned tail, but again stopped - this time farther off, and 
howled with vexation at having to wait till their prey 
succumbed.

The sun rose.  Samson was on the move.  I shouted to him, and 
he to me.  Finding me thus reinforced the enemy slunk off, 
and I was not sorry to see the last of my ugly foes.  I now 
repeated my instructions about our trysting place, waited 
patiently till Samson had breakfasted (which he did with the 
most exasperating deliberation), saw him saddle my horse and 
leave his camp.  I then started upon my travels up the river, 
to meet him.  After a mile or so, the high ground on both 
banks obliged us to make some little detour.  We then lost 
sight of each other; nor was he to be seen when I reached the 
appointed spot.

Long before I did so I began to feel the effects of my 
labours.  My naked feet were in a terrible state from the 
cactus thorns, which I had been unable to avoid in the dark; 
occasional stones, too, had bruised and made them very 
tender.  Unable to shuffle on at more than two miles an hour 
at fastest, the happy thought occurred to me of tearing up my 
shirt and binding a half round each foot.  This enabled me to 
get on much better; but when the September sun was high, my 
unprotected skin and head paid the penalty.  I waited for a 
couple of hours, I dare say, hoping Samson would appear.  But 
concluding at length that he had arrived long before me, 
through the slowness of my early progress, and had gone 
further up the river - thinking perhaps that I had meant some 
other place - I gave him up; and, full of internal 'd-n' at 
his incorrigible consistency, plodded on and on for - I knew 
not where.

Why, it may be asked, did I not try to cross where I had 
intended?  I must confess my want of courage.  True, the 
river here was not half, not a third, of the width of the 
scene of my disasters; but I was weak in body and in mind.  
Had anything human been on the other side to see me - to see 
how brave I was, (alas! poor human nature!) - I could have 
plucked up heart to risk it.  It would have been such a 
comfort to have some one to see me drown!  But it is 
difficult to play the hero with no spectators save oneself.  
I shall always have a fellow-feeling with the Last Man:  
practically, my position was about as uncomfortable as his 
will be.

One of the worst features of it was, what we so often 
suffered from before - the inaccessibility of water.  The sun 
was broiling, and the and soil reflected its scorching rays.  
I was feverish from exhaustion, and there was nothing, 
nothing to look forward to.  Mile after mile I crawled along, 
sometimes half disposed to turn back, and try the deep but 
narrow passage; then that inexhaustible fountain of last 
hopes - the Unknown - tempted me to go forward.  I 
persevered; when behold! as I passed a rock, an Indian stood 
before me.

He was as naked as I was.  Over his shoulder he carried a 
spear as long as a salmon rod.  Though neither had foreseen 
the other, he was absolutely unmoved, showed no surprise, no 
curiosity, no concern.  He stood still, and let me come up to 
him.  My only, or rather my uppermost, feeling was gladness.  
Of course the thought crossed me of what he might do if he 
owed the white skins a grudge.  If any white man had ever 
harmed one of his tribe, I was at his mercy; and it was 
certain that he would show me none.  He was a tall powerful 
man, and in my then condition he could have done what he 
pleased with me.  Friday was my model; the red man was 
Robinson Crusoe.  I kneeled at his feet, and touched the 
ground with my forehead.  He did not seem the least elated by 
my humility:  there was not a spark of vanity in him.  
Indeed, except for its hideousness and brutality, his face 
was without expression.

I now proceeded to make a drawing, with my finger, in the 
sand, of a mule in the water; while I imitated by pantomime 
the struggles of the drowning.  I then pointed to myself; 
and, using my arms as in swimming, shook my head and my 
finger to signify that I could not swim.  I worked an 
imaginary paddle, and made him understand that I wanted him 
to paddle me across the river.  Still he remained unmoved; 
till finally I used one argument which interested him more 
than all the rest of my story.  I untied a part of the shirt 
round one foot and showed him three gold studs.  These I took 
out and gave to him.  I also made a drawing of a rifle in the 
sand, and signified that he would get the like if he went 
with me to my camp.  Whereupon he turned in the direction I 
was going; and, though unbidden by a look, I did not hesitate 
to follow.

I thought I must have dropped before we reached his village.  
This was an osier-bed at the water's side, where the whole 
river rushed through a rocky gorge not more than fifty to 
sixty yards broad.  There were perhaps nearly a hundred 
Indians here, two-thirds of whom were women and children.  
Their habitations were formed by interlacing the tops of the 
osiers.  Dogs' skins spread upon the ground and numerous 
salmon spears were their only furniture.  In a few minutes my 
arrival created a prodigious commotion.  The whole population 
turned out to stare at me.  The children ran into the bushes 
to hide.  But feminine curiosity conquered feminine timidity.  
Although I was in the plight of the forlorn Odysseus after 
his desperate swim, I had no 'blooming foliage' to wind 
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced].  Unlike the 
Phaeacian maidens, however, the tawny nymphs were all as 
brave as Princess Nausicaa herself.  They stared, and 
pointed, and buzzed, and giggled, and even touched my skin 
with the tips of their fingers - to see, I suppose, if the 
white would come off.

But ravenous hunger turned up its nose at flirtation.  The 
fillets of drying salmon suspended from every bough were a 
million times more seductive than the dark Naiads who had 
dressed them.  Slice after slice I tore down and devoured, as 
though my maw were as compendious as Jack the Giant Killer's.  
This so astonished and delighted the young women that they 
kept supplying me, - with the expectation, perhaps, that 
sooner or later I must share the giant's fate.

While this was going on, a conference was being held; and I 
had the satisfaction of seeing some men pull up a lot of dead 
rushes, dexterously tie them into bundles, and truss these 
together by means of spears.  They had no canoes, for the 
very children were amphibious, living, so it seemed, as much 
in the water as out of it.  When the raft was completed, I 
was invited to embark.  My original friend, who had twisted a 
tow-rope, took this between his teeth, and led the way.  
Others swam behind and beside me to push and to pull.  The 
force of the water was terrific; but they seemed to care no 
more for that than fish.  My weight sunk the rush bundles a 
good bit below the surface; and to try my nerves, my crew 
every now and then with a wild yell dived simultaneously, 
dragging the raft and me under water.  But I sat tight; and 
with genuine friendliness they landed me safely on the 
desired shore.

It was quite dark before we set forth.  Robinson Crusoe 
walked on as if he knew exactly where my camp was.  Probably 
the whole catastrophe had by this time been bruited for miles 
above and below the spot.  Five other stalwart young fellows 
kept us company, each with salmon spear in hand.  The walk 
seemed interminable; but I had shipped a goodly cargo of 
latent energy.

When I got home, instead of Samson, I found the camp occupied 
by half a dozen Indians.  They were squatted round a fire, 
smoking.  Each one, so it seemed, had appropriated some 
article of our goods.  Our blankets were over their 
shoulders.  One had William's long rifle in his lap.  Another 
was sitting upon mine.  A few words were exchanged with the 
newcomers, who seated themselves beside their friends; but no 
more notice was taken of me than of the mules which were 
eating rushes close to us.  How was I, single-handed, to 
regain possession?  That was the burning question.  A 
diplomatic course commanded itself as the only possible one.  
There were six men who expected rewards, but the wherewithal 
was held in seisin by other six.  The fight, if there were 
one, should be between the two parties.  I would hope to 
prove, that when thieves fall out honest men come by their 
own.

There is one adage whose truth I needed no further proof of.  
Its first line apostrophises the 'Gods and little fishes.'  
My chief need was for the garment which completes the rhyme.  
Indians, having no use for corduroy small clothes, I speedily 
donned mine.  Next I quietly but quickly snatched up 
William's rifle, and presented it to Robinson Crusoe, patting 
him on the back as if with honours of knighthood.  The 
dispossessed was not well pleased, but Sir Robinson was; and, 
to all appearances, he was a man of leading, if of darkness.  
While words were passing between the two, I sauntered round 
to the gentleman who sat cross-legged upon my weapon.  He was 
as heedless of me as I, outwardly, of him.  When well within 
reach, mindful that 'DE L'AUDACE' is no bad motto, in love 
and war, I suddenly placed my foot upon his chest, tightened 
the extensor muscle of my leg, and sent him heels over head.  
In an instant the rifle was mine, and both barrels cocked.  
After yesterday's immersion it might not have gone off, but 
the offended Indian, though furious, doubtless inferred from 
the histrionic attitude which I at once struck, that I felt 
confident it would.  With my rifle in hand, with my suite 
looking to me to transfer the plunder to them, my position 
was now secure.  I put on a shirt - the only one left to me, 
by the way - my shoes and stockings, and my shooting coat; 
and picking out William's effects, divided these, with his 
ammunition, his carpet-bag, and his blankets, amongst my 
original friends.  I was beginning to gather my own things 
together, when Samson, leading my horse, unexpectedly rode 
into the midst of us.  The night was far advanced.  The 
Indians took their leave; and added to the obligation by 
bequeathing us a large fresh salmon, which served us for many 
a day to come.

As a postscript I may add that I found poor Mary's address on 
one of her letters, and faithfully kept my promise as soon as 
I reached pen and ink.



CHAPTER XXVIII



WHAT remains to be told will not take long.  Hardships 
naturally increased as the means of bearing them diminished.  
I have said the salmon held out for many days.  We cut it in 
strips, and dried it as well as we could; but the flies and 
maggots robbed us of a large portion of it.  At length we 
were reduced to two small hams; nothing else except a little 
tea.  Guessing the distance we had yet to go, and taking into 
account our slow rate of travelling, I calculated the number 
of days which, with the greatest economy, these could be made 
to last.  Allowing only one meal a day, and that of the 
scantiest, I scored the hams as a cook scores a leg of roast 
pork, determined under no circumstances to exceed the daily 
ration.

No little discipline was requisite to adhere to this 
resolution.  Samson broke down under the exposure and 
privation; superadded dysentery rendered him all but 
helpless, and even affected his mind.  The whole labour of 
the camp then devolved on me.  I never roused him in the 
morning till the mules were packed - with all but his blanket 
and the pannikin for his tea - and until I had saddled his 
horse for him.  Not till we halted at night did we get our 
ration of ham.  This he ate, or rather bolted, raw, like a 
wild beast.  My share I never touched till after I lay down 
to sleep.  And so tired have I been, that once or twice I 
woke in the morning with my hand at my mouth, the unswallowed 
morsel between my teeth.  For three weeks we went on in this 
way, never exchanging a word.  I cannot say how I might have 
behaved had Fred been in Samson's place.  I hope I should 
have been at least humane.  But I was labouring for my life, 
and was not over tender-hearted.

Certainly there was enough to try the patience of a better 
man.  Take an instance.  Unable one morning to find my own 
horse, I saddled his and started him off, so as not to waste 
time, with his spare animal and the three mules.  It so 
happened that our line of march was rather tortuous, owing to 
some hills we had to round.  Still, as there were high 
mountains in the distance which we were making for, it seemed 
impossible that anyone could miss his way.  It was twenty 
minutes, perhaps, before I found my horse; this would give 
him about a mile or more start of me.  I hurried on, but 
failed to overtake him.  At the end of an hour I rode to the 
top of a hill which commanded a view of the course he should 
have taken.  Not a moving speck was to be seen.  I knew then 
that he had gone astray.  But in which direction?

My heart sank within me.  The provisions and blankets were 
with him.  I do not think that at any point of my journey I 
had ever felt fear - panic that is - till now.  Starvation 
stared me in the face.  My wits refused to suggest a line of 
action.  I was stunned.  I felt then what I have often felt 
since, what I still feel, that it is possible to wrestle 
successfully with every difficulty that man has overcome, but 
not with that supreme difficulty - man's stupidity.  It did 
not then occur to me to give a name to the impatience that 
seeks to gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles.

I turned back, retraced my steps till I came to the track of 
the mules.  Luckily the ground retained the footprints, 
though sometimes these would be lost for a hundred yards or 
so.  Just as I anticipated - Samson had wound round the base 
of the very first hill he came to; then, instead of 
correcting the deviation, and steering for the mountains, had 
simply followed his nose, and was now travelling due east, - 
in other words, was going back over our track of the day 
before.  It was past noon when I overtook him, so that a 
precious day's labour was lost.

I said little, but that little was a sentence of death.

'After to-day,' I began, 'we will travel separately.'

At first he seemed hardly to take in my meaning.  I explained 
it.

'As well as I can make out, before we get to the Dalles, 
where we ought to find the American outposts, we have only 
about 150 miles to go.  This should not take more than eight 
or nine days.  I can do it in a week alone, but not with you.  
I have come to the conclusion that with you I may not be able 
to do it at all.  We have still those mountains' - pointing 
to the Blue Mountain range in the distance - 'to cross.  They 
are covered with snow, as you see.  We may find them 
troublesome.  In any case our food will only last eight or 
nine days more, even at the present rate.  You shall have the 
largest half of what is left, for you require more than I do.  
But I cannot, and will not, sacrifice my life for your sake.  
I have made up my mind to leave you.'

It must always be a terrible thing for a judge to pass the 
sentence of death.  But then he is fulfilling a duty, merely 
carrying out a law which is not of his making.  Moreover, he 
has no option - the responsibility rests with the jury; last 
of all, the sufferer is a criminal.  Between the judge's case 
and mine there was no analogy.  My act was a purely selfish 
one - justifiable I still think, though certainly not 
magnanimous.  I was quite aware of this at the time, but a 
starving man is not burdened with generosity.

I dismounted, and, without unsaddling the mules, took off 
their packs, now reduced to a few pounds, which was all the 
wretched, raw-backed, and half-dead, animals could stagger 
under; and, putting my blanket, the remains of a ham, and a 
little packet of tea - some eight or ten tea-spoonfuls - on 
one mule, I again prepared to mount my horse and depart.

I took, as it were, a sneaking glance at Samson.  He was 
sitting upon the ground, with his face between his knees, 
sobbing.

At three-and-twenty the heart of a man, or of a woman - if 
either has any, which, of course, may be doubtful - is apt to 
play the dynamite with his or her resolves.  Water-drops have 
ever been formidable weapons of the latter, as we all know; 
and, not being so accustomed to them then as I have become 
since, the sight of the poor devil's abject woe and 
destitution, the thought that illness and suffering were the 
causes, the secret whisper that my act was a cowardly one, 
forced me to follow the lines of least resistance, and submit 
to the decrees of destiny.

One more page from my 'Ride,' and the reader will, I think, 
have a fair conception of its general character.  For the 
last two hours the ascent of the Blue Mountains had been very 
steep.  We were in a thick pine forest.  There was a track - 
probably made by Indians.  Near the summit we found a spring 
of beautiful water.  Here we halted for the night.  It was a 
snug spot.  But, alas! there was nothing for the animals to 
eat except pine needles.  We lighted our fire against the 
great up-torn roots of a fallen tree; and, though it was 
freezing hard, we piled on such masses of dead boughs that 
the huge blaze seemed to warm the surrounding atmosphere.

I must here give the words of my journal, for one exclamation 
in it has a sort of schoolboy ring that recalls the buoyancy 
of youthful spirits, the spirits indeed to which in early 
life we owe our enterprise and perseverance:

'As I was dozing off, a pack of hungry wolves that had 
scented us out set up the most infernal chorus ever heard.  
In vain I pulled the frozen buffalo-robe over my head, and 
tried to get to sleep.  The demons drew nearer and nearer, 
howling, snarling, fighting, moaning, and making a row in the 
perfect stillness which reigned around, as if hell itself 
were loose.  For some time I bore it with patience.  At 
length, jumping up, I yelled in a voice that made the valley 
ring:  You devils! will you be quiet?  The appeal was 
immediately answered by silence; but hearing them tuning up 
for a second concert, I threw some wood on the blazing fire 
and once more retired to my lair.  For a few minutes I lay 
awake to admire a brilliant Aurora Borealis shooting out its 
streams of electric light.  Then, turning over on my side, I 
never moved again till dawn.'

The first objects that caught my eye were the animals.  They 
were huddled together within a couple of yards of where we 
lay.  It was a horrible sight.  Two out of the three mules, 
and Samson's horse, had been attacked by the wolves.  The 
flanks of the horse were terribly torn, and the entrails of 
both the mules were partially hanging out.  Though all three 
were still standing with their backs arched, they were 
rapidly dying from loss of blood.  My dear little ' 
Strawberry' - as we called him to match William's 'Cream' and 
my mare were both intact.

A few days after this, Samson's remaining horse gave out.  I 
had to surrender what remained of my poor beast in order to 
get my companion through.  The last fifty miles of the 
journey I performed on foot; sometimes carrying my rifle to 
relieve the staggering little mule of a few pounds extra 
weight.  At long last the Dalles hove in sight.  And our cry, 
'The tents! the tents!' echoed the joyous 'Thalassa! 
Thalassa!' of the weary Greeks.



CHAPTER XXIX



'WHERE is the tent of the commanding officer?' I asked of the 
first soldier I came across.

He pointed to one on the hillside.  'Ags for Major Dooker,' 
was the Dutch-accented answer.

Bidding Samson stay where he was, I made my way as directed.  
A middle-aged officer in undress uniform was sitting on an 
empty packing-case in front of his tent, whittling a piece of 
its wood.

'Pray sir,' said I in my best Louis Quatorze manner, 'have I 
the pleasure of speaking to Major Dooker?'

'Tucker, sir.  And who the devil are you?'

Let me describe what the Major saw:  A man wasted by 
starvation to skin and bone, blackened, almost, by months of 
exposure to scorching suns; clad in the shreds of what had 
once been a shirt, torn by every kind of convict labour, 
stained by mud and the sweat and sores of mules; the rags of 
a shooting coat to match; no head covering; hands festering 
with sores, and which for weeks had not touched water - if 
they could avoid it.  Such an object, in short, as the genius 
of a Phil May could alone have depicted as the most repulsive 
object he could imagine.

'Who the devil are you?'

'An English gentleman, sir, travelling for pleasure.'

He smiled.  'You look more like a wild beast.'

'I am quite tame, sir, I assure you - could even eat out of 
your hand if I had a chance.'

'Is your name Coke?'

'Yes,' was my amazed reply.

'Then come with me - I will show you something that may 
surprise you.'

I followed him to a neighbouring tent.  He drew aside the 
flap of it, and there on his blanket lay Fred Calthorpe, 
snoring in perfect bliss.

Our greetings were less restrained than our parting had been.  
We were truly glad to meet again.  He had arrived just two 
days before me, although he had been at Salt Lake City.  But 
he had been able there to refit, had obtained ample supplies 
and fresh animals.  Curiously enough, his Nelson - the 
French-Canadian - had also been drowned in crossing the Snake 
River.  His place, however, had been filled by another man, 
and Jacob had turned out a treasure.  The good fellow greeted 
me warmly.  And it was no slight compensation for bygone 
troubles to be assured by him that our separation had led to 
the final triumphal success.

Fred and I now shared the same tent.  To show what habit will 
do, it was many days before I could accustom myself to sleep 
under cover of a tent even, and in preference slept, as I had 
done for five months, under the stars.  The officers 
liberally furnished us with clothing.  But their excessive 
hospitality more nearly proved fatal to me than any peril I 
had met with.  One's stomach had quite lost its discretion.  
And forgetting that


Famished people must be slowly nursed,
And fed by spoonfuls, else they always burst,


one never knew when to leave off eating.  For a few days I 
was seriously ill.

An absurd incident occurred to me here which might have had 
an unpleasant ending.  Every evening, after dinner in the 
mess tent, we played whist.  One night, quite by accident, 
Fred and I happened to be partners.  The Major and another 
officer made up the four.  The stakes were rather high.  We 
two had had an extraordinary run of luck.  The Major's temper 
had been smouldering for some time.  Presently the deal fell 
to me; and as bad luck would have it, I dealt myself a 
handful of trumps, and - all four honours.  As the last of 
these was played, the now blazing Major dashed his cards on 
the table, and there and then called me out.  The cooler 
heads of two or three of the others, with whom Fred had had 
time to make friends, to say nothing of the usual roar of 
laughter with which he himself heard the challenge, brought 
the matter to a peaceful issue.  The following day one of the 
officers brought me a graceful apology.

As may readily be supposed, we had no hankering for further 
travels such as we had gone through.  San Francisco was our 
destination; but though as unknown to us as Charles Lamb's 
'Stranger,' we 'damned' the overland route 'at a venture'; 
and settled, as there was no alternative, to go in a trading 
ship to the Sandwich Islands thence, by the same means, to 
California.

On October 20 we procured a canoe large enough for seven or 
eight persons; and embarking with our light baggage, Fred, 
Samson, and I, took leave of the Dalles.  For some miles the 
great river, the Columbia, runs through the Cascade 
Mountains, and is confined, as heretofore, in a channel of 
basaltic rock.  Further down it widens, and is ornamented by 
groups of small wooded islands.  On one of these we landed to 
rest our Indians and feed.  Towards evening we again put 
ashore, at an Indian village, where we camped for the night.  
The scenery here is magnificent.  It reminded me a little of 
the Danube below Linz, or of the finest parts of the Elbe in 
Saxon Switzerland.  But this is to compare the full-length 
portrait with the miniature.  It is the grandeur of the scale 
of the best of the American scenery that so strikes the 
European.  Variety, however, has its charms; and before one 
has travelled fifteen hundred miles on the same river - as 
one may easily do in America - one begins to sigh for the 
Rhine, or even for a trip from London to Greenwich, with a 
white-bait dinner at the end of it.

The day after, we descended the Cascades.  They are the 
beginning of an immense fall in the level, and form a 
succession of rapids nearly two miles long.  The excitement 
of this passage is rather too great for pleasure.  It is like 
being run away with by a 'motor' down a steep hill.  The bow 
of the canoe is often several feet below the stern, as if 
about to take a 'header.'  The water, in glassy ridges and 
dark furrows, rushes headlong, and dashes itself madly 
against the reefs which crop up everywhere.  There is no 
time, one thinks, to choose a course, even if steerage, which 
seems absurd, were possible.  One is hurled along at railway 
speed.  The upreared rock, that a moment ago seemed a hundred 
yards off, is now under the very bow of the canoe.  One 
clenches one's teeth, holds one's breath, one's hour is 
surely come.  But no - a shout from the Indians, a magic 
stroke of the paddle in the bow, another in the stern, and 
the dreaded crag is far above out heads, far, far behind; 
and, for the moment, we are gliding on - undrowned.

At the lower end of the rapids (our Indians refusing to go 
further), we had to debark.  A settler here was putting up a 
zinc house for a store.  Two others, with an officer of the 
Mounted Rifles - the regiment we had left at the Dalles - 
were staying with him.  They welcomed our arrival, and 
insisted on our drinking half a dozen of poisonous stuff they 
called champagne.  There were no chairs or table in the 
'house,' nor as yet any floor; and only the beginning of a 
roof.  We sat on the ground, so that I was able 
surreptitiously to make libations with my share, to the 
earth.

According to my journal:  'In a short time the party began to 
be a noisy one.  Healths were drunk, toasts proposed, 
compliments to our respective nationalities paid in the most 
flattering terms.  The Anglo-Saxon race were destined to 
conquer the globe.  The English were the greatest nation 
under the sun - that is to say, they had been.  America, of 
course, would take the lead in time to come.  We disputed 
this.  The Americans were certain of it, in fact this was 
already an accomplished fact.  The big officer - a genuine 
"heavy" - wanted to know where the man was that would give 
him the lie!  Wasn't the Mounted Rifles the crack regiment of 
the United States army?  And wasn't the United States army 
the finest army in the universe?  Who that knew anything of 
history would compare the Peninsular Campaign to the war in 
Mexico?  Talk of Waterloo - Britishers were mighty fond of 
swaggering about Waterloo!  Let 'em look at Chepultapec.  As 
for Wellington, he couldn't shine nohow with General Scott, 
nor old Zack neither!'

Then, WE wished for a war, just to let them see what our 
crack cavalry regiments could do.  Mounted Rifles forsooth!  
Mounted costermongers! whose trade it was to sell 'nutmegs 
made of wood, and clocks that wouldn't figure.'  Then some 
pretty forcible profanity was vented, fists were shaken, and 
the zinc walls were struck, till they resounded like the 
threatened thunder of artillery.

But Fred's merry laughter diverted the tragic end.  It was 
agreed that there had been too much tall talk.  Britishers 
and Americans were not such fools as to quarrel.  Let 
everybody drink everybody else's health.  A gentleman in the 
corner (he needed the support of both walls) thought it 
wasn't good to 'liquor up' too much on an empty stomach; he 
put it to the house that we should have supper.  The motion 
was carried NEM. CON., and a Dutch cheese was produced with 
much ECLAT.  Samson coupled the ideas of Dutch cheeses and 
Yankee hospitality.  This revived the flagging spirit of 
emulation.  On one side, it was thought that British manners 
were susceptible of amendment.  Confusion was then 
respectively drunk to Yankee hospitality, English manners, 
and - this was an addition of Fred's - to Dutch cheeses.  
After which, to change the subject, a song was called for, 
and a gentleman who shall be nameless, for there was a little 
mischief in the choice, sang 'Rule Britannia.'  Not being 
encored, the singer drank to the flag that had braved the 
battle and the breeze for nearly ninety years.  'Here's to 
Uncle Sam, and his stars and stripes.'  The mounted officer 
rose to his legs (with difficulty) and declared 'that he 
could not, and would not, hear his country insulted any 
longer.  He begged to challenge the "crowd."  He regretted 
the necessity, but his feelings had been wounded, and he 
could not - no, he positively could not stand it.'  A slight 
push from Samson proved the fact - the speaker fell, to rise 
no more.  The rest of the company soon followed his example, 
and shortly afterwards there was no sound but that of the 
adjacent rapids.

Early next morning the settler's boat came up, and took us a 
mile down the river, where we found a larger one to convey us 
to Fort Vancouver.  The crew were a Maltese sailor and a man 
who had been in the United States army.  Each had his private 
opinions as to her management.  Naturally, the Maltese should 
have been captain, but the soldier was both supercargo and 
part owner, and though it was blowing hard and the sails were 
fully large, the foreigner, who was but a poor little 
creature, had to obey orders.

As the river widened and grew rougher, we were wetted from 
stem to stern at every plunge; and when it became evident 
that the soldier could not handle the sails if the Maltese 
was kept at the helm, the heavy rifleman who was on board, 
declaring that he knew the river, took upon himself to steer 
us.  In a few minutes the boat was nearly swamped.  The 
Maltese prayed and blasphemed in language which no one 
understood.  The oaths of the soldier were intelligible 
enough.  The 'heavy,' now alarmed, nervously asked what had 
better be done.  My advice was to grease the bowsprit, let go 
the mast, and splice the main brace.  'In another minute or 
two,' I added, 'you'll steer us all to the bottom.'

Fred, who thought it no time for joking, called the rifleman 
a 'damned fool,' and authoritatively bade him give up the 
tiller; saying that I had been in Her Majesty's Navy, and 
perhaps knew a little more about boats than he did.  To this 
the other replied that 'he didn't want anyone to learn him; 
he reckon'd he'd been raised to boating as well as the next 
man, and he'd be derned if he was going to trust his life to 
anybody!'  Samson, thinking no doubt of his own, took his 
pipe out of his mouth, and towering over the steersman, flung 
him like a child on one side.  In an instant I was in his 
place.

It was a minute or two before the boat had way enough to 
answer the helm.  By that time we were within a dozen yards 
of a reef.  Having noticed, however, that the little craft 
was quick in her stays, I kept her full till the last, put 
the helm down, and round she spun in a moment.  Before I 
could thank my stars, the pintle, or hook on which the rudder 
hangs, broke off.  The tiller was knocked out of my hand, and 
the boat's head flew into the wind.  'Out with the sweeps,' I 
shouted.  But the sweeps were under the gear.  All was 
confusion and panic.  The two men cursed in the names of 
their respective saints.  The 'heavy' whined, 'I told you how 
it w'd be.'  Samson struggled valiantly to get at an oar, 
while Fred, setting the example, begged all hands to be calm, 
and be ready to fend the stern off the rocks with a boathook.  
As we drifted into the surf I was wondering how many bumps 
she would stand before she went to pieces.  Happily the water 
shallowed, and the men, by jumping overboard, managed to drag 
the boat through the breakers under the lee of the point.  We 
afterwards drew her up on to the beach, kindled a fire, got 
out some provisions, and stayed till the storm was over.



CHAPTER XXX



WHAT was then called Fort Vancouver was a station of the 
Hudson's Bay Company.  We took up our quarters here till one 
of the company's vessels - the 'Mary Dare,' a brig of 120 
tons, was ready to sail for the Sandwich Islands.  This was 
about the most uncomfortable trip I ever made.  A sailing 
merchant brig of 120 tons, deeply laden, is not exactly a 
pleasure yacht; and 2,000 miles is a long voyage.  For ten 
days we lay at anchor at the mouth of the Columbia, detained 
by westerly gales.  A week after we put to sea, all our fresh 
provisions were consumed, and we had to live on our cargo - 
dried salmon.  We three and the captain more than filled the 
little hole of a cabin.  There wasn't even a hammock, and we 
had to sleep on the deck, or on the lockers.  The fleas, the 
cockroaches, and the rats, romped over and under one all 
night.  Not counting the time it took to go down the river, 
or the ten days we were kept at its mouth, we were just six 
weeks at sea before we reached Woahoo, on Christmas Day.

How beautiful the islands looked as we passed between them, 
with a fair wind and studding sails set alow and aloft.  
Their tropical charms seemed more glowing, the water bluer, 
the palm trees statelier, the vegetation more libertine than 
ever.  On the south the land rises gradually from the shore 
to a range of lofty mountains.  Immediately behind Honolulu - 
the capital - a valley with a road winding up it leads to the 
north side of the island.  This valley is, or was then, 
richly cultivated, principally with TARO, a large root not 
unlike the yam.  Here and there native huts were dotted 
about, with gardens full of flowers, and abundance of 
tropical fruit.  Higher up, where it becomes too steep for 
cultivation, growth of all kind is rampant.  Acacias, 
oranges, maples, bread-fruit, and sandal-wood trees, rear 
their heads above the tangled ever-greens.  The high peaks, 
constantly in the clouds, arrest the moisture of the ocean 
atmosphere, and countless rills pour down the mountain sides, 
clothing everything in perpetual verdure.  The climate is one 
of the least changeable in the world; the sea breeze blows 
day and night, and throughout the year the day temperature 
does not vary more than five or six degrees, the average 
being about eighty-three degrees Fahrenheit in the shade.  In 
1850 the town of Honolulu was little else than a native 
village of grass and mat huts.  Two or three merchants had 
good houses.  In one of these Fred and Samson were domiciled; 
there was no such thing as a hotel.  I was the guest of 
General Miller, the Consul-General.  What changes may have 
taken place since the above date I have no means of knowing.  
So far as the natives go, the change will assuredly have been 
for the worse; for the aborigines, in all parts of the world, 
lose their primitive simplicity and soon acquire the worst 
vices of civilisation.

Even King Tamehameha III. was not innocent of one of them.  
General Miller offered to present us at court, but he had to 
give several days' notice in order that his Majesty might be 
sufficiently sober to receive us.  A negro tailor from the 
United States fitted us out with suits of black, and on the 
appointed day we put ourselves under the shade of the old 
General's cocked hat, and marched in a body to the palace.  A 
native band, in which a big drum had the leading part, 
received us with 'God save the Queen' - whether in honour of 
King Tamy, or of his visitors, was not divulged.  We were 
first introduced to a number of chiefs in European uniforms - 
except as to their feet, which were mostly bootless.  Their 
names sounded like those of the state officers in Mr. 
Gilbert's 'Mikado.'  I find in my journal one entered as 
Tovey-tovey, another as Kanakala.  We were then conducted to 
the presence chamber by the Foreign Minister, Mr. Wiley, a 
very pronounced Scotch gentleman with a star of the first 
magnitude on his breast.  The King was dressed as an English 
admiral.  The Queen, whose ample undulations also reminded 
one of the high seas, was on his right; while in perfect 
gradation on her right again were four princesses in short 
frocks and long trousers, with plaited tails tied with blue 
ribbon, like the Miss Kenwigs.  A little side dispute arose 
between the stiff old General and the Foreign Minister as to 
whose right it was to present us.  The Consul carried the 
day; but the Scot, not to be beaten, informed Tamehameha, in 
a long prefatory oration, of the object of the ceremony.  
Taking one of us by the hand (I thought the peppery old 
General would have thrust him aside), Mr. Wiley told the King 
that it was seldom the Sandwich Islands were 'veesited' by 
strangers of such 'desteenction' - that the Duke of this 
(referring to Fred's relations), and Lord the other, were the 
greatest noblemen in the world; then, with much solemnity, 
quoted a long speech from Shakespeare, and handed us over to 
his rival.

His Majesty, who did not understand a word of English, or 
Scotch, looked grave and held tight to the arm of the throne; 
for the truth is, that although he had relinquished his 
bottle for the hour, he had brought its contents with him.  
My salaam was soon made; but as I retired backwards I had the 
misfortune to set my heel on the toes of a black-and-tan 
terrier, a privileged pet of the General's.  The shriek of 
the animal and the loss of my equilibrium nearly precipitated 
me into the arms of a trousered princess; but the amiable 
young lady only laughed.  Thus ended my glimpse of the 
Hawaian Court.  Mr. Wiley afterwards remarked to me:  'We do 
things in a humble way, ye'll obsairve; but royalty is 
royalty all over the world, and His Majesty Tamehameha is as 
much Keng of his ain domeenions as Victoria is Queen of 
Breetain.' The relativity of greatness was not to be denied.

The men - Kanakas, as they are called - are fine stalwart 
fellows above our average height.  The only clothing they 
then wore was the MARO, a cloth made by themselves of the 
acacia bark.  This they pass between the legs, and once or 
twice round the loins.  The WYHEENES - women - formerly wore 
nothing but a short petticoat or kilt of the same material.  
By persuasion of the missionaries they have exchanged this 
simple garment for a chemise of printed calico, with the 
waist immediately under the arms so as to conceal the contour 
of the figure.  Other clothing have they none.

Are they the more chaste?  Are they the less seductive -?  
Hear what M. Anatole France says in his apostrophe to the 
sex:  'Pour faire de vous la terrible merveille que vous etes 
aujourd'hui, pour devenir la cause indifferente et souveraine 
des sacrifices et des crimes, il vous a fallu deux choses:  
la civilisation qui vous donna des voiles, et la religion qui 
vous donna des scrupules.'  The translation of which is 
(please take note of it, my dear young ladies with 'les 
epaules qui ne finissent pas'):


'Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard
Are sweeter.'


Be this as it may, these chocolate-skinned beauties, with 
their small and regular features, their rosy lips, their 
perfect teeth - of which they take great care - their 
luxurious silky tresses, their pretty little hands and naked 
feet, and their exquisite forms, would match the matchless 
Cleopatra.

Through the kindness of Fred's host, the principal merchant 
in the island, we were offered an opportunity of becoming 
acquainted with the ELITE of the Honolulu nymphs.  Mr. S. 
invited us to what is called a LOOHOU feast got up by him for 
their entertainment.  The head of one of the most picturesque 
valleys in Woahoo was selected for the celebration of this 
ancient festival.  Mounted on horses with which Mr. S. had 
furnished us, we repaired in a party to the appointed spot.  
It was early in the afternoon when we reached it; none of the 
guests had arrived, excepting a few Kanakas, who were engaged 
in thatching an old shed as shelter from the sun, and 
strewing the ground with a thick carpet of palm-leaves.  Ere 
long, a cavalcade of between thirty and forty amazons - they 
all rode astride - came racing up the valley at full speed, 
their merry shouts proclaiming their approach.  Gaudy strips 
of MARO were loosely folded around their legs for skirts.  
Their pretty little straw hats trimmed with ribbons, or their 
uncovered heads with their long hair streaming in the wind, 
confined only by a wreath of fresh orange flowers, added to 
their irresistible charm.  Certainly, the bravest soldiers 
could not have withstood their charge.  No men, however, were 
admitted, save those who had been expressly invited; but each 
lady of importance was given a CARTE BLANCHE to bring as many 
of her own sex as she pleased, provided they were both pretty 
and respectable.

As they rode up, we cavaliers, with becoming gallantry, 
offered our assistance while they dismounted.  Smitten 
through and through by the bright eyes of one little houri 
who possessed far more than her share of the first 
requirement, and, taking the second for granted, I 
courteously prepared to aid her to alight; when, to my 
discomfiture, instead of a gracious acknowledgment of my 
services, she gave me a sharp cut with her whip.  As, 
however, she laughed merrily at my wry faces, I accepted the 
act as a scratch of the kitten's claws; at least, it was no 
sign of indifference, and giving myself the benefit of the 
doubt, lifted her from her saddle without further 
chastisement, except a coquettish smile that wounded, alas! 
more than it healed.

The feast was thus prepared:  poultry, sucking-pigs, and 
puppies - the last, after being scalded and scraped, were 
stuffed with vegetables and spices, rolled in plantain 
leaves, and placed in the ground upon stones already heated.  
More stones were then laid over them, and fires lighted on 
the top of all.  While the cooking was in progress, the 
Kanakas ground TARO roots for the paste called 'poe'; the 
girls danced and sang.  The songs were devoid of melody, 
being musical recitations of imaginary love adventures, 
accompanied by swayings of the body and occasional choral 
interruptions, all becoming more and more excited as the 
story or song approached its natural climax.  Sometimes this 
was varied by a solitary dancer starting from the circle, and 
performing the wildest bacchanalian antics, to the vocal 
incitement of the rest.  This only ended with physical 
exhaustion, or collapse from feminine hysteria.

The food was excellent; the stuffed puppy was a dish for an 
epicure.  Though knives and forks were unknown, and each 
helped herself from the plantain leaf, one had not the least 
objection to do likewise, for the most scrupulous cleanliness 
is one of the many merits of these fascinating creatures.  
Before every dip into the leaf, the dainty little fingers 
were plunged into bowls of fresh water provided for the 
purpose.  Delicious fruit followed the substantial fare; a 
small glass of KAVA - a juice extracted from a root of the 
pepper tribe - was then served to all alike.  Having watched 
the process of preparing the beverage, I am unable to speak 
as to its flavour.  The making of it is remarkable.  A number 
of women sit on the ground, chew the root, and spit its juice 
into a bowl.  The liquor is kept till it ferments, after 
which it becomes highly intoxicating.  I regret to say that 
its potency was soon manifested on this occasion.  No sooner 
did the poison set their wild blood tingling, than a free 
fight began for the remaining gourds.  Such a scratching, 
pulling of hair, clawing, kicking, and crying, were never 
seen.  Only by main force did we succeed in restoring peace.  
It is but fair to state that, except on the celebration of 
one or two solemn and sacred rites such as that of the 
LOOHOU, these island Thyades never touch fermented liquors.



CHAPTER XXXI



IT was an easier task when all was over to set the little 
Amazons on their horses than to keep them there, for by the 
time we had perched one on her saddle, or pad rather, and 
adjusted her with the greatest nicety, another whom we had 
just left would lose her balance and fall with a scream to 
the ground.  It was almost as difficult as packing mules on 
the prairie.  For my part it must be confessed that I left 
the completion of the job to others.  Curious and 
entertaining as the feast was, my whole attention was centred 
and absorbed in Arakeeta, which that artful little 
enchantress had the gift to know, and lashed me accordingly 
with her eyes more cruelly than she had done with her whip.  
I had got so far, you see, as to learn her name, the first 
instalment of an intimacy which my demolished heart was 
staked on perfecting.  I noticed that she refused the KAVA 
with real or affected repugnance; and when the passage of 
arms, and legs, began, she slipped away, caught her animal, 
and with a parting laugh at me, started off for home.  There 
was not the faintest shadow of encouragement in her saucy 
looks to follow her.  Still, she was a year older than 
Juliet, who was nearly fourteen; so, who could say what those 
looks might veil?  Besides:


Das Naturell der Frauen
Ist so nah mit Kunst verwandt,


that one might easily be mistaken.  Anyhow, flight provoked 
pursuit; I jumped on to my horse, and raced along the plain 
like mad.  She saw me coming, and flogged the more, but being 
the better mounted of the two, by degrees I overhauled her.  
As I ranged alongside, neither slackened speed; and reaching 
out to catch her bridle, my knee hooked under the hollow of 
hers, twisted her clean off her pad, and in a moment she lay 
senseless on the ground.  I flung myself from my horse, and 
laid her head upon my lap.  Good God! had I broken her neck!  
She did not stir; her eyes were closed, but she breathed, and 
her heart beat quickly.  I was wild with terror and remorse.  
I looked back for aid, but the others had not started; we 
were still a mile or more from Honolulu.  I knew not what to 
do.  I kissed her forehead, I called her by her name.  But 
she lay like a child asleep.  Presently her dazed eyes opened 
and stared with wonderment, and then she smiled.  The tears, 
I think, were on my cheeks, and seeing them, she put her arms 
around my neck and - forgave me.

She had fallen on her head and had been stunned.  I caught 
the horses while she sat still, and we walked them slowly 
home.  When we got within sight of her hut on the outskirts 
of the town, she would not let me go further.  There was 
sadness in her look when we parted.  I made her understand (I 
had picked up two or three words) that I would return to see 
her.  She at once shook her head with an expression of 
something akin to fear.  I too felt sorrowful, and worse than 
sorrowful, jealous.

When the night fell I sought her hut.  It was one of the 
better kind, built like others mainly with matting; no doors 
or windows, but with an extensive verandah which protected 
the inner part from rain and sun.  Now and again I caught 
glimpses of Arakeeta's fairy form flitting in, or obscuring, 
the lamplight.  I could see two other women and two men.  Who 
and what were they?  Was one of those dark forms an Othello, 
ready to smother his Desdemona?  Or were either of them a 
Valentine between my Marguerite and me?  Though there was no 
moon, I dared not venture within the lamp's rays, for her 
sake; for my own, I was reckless now - I would have thanked 
either of them to brain me with his hoe.  But Arakeeta came 
not.

In the day-time I roamed about the district, about the TARO 
fields, in case she might be working there.  Every evening 
before sundown, many of the women and some of the well-to-do 
men, and a few whites, used to ride on the plain that 
stretches along the shore between the fringe of palm groves 
and the mountain spurs.  I had seen Arakeeta amongst them 
before the LOOHOU feast.  She had given this up now, and why?  
Night after night I hovered about the hut.  When she was in 
the verandah I whispered her name.  She started and peered 
into the dark, hesitated, then fled.  Again the same thing 
happened.  She had heard me, she knew that I was there, but 
she came not; no, wiser than I, she came not.  And though I 
sighed:


What is worth
The rest of Heaven, the rest of earth?


the shrewd little wench doubtless told herself:  'A quiet 
life, without the fear of the broomstick.'

Fred was impatient to be off, I had already trespassed too 
long on the kind hospitality of General Miller, neither of us 
had heard from England for more than a year, and the 
opportunities of trading vessels to California seldom 
offered.  A rare chance came - a fast-sailing brig, the 
'Corsair,' was to leave in a few days for San Francisco.  The 
captain was an Englishman, and had the repute of being a boon 
companion and a good caterer.  We - I, passively - settled to 
go.  Samson decided to remain.  He wanted to visit Owyhee.  
He came on board with us, however; and, with a parting bumper 
of champagne, we said 'Good-bye.'  That was the last I ever 
saw of him.  The hardships had broken him down.  He died not 
long after.

The light breeze carried us slowly away - for the first time 
for many long months with our faces to the east.  But it was 
not 'merry' England that filled my juvenile fancies.  I 
leaned upon the taffrail and watched this lovely land of the 
'flowery food' fade slowly from my sight.  I had eaten of the 
Lotus, and knew no wish but to linger on, to roam no more, to 
return no more, to any home that was not Arakeeta's.

This sort of feeling is not very uncommon in early life.  And 
'out of sight, out of mind,' is also a known experience.  
Long before we reached San Fr'isco I was again eager for 
adventure.

How magnificent is the bay!  One cannot see across it.  How 
impatient we were to land!  Everything new.  Bearded dirty 
heterogeneous crowds busy in all directions, - some running 
up wooden and zinc houses, some paving the streets with 
planks, some housing over ships beached for temporary 
dwellings.  The sandy hills behind the infant town are being 
levelled and the foreshore filled up.  A 'water surface' of 
forty feet square is worth 5,000 dollars.  So that here and 
there the shop-fronts are ships' broadsides.  Already there 
is a theatre.  But the chief feature is the gambling saloons, 
open night and day.  These large rooms are always filled with 
from 300 to 400 people of every description - from 'judges' 
and 'colonels' (every man is one or the other, who is nothing 
else) to Parisian cocottes, and escaped convicts of all 
nationalities.  At one end of the saloon is a bar, at the 
other a band.  Dozens of tables are ranged around.  Monte, 
faro, rouge-et-noir, are the games.  A large proportion of 
the players are diggers in shirt-sleeves and butcher-boots, 
belts round their waists for bowie knife and 'five shooters,' 
which have to be surrendered on admittance.  They come with 
their bags of nuggets or 'dust,' which is duly weighed, 
stamped, and sealed by officials for the purpose.

1 have still several specimens of the precious metal which I 
captured, varying in size from a grain of wheat to a mustard 
seed.

The tables win enormously, and so do the ladies of pleasure; 
but the winnings of these go back again to the tables.  Four 
times, while we were here, differences of opinion arose 
concerning points of 'honour,' and were summarily decided by 
revolvers.  Two of the four were subsequently referred to 
Judge 'Lynch.'

Wishing to see the 'diggings,' Fred and I went to Sacramento 
- about 150 miles up the river of that name.  This was but a 
pocket edition of San Francisco, or scarcely that.  We 
therefore moved to Marysville, which, from its vicinity to 
the various branches of the Sacramento river, was the chief 
depot for the miners of the 'wet diggin's' in Northern 
California.  Here we were received by a Mr. Massett - a 
curious specimen of the waifs and strays that turn up all 
over the world in odd places, and whom one would be sure to 
find in the moon if ever one went there.  He owned a little 
one-roomed cabin, over the door of which was painted 'Offices 
of the Marysville Herald.'  He was his own contributor and 
'correspondent,' editor and printer, (the press was in a 
corner of the room).  Amongst other avocations he was a 
concert-giver, a comic reader, a tragic actor, and an 
auctioneer.  He had the good temper and sanguine disposition 
of a Mark Tapley.  After the golden days of California he 
spent his life wandering about the globe; giving 
'entertainments' in China, Japan, India, Australia.  Wherever 
the English language is spoken, Stephen Massett had many 
friends and no enemies.

Fred slept on the table, I under it, and next morning we 
hired horses and started for the 'Forks of the Yuba.'  A few 
hours' ride brought us to the gold-hunters.  Two or three 
hundred men were at work upon what had formerly been the bed 
of the river.  By unwritten law, each miner was entitled to a 
certain portion of the 'bar,' as it was called, in which the 
gold is found.  And, as the precious metal has to be obtained 
by washing, the allotments were measured by thirty feet on 
the banks of the river and into the dry bed as far as this 
extends; thus giving each man his allowance of water.  
Generally three or four combined to possess a 'claim.'  Each 
would then attend to his own department:  one loosened the 
soil, another filled the barrow or cart, a third carried it 
to the river, and the fourth would wash it in the 'rocker.'  
The average weight of gold got by each miner while we were at 
the 'wet diggin's,' I.E. where water had to be used, was 
nearly half an ounce or seven dollars' worth a day.  We saw 
three Englishmen who had bought a claim 30 feet by 100 feet, 
for 1,400 dollars.  It had been bought and sold twice before 
for considerable sums, each party supposing it to be nearly 
'played out.'  In three weeks the Englishmen paid their 1,400 
dollars and had cleared thirteen dollars a day apiece for 
their labour.

Our presence here created both curiosity and suspicion, for 
each gang and each individual was very shy of his neighbour.  
They did not believe our story of crossing the plains; they 
themselves, for the most part, had come round the Horn; a few 
across the isthmus.  Then, if we didn't want to dig, what did 
we want?  Another peculiarity about us - a great one - was, 
that, so far as they could see, we were unarmed.  At night 
the majority, all except the few who had huts, slept in a 
zinc house or sort of low-roofed barn, against the walls of 
which were three tiers of bunks.  There was no room for us, 
even if we had wished it, but we managed to hire a trestle.  
Mattress or covering we had none.  As Fred and I lay side by 
side, squeezed together in a trough scarcely big enough for 
one, we heard two fellows by the door of the shed talking us 
over.  They thought no doubt that we were fast asleep, they 
themselves were slightly fuddled.  We nudged each other and 
pricked up our ears, for we had already canvassed the 
question of security, surrounded as we were by ruffians who 
looked quite ready to dispose of babes in the wood.  They 
discussed our 'portable property' which was nil; one decided, 
while the other believed, that we must have money in our 
pockets.  The first remarked that, whether or no, we were 
unarmed; the other wasn't so sure about that - it wasn't 
likely we'd come there to be skinned for the asking.  Then 
arose the question of consequences, and it transpired that 
neither of them had the courage of his rascality.  After a 
bit, both agreed they had better turn in.  Tired as we were, 
we fell asleep.  How long we had slumbered I know not, but 
all of a sudden I was seized by the beard, and was conscious 
of a report which in my dreams I took for a pistol-shot.  I 
found myself on the ground amid the wrecks of the trestle.  
Its joints had given way under the extra weight, and Fred's 
first impulse had been to clutch at my throat.

On the way back to San Francisco we stayed for a couple of 
nights at Sacramento.  It was a miserable place, with nothing 
but a few temporary buildings except those of the Spanish 
settlers.  In the course of a walk round the town I noticed a 
crowd collected under a large elm-tree in the horse-market.  
On inquiry I was informed that a man had been lynched on one 
of its boughs the night before last.  A piece of the rope was 
still hanging from the tree.  When I got back to the 'hotel' 
- a place not much better than the shed at Yuba Forks - I 
found a newspaper with an account of the affair.  Drawing a 
chair up to the stove, I was deep in the story, when a huge 
rowdy-looking fellow in digger-costume interrupted me with:

'Say, stranger, let's have a look at that paper, will ye?'

'When I've done with it,' said I, and continued reading.  He 
lent over the back of my chair, put one hand on my shoulder, 
and with the other raised the paper so that he could read.

'Caint see rightly.  Ah, reckon you're readen 'baout Jim, 
ain't yer?'

'Who's Jim?'

'Him as they sus-spended yesterday mornin'.  Jim was a 
purticler friend o' mine, and I help'd to hang him.'

'A friendly act!  What was he hanged for?'

'When did you come to Sacramenty City?'

'Day before yesterday.'

'Wal, I'll tell yer haow't was then.  Yer see, Jim was a 
Britisher, he come from a place they call Botany Bay, which 
belongs to Victoria, but ain't 'xactly in the Old Country.  I 
judge, when he first come to Californy, 'baout six months 
back, he warn't acquainted none with any boys hereaway, so he 
took to diggin' by hisself.  It was up to Cigar Bar whar he 
dug, and I chanst to be around there too, that's haow we got 
to know one another.  Jim hadn't been here not a fortnight 
'fore one of the boys lost 300 dollars as he'd made a cache 
of.  Somehow suspicions fell on Jim.  More'n one of us 
thought he'd been a diggin' for bags instead of for dust; and 
the man as lost the money swore he'd hev a turn with him; so 
Jim took my advice not to go foolin' around, an' sloped.'

'Well,' said I, as my friend stopped to adjust his tobacco 
plug, 'he wasn't hanged for that?'

''Tain't likely!  Till last week nobody know'd whar he'd gone 
to.  When he come to Sacramenty this time, he come with a 
pile, an' no mistake.  All day and all night he used to play 
at faro an' a heap o' other games.  Nobody couldn't tell how 
he made his money hold out, nor whar he got it from; but 
sartin sure the crowd reckoned as haow Jim was considerable 
of a loafer.  One day a blacksmith as lives up Broad Street, 
said he found out the way he done it, and ast me to come with 
him and show up Jim for cheatin'.  Naow, whether it was as 
Jim suspicioned the blacksmith I cain't say, but he didn't 
cheat, and lost his money in consequence.  This riled him 
bad, so wantin' to get quit of the blacksmith he began a 
quarrel.  The blacksmith was a quick-tempered man, and after 
some language struck Jim in the mouth.  Jim jumps up, and 
whippin' out his revolver, shoots the t'other man dead on the 
spot.  I was the first to lay hold on him, but ef it hadn't 
'a' been for me they'd 'a' torn him to pieces.

'"Send for Judge Parker," says some.

'"Let's try him here," says others.

'"I don't want to be tried at all," says Jim.  "You all know 
bloody well as I shot the man.  And I knows bloody well as 
I'll hev to swing for it.  Gi' me till daylight, and I'll die 
like a man."

'But we wasn't going to hang him without a proper trial; and 
as the trial lasted two hours, it - '

'Two hours!  What did you want two hours for?'

'There was some as wanted to lynch him, and some as wanted 
him tried by the reg'lar judges of the Crim'nal Court.  One 
of the best speakers said lynch-law was no law at all, and no 
innocent man's life was safe with it.  So there was a lot of 
speakin', you bet.  By the time it was over it was just 
daylight, and the majority voted as he should die at onc't.  
So they took him to the horse-market, and stood him on a 
table under the big elm.  I kep' by his side, and when he was 
getting on the table he ast me to lend him my revolver to 
shoot the foreman of the jury.  When I wouldn't, he ast me to 
tie the knot so as it wouldn't slip.  "It ain't no account, 
Jim," says I, "to talk like that.  You're bound to die; and 
ef they didn't hang yer I'd shoot yer myself."

'"Well then," says he, "gi' me hold of the rope, and I'll 
show you how little I keer for death."  He snatches the cord 
out o' my hands, pulls hisself out o' reach o' the crowd, and 
sat cross-legged on the bough.  Half a dozen shooters was 
raised to fetch him down, but he tied a noose in the rope, 
put it round his neck, slipped it puty tight, and stood up on 
the bough and made 'em a speech.  What he mostly said was as 
he hated 'em all.  He cussed the man he shot, then he cussed 
the world, then he cussed hisself, and with a terr'ble oath 
he jumped off the bough, and swung back'ards and for'ards 
with his neck broke.'

'An Englishman,' I reflected aloud.

He nodded.  'You're a Britisher, I reckon, ain't yer?'

'Yes; why?'

'Wal, you've a puty strong accent.'

'Think so?'

'Wal, I could jest tie a knot in it.'

This is a vulgar and repulsive story.  But it is not fiction; 
and any picture of Californian life in 1850, without some 
such faithful touch of its local colour, would be inadequate 
and misleading.



CHAPTER XXXII



A STEAMER took us down to Acapulco.  It is probably a 
thriving port now.  When we were there, a few native huts and 
two or three stone buildings at the edge of the jungle 
constituted the 'town.'  We bought some horses, and hired two 
men - a Mexican and a Yankee - for our ride to the city of 
Mexico.  There was at that time nothing but a mule-track, and 
no public conveyance of any kind.  Nothing could exceed the 
beauty of the scenery.  Within 160 miles, as the crow flies, 
one rises up to the city of Mexico some 12,000 feet, with 
Popocatepetl overhanging it 17,500 feet high.  In this short 
space one passes from intense tropical heat and vegetation to 
pines and laurels and the proximity of perpetual snows.  The 
path in places winds along the brink of precipitous 
declivities, from the top of which one sees the climatic 
gradations blending one into another.  So narrow are some of 
the mountain paths that a mule laden with ore has often one 
panier overhanging the valley a thousand feet below it.  
Constantly in the long trains of animals descending to the 
coast, a slip of the foot or a charge from behind, for they 
all come down the steep track with a jolting shuffle, sends 
mule and its load over the ledge.  We found it very difficult 
in places to get out of the way in time to let the trains 
pass.  Flocks of parrots and great macaws screeching and 
flying about added to the novelty of the scene.

The villages, inhabited by a cross between the original 
Indians and the Spaniards, are about twenty miles apart.  At 
one of these we always stayed for the night, sleeping in 
grass hammocks suspended between the posts of the verandah.  
The only travellers we fell in with were a party of four 
Americans, returning to the Eastern States from California 
with the gold they had won there.  They had come in our 
steamer to Acapulco, and had left it a few hours before we 
did.  As the villages were so far apart we necessarily had to 
stop at night in the same one.  The second time this happened 
they, having arrived first, had quartered themselves on the 
Alcalde or principal personage of the place.  Our guide took 
us to the same house; and although His Worship, who had a 
better supply of maize for the horses, and a few more 
chickens to sell than the other natives, was anxious to 
accommodate us, the four Americans, a very rough-looking lot 
and armed to the teeth, wouldn't hear of it, but peremptorily 
bade us put up elsewhere.  Our own American, who was much 
afraid of them, obeyed their commands without more ado.  It 
made not the slightest difference to us, for one grass 
hammock is as soft as another, and the Alcalde's chickens 
were as tough as ours.

Before the morning start, two of the diggers, rifles in hand, 
came over to us and plainly told us they objected to our 
company.  Fred, with perfect good humour, assured them we had 
no thought of robbing them, and that as the villages were so 
far apart we had no choice in the matter.  However, as they 
wished to travel separate from us, if there should be two 
villages at all within suitable distances, they could stop at 
one and we at the other.  There the matter rested.  But our 
guide was more frightened than ever.  They were four to two, 
he argued, for neither he nor the Mexican were armed.  And 
there was no saying, etc., etc. . . . In short we had better 
stay where we were till they got through.  Fred laughed at 
the fellow's alarm, and told him he might stop if he liked, 
but we meant to go on.

As usual, when we reached the next stage, the diggers were 
before us; and when our men began to unsaddle at a hut about 
fifty yards from where they were feeding their horses, one of 
them, the biggest blackguard to look at of the lot, and 
though the fiercest probably the greatest cur, shouted at us 
to put the saddles on again and 'get out of that.'  He had 
warned us in the morning that they'd had enough of us, and, 
with a volley of oaths, advised us to be off.  Fred, who was 
in his shirt-sleeves, listened at first with a look of 
surprise at such cantankerous unreasonableness; but when the 
ruffian fell to swear and threaten, he burst into one of his 
contemptuous guffaws, turned his back and began to feed his 
horse with a corncob.  Thus insulted, the digger ran into the 
hut (as I could see) to get his rifle.  I snatched up my own, 
which I had been using every day to practise at the large 
iguanas and macaws, and, well protected by my horse, called 
out as I covered him, 'This is a double-barrelled rifle.  If 
you raise yours I'll drop you where you stand.'  He was 
forestalled and taken aback.  Probably he meant nothing but 
bravado.  Still, the situation was a critical one.  Obviously 
I could not wait till he had shot my friend.  But had it come 
to shooting there would have been three left, unless my 
second barrel had disposed of another.  Fortunately the 
'boss' of the digging party gauged the gravity of the crisis 
at a glance; and instead of backing him up as expected, swore 
at him for a 'derned fool,' and ordered him to have no more 
to do with us.

After that, as we drew near to the city, the country being 
more thickly populated, we no longer clashed.

This is not a guide-book, and I have nothing to tell of that 
readers would not find better described in their 'Murray.'  
We put up in an excellent hotel kept by M. Arago, the brother 
of the great French astronomer.  The only other travellers in 
it besides ourselves were the famous dancer Cerito, and her 
husband the violin virtuoso, St. Leon.  Luckily for me our 
English Minister was Mr. Percy Doyle, whom I had known as 
ATTACHE at Paris when I was at Larue, and who was a great 
friend of the De Cubriers.  We were thus provided with many 
advantages for 'sight-seeing' in and about the city, and also 
for more distant excursions through credentials from the 
Mexican authorities.  Under these auspices we visited the 
silver mines at Guadalajara, Potosi, and Guanajuata.

The life in Mexico city was delightful, after a year's tramp.  
The hotel, as I have said, was to us luxurious.  My room 
under the verandah opened on to a large and beautiful garden 
partially enclosed on two sides.  As I lay in bed of a 
morning reading Prescott's 'History of Mexico,' or watching 
the brilliant humming birds as they darted from flower to 
flower, and listened to the gentle plash of the fountain, my 
cup of enjoyment and romance was brimming over.

Just before I left, an old friend of mine arrived from 
England.  This was Mr. Joseph Clissold.  He was a 
schoolfellow of mine at Sheen.  He had pulled in the 
Cambridge boat, and played in the Cambridge eleven.  He 
afterwards became a magistrate either in Australia or New 
Zealand.  He was the best type of the good-natured, level-
headed, hard-hitting Englishman.  Curiously enough, as it 
turned out, the greater part of the only conversation we had 
(I was leaving the day after he came) was about the 
brigandage on the road between Mexico and Vera Cruz.  He told 
me the passengers in the diligence which had brought him up 
had been warned at Jalapa that the road was infested by 
robbers; and should the coach be stopped they were on no 
account to offer resistance, for the robbers would certainly 
shoot them if they did.

Fred chose to ride down to the coast, I went by coach.  This 
held six inside and two by the driver.  Three of the inside 
passengers sat with backs to the horses, the others facing 
them.  My coach was full, and stifling hot and stuffy it was 
before we had done with it.  Of the five others two were fat 
priests, and for twenty hours my place was between them.  But 
in one way I had my revenge:  I carried my loaded rifle 
between my knees, and a pistol in my belt.  The dismay, the 
terror, the panic, the protestations, the entreaties and 
execrations of all the five, kept us at least from ENNUI for 
many a weary mile.  I doubt whether the two priests ever 
thumbed their breviaries so devoutly in their lives.  Perhaps 
that brought us salvation.  We reached Vera Cruz without 
adventure, and in the autumn of '51 Fred and I landed safely 
at Southampton.

Two months after I got back, I read an account in the 'Times' 
of 'Joe' Clissold's return trip from Mexico.  The coach in 
which he was travelling was stopped by robbers.  Friend 
Joseph was armed with a double-barrelled smooth-bore loaded 
with slugs.  He considered this on the whole more suitable 
than a rifle.  When the captain of the brigands opened the 
coach door and, pistol in hand, politely proffered his 
request, Mr. Joe was quite ready for him, and confided the 
contents of one barrel to the captain's bosom.  Seeing the 
fate of their commander, and not knowing what else the dilly 
might contain, the rest of the band dug spurs into their 
horses and fled.  But the sturdy oarsman and smart cricketer 
was too quick for one of them - the horse followed his 
friends, but the rider stayed with his chief.



CHAPTER XXXIII



THE following winter, my friend, George Cayley, was ordered 
to the south for his health.  He went to Seville.  I joined 
him there; and we took lodgings and remained till the spring.  
As Cayley published an amusing account of our travels, 'Las 
Aforjas, or the Bridle Roads of Spain,' as this is more than 
fifty years ago - before the days of railways and tourists - 
and as I kept no journal of my own, I will make free use of 
his.

A few words will show the terms we were on.

I had landed at Cadiz, and had gone up the Guadalquivir in a 
steamer, whose advent at Seville my friend was on the look-
out for.  He describes his impatience for her arrival.  By 
some mistake he is misinformed as to the time; he is a 
quarter of an hour late.

'A remnant of passengers yet bustled around the luggage, 
arguing, struggling and bargaining with a contentious company 
of porters.  Alas! H. was not to be seen among them.  There 
was still a chance; he might be one of the passengers who had 
got ashore before my coming down, and I was preparing to rush 
back to the city to ransack the hotels.  Just then an 
internal convulsion shook the swarm around the luggage pile; 
out burst a little Gallego staggering under a huge British 
portmanteau, and followed by its much desired, and now almost 
despaired of, proprietor.

'I saw him come bowling up the slope with his familiar gait, 
evidently unconscious of my presence, and wearing that sturdy 
and almost hostile demeanour with which a true Briton marches 
into a strange city through the army of officious 
importunates who never fail to welcome the true Briton's 
arrival.  As he passed the barrier he came close to me in the 
crowd, still without recognising me, for though straight 
before his nose I was dressed in the costume of the people.  
I touched his elbow and he turned upon me with a look of 
impatient defiance, thinking me one persecutor more.

'How quickly the expression changed, etc., etc.  We rushed 
into each other's arms, as much as the many great coats slung 
over his shoulders, and the deep folds of cloak in which I 
was enveloped, would mutually permit.  Then, saying more than 
a thousand things in a breath, or rather in no breath at all, 
we set off in great glee for my lodgings, forgetting in the 
excitement the poor little porter who was following at full 
trot, panting and puffing under the heavy portmanteau.  We 
got home, but were no calmer.  We dined, but could not eat.  
We talked, but the news could not be persuaded to come out 
quick enough.'

Who has not known what is here described?  Who does not envy 
the freshness, the enthusiasm, of such bubbling of warm young 
hearts?  Oh, the pity of it! if these generous emotions 
should prove as transient as youth itself.  And then, when 
one of those young hearts is turned to dust, and one is left 
to think of it - why then, 'tis not much comfort to reflect 
that - nothing in the world is commoner.

We got a Spanish master and worked industriously, also picked 
up all the Andalusian we could, which is as much like pure 
Castilian as wold-Yorkshire is to English.  I also took 
lessons on the guitar.  Thus prepared, I imitated my friend 
and adopted the ordinary costume of the Andalusian peasant:  
breeches, ornamented with rows of silvered buttons, gaiters, 
a short jacket with a red flower-pot and blue lily on the 
back, and elbows with green and scarlet patterns, a red FAJA 
or sash, and the sombrero which I believe is worn nowhere 
except in the bull-ring.  The whole of this picturesque dress 
is now, I think, given up.  I have spent the last two winters 
in the south of Spain, but have not once seen it.

It must not be supposed that we chose this 'get-up' to 
gratify any aesthetic taste of our own or other people's; it 
was long before the days of the 'Too-toos,' whom Mr. Gilbert 
brought to a timely end.  We had settled to ride through 
Spain from Gibraltar to Bayonne, choosing always the bridle-
roads so as to avoid anything approaching a beaten track.  We 
were to visit the principal cities and keep more or less a 
northerly course, staying on the way at such places as 
Malaga, Cordova, Toledo, Madrid, Valladolid, and Burgos.  The 
rest was to be left to chance.  We were to take no map; and 
when in doubt as to diverging roads, the toss of a coin was 
to settle it.  This programme was conscientiously adhered to.  
The object of the dress then was obscurity.  For safety 
(brigands abounded) and for economy, it was desirable to pass 
unnoticed.  We never knew in what dirty POSADA or road-side 
VENTA we should spend the night.  For the most part it was at 
the resting-place of the muleteers, which would be nothing 
but a roughly paved dark chamber, one end occupied by mules 
and the other by their drivers.  We made our own omelets and 
salad and chocolate; with the exception of the never failing 
BACALLAO, or salt fish, we rarely had anything else; and 
rolling ourselves into our cloaks, with saddles for pillows, 
slept amongst the muleteers on the stone flags.  We had 
bought a couple of ponies in the Seville market for 7L. and 
8L.  Our ALFORJAS or saddlebags contained all we needed.  Our 
portmanteaus were sent on from town to town, wherever we had 
arranged to stop.  Rough as the life was, we saw the people 
of Spain as no ordinary travellers could hope to see them.  
The carriers, the shepherds, the publicans, the travelling 
merchants, the priests, the barbers, the MOLINERAS of 
Antequera, the Maritornes', the Sancho Panzas - all just as 
they were seen by the immortal knight.

From the MOZOS DE LA CUADRA (ostlers) and ARRIEROS, upwards 
and downwards, nowhere have I met, in the same class, with 
such natural politeness.  This is much changed for the worse 
now; but before the invasion of tourists one never passed a 
man on the road who did not salute one with a 'Vaya usted con 
Dios.'  Nor would the most indigent vagabond touch the filthy 
BACALLAO which he drew from his wallet till he had 
courteously addressed the stranger with the formula 'Quiere 
usted comer?'  ('Will your Lordship please to eat?')  The 
contrast between the people and the nobles in this respect 
was very marked.  We saw something of the latter in the club 
at Seville, where one met men whose high-sounding names and 
titles have come down to us from the greatest epochs of 
Spanish history.  Their ignorance was surprising.  Not one of 
them had been farther than Madrid.  Not one of them knew a 
word of any language but his own, nor was he acquainted with 
the rudiments even of his country's history.  Their 
conversation was restricted to the bull-ring and the cockpit, 
to cards and women.  Their chief aim seemed to be to stagger 
us with the number of quarterings they bore upon their 
escutcheons; and they appraised others by a like estimate.

Cayley, tickled with the humour of their childish vanity, 
painted an elaborate coat of arms, which he stuck in the 
crown of his hat, and by means of which he explained to them 
that he too was by rights a Spanish nobleman.  With the 
utmost gravity he delivered some such medley as this:  His 
Iberian origin dated back to the time of Hannibal, who, after 
his defeat of the Papal forces and capture of Rome, had, as 
they well knew, married Princess Peri Banou, youngest 
daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella.  The issue of the 
marriage was the famous Cardinal Chicot, from whom he - 
George Cayley - was of direct male descent.  When Chicot was 
slain by Oliver Cromwell at the battle of Hastings, his 
descendants, foiled in their attempt to capture England with 
the Spanish Armada, settled in the principality of Yorkshire, 
adopted the noble name of Cayley, and still governed that 
province as members of the British Parliament.

From that day we were treated with every mark of distinction.

Here is another of my friend's pranks.  I will let Cayley 
speak; for though I kept no journal, we had agreed to write a 
joint account of our trip, and our notebooks were common 
property.

After leaving Malaga we met some beggars on the road, to one 
of whom, 'an old hag with one eye and a grizzly beard,' I 
threw the immense sum of a couple of 2-cuarto pieces.  An old 
man riding behind us on an ass with empty panniers, seeing 
fortunes being scattered about the road with such reckless 
and unbounded profusion, came up alongside, and entered into 
a piteous detail of his poverty.  When he wound up with plain 
begging, the originality and boldness of the idea of a 
mounted beggar struck us in so humorous a light that we could 
not help laughing.  As we rode along talking his case over, 
Cayley said, 'Suppose we rob him.  He has sold his market 
produce in Malaga, and depend upon it, has a pocketful of 
money.'  We waited for him to come up.  When he got fairly 
between us, Cayley pulled out his revolver (we both carried 
pistols) and thus addressed him:

'Impudent old scoundrel! stand still.  If thou stirr'st hand 
or foot, or openest thy mouth, I will slay thee like a dog.  
Thou greedy miscreant, who art evidently a man of property 
and hast an ass to ride upon, art not satisfied without 
trying to rob the truly poor of the alms we give them.  
Therefore hand over at once the two dollars for which thou 
hast sold thy cabbages for double what they were worth.'

The old culprit fell on his knees, and trembling violently, 
prayed Cayley for the love of the Virgin to spare him.

'One moment, CABALLEROS,' he cried, 'I will give you all I 
possess.  But I am poor, very poor, and I have a sick wife at 
the disposition of your worships.'

'Wherefore art thou fumbling at thy foot?  Thou carriest not 
thy wife in thy shoe?'

'I cannot untie the string - my hand trembles; will your 
worships permit me to take out my knife?'

He did so, and cutting the carefully knotted thong of a 
leather bag which had been concealed in the leg of his 
stocking, poured out a handful of small coin and began to 
weep piteously.

Said Cayley, 'Come, come, none of that, or we shall feel it 
our duty to shoot thy donkey that thou may'st have something 
to whimper for.'

The genuine tears of the poor old fellow at last touched the 
heart of the jester.

'We know now that thou art poor,' said he, 'for we have taken 
all thou hadst.  And as it is the religion of the Ingleses, 
founded on the practice of their celebrated saint, Robino 
Hoodo, to levy funds from the rich for the benefit of the 
needy, hold out thy sombero, and we will bestow a trifle upon 
thee.'

So saying he poured back the plunder; to which was added, to 
the astonishment of the receiver, some supplementary pieces 
that nearly equalled the original sum.



CHAPTER XXXIV



BEFORE setting out from Seville we had had our Foreign Office 
passports duly VISED.  Our profession was given as that of 
travelling artists, and the VISE included the permission to 
carry arms.  More than once the sight of our pistols caused 
us to be stopped by the CARABINEROS.  On one occasion these 
road-guards disputed the wording of the VISE.  They protested 
that 'armas' meant 'escopetas,' not pistols, which were 
forbidden.  Cayley indignantly retorted, 'Nothing is 
forbidden to Englishmen.  Besides, it is specified in our 
passports that we are 'personas de toda confianza,' which 
checkmated them.

We both sketched, and passed ourselves off as 'retratistas' 
(portrait painters), and did a small business in this way - 
rather in the shape of caricatures, I fear, but which gave 
much satisfaction.  We charged one peseta (seven-pence), or 
two, a head, according to the means of the sitter.  The 
fiction that we were earning our bread wholesomely tended to 
moderate the charge for it.

Passing through the land of Don Quixote's exploits, we 
reverentially visited any known spot which these had rendered 
famous.  Amongst such was the VENTA of Quesada, from which, 
or from Quixada, as some conjecture, the knight derived his 
surname.  It was here, attracted by its castellated style, 
and by two 'ladies of pleasure' at its door - whose virginity 
he at once offered to defend, that he spent the night of his 
first sally.  It was here that, in his shirt, he kept guard 
till morning over the armour he had laid by the well.  It was 
here that, with his spear, he broke the head of the carrier 
whom he took for another knight bent on the rape of the 
virgin princesses committed to his charge.  Here, too, it was 
that the host of the VENTA dubbed him with the coveted 
knighthood which qualified him for his noble deeds.

To Quesada we wended our way.  We asked the Senor Huesped 
whether he knew anything of the history of his VENTA.  Was it 
not very ancient?

'Oh no, it was quite modern.  But on the site of it had stood 
a fine VENTA which was burnt down at the time of the war.'

'An old building?'

'Yes, indeed! A COSA DE SIEMPRE - thing of always.  Nothing, 
was left of it now but that well, and the stone trough.'

These bore marks of antiquity, and were doubtless as the 
gallant knight had left them.  Curiously, too, there were 
remains of an outhouse with a crenellated parapet, suggestive 
enough of a castle.

From Quesada we rode to Argamasilla del Alba, where Cervantes 
was imprisoned, and where the First Part of Don Quixote was 
written.

In his Life of Cervantes, Don Gregorio Mayano throws some 
doubt upon this.  Speaking of the attacks of his 
contemporary, the 'Aragonian,' Don Gregorio writes (I give 
Ozell's translation):  'As for this scandalous fellow's 
saying that Cervantes wrote his First Part of "Don Quixote" 
in a prison, and that that might make it so dull and 
incorrect, Cervantes did not think fit to give any answer 
concerning his being imprisoned, perhaps to avoid giving 
offence to the ministers of justice; for certainly his 
imprisonment must not have been ignominious, since Cervantes 
himself voluntarily mentions it in his Preface to the First 
Part of "Don Quixote."'

This reasoning, however, does not seem conclusive; for the 
only reference to the subject in the preface is as follows:  
'What could my sterile and uncultivated genius produce but 
the history of a child, meagre, adust, and whimsical, full of 
various wild imaginations never thought of before; like one 
you may suppose born in a prison, where every inconvenience 
keeps its residence, and every dismal sound its habitation?'

We took up our quarters in the little town at the 'Posada de 
la Mina.'  While our OLLA was being prepared; we asked the 
hostess whether she had ever heard of the celebrated Don 
Miguel de Cervantes, who had been imprisoned there?  (I will 
quote Cayley).

'No, Senores; I think I have heard of one Cervantes, but he 
does not live here at present.'

'Do you know anything of Don Quixote?'

'Oh, yes.  He was a great CABALLERO, who lived here some 
years ago.  His house is over the way, on the other side of 
the PLAZA, with the arms over the door.  The father of the 
Alcalde is the oldest man in the PUEBLO; perhaps he may 
remember him.'

We were amused at his hero's fame outliving that of the 
author.  But is it not so with others - the writers of the 
Book of Job, of the Pentateuch, and perhaps, too, of the 
'Iliad,' if not of the 'Odyssey'?

But, to let Cayley speak:

'While we were undressing to go to bed, three gentlemen were 
announced and shown in.  We begged them to be seated. . . . 
We sat opposite on the ends of our respective beds to hear 
what they might have to communicate.  A venerable old man 
opened the conference.

'"We have understood, gentlemen, that you have come hither 
seeking for information respecting the famous Don Quixote, 
and we have come to give you such information as we may; but, 
perhaps you will understand me better if I speak in Latin."

'"We have learnt the Latin at our schools, but are more 
accustomed to converse in Castilian; pray proceed."

'"I am the Medico of the place, an old man, as you see; and 
what little I know has reached me by tradition.  It is 
reported that Cervantes was paying his addresses to a young 
lady, whose name was Quijana or Quijada.  The Alcalde, 
disapproving of the suit, put him into a dungeon under his 
house, and kept him there a year.  Once he escaped and fled, 
but he was taken in Toboso, and brought back.  Cervantes 
wrote 'Don Quixote' as a satire on the Alcalde, who was a 
very proud man, full of chivalresque ideas.  You can see the 
dungeon to-morrow; but you should see the BATANES (water-
mills) of the Guadiana, whose 'golpear' so terrified Sancho 
Panza.  They are at about three leagues distance."'

The old gentleman added that he was proud to receive 
strangers who came to do honour to the memory of his 
illustrious townsman; and hoped we would visit him next day, 
on our return from the fulling-mills, when he would have the 
pleasure of conducting us to the house of the Quijanas, in 
the cellars of which Cervantes was confined.

To the BATANES we went next morning.  Their historical 
importance entitles them to an accurate description.  None 
could be more lucid than that of my companion.  'These 
clumsy, ancient machines are composed of a couple of huge 
wooden mallets, slung in a timber framework, which, being 
pushed out of the perpendicular by knobs on a water-wheel, 
clash back again alternately in two troughs, pounding 
severely whatever may be put in between the face of the 
mallet and the end of the trough into which the water runs.'

It will be remembered that, after a copious meal, Sancho 
having neglected to replenish the gourd, both he and his 
master suffered greatly from thirst.  It was now 'so dark,' 
says the history, 'that they could see nothing; but they had 
not gone two hundred paces when a great noise of water 
reached their ears. . . . The sound rejoiced them 
exceedingly; and, stopping to listen from whence it came, 
they heard on a sudden another dreadful noise, which abated 
their pleasure occasioned by that of the water, especially 
Sancho's. . . . They heard a dreadful din of irons and chains 
rattling across one another, and giving mighty strokes in 
time and measure which, together with the furious noise of 
the water, would have struck terror into any other heart than 
that of Don Quixote.'  For him it was but an opportunity for 
some valorous achievement.  So, having braced on his buckler 
and mounted Rosinante, he brandished his spear, and explained 
to his trembling squire that by the will of Heaven he was 
reserved for deeds which would obliterate the memory of the 
Platirs, Tablantes, the Olivantes, and Belianesas, with the 
whole tribe of the famous knights-errant of times past.

'Wherefore, straighten Rosinante's girths a little,' said he, 
'and God be with you.  Stay for me here three days, and no 
more; if I do not return in that time you may go to Toboso, 
where you shall say to my incomparable Lady Dulcinea that her 
enthralled knight died in attempting things that might have 
made him worthy to be styled "hers."'

Sancho, more terrified than ever at the thoughts of being 
left alone, reminded his master that it was unwise to tempt 
God by undertaking exploits from which there was no escaping 
but by a miracle; and, in order to emphasize this very 
sensible remark, secretly tied Rosinante's hind legs together 
with his halter.  Seeing the success of his contrivance, he 
said:  'Ah, sir! behold how Heaven, moved by my tears and 
prayers, has ordained that Rosinante cannot go,' and then 
warned him not to set Providence at defiance.  Still Sancho 
was much too frightened by the infernal clatter to relax his 
hold of the knight's saddle.  For some time he strove to 
beguile his own fears with a very long story about the 
goatherd Lope Ruiz, who was in love with the shepherdess 
Torralva - 'a jolly, strapping wench, a little scornful, and 
somewhat masculine.'  Now, whether owing to the cold of the 
morning, which was at hand, or whether to some lenitive diet 
on which he had supped, it so befell that Sancho . . . what 
nobody could do for him.  The truth is, the honest fellow was 
overcome by panic, and under no circumstances would, or did, 
he for one instant leave his master's side.  Nay, when the 
knight spurred his steed and found it could not move, Sancho 
reminded him that the attempt was useless, since Rosinante 
was restrained by enchantment.  This the knight readily 
admitted, but stoutly protested that he himself was anything 
but enchanted by the close proximity of his squire.

We all remember the grave admonitions of Don Quixote, and the 
ingenious endeavours of Sancho to lay the blame upon the 
knight.  But the final words of the Don contain a moral 
apposite to so many other important situations, that they 
must not be omitted here.  'Apostare, replico Sancho, que 
pensa vuestra merced que yo he hecho de mi persona alguna 
cosa que no deba.'  'I will lay a wager,' replied Sancho, 
'that your worship thinks that I have &c.'  The brief, but 
memorable, answer was:  'Peor es meneallo, amigo Sancho,' 
which, as no translation could do justice to it, must be left 
as it stands.  QUIETA NON MOVERE.

We were nearly meeting with an adventure here.  While I was 
busy making a careful drawing of the BATANES, Cayley's pony 
was as much alarmed by the rushing waters as had been Sancho 
Panza.  In his endeavours to picket the animal, my friend 
dropped a pistol which I had lent him to practise with, 
although he carried a revolver of his own.  Not till he had 
tied up the pony at some little distance did he discover the 
loss.  In vain he searched the spot where he knew the pistol 
must have escaped from his FAJA.  Near it, three rough-
looking knaves in shaggy goatskin garments, with guns over 
their shoulders, were watching the progress of my sketch.  On 
his return Cayley asked two of these (the third moved away as 
he came up) whether they had seen the pistol.  They declared 
they had not; upon which he said he must search them.  He was 
not a man to be trifled with, and although they refused at 
first, they presently submitted.  He then overtook the third, 
and at once accused him of the theft.  The man swore he knew 
nothing of the lost weapon, and brought his gun to the 
charge.  As he did so, Cayley caught sight of the pistol 
under the fellow's sheepskin jacket, and with characteristic 
promptitude seized it, while he presented a revolver at the 
thief's head.  All this he told me with great glee a minute 
or two later.

When we got back to Argamasilla the Medico was already 
awaiting us.  He conducted us to the house of the Quijanas, 
where an old woman-servant, lamp in hand, showed the way down 
a flight of steps into the dungeon.  It was a low vaulted 
chamber, eight feet high, ten broad, and twenty-four long, 
dimly lighted by a lancet window six feet from the ground.  
She confidently informed us that Cervantes was in the habit 
of writing at the farthest end, and that he was allowed a 
lamp for the purpose.  We accepted the information with 
implicit faith; silently picturing on our mental retinas the 
image of him whose genius had brightened the dark hours of 
millions for over three hundred years.  One could see the 
spare form of the man of action pacing up and down his cell, 
unconscious of prison walls, roaming in spirit through the 
boundless realms of Fancy, his piercing eyes intent upon the 
conjured visions of his brain.  One noted his vast expanse of 
brow, his short, crisp, curly hair, his high cheek-bones and 
singularly high-bridged nose, his refined mouth, small 
projecting chin and pointed beard.  One noticed, too, as he 
turned, the stump of the left wrist clasped by the remaining 
hand.  Who could stand in such a presence and fail to bow 
with veneration before this insulted greatness!  Potentates 
pass like Ozymandias, but not the men who, through the ages, 
help to save us from this tread-mill world, and from 
ourselves.

We visited Cuenca, Segovia, and many an out-of-the-way spot.  
If it be true, as Don Quixote declares, that 'No hay libro 
tan malo que no tenga alguna cosa buena' ('there is no book 
so worthless that has not some good in it'), still more true 
is this of a country like Spain.  And the pleasantest places 
are just those which only by-roads lead to.  In and near the 
towns every other man, if not by profession still by 
practice, is a beggar.  From the seedy-looking rascal in the 
street, of whom you incautiously ask the way, and who 
piteously whines 'para zapatos' - for the wear and tear of 
shoe leather, to the highest official, one and all hold out 
their hands for the copper CUARTO or the eleemosynary 
sinecure.  As it was then, so is it now; the Government wants 
support, and it is always to be had, at a price; deputies 
always want 'places.'  For every duty the functionary 
performs, or ought to perform, he receives his bribe.  The 
Government is too poor to keep him honest, but his POUR-
BOIRES are not measured by his scruples.  All is winked at, 
if the Ministry secures a vote.

Away in the pretty rural districts, in the little villages 
amid the woods and the mountains, with their score or so of 
houses and their little chapel with its tinkling old bell and 
its poverty-stricken curate, the hard-working, simple-minded 
men are too proud and too honest to ask for more than a pinch 
of tobacco for the CIGARILLO.  The maidens are comely, and as 
chaste as - can reasonably be expected.

Madrid is worth visiting - not for its bull-fights, which are 
disgusting proofs of man's natural brutality, but for its 
picture gallery.  No one knows what Velasquez could do, or 
has done, till he has seen Madrid; and Charles V. was 
practically master of Europe when the collection was in his 
hands.  The Escurial's chief interests are in its 
associations with Charles V. and Philip II.  In the dark and 
gloomy little bedroom of the latter is a small window opening 
into the church, so that the King could attend the services 
in bed if necessary.

It cannot be said of Philip that he was nothing if not 
religious, for Nero even was not a more indefatigable 
murderer, nor a more diabolical specimen of cruelty and 
superstition.  The very thought of the wretch tempts one to 
revolt at human piety, at any rate where priestcraft and its 
fabrications are at the bottom of it.

When at Madrid we met Mr. Arthur Birch.  He had been with 
Cayley at Eton, as captain of the school.  While we were 
together, he received and accepted the offer of an Eton 
mastership.  We were going by diligence to Toledo, and Birch 
agreed to go with us.  I mention the fact because the place 
reminds me of a clever play upon its name by the Eton 
scholar.  Cayley bought a Toledo sword-blade, and asked Birch 
for a motto to engrave upon it.  In a minute or two he hit 
off this:  TIMETOLETUM, which reads Time Toletum=Honour 
Toledo, or Timeto Letum=Fear death.  Cayley's attempts, 
though not so neat, were not bad.  Here are a couple of 
them:-


Though slight I am, no slight I stand,
Saying my master's sleight of hand.


or:-


Come to the point; unless you do,
The point will shortly come to you.


Birch got the Latin poem medal at Cambridge the same year 
that Cayley got the English one.

Before we set forth again upon our gipsy tramp, I received a 
letter from Mr. Ellice bidding me hasten home to contest the 
Borough of Cricklade in the General Election of 1852.  Under 
these circumstances we loitered but little on the Northern 
roads.  At the end of May we reached Yrun.  Here we sold our 
ponies - now quite worn out - for twenty-three dollars - 
about five guineas.  So that a thousand miles of locomotion 
had cost us a little over five guineas apiece.  Not counting 
hotels at Madrid and such smart places, our daily cost for 
selves and ponies rarely exceeded six pesetas, or three 
shillings each all told.  The best of it was, the trip 
restored the health of my friend.



CHAPTER XXXV



IN February of this year, 1852, Lord Palmerston, aided by an 
incongruous force of Peelites and Protectionists, turned Lord 
John Russell out of office on his Militia Bill.  Lord Derby, 
with Disraeli as Chancellor of the Exchequer and leader of 
the House of Commons, came into power on a cry for 
Protection.

Not long after my return to England, I was packed off to 
canvas the borough of Cricklade.  It was then a very 
extensive borough, including a large agricultural district, 
as well as Swindon, the headquarters of the Great Western 
Railway.  For many years it had returned two Conservative 
members, Messrs. Nield and Goddard.  It was looked upon as an 
impregnable Tory stronghold, and the fight was little better 
than a forlorn hope.

My headquarters were at Coleshill, Lord Radnor's.  The old 
lord had, in his Parliamentary days, been a Radical; hence, 
my advanced opinions found great favour in his eyes.  My 
programme was - Free Trade, Vote by Ballot, and 
Disestablishment.  Two of these have become common-places 
(one perhaps effete), and the third is nearer to 
accomplishment than it was then.

My first acquaintance with a constituency, amongst whom I 
worked enthusiastically for six weeks, was comic enough.  My 
instructions were to go to Swindon; there an agent, whom I 
had never seen, would join me.  A meeting of my supporters 
had been arranged by him, and I was to make my maiden speech 
in the market-place.

My address, it should be stated - ultra-Radical, of course - 
was mainly concocted for me by Mr. Cayley, an almost rabid 
Tory, and then member for the North Riding of Yorkshire, but 
an old Parliamentary hand; and, in consequence of my 
attachment to his son, at that time and until his death, like 
a father to me.

When the train stopped at Swindon, there was a crowd of 
passengers, but not a face that I knew; and it was not till 
all but one or two had left, that a business-looking man came 
up and asked if I were the candidate for Cricklade.  He told 
me that a carriage was in attendance to take us up to the 
town; and that a procession, headed by a band, was ready to 
accompany us thither.  The procession was formed mainly of 
the Great Western boiler-makers and artisans.  Their 
enthusiasm seemed slightly disproportioned to the occasion; 
and the vigour of the brass, and especially of the big drum, 
so filled my head with visions of Mr. Pickwick and his friend 
the Honourable Samuel Slumkey, that by the time I reached the 
market-place, I had forgotten every syllable of the speech 
which I had carefully learnt by heart.  Nor was it the band 
alone that upset me; going up the hill the carriage was all 
but capsized by the frightened horses and the breaking of the 
pole.  The gallant boiler-makers, however, at once removed 
the horses, and dragged the carriage with cheers of defiance 
into the crowd awaiting us.

My agent had settled that I was to speak from a window of the 
hotel.  The only available one was an upper window, the lower 
sash of which could not be persuaded to keep up without being 
held.  The consequence was, just as I was getting over the 
embarrassment of extemporary oration, down came the sash and 
guillotined me.  This put the crowd in the best of humours; 
they roared with laughter, and after that we got on capitally 
together.

A still more inopportune accident happened to me later in the 
day, when speaking at Shrivenham.  A large yard enclosed by 
buildings was chosen for the meeting.  The difficulty was to 
elevate the speaker above the heads of the assembly.  In one 
corner of the yard was a water-butt.  An ingenious elector 
got a board, placed it on the top of the butt - which was 
full of water - and persuaded me to make this my rostrum.  
Here, again, in the midst of my harangue - perhaps I stamped 
to emphasize my horror of small loaves and other Tory 
abominations - the board gave way; and I narrowly escaped a 
ducking by leaping into the arms of a 'supporter.'

The end of it all was that my agent at the last moment threw 
up the sponge.  The farmers formed a serried phalanx against 
Free Trade; it was useless to incur the expense of a poll.  
Then came the bill.  It was a heavy one; for in addition to 
my London agent - a professional electioneering functionary - 
were the local agents at towns like Malmesbury, Wootton 
Bassett, Shrivenham, &c., &c.  My eldest brother, who was a 
soberer-minded politician than I, although very liberal to me 
in other ways, declined to support my political opinions.  I 
myself was quite unable to pay the costs.  Knowing this, Lord 
Radnor called me into his study as I was leaving Coleshill, 
and expressed himself warmly with respect to my labours; 
regretting the victory of the other side, he declared that, 
as the question of Protection would be disposed of, one of 
the two seats would be safe upon a future contest.

'And who,' asked the old gentleman, with a benevolent grin on 
his face, 'who is going to pay your expenses?'

'Goodness knows, sir,' said I; 'I hope they won't come down 
upon me.  I haven't a thousand pounds in the world, unless I 
tap my fortune.'

'Well,' said his Lordship, with a chuckle, 'I haven't paid my 
subscription to Brooks's yet, so I'll hand it over to you,' 
and he gave me a cheque for 500 pounds.

The balance was obtained through Mr. Ellice from the 
patronage Secretary to the Treasury.  At the next election, 
as Lord Radnor predicted, Lord Ashley, Lord Shaftesbury's 
eldest son, won one of the two seats for the Liberals with 
the greatest ease.

As Coleshill was an open house to me from that time as long 
as Lord Radnor lived, I cannot take leave of the dear old man 
without an affectionate word at parting.  Creevey has an ill-
natured fling at him, as he has at everybody else, but a 
kinder-hearted and more perfect gentleman would be difficult 
to meet with.  His personality was a marked one.  He was a 
little man, with very plain features, a punch-like nose, an 
extensive mouth, and hardly a hair on his head.  But in spite 
of these peculiarities, his face was pleasant to look at, for 
it was invariably animated by a sweet smile, a touch of 
humour, and a decided air of dignity.  Born in 1779, he 
dressed after the orthodox Whig fashion of his youth, in buff 
and blue, his long-tailed coat reaching almost to his heels.  
His manner was a model of courtesy and simplicity.  He used 
antiquated expressions:  called London 'Lunnun,' Rome 'Room,' 
a balcony a 'balcony'; he always spoke of the clergyman as 
the 'pearson,' and called his daughter Lady Mary, 'Meary.'  
Instead of saying 'this day week' he would say this day 
sen'nit' (for sen'night).

The independence of his character was very noticeable.  As an 
instance:  A party of twenty people, say, would be invited 
for a given day.  Abundance of carriages would be sent to 
meet the trains, so that all the guests would arrive in ample 
time for dinner.  It generally happened that some of them, 
not knowing the habits of the house, or some duchess or great 
lady who might assume that clocks were made for her and not 
she for clocks, would not appear in the drawing-room till a 
quarter of an hour after the dinner gong had sounded.  If 
anyone did so, he or she would find that everybody else had 
got through soup and fish.  If no one but Lady Mary had been 
down when dinner was announced, his Lordship would have 
offered his arm to his daughter, and have taken his seat at 
the table alone.  After the first night, no one was ever 
late.  In the morning he read prayers to the household before 
breakfast with the same precise punctuality.

Lady Mary Bouverie, his unmarried daughter, was the very best 
of hostesses.  The house under her management was the 
perfection of comfort.  She married an old and dear friend of 
mine, Sir James Wilde, afterwards the Judge, Lord Penzance.  
I was his 'best man.'

My 'Ride over the Rocky Mountains' was now published; and, as 
the field was a new one, the writer was rewarded, for a few 
weeks, with invitations to dinner, and the usual tickets for 
'drums' and dances.  To my astonishment, or rather to my 
alarm, I received a letter from the Secretary of the Royal 
Geographical Society (Charles Fox, or perhaps Sir George 
Simpson had, I think, proposed me - I never knew), to say 
that I had been elected a member.  Nothing was further from 
my ambition.  The very thought shrivelled me with a sense of 
ignorance and insignificance.  I pictured to myself an 
assembly of old fogies crammed with all the 'ologies.  I 
broke into a cold perspiration when I fancied myself called 
upon to deliver a lecture on the comparative sea-bottomy of 
the Oceanic globe, or give my theory of the simultaneous 
sighting by 'little Billee' of ' Madagascar, and North, and 
South Amerikee.'  Honestly, I had not the courage to accept; 
and, young Jackanapes as I was, left the Secretary's letter 
unanswered.

But a still greater honour - perhaps the greatest compliment 
I ever had paid me - was to come.  I had lodgings at this 
time in an old house, long since pulled down, in York Street.  
One day, when I was practising the fiddle, who should walk 
into my den but Rogers the poet!  He had never seen me in his 
life.  He was in his ninetieth year, and he had climbed the 
stairs to the first floor to ask me to one of his breakfast 
parties.  To say nothing of Rogers' fame, his wealth, his 
position in society, those who know what his cynicism and his 
worldliness were, will understand what such an effort, 
physical and moral, must have cost him.  He always looked 
like a death's head, but his ghastly pallor, after that 
Alpine ascent, made me feel as if he had come - to stay.

These breakfasts were entertainments of no ordinary 
distinction.  The host himself was of greater interest than 
the most eminent of his guests.  All but he, were more or 
less one's contemporaries:  Rogers, if not quite as dead as 
he looked, was ancient history.  He was old enough to have 
been the father of Byron, of Shelley, of Keats, and of Moore.  
He was several years older than Scott, or Wordsworth, or 
Coleridge, and only four years younger than Pitt.  He had 
known all these men, and could, and did, talk as no other 
could talk, of all of them.  Amongst those whom I met at 
these breakfasts were Cornewall Lewis, Delane, the Grotes, 
Macaulay, Mrs. Norton, Monckton Milnes, William Harcourt (the 
only one younger than myself), but just beginning to be 
known, and others of scarcely less note.

During the breakfast itself, Rogers, though seated at table 
in an armchair, took no part either in the repast or in the 
conversation; he seemed to sleep until the meal was over.  
His servant would then place a cup of coffee before him, and, 
like a Laputian flapper, touch him gently on the shoulder.  
He would at once begin to talk, while others listened.  The 
first time I witnessed this curious resurrection, I whispered 
something to my neighbour, at which he laughed.  The old 
man's eye was too sharp for us.

'You are laughing at me,' said he; 'I dare say you young 
gentlemen think me an old fellow; but there are younger than 
I who are older.  You should see Tommy Moore.  I asked him to 
breakfast, but he's too weak - weak here, sir,' and he tapped 
his forehead.  'I'm not that.'  (This was the year that Moore 
died.)  He certainly was not; but his whole discourse was of 
the past.  It was as though he would not condescend to 
discuss events or men of the day.  What were either to the 
days and men that he had known - French revolutions, battles 
of Trafalgar and Waterloo, a Nelson and a Buonaparte, a Pitt, 
a Burke, a Fox, a Johnson, a Gibbon, a Sheridan, and all the 
men of letters and all the poets of a century gone by?  Even 
Macaulay had for once to hold his tongue; and could only 
smile impatiently at what perhaps he thought an old man's 
astonishing garrulity.  But if a young and pretty woman 
talked to him, it was not his great age that he vaunted, nor 
yet the 'pleasures of memory' - one envied the adroitness of 
his flattery, and the gracefulness of his repartee.

My friend George Cayley had a couple of dingy little rooms 
between Parliament Street and the river.  Much of my time was 
spent there with him.  One night after dinner, quite late, we 
were building castles amidst tobacco clouds, when, following 
a 'May I come in?' Tennyson made his appearance.  This was 
the first time I had ever met him.  We gave him the only 
armchair in the room; and pulling out his dudeen and placing 
afoot on each side of the hob of the old-fashioned little 
grate, he made himself comfortable before he said another 
word.  He then began to talk of pipes and tobacco.  And 
never, I should say, did this important topic afford so much 
ingenious conversation before.  We discussed the relative 
merits of all the tobaccos in the world - of moist tobacco 
and dry tobacco, of old tobacco and new tobacco, of clay 
pipes and wooden pipes and meerschaum pipes.  What was the 
best way to colour them, the advantages of colouring them, 
the beauty of the 'culotte,' the coolness it gave to the 
smoke, &c.  We listened to the venerable sage - he was then 
forty-three and we only five or six and twenty - as we should 
have listened to a Homer or an Aristotle, and he thoroughly 
enjoyed our appreciation of his jokes.

Some of them would have startled such of his admirers who 
knew him only by his poems; for his stories were anything but 
poetical - rather humorous one might say, on the whole.  
Here's one of them:  he had called last week on the Duchess 
of Sutherland at Stafford House.  Her two daughters were with 
her, the Duchess of Argyll and the beautiful Lady Constance 
Grosvenor, afterwards Duchess of Westminster.  They happened 
to be in the garden.  After strolling about for a while, the 
Mama Duchess begged him to recite some of his poetry.  He 
chose 'Come into the garden, Maud' - always a favourite of 
the poet's, and, as may be supposed, many were the fervid 
exclamations of 'How beautiful!'  When they came into the 
house, a princely groom of the chambers caught his eye and 
his ear, and, pointing to his own throat, courteously 
whispered:  'Your dress is not quite as you would wish it, 
sir.'

'I had come out without a necktie; and there I was, spouting 
my lines to the three Graces, as DECOLLETE as a strutting 
turkey cock.'

The only other allusion to poetry or literature that night 
was a story I told him of a Mr. Thomas Wrightson, a Yorkshire 
banker, and a fanatical Swedenborgian.  Tommy Wrightson, who 
was one of the most amiable and benevolent of men, spent his 
life in making a manuscript transcript of Swedenborg's works.  
His writing was a marvel of calligraphic art; he himself, a 
curiosity.  Swedenborg was for him an avatar; but if he had 
doubted of Tennyson's ultimate apotheosis, I think he would 
have elected to seek him in 'the other place.'  Anyhow, Mr. 
Wrightson avowed to me that he repeated 'Locksley Hall' every 
morning of his life before breakfast.  This I told Tennyson.  
His answer was a grunt; and in a voice from his boots, 'Ugh! 
enough to make a dog sick!'  I did my utmost to console him 
with the assurance that, to the best of my belief, Mr. 
Wrightson had once fallen through a skylight.

As illustrating the characters of the admired and his 
admirer, it may be related that the latter, wishing for the 
poet's sign-manual, wrote and asked him for it.  He addressed 
Tennyson, whom he had never seen, as 'My dear Alfred.'  The 
reply, which he showed to me, was addressed 'My dear Tom.'



CHAPTER XXXVI



MY stepfather, Mr. Ellice, having been in two Ministries - 
Lord Grey's in 1830, and Lord Melbourne's in 1834 - had 
necessarily a large parliamentary acquaintance; and as I 
could always dine at his house in Arlington Street when I 
pleased, I had constant opportunities of meeting most of the 
prominent Whig politicians, and many other eminent men of the 
day.  One of the dinner parties remains fresh in my memory - 
not because of the distinguished men who happened to be 
there, but because of the statesman whose name has since 
become so familiar to the world.

Some important question was before the House in which Mr. 
Ellice was interested, and upon which he intended to speak.  
This made him late for dinner, but he had sent word that his 
son was to take his place, and the guests were not to wait.  
When he came Lord John Russell greeted him with -

'Well, Ellice, who's up?'

'A younger son of Salisbury's,' was the reply; 'Robert Cecil, 
making his maiden speech.  If I hadn't been in a hurry I 
should have stopped to listen to him.  Unless I am very much 
mistaken, he'll make his mark, and we shall hear more of 
him.'

There were others dining there that night whom it is 
interesting to recall.  The Grotes were there.  Mrs. Grote, 
scarcely less remarkable than her husband; Lord Mahon, 
another historian (who married a niece of Mr. Ellice's), Lord 
Brougham, and two curious old men both remarkable, if for 
nothing else, for their great age.  One was George Byng, 
father of the first Lord Strafford, and 'father' of the House 
of Commons; the other Sir Robert Adair, who was Ambassador at 
Constantinople when Byron was there.  Old Mr. Byng looked as 
aged as he was, and reminded one of Mr. Smallweed doubled up 
in his porter's chair.  Quite different was his compeer.  We 
were standing in the recess of the drawing-room window after 
dinner when Sir Robert said to me:

'Very shaky, isn't he!  Ah! he was my fag at Eton, and I've 
got the best of it still.'

Brougham having been twice in the same Government with Mr. 
Ellice, and being devoted to young Mrs. Edward Ellice, his 
charming daughter-in-law, was a constant visitor at 18 
Arlington Street.  Mrs. Ellice often told me of his 
peculiarities, which must evidently have been known to 
others.  Walter Bagehot, speaking of him, says:

'Singular stories of eccentricity and excitement, even of 
something more than either of these, darken these latter 
years.'

What Mrs. Ellice told me was, that she had to keep a sharp 
watch on Lord Brougham if he sat near her writing-table while 
he talked to her; for if there was any pretty little knick-
knack within his reach he would, if her head were turned, 
slip it into his pocket.  The truth is perhaps better than 
the dark hint, for certainly we all laughed at it as nothing 
but eccentricity.

But the man who interested me most (for though when in the 
Navy I had heard a hundred legends of his exploits, I had 
never seen him before) was Lord Dundonald.  Mr. Ellice 
presented me to him, and the old hero asked why I had left 
the Navy.

'The finest service in the world; and likely, begad, to have 
something to do before long.'

This was only a year before the Crimean war.  With his strong 
rough features and tousled mane, he looked like a grey lion.  
One expected to see him pick his teeth with a pocket 
boarding-pike.

The thought of the old sailor always brings before me the 
often mooted question raised by the sentimentalists and 
humanitarians concerning the horrors of war.  Not long after 
this time, the papers - the sentimentalist papers - were 
furious with Lord Dundonald for suggesting the adoption by 
the Navy of a torpedo which he himself, I think, had 
invented.  The bare idea of such wholesale slaughter was 
revolting to a Christian world.  He probably did not see much 
difference between sinking a ship with a torpedo, and firing 
a shell into her magazine; and likely enough had as much 
respect for the opinions of the woman-man as he had for the 
man-woman.

There is always a large number of people in the world who 
suffer from emotional sensitiveness and susceptibility to 
nervous shocks of all kinds.  It is curious to observe the 
different and apparently unallied forms in which these 
characteristics manifest themselves.  With some, they exhibit 
extreme repugnance to the infliction of physical pain for 
whatever end; with others there seems to be a morbid dread of 
violated pudicity.  Strangely enough the two phases are 
frequently associated in the same individual.  Both 
tendencies are eminently feminine; the affinity lies in a 
hysterical nature.  Thus, excessive pietism is a frequent 
concomitant of excessive sexual passion; this, though notably 
the case with women, is common enough with men of unduly 
neurotic temperaments.

Only the other day some letters appeared in the 'Times' about 
the flogging of boys in the Navy.  And, as a sentimental 
argument against it, we were told by the Humanitarian 
Leaguers that it is 'obscene.'  This is just what might be 
expected, and bears out the foregoing remarks.  But such 
saintly simplicity reminds us of the kind of squeamishness of 
which our old acquaintance Mephisto observes:


Man darf das nicht vor keuschen Ohren nennen,
Was keusche Herzen nicht entbehren konnen.

(Chaste ears find nothing but the devil in
What nicest fancies love to revel in.)


The same astute critic might have added:


And eyes demure that look away when seen,
Lose ne'er a chance to peep behind the screen.


It is all of a piece.  We have heard of the parlour-maid who 
fainted because the dining-table had 'ceder legs,' but never 
before that a 'switching' was 'obscene.'  We do not envy the 
unwholesomeness of a mind so watchful for obscenity.

Be that as it may, so far as humanity is concerned, this 
hypersensitive effeminacy has but a noxious influence; and 
all the more for the twofold reason that it is sometimes 
sincere, though more often mere cant and hypocrisy.  At the 
best, it is a perversion of the truth; for emotion combined 
with ignorance, as it is in nine hundred and ninety-nine 
cases out of a thousand, is a serious obstacle in the path of 
rational judgment.

Is sentimentalism on the increase?  It seems to be so, if we 
are to judge by a certain portion of the Press, and by 
speeches in Parliament.  But then, this may only mean that 
the propensity finds easier means of expression than it did 
in the days of dearer paper and fewer newspapers, and also 
that speakers find sentimental humanity an inexhaustible fund 
for political capital.  The excess of emotional attributes in 
man over his reasoning powers must, one would think, have 
been at least as great in times past as it is now.  Yet it is 
doubtful whether it showed itself then so conspicuously as it 
does at present.  Compare the Elizabethan age with our own.  
What would be said now of the piratical deeds of such men as 
Frobisher, Raleigh, Gilbert, and Richard Greville?  Suppose 
Lord Roberts had sent word to President Kruger that if four 
English soldiers, imprisoned at Pretoria, were molested, he 
would execute 2,000 Boers and send him their heads?  The 
clap-trap cry of 'Barbaric Methods' would have gone forth to 
some purpose; it would have carried every constituency in the 
country.  Yet this is what Drake did when four English 
sailors were captured by the Spaniards, and imprisoned by the 
Spanish Viceroy in Mexico.

Take the Elizabethan drama, and compare it with ours.  What 
should we think of our best dramatist if, in one of his 
tragedies, a man's eyes were plucked out on the stage, and if 
he that did it exclaimed as he trampled on them, 'Out, vile 
jelly! where is thy lustre now?' or of a Titus Andronicus 
cutting two throats, while his daughter ''tween her stumps 
doth hold a basin to receive their blood'?

'Humanity,' says Taine, speaking of these times, 'is as much 
lacking as decency.  Blood, suffering, does not move them.'

Heaven forbid that we should return to such brutality!  I 
cite these passages merely to show how times are changed; and 
to suggest that with the change there is a decided loss of 
manliness.  Are men more virtuous, do they love honour more, 
are they more chivalrous, than the Miltons, the Lovelaces, 
the Sidneys of the past?  Are the women chaster or more 
gentle?  No; there is more puritanism, but not more true 
piety.  It is only the outside of the cup and the platter 
that are made clean, the inward part is just as full of 
wickedness, and all the worse for its hysterical 
fastidiousness.

To what do we owe this tendency?  Are we degenerating morally 
as well as physically?  Consider the physical side of the 
question.  Fifty years ago the standard height for admission 
to the army was five feet six inches.  It is now lowered to 
five feet.  Within the last ten years the increase in the 
urban population has been nearly three and a half millions.  
Within the same period the increase in the rural population 
is less than a quarter of one million.  Three out of five 
recruits for the army are rejected; a large proportion of 
them because their teeth are gone or decayed.  Do these 
figures need comment?  Can you look for sound minds in such 
unsound bodies?  Can you look for manliness, for self-
respect, and self-control, or anything but animalistic 
sentimentality?

It is not the character of our drama or of our works of 
fiction that promotes and fosters this propensity; but may it 
not be that the enormous increase in the number of theatres, 
and the prodigious supply of novels, may have a share in it, 
by their exorbitant appeal to the emotional, and hence 
neurotic, elements of our nature?  If such considerations 
apply mainly to dwellers in overcrowded towns, there is yet 
another cause which may operate on those more favoured, - the 
vast increase in wealth and luxury.  Wherever these have 
grown to excess, whether in Babylon, or Nineveh, or Thebes, 
or Alexandria, or Rome, they have been the symptoms of 
decadence, and forerunners of the nation's collapse.

Let us be humane, let us abhor the horrors of war, and strain 
our utmost energies to avert them.  But we might as well 
forbid the use of surgical instruments as the weapons that 
are most destructive in warfare.  If a limb is rotting with 
gangrene, shall it not be cut away?  So if the passions which 
occasion wars are inherent in human nature, we must face the 
evil stout-heartedly; and, for one, I humbly question whether 
any abolition of dum-dum bullets or other attempts to 
mitigate this disgrace to humanity, do, in the end, more good 
than harm.

It is elsewhere that we must look for deliverance, - to the 
overwhelming power of better educated peoples; to closer 
intercourse between the nations; to the conviction that, from 
the most selfish point of view even, peace is the only path 
to prosperity; to the restraint of the baser Press which, for 
mere pelf, spurs the passions of the multitude instead of 
curbing them; and, finally, to deliverance from the 'all-
potent wills of Little Fathers by Divine right,' and from the 
ignoble ambition of bullet-headed uncles and brothers and 
cousins - a curse from which England, thank the Gods! is, and 
let us hope, ever will be, free.  But there are more 
countries than one that are not so - just now; and the world 
may ere long have to pay the bitter penalty.



CHAPTER XXXVII



IT is curious if one lives long enough to watch the change of 
taste in books.  I have no lending-library statistics at 
hand, but judging by the reading of young people, or of those 
who read merely for their amusement, the authors they 
patronise are nearly all living or very recent.  What we old 
stagers esteemed as classical in fiction and BELLES-LETTRES 
are sealed books to the present generation.  It is an 
exception, for instance, to meet with a young man or young 
woman who has read Walter Scott.  Perhaps Balzac's reason is 
the true one.  Scott, says he, 'est sans passion; il 
l'ignore, ou peut-etre lui etait-elle interdite par les 
moeurs hypocrites de son pays.  Pour lui la femme est le 
devoir incarne.  A de rares exceptions pres, ses heroines 
sont absolument les memes ... La femme porte le desordre dans 
la societe par la passion.  La passion a des accidents 
infinis.  Peignez donc les passions, vous aurez les sources 
immenses dont s'est prive ce grand genie pour etre lu dans 
toutes les familles de la prude Angleterre.'  Does not 
Thackeray lament that since Fielding no novelist has dared to 
face the national affectation of prudery?  No English author 
who valued his reputation would venture to write as Anatole 
France writes, even if he could.  Yet I pity the man who does 
not delight in the genius that created M. Bergeret.

A well-known author said to me the other day, he did not 
believe that Thackeray himself would be popular were he 
writing now for the first time - not because of his freedom, 
but because the public taste has altered.  No present age can 
predict immortality for the works of its day; yet to say that 
what is intrinsically good is good for all time is but a 
truism.  The misfortune is that much of the best in 
literature shares the fate of the best of ancient monuments 
and noble cities; the cumulative rubbish of ages buries their 
splendours, till we know not where to find them.  The day may 
come when the most valuable service of the man of letters 
will be to unearth the lost treasures and display them, 
rather than add his grain of dust to the ever-increasing 
middens.

Is Carlyle forgotten yet, I wonder?  How much did my 
contemporaries owe to him in their youth?  How readily we 
followed a leader so sure of himself, so certain of his own 
evangel.  What an aid to strength to be assured that the true 
hero is the morally strong man.  One does not criticise what 
one loves; one didn't look too closely into the doctrine 
that, might is right, for somehow he managed to persuade us 
that right makes the might - that the strong man is the man 
who, for the most part, does act rightly.  He is not over-
patient with human frailty, to be sure, and is apt, as 
Herbert Spencer found, to fling about his scorn rather 
recklessly.  One fancies sometimes that he has more respect 
for a genuine bad man than for a sham good one.  In fact, his 
'Eternal Verities' come pretty much to the same as Darwin's 
'Law of the advancement of all organic bodies'; 'let the 
strong live, and the weakest die.'  He had no objection to 
seeing 'the young cuckoo ejecting its foster-brothers, or 
ants making slaves.'  But he atones for all this by his 
hatred of cant and hypocrisy.  It is for his manliness that 
we love him, for his honesty, for his indifference to any 
mortal's approval save that of Thomas Carlyle.  He convinces 
us that right thinking is good, but that right doing is much 
better.  And so it is that he does honour to men of action 
like his beloved Oliver, and Fritz, - neither of them 
paragons of wisdom or of goodness, but men of doughty deeds.

Just about this time I narrowly missed a longed-for chance of 
meeting this hero of my PENATES.  Lady Ashburton - Carlyle's 
Lady Ashburton - knowing my admiration, kindly invited me to 
The Grange, while he was there.  The house was full - mainly 
of ministers or ex-ministers, - Cornewall Lewis, Sir Charles 
Wood, Sir James Graham, Albany Fonblanque, Mr. Ellice, and 
Charles Buller - Carlyle's only pupil; but the great man 
himself had left an hour before I got there.  I often met him 
afterwards, but never to make his acquaintance.  Of course, I 
knew nothing of his special friendship for Lady Ashburton, 
which we are told was not altogether shared by Mrs. Carlyle; 
but I well remember the interest which Lady Ashburton seemed 
to take in his praise, how my enthusiasm seemed to please 
her, and how Carlyle and his works were topics she was never 
tired of discussing.

The South Western line to Alresford was not then made, and I 
had to post part of the way from London to The Grange.  My 
chaise companion was a man very well known in 'Society'; and 
though not remarkably popular, was not altogether 
undistinguished, as the following little tale will attest.  
Frederick Byng, one of the Torrington branch of the Byngs, 
was chiefly famous for his sobriquet 'The Poodle'; this he 
owed to no special merit of his own, but simply to the 
accident of his thick curly head of hair.  Some, who spoke 
feelingly of the man, used to declare that he had fulfilled 
the promises of his youth.  What happened to him then may 
perhaps justify the opinion.

The young Poodle was addicted to practical jokes - as usual, 
more amusing to the player than to the playee.  One of his 
victims happened to be Beau Brummell, who, except when he 
bade 'George ring the bell,' was as perfect a model of 
deportment as the great Mr. Turveydrop himself.  His studied 
decorum possibly provoked the playfulness of the young puppy; 
and amongst other attempts to disturb the Beau's complacency, 
Master Byng ran a pin into the calf of that gentleman's leg, 
and then he ran away.  A few days later Mr. Brummell, who had 
carefully dissembled his wrath, invited the unwary youth to 
breakfast, telling him that he was leaving town, and had a 
present which his young friend might have, if he chose to 
fetch it.  The boy kept the appointment, and the Beau his 
promise.  After an excellent breakfast, Brummell took a whip 
from his cupboard, and gave it to the Poodle in a way the 
young dog was not likely to forget.

The happiest of my days then, and perhaps of my life, were 
spent at Mr. Ellice's Highland Lodge, at Glenquoich.  For 
sport of all kinds it was and is difficult to surpass.  The 
hills of the deer forest are amongst the highest in Scotland; 
the scenery of its lake and glens, especially the descent to 
Loch Hourne, is unequalled.  Here were to be met many of the 
most notable men and women of the time.  And as the house was 
twenty miles from the nearest post-town, and that in turn two 
days from London, visitors ceased to be strangers before they 
left.  In the eighteen years during which this was my autumn 
home, I had the good fortune to meet numbers of distinguished 
people of whom I could now record nothing interesting but 
their names.  Still, it is a privilege to have known such men 
as John Lawrence, Guizot, Thiers, Landseer, Merimee, Comte de 
Flahault, Doyle, Lords Elgin and Dalhousie, Duc de Broglie, 
Pelissier, Panizzi, Motley, Delane, Dufferin; and of gifted 
women, the three Sheridans, Lady Seymour - the Queen of 
Beauty, afterwards Duchess of Somerset - Mrs. Norton, and 
Lady Dufferin.  Amongst those who have a retrospective 
interest were Mr. and Lady Blanche Balfour, parents of Mr. 
Arthur Balfour, who came there on their wedding tour in 1843.  
Mr. Arthur Balfour's father was Mrs. Ellice's first cousin.

It would be easy to lengthen the list; but I mention only 
those who repeated their visits, and who fill up my mental 
picture of the place and of the life.  Some amongst them 
impressed me quite as much for their amiability - their 
loveableness, I may say - as for their renown; and regard for 
them increased with coming years.  Panizzi was one of these.  
Dufferin, who was just my age, would have fascinated anyone 
with the singular courtesy of his manner.  Dicky Doyle was 
necessarily a favourite with all who knew him.  He was a 
frequent inmate of my house after I married, and was engaged 
to dine with me, alas! only eight days before he died.  
Motley was a singularly pleasant fellow.  My friendship with 
him began over a volume of Sir W. Hamilton's Lectures.  He 
asked what I was reading - I handed him the book.

'A-h,' said he, 'there's no mental gymnastic like 
metaphysics.'

Many a battle we afterwards had over them.  When I was at 
Cannes in 1877 I got a message from him one day saying he was 
ill, and asking me to come and see him.  He did not say how 
ill, so I put off going.  Two days after I heard he was dead.

Merimee's cynicism rather alarmed one.  He was a capital 
caricaturist, though, to our astonishment, he assured us he 
had never drawn, or used a colour-box, till late in life.  He 
had now learnt to use it, in a way that did not invariably 
give satisfaction.  Landseer always struck me as sensitive 
and proud, a Diogenes-tempered individual who had been spoilt 
by the toadyism of great people.  He was agreeable if made 
much of, or almost equally so if others were made little of.

But of all those named, surely John Lawrence was the 
greatest.  I wish I had read his life before it ended.  Yet, 
without knowing anything more of him than that he was Chief 
Commissioner of the Punjab, which did not convey much to my 
understanding, one felt the greatness of the man beneath his 
calm simplicity.  One day the party went out for a deer-
drive; I was instructed to place Sir John in the pass below 
mine.  To my disquietude he wore a black overcoat.  I assured 
him that not a stag would come within a mile of us, unless he 
covered himself with a grey plaid, or hid behind a large rock 
there was, where I assured him he would see nothing.

'Have the deer to pass me before they go on to you?' he 
asked.

'Certainly they have,' said I; 'I shall be up there above 
you.'

'Well then,' was his answer, 'I'll get behind the rock - it 
will be more snug out of the wind.'

One might as well have asked the deer not to see him, as try 
to persuade John Lawrence not to sacrifice himself for 
others.  That he did so here was certain, for the deer came 
within fifty yards of him, but he never fired a shot.

Another of the Indian viceroys was the innocent occasion of 
great discomfort to me, or rather his wife was.  Lady Elgin 
had left behind her a valuable diamond necklace.  I was going 
back to my private tutor at Ely a few days after, and the 
necklace was entrusted to me to deliver to its owner on my 
way through London.  There was no railway then further north 
than Darlington, except that between Edinburgh and Glasgow.  
When I reached Edinburgh by coach from Inverness, my 
portmanteau was not to be found.  The necklace was in a 
despatch-box in my portmanteau; and by an unlucky oversight, 
I had put my purse into my despatch-box.  What was to be 
done?  I was a lad of seventeen, in a town where I did not 
know a soul, with seven or eight shillings at most in my 
pocket.  I had to break my journey and to stop where I was 
till I could get news of the necklace; this alone was clear 
to me, for the necklace was the one thing I cared for.

At the coach office all the comfort I could get was that the 
lost luggage might have gone on to Glasgow; or, what was more 
probable, might have gone astray at Burntisland.  It might 
not have been put on board, or it might not have been taken 
off the ferry-steamer.  This could not be known for twenty-
four hours, as there was no boat to or from Burntisland till 
the morrow.  I decided to try Glasgow.  A return third-class 
ticket left me without a copper.  I went, found nothing, got 
back to Edinburgh at 10 P.M., ravenously hungry, dead tired, 
and so frightened about the necklace that food, bed, means of 
continuing my journey, were as mere death compared with 
irreparable dishonour.  What would they all think of me?  How 
could I prove that I had not stolen the diamonds?  Would Lord 
Elgin accuse me?  How could I have been such an idiot as to 
leave them in my portmanteau!  Some rascal might break it 
open, and then, goodbye to my chance for ever!  Chance? what 
chance was there of seeing that luggage again?  There were so 
many 'mights.'  I couldn't even swear that I had seen it on 
the coach at Inverness.  Oh dear! oh dear!  What was to be 
done?  I walked about the streets; I glanced woefully at 
door-steps, whereon to pass the night; I gazed piteously 
through the windows of a cheap cook's shop, where solid 
wedges of baked pudding, that would have stopped digestion 
for a month, were advertised for a penny a block.  How rich 
should I have been if I had had a penny in my pocket!  But I 
had to turn away in despair.

At last the inspiration came.  I remembered hearing Mr. 
Ellice say that he always put up at Douglas' Hotel when he 
stayed in Edinburgh.  I had very little hope of success, but 
I was too miserable to hesitate.  It was very late, and 
everybody might be gone to bed.  I rang the bell.  'I want to 
see the landlord.'

'Any name?' the porter asked.

'No.'  The landlord came, fat, amiable looking.  'May I speak 
to you in private?'  He showed the way to an unoccupied room.  
'I think you know Mr. Ellice?'

'Glenquoich, do you mean?'

'Yes.'

'Oh, very well - he always stays here on his way through.'

'I am his step-son; I left Glenquoich yesterday.  I have lost 
my luggage, and am left without any money.  Will you lend me 
five pounds?'  I believe if I were in the same strait now, 
and entered any strange hotel in the United Kingdom at half-
past ten at night, and asked the landlord to give me five 
pounds upon a similar security, he would laugh in my face, or 
perhaps give me in charge of a policeman.

My host of Douglas' did neither; but opened both his heart 
and his pocket-book, and with the greatest good humour handed 
me the requested sum.  What good people there are in this 
world, which that crusty old Sir Peter Teazle calls 'a d-d 
wicked one.'  I poured out all my trouble to the generous 
man.  He ordered me an excellent supper, and a very nice 
room.  And on the following day, after taking a great deal of 
trouble, he recovered my lost luggage and the priceless 
treasure it contained.  It was a proud and happy moment when 
I returned his loan, and convinced him, of what he did not 
seem to doubt, that I was positively not a swindler.

But the roofless night and the empty belly, consequent on an 
empty pocket, was a lesson which I trust was not thrown away 
upon me.  It did not occur to me to do so, but I certainly 
might have picked a pocket, if - well, if I had been brought 
up to it.  Honesty, as I have often thought since, is dirt 
cheap if only one can afford it.

Before departing from my beloved Glenquoich, I must pay a 
passing tribute to the remarkable qualities of Mrs. Edward 
Ellice and of her youngest sister Mrs. Robert Ellice, the 
mother of the present member for St. Andrews.  It was, in a 
great measure, the bright intelligence, the rare tact, and 
social gifts of these two ladies that made this beautiful 
Highland resort so attractive to all comers.



CHAPTER XXXVIII



THE winter of 1854-55 I spent in Rome.  Here I made the 
acquaintance of Leighton, then six-and-twenty.  I saw a good 
deal of him, as I lived almost entirely amongst the artists, 
taking lessons myself in water colours of Leitch.  Music also 
brought us into contact.  He had a beautiful voice, and used 
to sing a good deal with Mrs. Sartoris - Adelaide Kemble - 
whom he greatly admired, and whose portrait is painted under 
a monk's cowl, in the Cimabue procession.

Calling on him one morning, I found him on his knees 
buttering and rolling up this great picture, preparatory to 
sending it to the Academy.  I made some remark about its 
unusual size, saying with a sceptical smile, 'It will take up 
a lot of room.'

'If they ever hang it,' he replied; 'but there's not much 
chance of that.'

Seeing that his reputation was yet to win, it certainly 
seemed a bold venture to make so large a demand for space to 
begin with.  He did not appear the least sanguine.  But it 
was accepted; and Prince Albert bought it before the 
Exhibition opened.

Gibson also I saw much of.  He had executed a large alto-
rilievo monument of my mother, which is now in my parish 
church, and the model of which is on the landing of one of 
the staircases of the National Gallery.  His studio was 
always an interesting lounge, for he was ever ready to 
lecture upon antique marbles.  To listen to him was like 
reading the 'Laocoon,' which he evidently had at his fingers' 
ends.  My companion through the winter was Mr. Reginald 
Cholmondeley, a Cambridge ally, who was studying painting.  
He was the uncle of Miss Cholmondeley the well-known 
authoress, whose mother, by the way, was a first cousin of 
George Cayley's, and also a great friend of mine.

On my return to England I took up my abode in Dean's Yard, 
and shared a house there with Mr. Cayley, the Yorkshire 
member, and his two sons, the eldest a barrister, and my 
friend George.  Here for several years we had exceedingly 
pleasant gatherings of men more or less distinguished in 
literature and art.  Tennyson was a frequent visitor - coming 
late, after dinner hours, to smoke his pipe.  He varied a 
good deal, sometimes not saying a word, but quietly listening 
to our chatter.  Thackeray also used to drop in occasionally.

George Cayley and I, with the assistance of his father and 
others, had started a weekly paper called 'The Realm.'  It 
was professedly a currency paper, and also supported a fiscal 
policy advocated by Mr. Cayley and some of his parliamentary 
clique.  Coming in one day, and finding us hard at work, 
Thackeray asked for information.  We handed him a copy of the 
paper.  'Ah,' he exclaimed, with mock solemnity, '"The 
Rellum," should be printed on vellum.'  He too, like 
Tennyson, was variable.  But this depended on whom he found.  
In the presence of a stranger he was grave and silent.  He 
would never venture on puerile jokes like this of his 
'Rellum' - a frequent playfulness, when at his ease, which 
contrasted so unexpectedly with his impenetrable exterior.  
He was either gauging the unknown person, or feeling that he 
was being gauged.  Monckton Milnes was another.  Seeing me 
correcting some proof sheets, he said, 'Let me give you a 
piece of advice, my young friend.  Write as much as you 
please, but the less you print the better.'

'For me, or for others?'

'For both.'

George Cayley had a natural gift for, and had acquired 
considerable skill, in the embossing and working of silver 
ware.  Millais so admired his art that he commissioned him to 
make a large tea-tray; Millais provided the silver.  Round 
the border of the tray were beautifully modelled sea-shells, 
cray-fish, crabs, and fish of quaint forms, in high relief.  
Millais was so pleased with the work that he afterwards 
painted, and presented to Cayley, a fine portrait in his best 
style of Cayley's son, a boy of six or seven years old.

Laurence Oliphant was one of George Cayley's friends.  
Attractive as he was in many ways, I had little sympathy with 
his religious opinions, nor did I comprehend Oliphant's 
exalted inspirations; I failed to see their practical 
bearing, and, at that time I am sorry to say, looked upon him 
as an amiable faddist.  A special favourite with both of us 
was William Stirling of Keir.  His great work on the Spanish 
painters, and his 'Cloister Life of Charles the Fifth,' 
excited our unbounded admiration, while his BONHOMIE and 
radiant humour were a delight we were always eager to 
welcome.

George Cayley and I now entered at Lincoln's Inn.  At the end 
of three years he was duly called to the Bar.  I was not; for 
alas, as usual, something 'turned up,' which drew me in 
another direction.  For a couple of years, however, I 'ate' 
my terms - not unfrequently with William Harcourt, with whom 
Cayley had a Yorkshire intimacy even before our Cambridge 
days.

Old Mr. Cayley, though not the least strait-laced, was a 
religious man.  A Unitarian by birth and conviction, he began 
and ended the day with family prayers.  On Sundays he would 
always read to us, or make us read to him, a sermon of 
Channing's, or of Theodore Parker's, or what we all liked 
better, one of Frederick Robertson's.  He was essentially a 
good man.  He had been in Parliament all his life, and was a 
broad-minded, tolerant, philosophical man-of-the-world.  He 
had a keen sense of humour, and was rather sarcastical; but, 
for all that, he was sensitively earnest, and conscientious.  
I had the warmest affection and respect for him.  Such a 
character exercised no small influence upon our conduct and 
our opinions, especially as his approval or disapproval of 
these visibly affected his own happiness.

He was never easy unless he was actively engaged in some 
benevolent scheme, the promotion of some charity, or in what 
he considered his parliamentary duties, which he contrived to 
make very burdensome to his conscience.  As his health was 
bad, these self-imposed obligations were all the more 
onerous; but he never spared himself, or his somewhat scanty 
means.  Amongst other minor tasks, he used to teach at the 
Sunday-school of St. John's, Westminster; in this he 
persuaded me to join him.  The only other volunteer, not a 
clergyman, was Page Wood - a great friend of Mr. Cayley's - 
afterwards Lord Chancellor Hatherley.  In spite of Mr. 
Cayley's Unitarianism, like Frederick the Great, he was all 
for letting people 'go to Heaven in their own way,' and was 
moreover quite ready to help them in their own way.  So that 
he had no difficulty in hearing the boys repeat the day's 
collect, or the Creed, even if Athanasian, in accordance with 
the prescribed routine of the clerical teachers.

This was right, at all events for him, if he thought it 
right.  My spirit of nonconformity did not permit me to 
follow his example.  Instead thereof, my teaching was purely 
secular.  I used to take a volume of Mrs. Marcet's 
'Conversations' in my pocket; and with the aid of the 
diagrams, explain the application of the mechanical forces, - 
the inclined plane, the screw, the pulley, the wedge, and the 
lever.  After two or three Sundays my class was largely 
increased, for the children keenly enjoyed their competitive 
examinations.  I would also give them bits of poetry to get 
by heart for the following Sunday - lines from Gray's 
'Elegy,' from Wordsworth, from Pope's 'Essay on Man' - such 
in short as had a moral rather than a religious tendency.

After some weeks of this, the boys becoming clamorous in 
their zeal to correct one another, one of the curates left 
his class to hear what was going on in mine.  We happened at 
the moment to be dealing with geography.  The curate, 
evidently shocked, went away and brought another curate.  
Then the two together departed, and brought back the rector - 
Dr. Jennings, one of the Westminster Canons - a most kind and 
excellent man.  I went on as if unconscious of the 
censorship, the boys exerting themselves all the more eagerly 
for the sake of the 'gallery.'  When the hour was up, Canon 
Jennings took me aside, and in the most polite manner thanked 
me for my 'valuable assistance,' but did not think that the 
'Essay on Man,' or especially geography, was suited for the 
teaching in a Sunday-school.  I told him I knew it was 
useless to contend with so high a canonical authority; 
personally I did not see the impiety of geography, but then, 
as he already knew, I was a confirmed latitudinarian.  He 
clearly did not see the joke, but intimated that my services 
would henceforth be dispensed with.

Of course I was wrong, though I did not know it then, for it 
must be borne in mind that there were no Board Schools in 
those days, and general education, amongst the poor, was 
deplorably deficient.  At first, my idea was to give the 
children (they were all boys) a taste for the 'humanities,' 
which might afterwards lead to their further pursuit.  I 
assumed that on the Sunday they would be thinking of the 
baked meats awaiting them when church was over, or of their 
week-day tops and tipcats; but I was equally sure that a time 
would come when these would be forgotten, and the other 
things remembered.  The success was greater from the 
beginning than could be looked for; and some years afterwards 
I had reason to hope that the forecast was not altogether too 
sanguine.

While the Victoria Tower was being built, I stopped one day 
to watch the masons chiselling the blocks of stone.  
Presently one of them, in a flannel jacket and a paper cap, 
came and held out his hand to me.  He was a handsome young 
fellow with a big black beard and moustache, both powdered 
with his chippings.

'You don't remember me, sir, do you?'

'Did I ever see you before?'

'My name is Richards; don't you remember, sir?  I was one of 
the boys you used to teach at the Sunday-school.  It gave me 
a turn for mechanics, which I followed up; and that's how I 
took to this trade.  I'm a master mason now, sir; and the 
whole of this lot is under me.'

'I wonder what you would have been,' said I, 'if we'd stuck 
to the collects?'

'I don't think I should have had a hand in this little job,' 
he answered, looking up with pride at the mighty tower, as 
though he had a creative share in its construction.

All this while I was working hard at my own education, and 
trying to make up for the years I had wasted (so I thought of 
them), by knocking about the world.  I spent laborious days 
and nights in reading, dabbling in geology, chemistry, 
physiology, metaphysics, and what not.  On the score of 
dogmatic religion I was as restless as ever.  I had an 
insatiable thirst for knowledge; but was without guidance.  I 
wanted to learn everything; and, not knowing in what 
direction to concentrate my efforts, learnt next to nothing.  
All knowledge seemed to me equally important, for all bore 
alike upon the great problems of belief and of existence.  
But what to pursue, what to relinquish, appeared to me an 
unanswerable riddle.  Difficult as this puzzle was, I did not 
know then that a long life's experience would hardly make it 
simpler.  The man who has to earn his bread must fain resolve 
to adapt his studies to that end.  His choice not often rests 
with him.  But the unfortunate being cursed in youth with the 
means of idleness, yet without genius, without talents even, 
is terribly handicapped and perplexed.

And now, with life behind me, how should I advise another in 
such a plight?  When a young lady, thus embarrassed, wrote to 
Carlyle for counsel, he sympathetically bade her 'put her 
drawers in order.'

Here is the truth to be faced at the outset:  'Man has but 
the choice to go a little way in many paths, or a great way 
in only one.'  'Tis thus John Mill puts it.  Which will he, 
which should he, choose?  Both courses lead alike to 
incompleteness.  The universal man is no specialist, and has 
to generalise without his details.  The specialist sees only 
through his microscope, and knows about as much of cosmology 
as does his microbe.  Goethe, the most comprehensive of 
Seers, must needs expose his incompleteness by futile 
attempts to disprove Newton's theory of colour.  Newton must 
needs expose his, by a still more lamentable attempt to prove 
the Apocalypse as true as his own discovery of the laws of 
gravitation.  All science nowadays is necessarily confined to 
experts.  Without illustrating the fact by invidious hints, I 
invite anyone to consider the intellectual cost to the world 
which such limitation entails; nor is the loss merely 
negative; the specialist is unfortunately too often a bigot, 
when beyond his contracted sphere.

This, you will say, is arguing in a circle.  The universal 
must be given up for the detail, the detail for the 
universal; we leave off where we began.  Yes, that is the 
dilemma.  Still, the gain to science through a devotion of a 
whole life to a mere group of facts, in a single branch of a 
single science, may be an incalculable acquisition to human 
knowledge, to the intellectual capital of the race - a gain 
that sometimes far outweighs the loss.  Even if we narrow the 
question to the destiny of the individual, the sacrifice of 
each one for the good of the whole is doubtless the highest 
aim the one can have.

But this conclusion scarcely helps us; for remember, the 
option is not given to all.  Genius, or talent, or special 
aptitude, is a necessary equipment for such an undertaking.  
Great discoverers must be great observers, dexterous 
manipulators, ingenious contrivers, and patient thinkers.

The difficulty we started with was, what you and I, my 
friend, who perhaps have to row in the same boat, and perhaps 
'with the same sculls,' without any of these provisions, what 
we should do?  What point of the compass should we steer for?  
'Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.'  
Truly there could be no better advice.  But the 'finding' is 
the puzzle; and like the search for truth it must, I fear, be 
left to each one's power to do it.  And then - and then the 
countless thousands who have the leisure without the means - 
who have hands at least, and yet no work to put them to - 
what is to be done for these?  Not in your time or mine, dear 
friend, will that question be answered.  For this, I fear we 
must wait till by the 'universal law of adaptation' we reach 
'the ultimate development of the ideal man.'  'Colossal 
optimism,' exclaims the critic.



CHAPTER XXXIX



IN February, 1855, Roebuck moved for a select committee to 
inquire into the condition of the Army before Sebastopol.  
Lord John Russell, who was leader of the House, treated this 
as a vote of censure, and resigned.  Lord Palmerston resisted 
Roebuck's motion, and generously defended the Government he 
was otherwise opposed to.  But the motion was carried by a 
majority of 157, and Lord Aberdeen was turned out of office.  
The Queen sent for Lord Derby, but without Lord Palmerston he 
was unable to form a Ministry.  Lord John was then appealed 
to, with like results; and the premiership was practically 
forced upon Palmerston, in spite of his unpopularity at 
Court.  Mr. Horsman was made Chief Secretary for Ireland; and 
through Mr. Ellice I became his private secretary.

Before I went to the Irish Office I was all but a stranger to 
my chief.  I had met him occasionally in the tennis court; 
but the net was always between us.  He was a man with a great 
deal of manner, but with very little of what the French call 
'conviction.'  Nothing keeps people at a distance more 
effectually than simulated sincerity; Horsman was a master of 
the art.  I was profoundly ignorant of my duties.  But though 
this was a great inconvenience to me at first, it led to a 
friendship which I greatly prized until its tragic end.  For 
all information as to the writers of letters, as to Irish 
Members who applied for places for themselves, or for others, 
I had to consult the principal clerk.  He was himself an 
Irishman of great ability; and though young, was either 
personally or officially acquainted, so it seemed to me, with 
every Irishman in the House of Commons, or out of it.  His 
name is too well known - it was Thomas Bourke, afterwards 
Under Secretary, and one of the victims of the Fenian 
assassins in the Phoenix Park.  His patience and amiability 
were boundless; and under his guidance I soon learnt the 
tricks of my trade.

During the session we remained in London; and for some time 
it was of great interest to listen to the debates.  When 
Irish business was before the House, I had often to be in 
attendance on my chief in the reporters' gallery.  Sometimes 
I had to wait there for an hour or two before our questions 
came on, and thus had many opportunities of hearing Bright, 
Gladstone, Disraeli, and all the leading speakers.  After a 
time the pleasure, when compulsory, began to pall; and I used 
to wonder what on earth could induce the ruck to waste their 
time in following, sheeplike, their bell-wethers, or waste 
their money in paying for that honour.  When Parliament was 
up we moved to Dublin.  I lived with Horsman in the Chief 
Secretary's lodge.  And as I had often stayed at Castle 
Howard before Lord Carlisle became Viceroy, between the two 
lodges I saw a great deal of pleasant society.

Amongst those who came to stay with Horsman was Sidney 
Herbert, then Colonial Secretary, a man of singular nobility 
of nature.  Another celebrity for the day, but of a very 
different character, was Lord Cardigan.  He had just returned 
from the Crimea, and was now in command of the forces in 
Ireland.  This was about six months after the Balaklava 
charge.  Horsman asked him one evening to give a description 
of it, with a plan of the battle.  His Lordship did so; no 
words could be more suited to the deed.  If this was 'pell-
mell, havock, and confusion,' the account of it was 
proportionately confounded.  The noble leader scrawled and 
inked and blotted all the phases of the battle upon the same 
scrap of paper, till the batteries were at the starting-point 
of the charge, the Light Brigade on the far side of the guns, 
and all the points of the compass, attack and defence, had 
changed their original places; in fact, the gallant Earl 
brandished his pen as valiantly as he had his sword.  When 
quite bewildered, like everybody else, I ventured mildly to 
ask, 'But where were you, Lord Cardigan, and where were our 
men when it came to this?'

'Where?  Where?  God bless my soul!  How should I know where 
anybody was?'  And this, no doubt, described the situation to 
a nicety.

My office was in the Castle, and the next room to mine was 
that of the Solicitor-General Keogh, afterwards Judge.  We 
became the greatest of friends.  It was one of Horsman's 
peculiarities to do business circuitously.  He was fond of 
mysteries and of secrets, secrets that were to be kept from 
everyone, but which were generally known to the office 
messengers.  When Keogh and I met in the morning he would 
say, with admirable imitation of Horsman's manner, 'Well, it 
is all settled; the Viceroy has considered the question, and 
has decided to act upon my advice.  Mind you don't tell 
anyone - it is a profound secret,' then, lowering his voice 
and looking round the room, 'His Excellency has consented to 
score at the next cricket match between the garrison and the 
Civil Service.'  If it were a constabulary appointment, or 
even a village post-office, the Attorney or the Solicitor-
General would be strictly enjoined not to inform me, and I 
received similar injunctions respecting them.  In spite of 
his apparent attention to details, Mr. Horsman hunted three 
days a week, and stated in the House of Commons that the 
office of Chief Secretary was a farce, meaning when excluded 
from the Cabinet.  All I know is, that his private secretary 
was constantly at work an hour before breakfast by candle-
light, and never got a single day's holiday throughout the 
winter.

Horsman had hired a shooting - Balnaboth in Scotland; here, 
too, I had to attend upon him in the autumn, mainly for the 
purpose of copying voluminous private correspondence about a 
sugar estate he owned at Singapore, then producing a large 
income, but the subsequent failure of which was his ruin.  
One year Sir Alexander Cockburn, the Lord Chief Justice, came 
to stay with him; and excellent company he was.  Horsman had 
sometimes rather an affected way of talking; and referring to 
some piece of political news, asked Cockburn whether he had 
seen it in the 'Courier.'  This he pronounced with an accent 
on the last syllable, like the French 'Courrier.'  Cockburn, 
with a slight twinkle in his eye, answered in his quiet way, 
'No, I didn't see it in the "Courrier," perhaps it is in the 
"Morning Post,"' also giving the French pronunciation to the 
latter word.

Sir Alexander told us an amusing story about Disraeli.  He 
and Bernal Osborne were talking together about Mrs. Disraeli, 
when presently Osborne, with characteristic effrontery, 
exclaimed:  'My dear Dizzy, how could you marry such a 
woman?'  The answer was; 'My dear Bernal, you never knew what 
gratitude was, or you would not ask the question.'

The answer was a gracious one, and doubtless sincere.  But, 
despite his cynicism, no one could be more courteous or say 
prettier things than Disraeli.  Here is a little story that 
was told me at the time by my sister-in-law, who was a woman 
of the bedchamber, and was present on the occasion.  When her 
Majesty Queen Alexandra was suffering from an accident to her 
knee, and had to use crutches, Disraeli said to her:  'I have 
heard of a devil on two sticks, but never before knew an 
angel to use them.'

Keogh, Bourke, and I, made several pleasant little excursions 
to such places as Bray, the Seven Churches, Powerscourt, &c., 
and, with a chosen car-driver, the wit and fun of the three 
clever Irishmen was no small treat.  The last time I saw 
either of my two friends was at a dinner-party which Bourke 
gave at the 'Windham.'  We were only four, to make up a whist 
party; the fourth was Fred Clay, the composer.  It is sad to 
reflect that two of the lot came to violent ends - Keogh, the 
cheeriest of men in society, by his own hands.  Bourke I had 
often spoken to of the danger he ran in crossing the Phoenix 
Park nightly on his way home, on foot and unarmed.  He 
laughed at me, and rather indignantly - for he was a very 
vain man, though one of the most good-natured fellows in the 
world.  In the first place, he prided himself on his physique 
- he was a tall, well-built, handsome man, and a good boxer 
and fencer to boot.  In the next place, he prided himself 
above all things on being a thorough-bred Irishman, with a 
sneaking sympathy with even Fenian grievances.  'They all 
know ME,' he would say.  'The rascals know I'm the best 
friend they have.  I'm the last man in the world they'd harm, 
for political reasons.  Anyway, I can take care of myself.'  
And so it was he fell.

The end of Horsman's secretaryship is soon told.  A bishopric 
became vacant, and almost as much intrigue was set agoing as 
we read of in the wonderful story of 'L'Anneau d'Amethyste.'  
Horsman, at all times a profuse letter-writer, wrote folios 
to Lord Palmerston on the subject, each letter more 
exuberant, more urgent than the last.  But no answer came.  
Finally, the whole Irish vote, according to the Chief 
Secretary, being at stake - not to mention the far more 
important matter of personal and official dignity - Horsman 
flew off to London, boiling over with impatience and 
indignation.  He rushed to 10 Downing Street.  His Lordship 
was at the Foreign office, but was expected every minute; 
would Mr. Horsman wait?  Mr. Horsman was shown into his 
Lordship's room.  Piles of letters, opened and unopened, were 
lying upon the table.  The Chief Secretary recognised his own 
signatures on the envelopes of a large bundle, all amongst 
the 'un's.' The Premier came in, an explanation EXTREMEMENT 
VIVE followed; on his return to Dublin Mr. Horsman resigned 
his post, and from that moment became one of Lord 
Palmerston's bitterest opponents.



CHAPTER XL



THE lectures at the Royal Institution were of some help to 
me.  I attended courses by Owen, Tyndall, Huxley, and Bain.  
Of these, Huxley was FACILE PRINCEPS, though both Owen and 
Tyndall were second to no other.  Bain was disappointing.  I 
was a careful student of his books, and always admired the 
logical lucidity of his writing.  But to the mixed audience 
he had to lecture to - fashionable young ladies in their 
teens, and drowsy matrons in charge of them, he discreetly 
kept clear of transcendentals.  In illustration perhaps of 
some theory of the relation of the senses to the intellect, 
he would tell an amusing anecdote of a dog that had had an 
injured leg dressed at a certain house, after which the 
recovered dog brought a canine friend to the same house to 
have his leg - or tail - repaired.  Out would come all the 
tablets and pretty pencil cases, and every young lady would 
be busy for the rest of the lecture in recording the 
marvellous history.  If the dog's name had been 'Spot' or 
'Bob,' the important psychological fact would have been 
faithfully registered.  As to the theme of the discourse, 
that had nothing to do with - millinery.  And Mr. Bain 
doubtless did not overlook the fact.

Owen was an accomplished lecturer; but one's attention to him 
depended on two things - a primary interest in the subject, 
and some elementary acquaintance with it.  If, for example, 
his subject were the comparative anatomy of the cycloid and 
ganoid fishes, the difference in their scales was scarcely of 
vital importance to one's general culture.  But if he were 
lecturing on fish, he would stick to fish; it would be 
essentially a JOUR MAIGRE.

With Huxley, the suggestion was worth more than the thing 
said.  One thought of it afterwards, and wondered whether his 
words implied all they seemed to imply.  One knew that the 
scientist was also a philosopher; and one longed to get at 
him, at the man himself, and listen to the lessons which his 
work had taught him.  At one of these lectures I had the 
honour of being introduced to him by a great friend of mine, 
John Marshall, then President of the College of Surgeons.  In 
later years I used to meet him constantly at the Athenaeum.

Looking back to the days of one's plasticity, two men are 
pre-eminent among my Dii Majores.  To John Stuart Mill and to 
Thomas Huxley I owe more, educationally, than to any other 
teachers.  Mill's logic was simply a revelation to me.  For 
what Kant calls 'discipline,' I still know no book, unless it 
be the 'Critique' itself, equal to it.  But perhaps it is the 
men themselves, their earnestness, their splendid courage, 
their noble simplicity, that most inspired one with 
reverence.  It was Huxley's aim to enlighten the many, and he 
enlightened them.  It was Mill's lot to help thinkers, and he 
helped them.  SAPERE AUDE was the motto of both.  How few 
there are who dare to adopt it!  To love truth is valiantly 
professed by all; but to pursue it at all costs, to 'dare to 
be wise' needs daring of the highest order.

Mill had the enormous advantage, to start with, of an 
education unbiassed by any theological creed; and he brought 
exceptional powers of abstract reasoning to bear upon matters 
of permanent and supreme importance to all men.  Yet, in 
spite of his ruthless impartiality, I should not hesitate to 
call him a religious man.  This very tendency which no 
imaginative mind, no man or woman with any strain of poetical 
feeling, can be without, invests Mill's character with a 
clash of humanity which entitles him to a place in our 
affections.  It is in this respect that he so widely differs 
from Mr. Herbert Spencer.  Courageous Mr. Spencer was, but 
his courage seems to have been due almost as much to absence 
of sympathy or kinship with his fellow-creatures, and to his 
contempt of their opinions, as from his dispassionate love of 
truth, or his sometimes passionate defence of his own tenets.

My friend Napier told me an amusing little story about John 
Mill when he was in the East India Company's administration.  
Mr. Macvey Napier, my friend's elder brother, was the senior 
clerk.  On John Mill's retirement, his co-officials 
subscribed to present him with a silver standish.  Such was 
the general sense of Mill's modest estimate of his own 
deserts, and of his aversion to all acknowledgment of them, 
that Mr. Napier, though it fell to his lot, begged others to 
join in the ceremony of presentation.  All declined; the 
inkstand was left upon Mill's table when he himself was out 
of the room.

Years after the time of which I am writing, when Mill stood 
for Westminster, I had the good fortune to be on the platform 
at St. James's Hall, next but one to him, when he made his 
first speech to the electors.  He was completely unknown to 
the public, and, though I worshipped the man, I had never 
seen him, nor had an idea what he looked like.  To satisfy my 
curiosity I tried to get a portrait of him at the 
photographic shop in Regent Street.

'I want a photograph of Mr. Mill.'

'Mill?  Mill?' repeated the shopman, 'Oh yes, sir, I know - a 
great sporting gent,' and he produced the portrait of a 
sportsman in top boots and a hunting cap.

Very different from this was the figure I then saw.  The hall 
and the platform were crowded.  Where was the principal 
personage?  Presently, quite alone, up the side steps, and 
unobserved, came a thin but tallish man in black, with a tail 
coat, and, almost unrecognised, took the vacant front seat.  
He might have been, so far as dress went, a clerk in a 
counting-house, or an undertaker.  But the face was no 
ordinary one.  The wide brow, the sharp nose of the Burke 
type, the compressed lips and strong chin, were suggestive of 
intellect and of suppressed emotion.  There was no applause, 
for nothing was known to the crowd, even of his opinions, 
beyond the fact that he was the Liberal candidate for 
Westminster.  He spoke with perfect ease to himself, never 
faltering for the right word, which seemed to be always at 
his command.  If interrupted by questions, as he constantly 
was, his answers could not have been amended had he written 
them.  His voice was not strong, and there were frequent 
calls from the far end to 'speak up, speak up; we can't hear 
you.'  He did not raise his pitch a note.  They might as well 
have tried to bully an automaton.  He was doing his best, and 
he could do no more.  Then, when, instead of the usual 
adulations, instead of declamatory appeals to the passions of 
a large and a mixed assembly, he gave them to understand, in 
very plain language, that even socialists are not infallible, 
- that extreme and violent opinions, begotten of ignorance, 
do not constitute the highest political wisdom; then there 
were murmurs of dissent and disapproval.  But if the ignorant 
and the violent could have stoned him, his calm manner would 
still have said, 'Strike, but hear me.'

Mr. Robert Grosvenor - the present Lord Ebury - then the 
other Liberal member for Westminster, wrote to ask me to take 
the chair at Mill's first introduction to the Pimlico 
electors.  Such, however, was my admiration of Mill, I did 
not feel sure that I might not say too much in his favour; 
and mindful of the standish incident, I knew, that if I did 
so, it would embarrass and annoy him.

Under these circumstances I declined the honour.

When Owen was delivering a course of lectures at Norwich, my 
brother invited him to Holkham.  I was there, and we took 
several long walks together.  Nothing seemed to escape his 
observation.  My brother had just completed the recovery of 
many hundred acres of tidal marsh by embankments.  Owen, who 
was greatly interested, explained what would be the effect 
upon the sandiest portion of this, in years to come; what the 
chemical action of the rain would be, how the sand would 
eventually become soil, how vegetation would cover it, and 
how manure render it cultivable.  The splendid crops now 
grown there bear testimony to his foresight.  He had always 
something instructive to impart, stopping to contemplate 
trifles which only a Zadig would have noticed.

'I observe,' said he one day, 'that your prevailing wind here 
is north-west.'

'How do you know?' I asked.

'Look at the roots of all these trees; the large roots are 
invariably on the north-west side.  This means that the 
strain comes on this side.  The roots which have to bear it 
loosen the soil, and the loosened soil favours the extension 
and the growth of the roots.  Nature is beautifully 
scientific.'

Some years after this, I published a book called 'Creeds of 
the Day.'  My purpose was to show, in a popular form, the 
bearings of science and speculative thought upon the 
religious creeds of the time.  I sent Owen a copy of the 
work.  He wrote me one of the most interesting letters I ever 
received.  He had bought the book, and had read it.  But the 
important content of the letter was the confession of his own 
faith.  I have purposely excluded all correspondence from 
these Memoirs, but had it not been that a forgotten collector 
of autographs had captured it, I should have been tempted to 
make an exception in its favour.  The tone was agnostic; but 
timidly agnostic.  He had never freed himself from the 
shackles of early prepossessions.  He had not the necessary 
daring to clear up his doubts.  Sometimes I fancy that it was 
this difference in the two men that lay at the bottom of the 
unfortunate antagonism between Owen and Huxley.  There is in 
Owen's writing, where he is not purely scientific, a touch of 
the apologist.  He cannot quite make up his mind to follow 
evolution to its logical conclusions.  Where he is forced to 
do so, it is to him like signing the death warrant of his 
dearest friend.  It must not be forgotten that Owen was born 
more than twenty years before Huxley; and great as was the 
offence of free-thinking in Huxley's youth, it was nothing 
short of anathema in Owen's.  When I met him at Holkham, the 
'Origin of Species' had not been published; and Napier and I 
did all we could to get Owen to express some opinion on 
Lamarck's theory, for he and I used to talk confidentially on 
this fearful heresy even then.  But Owen was ever on his 
guard.  He evaded our questions and changed the subject.

Whenever I pass near the South Kensington Museum I step aside 
to look at the noble statues of the two illustrious men.  A 
mere glance at them, and we appreciate at once their 
respective characters.  In the one we see passive wisdom, in 
the other militant force.



CHAPTER XLI



BEFORE I went to America, I made the acquaintance of Dr. 
George Bird; he continued to be one of my most intimate 
friends till his death, fifty years afterwards.  When I first 
knew him, Bird was the medical adviser and friend of Leigh 
Hunt, whose family I used often to meet at his house.  He had 
been dependent entirely upon his own exertions; had married 
young; and had had a pretty hard fight at starting to provide 
for his children and for himself.  His energy, his abilities, 
his exceeding amiability, and remarkable social qualities, 
gradually procured him a large practice and hosts of devoted 
friends.  He began looking for the season for sprats - the 
cheapest of fish - to come in; by middle life he was 
habitually and sumptuously entertaining the celebrities of 
art and literature.  With his accomplished sister, Miss Alice 
Bird, to keep house for him, there were no pleasanter dinner 
parties or receptions in London.  His CLIENTELE was mainly 
amongst the artistic world.  He was a great friend of Miss 
Ellen Terry's, Mr. Marcus Stone and his sisters were 
frequenters of his house, so were Mr. Swinburne, Mr. Woolner 
the sculptor - of whom I was not particularly fond - Horace 
Wigan the actor, and his father, the Burtons, who were much 
attached to him - Burton dedicated one volume of his 'Arabian 
Nights' to him - Sir William Crookes, Mr. Justin Macarthy and 
his talented son, and many others.

The good doctor was a Radical and Home Ruler, and attended 
professionally the members of one or two labouring men's 
clubs for fees which, as far as I could learn, were 
rigorously nominal.  His great delight was to get an order 
for the House of Commons, especially on nights when Mr. 
Gladstone spoke; and, being to the last day of his life as 
simple-minded as a child, had a profound belief in the 
statemanship and integrity of that renowned orator.

As far as personality goes, the Burtons were, perhaps, the 
most notable of the above-named.  There was a mystery about 
Burton which was in itself a fascination.  No one knew what 
he had done; or consequently what he might not do.  He never 
boasted, never hinted that he had done, or could do, anything 
different from other men; and, in spite of the mystery, one 
felt that he was transparently honest and sincere.  He was 
always the same, always true to himself; but then, that 
'self' was a something PER SE, which could not be 
categorically classed - precedent for guidance was lacking.  
There is little doubt Burton had gipsy blood in his veins; 
there was something Oriental in his temperament, and even in 
his skin.

One summer's day I found him reading the paper in the 
Athenaeum.  He was dressed in a complete suit of white - 
white trousers, a white linen coat, and a very shabby old 
white hat.  People would have stared at him anywhere.

'Hullo, Burton!' I exclaimed, touching his linen coat, 'Do 
you find it so hot - DEJA?'

Said he:  'I don't want to be mistaken for other people.'

'There's not much fear of that, even without your clothes,' I 
replied.

Such an impromptu answer as his would, from any other, have 
implied vanity.  Yet no man could have been less vain, or 
more free from affectation.  It probably concealed regret at 
finding himself conspicuous.

After dinner at the Birds' one evening we fell to talking of 
garrotters.  About this time the police reports were full of 
cases of garrotting.  The victim was seized from behind, one 
man gagged or burked him, while another picked his pocket.

'What should you do, Burton?' the Doctor asked, 'if they 
tried to garrotte you?'

'I'm quite ready for 'em,' was the answer; and turning up his 
sleeve he partially pulled out a dagger, and shoved it back 
again.

We tried to make him tell us what became of the Arab boy who 
accompanied him to Mecca, and whose suspicions threatened 
Burton's betrayal, and, of consequence, his life.  I don't 
think anyone was present except us two, both of whom he well 
knew to be quite shock-proof, but he held his tongue.

'You would have been perfectly justified in saving your own 
life at any cost.  You would hardly have broken the sixth 
commandment by doing so in this case,' I suggested.

'No,' said he gravely, 'and as I had broken all the ten 
before, it wouldn't have so much mattered.'

The Doctor roared.  It should, however, be stated that Burton 
took no less delight in his host's boyish simplicity, than 
the other in what he deemed his guest's superb candour.

'Come, tell us,' said Bird, 'how many men have you killed?'

'How many have you, Doctor?' was the answer.

Richard Burton was probably the most extraordinary linguist 
of his day.  Lady Burton mentions, I think, in his Life, the 
number of languages and dialects her husband knew.  That 
Mahometans should seek instruction from him in the Koran, 
speaks of itself for his astonishing mastery of the greatest 
linguistic difficulties.  With Indian languages and their 
variations, he was as completely at home as Miss Youghal's 
Sais; and, one may suppose, could have played the ROLE of a 
fakir as perfectly as he did that of a Mecca pilgrim.  I 
asked him what his method was in learning a fresh language.  
He said he wrote down as many new words as he could learn and 
remember each day; and learnt the construction of the 
language colloquially, before he looked at a grammar.

Lady Burton was hardly less abnormal in her way than Sir 
Richard.  She had shared his wanderings, and was intimate, as 
no one else was, with the eccentricities of his thoughts and 
deeds.  Whatever these might happen to be, she worshipped her 
husband notwithstanding.  For her he was the standard of 
excellence; all other men were departures from it.  And the 
singularity is, her religious faith was never for an instant 
shaken - she remained as strict a Roman Catholic as when he 
married her from a convent.  Her enthusiasm and 
cosmopolitanism, her NAIVETE and the sweetness of her 
disposition made her the best of company.  She had lived so 
much the life of a Bedouin, that her dress and her habits had 
an Eastern glow.  When staying with the Birds, she was 
attended by an Arab girl, one of whose duties it was to 
prepare her mistress' chibouk, which was regularly brought in 
with the coffee.  On one occasion, when several other ladies 
were dining there, some of them yielded to Lady Burton's 
persuasion to satisfy their curiosity.  The Arab girl soon 
provided the means; and it was not long before there were 
four or five faces as white as Mrs. Alfred Wigan's, under 
similar circumstances, in the 'Nabob.'

Alfred Wigan's father was an unforgettable man.  To describe 
him in a word, he was Falstag REDIVIVUS.  In bulk and 
stature, in age, in wit and humour, and morality, he was 
Falstaff.  He knew it and gloried in it.  He would complain 
with zest of 'larding the lean earth' as he walked along.  He 
was as partial to whisky as his prototype to sack.  He would 
exhaust a Johnsonian vocabulary in describing his ailments; 
and would appeal pathetically to Miss Bird, as though at his 
last gasp, for 'just a tea-spoonful' of the grateful 
stimulant.  She served him with a liberal hand, till he cried 
'Stop!'  But if she then stayed, he would softly insinuate 'I 
didn't mean it, my dear.'  Yet he was no Costigan.  His brain 
was stronger than casks of whisky.  And his powers of 
digestion were in keeping.  Indeed, to borrow the well-known 
words applied to a great man whom we all love, 'He tore his 
dinner like a famished wolf, with the veins swelling in his 
forehead, and the perspiration running down his cheeks.'  The 
trend of his thoughts, though he was eminently a man of 
intellect, followed the dictates of his senses.  Walk with 
him in the fields and, from the full stores of a prodigious 
memory, he would pour forth pages of the choicest poetry.  
But if you paused to watch the lambs play, or disturbed a 
young calf in your path, he would almost involuntarily 
exclaim:  'How deliciously you smell of mint, my pet!' or 
'Bless your innocent face!  What sweetbreads you will 
provide!'

James Wigan had kept a school once.  The late Serjeant 
Ballantine, who was one of his pupils, mentions him in his 
autobiography.  He was a good scholar, and when I first knew 
him, used to teach elocution.  Many actors went to him, and 
not a few members of both Houses of Parliament.  He could 
recite nearly the whole of several of Shakespeare's plays; 
and, with a dramatic art I have never known equalled by any 
public reader.

His later years were passed at Sevenoaks, where he kept an 
establishment for imbeciles, or weak-minded youths.  I often 
stayed with him (not as a patient), and a very comfortable 
and pretty place it was.  Now and then he would call on me in 
London; and, with a face full of theatrical woe, tell me, 
with elaborate circumlocution, how the Earl of This, or the 
Marquis of That, had implored him to take charge of young 
Lord So-and-So, his son; who, as all the world knew, had - 
well, had 'no guts in his brains.'  Was there ever such a 
chance?  Just consider what it must lead to!  Everybody knew 
- no, nobody knew - the enormous number of idiots there were 
in noble families.  And, such a case as that of young Lord 
Dash - though of course his residence at Sevenoaks would be a 
profound secret, would be patent to the whole peerage; and, 
my dear sir, a fortune to your humble servant, if - ah! if he 
could only secure it!'

'But I thought you said you had been implored to take him?'

'I did say so.  I repeat it.  His Lordship's father came to 
me with tears in his eyes.  "My dear Wigan," were that 
nobleman's words, "do me this one favour and trust me, you 
will never regret it!"  But - ' he paused to remove the 
dramatic tear, 'but, I hardly dare go on.  Yes - yes, I know 
your kindness' (seizing my hand) 'I know how ready you are to 
help me' - (I hadn't said a word) - 'but - '

'How much is it this time? and what is it for?'

'For?  I have told you what it is for.  The merest trifle 
will suffice.  I have the room - a beautiful room, the best 
aspect in the house.  It is now occupied by young Rumagee 
Bumagee the great Bombay millionaire's son.  Of course he can 
be moved.  But a bed - there positively is not a spare bed in 
the house.  This is all I want - a bed, and perhaps a 
tuppenny ha'penny strip of carpet, a couple of chairs, a - 
let me see; if you give me a slip of paper I can make out in 
a minute what it will come to.'

'Never mind that.  Will a ten-pound note serve your 
purposes?'

'Dear boy!  Dear boy!  But on one condition, on one condition 
only, can I accept it - this is a loan, a loan mind! and not 
a gift.  No, no - it is useless to protest; my pride, my 
sense of honour, forbids my acceptance upon any other terms.'

A day or two afterwards I would learn from George Bird that 
he and Miss Alice had accepted an invitation to meet me at 
Sevenoaks.  Mr. Donovan, the famous phrenologist, was to be 
of the party; the Rector of Sevenoaks, and one or two local 
magnates, had also been invited to dine.  We Londoners were 
to occupy the spare rooms, for this was in the coaching days.

We all knew what we had to expect - a most enjoyable banquet 
of conviviality.  Young Mrs. Wigan, his second wife, was an 
admirable housekeeper, and nothing could have been better 
done.  The turbot and the haunch of venison were the pick of 
Grove's shop, the champagne was iced to perfection, and there 
was enough of it, as Mr. Donovan whispered to me, casting his 
eyes to the ceiling, 'to wash an omnibus, bedad.'  Mr. 
Donovan, though he never refused Mr. Wigan's hospitality, 
balanced the account by vilipending his friend's extravagant 
habits.  While Mr. Wigan, probably giving him full credit for 
his gratitude, always spoke of him as 'Poor old Paddy 
Donovan.'

With Alfred Wigan, the eldest son, I was on very friendly 
terms.  Nothing could be more unlike his father.  His manner 
in his own house was exactly what it was on the stage.  
Albany Fonblanque, whose experiences began nearly forty years 
before mine, and who was not given to waste his praise, told 
me he considered Alfred Wigan the best 'gentleman' he had 
ever seen on the stage.  I think this impression was due in a 
great measure to Wigan's entire absence of affectation, and 
to his persistent appeal to the 'judicious' but never to the 
'groundlings.'  Mrs. Alfred Wigan was also a consummate 
artiste.



CHAPTER XLII



THROUGH George Bird I made the acquaintance of the leading 
surgeons and physicians of the North London Hospital, where I 
frequently attended the operations of Erichsen, John 
Marshall, and Sir Henry Thompson, following them afterwards 
in their clinical rounds.  Amongst the physicians, Professor 
Sydney Ringer remains one of my oldest friends.  Both surgery 
and therapeutics interested me deeply.  With regard to the 
first, curiosity was supplemented by the incidental desire to 
overcome the natural repugnance we all feel to the mere sight 
of blood.

Chemistry I studied in the laboratory of a professional 
friend of Dr. Bird's.  After a while my teacher would leave 
me to carry out small commissions of a simple character which 
had been put into his hands, such as the analysis of water, 
bread, or other food-stuffs.  He himself often had 
engagements elsewhere, and would leave me in possession of 
the laboratory, with a small urchin whom he had taught to be 
useful.  This boy was of the meekest and mildest disposition.  
Whether his master had frightened him or not I do not know.  
He always spoke in a whisper, and with downcast eyes.  He 
handled everything as if it was about to annihilate him, or 
he it, and looked as if he wouldn't bite - even a tartlet.

One day when I had finished my task, and we were alone, I 
bethought me of making some laughing gas, and trying the 
effect of it on the gentle youth.  I offered him a shilling 
for the experiment, which, however, proved more expensive 
than I had bargained for.  I filled a bladder with the gas, 
and putting a bit of broken pipe-stem in its neck for a 
mouthpiece, gave it to the boy to suck - and suck he did.  In 
a few seconds his eyes dilated, his face became lividly 
white, and I had some trouble to tear the intoxicating 
bladder from his clutches.  The moment I had done so, the 
true nature of the gutter-snipe exhibited itself.  He began 
by cutting flip-flaps and turning windmills all round the 
room; then, before I could stop him, swept an armful of 
valuable apparatus from the tables, till the whole floor was 
strewn with wreck and poisonous solutions.  The dismay of the 
chemist when he returned may be more easily imagined than 
described.

Some years ago, there was a well-known band of amateur 
musicians called the 'Wandering Minstrels.'  This band 
originated in my rooms in Dean's Yard.  Its nucleus was 
composed of the following members:  Seymour Egerton, 
afterwards Lord Wilton, Sir Archibald Macdonald my brother-
in-law, Fred Clay, Bertie Mitford (the present Lord Redesdale 
- perhaps the finest amateur cornet and trumpet player of the 
day), and Lord Gerald Fitzgerald.  Our concerts were given in 
the Hanover Square Rooms, and we played for charities all 
over the country.

To turn from the musical art to the art - or science is it 
called? - of self-defence, once so patronised by the highest 
fashion, there was at this time a famous pugilistic battle - 
the last of the old kind - fought between the English 
champion, Tom Sayers, and the American champion, Heenan.  
Bertie Mitford and I agreed to go and see it.

The Wandering Minstrels had given a concert in the Hanover 
Square Rooms.  The fight was to take place on the following 
morning.  When the concert was over, Mitford and I went to 
some public-house where the 'Ring' had assembled, and where 
tickets were to be bought, and instructions received.  Fights 
when gloves were not used, and which, especially in this 
case, might end fatally, were of course illegal; and every 
precaution had been taken by the police to prevent it.  A 
special train was to leave London Bridge Station about 6 A.M.  
We sat up all night in my room, and had to wait an hour in 
the train before the men with their backers arrived.  As soon 
as it was daylight, we saw mounted police galloping on the 
roads adjacent to the line.  No one knew where the train 
would pull up.  Ten minutes after it did so, a ring was 
formed in a meadow close at hand.  The men stripped, and 
tossed for places.  Heenan won the toss, and with it a 
considerable advantage.  He was nearly a head taller than 
Sayers, and the ground not being quite level, he chose the 
higher side of the ring.  But this was by no means his only 
'pull.'  Just as the men took their places the sun began to 
rise.  It was in Heenan's back, and right in the other's 
face.

Heenan began the attack at once with scornful confidence; and 
in a few minutes Sayers received a blow on the forehead above 
his guard which sent him slithering under the ropes; his head 
and neck, in fact, were outside the ring.  He lay perfectly 
still, and in my ignorance, I thought he was done for.  Not a 
bit of it.  He was merely reposing quietly till his seconds 
put him on his legs.  He came up smiling, but not a jot the 
worse.  But in the course of another round or two, down he 
went again.  The fight was going all one way.  The Englishman 
seemed to be completely at the mercy of the giant.  I was so 
disgusted that I said to my companion:  'Come along, Bertie, 
the game's up.  Sayers is good for nothing.'

But now the luck changed.  The bull-dog tenacity and splendid 
condition of Sayers were proof against these violent shocks.  
The sun was out of his eyes, and there was not a mark of a 
blow either on his face or his body.  His temper, his 
presence of mind, his defence, and the rapidity of his 
movements, were perfect.  The opening he had watched for came 
at last.  He sprang off his legs, and with his whole weight 
at close quarters, struck Heenan's cheek just under the eye.  
It was like the kick of a cart-horse.  The shouts might have 
been heard half-a-mile off.  Up till now, the betting called 
after each round had come to 'ten to one on Heenan'; it fell 
at once to evens.

Heenan was completely staggered.  He stood for a minute as if 
he did not know where he was or what had happened.  And then, 
an unprecedented thing occurred.  While he thus stood, Sayers 
put both hands behind his back, and coolly walked up to his 
foe to inspect the damage he had inflicted.  I had hold of 
the ropes in Heenan's corner, consequently could not see his 
face without leaning over them.  When I did so, and before 
time was called, one eye was completely closed.  What kind of 
generosity prevented Sayers from closing the other during the 
pause, is difficult to conjecture.  But his forbearance did 
not make much difference.  Heenan became more fierce, Sayers 
more daring.  The same tactics were repeated; and now, no 
longer to the astonishment of the crowd, the same success 
rewarded them.  Another sledge-hammer blow from the 
Englishman closed the remaining eye.  The difference in the 
condition of the two men must have been enormous, for in five 
minutes Heenan was completely sightless.

Sayers, however, had not escaped scot-free.  In countering 
the last attack, Heenan had broken one of the bones of 
Sayers' right arm.  Still the fight went on.  It was now a 
brutal scene.  The blind man could not defend himself from 
the other's terrible punishment.  His whole face was so 
swollen and distorted, that not a feature was recognisable.  
But he evidently had his design.  Each time Sayers struck him 
and ducked, Heenan made a swoop with his long arms, and at 
last he caught his enemy.  With gigantic force he got Sayers' 
head down, and heedless of his captive's pounding, backed 
step by step to the ring.  When there, he forced Sayers' neck 
on to the rope, and, with all his weight, leant upon the 
Englishman's shoulders.  In a few moments the face of the 
strangled man was black, his tongue was forced out of his 
mouth, and his eyes from their sockets.  His arms fell 
powerless, and in a second or two more he would have been a 
corpse.  With a wild yell the crowd rushed to the rescue.  
Warning cries of 'The police!  The police!' mingled with the 
shouts.  The ropes were cut, and a general scamper for the 
waiting train ended this last of the greatest prize-fights.

We two took it easily, and as the mob were scuttling away 
from the police, we saw Sayers with his backers, who were 
helping him to dress.  His arm seemed to hurt him a little, 
but otherwise, for all the damage he had received, he might 
have been playing at football or lawn tennis.

We were quietly getting into a first-class carriage, when I 
was seized by the shoulder and roughly spun out of the way.  
Turning to resent the rudeness, I found myself face to face 
with Heenan.  One of his seconds had pushed me on one side to 
let the gladiator get in.  So completely blind was he, that 
the friend had to place his foot upon the step.  And yet 
neither man had won the fight.

We still think - profess to think - the barbarism of the 
'Iliad' the highest flight of epic poetry; if Homer had sung 
this great battle, how glorious we should have thought it!  
Beyond a doubt, man 'yet partially retains the 
characteristics that adapted him to an antecedent state.'



CHAPTER XLIII



THROUGH the Cayley family, I became very intimate with their 
near relatives the Worsleys of Hovingham, near York.  
Hovingham has now become known to the musical world through 
its festivals, annually held at the Hall under the patronage 
of its late owner, Sir William Worsley.  It was in his 
father's time that this fine place, with its delightful 
family, was for many years a home to me.  Here I met the 
Alisons, and at the kind invitation of Sir Archibald, paid 
the great historian a visit at Possil, his seat in Scotland.  
As men who had achieved scientific or literary distinction 
inspired me with far greater awe than those of the highest 
rank - of whom from my childhood I had seen abundance - 
Alison's celebrity, his courteous manner, his oracular 
speech, his voluminous works, and his voluminous dimensions, 
filled me with too much diffidence and respect to admit of 
any freedom of approach.  One listened to him, as he held 
forth of an evening when surrounded by his family, with 
reverential silence.  He had a strong Scotch accent; and, if 
a wee bit prosy at times, it was sententious and polished 
prose that he talked; he talked invariably like a book.  His 
family were devoted to him; and I felt that no one who knew 
him could help liking him.

When Thackeray was giving readings from 'The Four Georges,' I 
dined with Lady Grey and Landseer, and we three went to hear 
him.  I had heard Dickens read 'The Trial of Bardell against 
Pickwick,' and it was curious to compare the style of the two 
great novelists.  With Thackeray, there was an entire absence 
of either tone or colour.  Of course the historical nature of 
his subject precluded the dramatic suggestion to be looked 
for in the Pickwick trial, thus rendering comparison 
inapposite.  Nevertheless one was bound to contrast them.  
Thackeray's features were impassive, and his voice knew no 
inflection.  But his elocution in other respects was perfect, 
admirably distinct and impressive from its complete 
obliteration of the reader.

The selection was from the reign of George the Third; and no 
part of it was more attentively listened to than his passing 
allusion to himself.  'I came,' he says, 'from India as a 
child, and our ship touched at an island on the way home, 
where my black servant took me a long walk over rocks and 
hills until we reached a garden, where we saw a man walking.  
"That is he," said the black man, "that is Bonaparte!  He 
eats three sheep every day, and all the little children he 
can lay hands on!"'  One went to hear Thackeray, to see 
Thackeray; and the child and the black man and the ogre were 
there on the stage before one.  But so well did the lecturer 
perform his part, that ten minutes later one had forgotten 
him, and saw only George Selwyn and his friend Horace 
Walpole, and Horace's friend, Miss Berry - whom by the way I 
too knew and remember.  One saw the 'poor society ghastly in 
its pleasures, its loves, its revelries,' and the redeeming 
vision of 'her father's darling, the Princess Amelia, 
pathetic for her beauty, her sweetness, her early death, and 
for the extreme passionate tenderness with which her father 
loved her.'  The story told, as Thackeray told it, was as 
delightful to listen to as to read.

Not so with Dickens.  He disappointed me.  He made no attempt 
to represent the different characters by varied utterance; 
but whenever something unusually comic was said, or about to 
be said, he had a habit of turning his eyes up to the 
ceiling; so that, knowing what was coming, one nervously 
anticipated the upcast look, and for the moment lost the 
illusion.  In both entertainments, the reader was naturally 
the central point of interest.  But in the case of Dickens, 
when curiosity was satisfied, he alone possessed one; 
Pickwick and Mrs. Bardell were put out of court.

Was it not Charles Lamb, or was it Hazlitt, that could not 
bear to see Shakespeare upon the stage?  I agree with him.  I 
have never seen a Falstaff that did not make me miserable.  
He is even more impossible to impersonate than Hamlet.  A 
player will spoil you the character of Hamlet, but he cannot 
spoil his thoughts.  Depend upon it, we are fortunate not to 
have seen Shakespeare in his ghost of Royal Denmark.

In 1861 I married Lady Katharine Egerton, second daughter of 
Lord Wilton, and we took up our abode in Warwick Square, 
which, by the way, I had seen a few years before as a turnip 
field.  My wife was an accomplished pianiste, so we had a 
great deal of music, and saw much of the artist world.  I may 
mention one artistic dinner amongst our early efforts at 
housekeeping, which nearly ended with a catastrophe.

Millais and Dicky Doyle were of the party; music was 
represented by Joachim, Piatti, and Halle.  The late Lord and 
Lady de Ros were also of the number.  Lady de Ros, who was a 
daughter of the Duke of Richmond, had danced at the ball 
given by her father at Brussels the night before Waterloo.  
As Lord de Ros was then Governor of the Tower, it will be 
understood that he was a veteran of some standing.  The great 
musical trio were enchanting all ears with their faultless 
performance, when the sweet and soul-stirring notes of the 
Adagio were suddenly interrupted by a loud crash and a 
shriek.  Old Lord de Ros was listening to the music on a sofa 
at the further end of the room.  Over his head was a large 
picture in a heavy frame.  What vibrations, what careless 
hanging, what mischievous Ate or Discord was at the bottom of 
it, who knows?  Down came the picture on the top of the poor 
old General's head, and knocked him senseless on the floor.  
He had to be carried upstairs and laid upon a bed.  Happily 
he recovered without serious injury.  There were many 
exclamations of regret, but the only one I remember was 
Millais'.  All he said was:  'And it is a good picture too.'

Sir Arthur Sullivan was one of our musical favourites.  My 
wife had known him as a chorister boy in the Chapel Royal; 
and to the end of his days we were on terms of the closest 
intimacy and friendship.  Through him we made the 
acquaintance of the Scott Russells.  Mr. Scott Russell was 
the builder of the Crystal Palace.  He had a delightful 
residence at Sydenham, the grounds of which adjoined those of 
the Crystal Palace, and were beautifully laid out by his 
friend Sir Joseph Paxton.  One of the daughters, Miss Rachel 
Russell, was a pupil of Arthur Sullivan's.  She had great 
musical talent, she was remarkably handsome, exceedingly 
clever and well-informed, and altogether exceptionally 
fascinating.  Quite apart from Sullivan's genius, he was in 
every way a charming fellow.  The teacher fell in love with 
the pupil; and, as naturally, his love was returned.  
Sullivan was but a youth, a poor and struggling music-master.  
And, very naturally again, Mrs. Scott Russell, who could not 
be expected to know what magic baton the young maestro 
carried in his knapsack, thought her brilliant daughter might 
do better.  The music lessons were put a stop to, and 
correspondence between the lovers was prohibited.

Once a week or so, either the young lady or the young 
gentleman would, quite unexpectedly, pay us a visit about tea 
or luncheon time.  And, by the strangest coincidence, the 
other would be sure to drop in while the one was there.  This 
went on for a year or two.  But destiny forbade the banns.  
In spite of the large fortune acquired by Mr. Scott Russell - 
he was the builder of the 'Great Eastern' as well as the 
Crystal Palace - ill-advised or unsuccessful ventures robbed 
him of his well-earned wealth.  His beautiful place at 
Sydenham had to be sold; and the marriage of Miss Rachel with 
young Arthur Sullivan was abandoned.  She ultimately married 
an Indian official.

Her story may here be told to the end.  Some years later she 
returned to England to bring her two children home for their 
education, going back to India without them, as Indian 
mothers have to do.  The day before she sailed, she called to 
take leave of us in London.  She was terribly depressed, but 
fought bravely with her trial.  She never broke down, but 
shunted the subject, talking and laughing with flashes of her 
old vivacity, about music, books, friends, and 'dear old 
dirty London,' as she called it.  When she left, I opened the 
street-door for her, and with both her hands in mine, bade 
her 'Farewell.'  Then the tears fell, and her parting words 
were:  'I am leaving England never to see it again.'  She was 
seized with cholera the night she reached Bombay, and died 
the following day.

To return to her father, the eminent engineer.  He was 
distinctly a man of genius, and what is called 'a character.'  
He was always in the clouds - not in the vapour of his 
engine-rooms, nor busy inventing machines for extracting 
sunbeams from cucumbers, but musing on metaphysical problems 
and abstract speculations about the universe generally.  In 
other respects a perfectly simple-minded man.

It was in his palmy days that he invited me to run down to 
Sheerness with him, and go over the 'Great Eastern' before 
she left with the Atlantic cable.  This was in 1865.  The 
largest ship in the world, and the first Atlantic cable, were 
both objects of the greatest interest.  The builder did not 
know the captain - Anderson - nor did the captain know the 
builder.  But clearly, each would be glad to meet the other.

As the leviathan was to leave in a couple of days, everything 
on board her was in the wildest confusion.  Russell could not 
find anyone who could find the Captain; so he began poking 
about with me, till we accidentally stumbled on the 
Commander.  He merely said that he was come to take a parting 
glance at his 'child,' which did not seem of much concern to 
the over-busy captain.  He never mentioned his own name, but 
introduced me as 'my friend Captain Cole.'  Now, in those 
days, Captain Cole was well known as a distinguished naval 
officer.  To Russell's absent and engineering mind, 'Coke' 
had suggested 'Cole,' and 'Captain' was inseparable from the 
latter.  It was a name to conjure with.  Captain Anderson 
took off his cap, shook me warmly by the hand, expressed his 
pleasure at making my acquaintance, and hoped I, and my 
friend Mr. - ahem - would come into his cabin and have 
luncheon, and then allow him to show me over his ship.  Scott 
Russell was far too deeply absorbed in his surroundings to 
note any peculiarity in this neglect of himself and marked 
respect for 'Captain Cole.'  We made the round of the decks, 
then explored the engine room.  Here the designer found 
himself in an earthly paradise.  He button-holed the engineer 
and inquired into every crank, and piston, and valve, and 
every bolt, as it seemed to me, till the officer in charge 
unconsciously began to ask opinions instead of offering 
explanations.  By degrees the captain was equally astonished 
at the visitor's knowledge, and when at last my friend asked 
what had become of some fixture or other which he missed, 
Captain Anderson turned to him and exclaimed, 'Why, you seem 
to know more about the ship than I do.'

'Well, so I ought,' says my friend, never for a moment 
supposing that Anderson was in ignorance of his identity.

'Indeed!  Who then are you, pray?'

'Who?  Why, Scott Russell of course, the builder!'

There was a hearty laugh over it all.  I managed to spare the 
captain's feelings by preserving my incognito, and so ended a 
pleasant day.



CHAPTER XLIV



IN November, 1862, my wife and I received an invitation to 
spend a week at Compiegne with their Majesties the Emperor 
and Empress of the French.  This was due to the circumstance 
that my wife's father, Lord Wilton, as Commodore of the Royal 
Yacht Squadron, had entertained the Emperor during his visit 
to Cowes.

We found an express train with the imperial carriages 
awaiting the arrival of the English guests at the station du 
Nord.  The only other English besides ourselves were Lord and 
Lady Winchilsea with Lady Florence Paget, and Lord and Lady 
Castlerosse, now Lord and Lady Kenmare.  These, however, had 
preceded us, so that with the exception of M. Drouyn de 
Lhuys, we had the saloon carriage to ourselves.

The party was a very large one, including the Walewskis, the 
Persignys, the Metternichs - he, the Austrian Ambassador - 
Prince Henri VII. of Reuss, Prussian Ambassador, the Prince 
de la Moskowa, son of Marshal Ney, and the Labedoyeres, 
amongst the historical names.  Amongst those of art and 
literature, of whom there were many, the only one whom I made 
the acquaintance of was Octave Feuillet.  I happened to have 
brought his 'Comedies et Proverbes' and another of his books 
with me, never expecting to meet him; this so pleased him 
that we became allies.  I was surprised to find that he could 
not even read English, which I begged him to learn for the 
sake of Shakespeare alone.

We did not see their Majesties till dinner-time.  When the 
guests were assembled, the women and the men were arranged 
separately on opposite sides of the room.  The Emperor and 
Empress then entered, each respectively welcoming those of 
their own sex, shaking hands and saying some conventional 
word in passing.  Me, he asked whether I had brought my guns, 
and hoped we should have a good week's sport.  To each one a 
word.  Every night during the week we sat down over a hundred 
to dinner.  The Army was largely represented.  For the first 
time I tasted here the national frog, which is neither fish 
nor flesh.  The wine was, of course, supreme; but after every 
dish a different wine was handed round.  The evening 
entertainments were varied.  There was the theatre in the 
Palace, and some of the best of the Paris artistes were 
requisitioned for the occasion.  With them came Dejazet, then 
nearly seventy, who had played before Buonaparte.

Almost every night there was dancing.  Sometimes the Emperor 
would walk through a quadrille, but as a rule he would retire 
with one of his ministers, though only to a smaller boudoir 
at the end of the suite, where a couple of whist-tables were 
ready for the more sedate of the party.  Here one evening I 
found Prince Metternich showing his Majesty a chess problem, 
of which he was the proud inventor.  The Emperor asked 
whether I was fond of chess.  I was very fond of chess, was 
one of the regular HABITUES of St. George's Chess Club, and 
had made a study of the game for years.  The Prince 
challenged me to solve his problem in four moves.  It was not 
a very profound one.  I had the hardihood to discover that 
three, rather obvious moves, were sufficient.  But as I was 
not Gil Blas, and the Prince was not the Archbishop of 
Grenada, it did not much matter.  Like the famous prelate, 
his Excellency proffered his felicitations, and doubtless 
also wished me 'un peu plus de gout' with the addition of 'un 
peu moins de perspicacite.'

One of the evening performances was an exhibition of POSES-
PLASTIQUES, the subjects being chosen from celebrated 
pictures in the Louvre.  Theatrical costumiers, under the 
command of a noted painter, were brought from Paris.  The 
ladies of the court were carefully rehearsed, and the whole 
thing was very perfectly and very beautifully done.  All the 
English ladies were assigned parts.  But, as nearly all these 
depended less upon the beauties of drapery than upon those of 
nature, the English ladies were more than a little staggered 
by the demands of the painter and of the - UNdressers.  To 
the young and handsome Lady Castlerosse, then just married, 
was allotted the figure of Diana.  But when informed that, in 
accordance with the original, the drapery of one leg would 
have to be looped up above the knee, her ladyship used very 
firm language; and, though of course perfectly ladylike, 
would, rendered into masculine terms, have signified that she 
would 'see the painter d-d first.'  The celebrated 'Cruche 
cassee' of Greuze, was represented by the reigning beauty, 
the Marquise de Gallifet, with complete fidelity and success.

There was one stage of the performance which neither I nor 
Lord Castlerosse, both of us newly married, at all 
appreciated.  This was the privileges of the Green-room, or 
rather of the dressing-rooms.  The exhibition was given in 
the ball-room.  On one side of this, until the night of the 
performances, an enclosure was boarded off.  Within it, were 
compartments in which the ladies dressed and - undressed.  At 
this operation, as we young husbands discovered, certain 
young gentlemen of the court were permitted to assist - I 
think I am not mistaken in saying that his Majesty was of the 
number.  What kind of assistance was offered or accepted, 
Castlerosse and I, being on the wrong side of the boarding, 
were not in a position to know.

There was a door in the boarding, over which one expected to 
see, 'No admittance except on business,' or perhaps, 'on 
pleasure.'  At this door I rapped, and rapped again 
impatiently.  It was opened, only as wide as her face, by the 
empress.

'What do you want, sir?' was the angry demand.

'To see my wife, madame,' was the submissive reply.

'You can't see her; she is rehearsing.'

'But, madame, other gentlemen - '

'Ah!  Mais, c'est un enfantillage!  Allez-vous-en.'

And the door was slammed in my face.

'Well,' thought I, 'the right woman is in the right place 
there, at all events.'

Another little incident at the performance itself also 
recalled the days and manners of the court of Louis XV.  
Between each tableau, which was lighted solely from the 
raised stage, the lights were put out, and the whole room 
left in complete darkness.  Whenever this happened, the 
sounds of immoderate kissing broke out in all directions, 
accompanied by little cries of resistance and protestation.  
Until then, I had always been under the impression that 
humour of this kind was confined to the servants' hall.  One 
could not help thinking of another court, where things were 
managed differently.

But the truth is, these trivial episodes were symptomatic of 
a pervading tone.  A no inconsiderable portion of the ladies 
seemed to an outsider to have been invited for the sake of 
their personal charms.  After what has just been related, one 
could not help fancying that there were some amongst them who 
had availed themselves of the privilege which, according to 
Tacitus, was claimed by Vistilia before the AEdiles.  So far, 
however, from any of these noble ladies being banished to the 
Isle of Seriphos, they seemed as much attached to the court 
as the court to them; and whatever the Roman Emperor might 
have done, the Emperor of the French was all that was most 
indulgent.

There were two days' shooting, one day's stag hunting, an 
expedition to Pierrefonds, and a couple of days spent in 
riding and skating.  The shooting was very much after the 
fashion of that already described at Prince Esterhazy's, 
though of a much more Imperial character.  As in Hungary, the 
game had been driven into coverts cut down to the height of 
the waist, with paths thirty to forty yards apart, for the 
guns.

The weather was cold, with snow on the ground, but it was a 
beautifully sunny day.  This was the party:  the two 
ambassadors, the Prince de la Moskowa, Persigny, Walewski - 
Bonaparte's natural son, and the image of his father - the 
Marquis de Toulongeon, Master of the Horse, and we three 
Englishmen.  We met punctually at eleven in the grand saloon.  
Here the Emperor joined us, with his cigarette in his mouth, 
shook hands with each, and bade us take our places in the 
char-a-bancs.  Four splendid Normandy greys, with postilions 
in the picturesque old costume, glazed hats and huge jack-
boots, took us through the forest at full gallop, and in half 
an hour we were at the covert side.  The Emperor was very 
cheery all the way.  He cautioned me not to shoot back for 
the beaters' sakes, and asked me how many guns I had brought.

'Two only? that's not enough, I will lend you some of mine.'

Arrived at our beat - 'Tire de Royallieu,' we found a 
squadron of dismounted cavalry drawn up in line, ready to 
commence operations.  They were in stable dress, with canvas 
trousers and spurs to their boots.  Several officers were 
galloping about giving orders, the whole being under the 
command of a mounted chief in green uniform and cocked hat!  
The place of each shooter had been settled by M. de 
Toulongeon.  I, being the only Nobody of the lot, was put on 
the extreme outside.  The Emperor was in the middle; and 
although, as I noticed, he made some beautiful shots at 
rocketers, he was engaged much of the time in talking to 
ministers who walked behind, or beside, him.

Our servants were already in the places allotted to their 
masters, and each of us had two keepers to carry spare guns 
(the Emperor had not forgotten to send me two of his, which I 
could not shoot with, and never used), and a sergeant with a 
large card to prick off each head of game, not as it fell to 
the gun, but only after it was picked up.  This conscientious 
scoring amused me greatly; for, as it chanced, my bag was a 
heavy one, and the Emperor's marker sent constant messages to 
mine to compare notes, and so arrange, as it transpired, to 
keep His Majesty at the top of the score.

About half-past one we reached a clearing where DEJEUNER was 
awaiting us.  The scene presented was striking.  Around a 
tent in which every delicacy was spread out were numbers of 
little charcoal fires, where a still greater number of cooks 
in white caps and jackets were preparing dainty dishes; while 
the Imperial footmen bustling about brightened the picture 
with colour.  After coffee all the cards were brought to his 
Majesty.  When he had scanned them, he said to me across the 
table:

'I congratulate you, Mr. Coke, upon having killed the most.'

My answer was, 'After you, Sir.'

'Yes,' said he, giving his moustache an upward twist, but 
with perfect gravity, 'I always kill the most.'

Just then the Empress and the whole court drove up.  
Presently she came into the tent and, addressing her husband, 
exclaimed:

'Avez-vous bientot fini, vous autres?  Ah! que vous etes des 
gourmands!'

Till the finish, she and the rest walked with the shooters.  
By four it was over.  The total score was 1,387 head.  Mine 
was 182, which included thirty-six partridges, two woodcocks, 
and four roedeer.  This, in three and a half hours' shooting, 
with two muzzle-loaders (breech-loaders were not then in 
use), was an unusually good bag.

Fashion is capricious.  When lunch was over I went to one of 
the charcoal fires, quite in the background, to light a 
cigarette.  An aide-de-camp immediately pounced upon me, with 
the information that this was not permitted in company with 
the Empress.  It reminded one at once of the ejaculation at 
Oliver Twist's bedside, 'Ladies is present, Mr. Giles.'  
After the shooting, I was told to go to tea with the Empress 
- a terrible ordeal, for one had to face the entire feminine 
force of the palace, nearly every one of whom, from the 
highest to the lowest, was provided with her own CAVALIERE 
SERVENTE.

The following night, when we assembled for dinner, I received 
orders to sit next to the Empress.  This was still more 
embarrassing.  It is true, one does not speak to a sovereign 
unless one is spoken to; but still one is permitted to make 
the initiative easy.  I found that I was expected to take my 
share of the task; and by a happy inspiration, introduced the 
subject of the Prince Imperial, then a child of eight years 
old.  The MONDAINE Empress was at once merged in the adoring 
mother; her whole soul was wrapped up in the boy.  It was 
easy enough then to speculate on his career, at least so far 
as the building of castles in the air for fantasies to roam 
in.  What a future he had before him! - to consolidate the 
Empire! to perfect the great achievement of his father, and 
render permanent the foundation of the Napoleonic dynasty! to 
build a superstructure as transcendent for the glories of 
Peace, as those of his immortal ancestor had been for War!

It was not difficult to play the game with such court cards 
in one's hand.  Nor was it easy to coin these PHRASES DE 
SUCRECANDI without sober and earnest reflections on the 
import of their contents.  What, indeed, might or might not 
be the consequences to millions, of the wise or unwise or 
evil development of the life of that bright and handsome 
little fellow, now trotting around the dessert table, with 
the long curls tumbling over his velvet jacket, and the 
flowers in his hand for some pretty lady who was privileged 
to kiss him?  Who could foretell the cruel doom - heedless of 
such favours and such splendid promises - that awaited the 
pretty child?  Who could hear the brave young soldier's last 
shrieks of solitary agony?  Who could see the forsaken body 
slashed with knives and assegais?  Ah! who could dream of 
that fond mother's heart, when the end came, which eclipsed 
even the disasters of a nation!

One by-day, when my wife and I were riding with the Emperor 
through the forest of Compiegne, a rough-looking man in a 
blouse, with a red comforter round his neck, sprang out from 
behind a tree; and before he could be stopped, seized the 
Emperor's bridle.  In an instant the Emperor struck his hand 
with a heavy hunting stock; and being free, touched his horse 
with the spur and cantered on.  I took particular notice of 
his features and his demeanour, from the very first moment of 
the surprise.  Nothing happened but what I have described.  
The man seemed fierce and reckless.  The Emperor showed not 
the faintest signs of discomposure.  All he said was, turning 
to my wife, 'Comme il avait l'air sournois, cet homme!' and 
resumed the conversation at the point where it was 
interrupted.

Before we had gone a hundred yards I looked back to see what 
had become of the offender.  He was in the hands of two GENS 
D'ARMES, who had been invisible till then.

'Poor devil,' thought I, 'this spells dungeon for you.'

Now, with Kinglake's acrimonious charge of the Emperor's 
personal cowardice running in my head, I felt that this 
exhibition of SANG FROID, when taken completely unawares, 
went far to refute the imputation.  What happened later in 
the day strongly confirmed this opinion.

After dark, about six o'clock, I took a stroll by myself 
through the town of Compiegne.  Coming home, when crossing 
the bridge below the Palace, I met the Emperor arm-in-arm 
with Walewski.  Not ten minutes afterwards, whom should I 
stumble upon but the ruffian who had seized the Emperor's 
bridle?  The same red comforter was round his neck, the same 
wild look was in his face.  I turned after he had passed, and 
at the same moment he turned to look at me.

Would this man have been at large but for the Emperor's 
orders?  Assuredly not.  For, supposing he were crazy, who 
could have answered for his deeds?  Most likely he was 
shadowed; and to a certainty the Emperor would be so.  Still, 
what could save the latter from a pistol-shot?  Yet, here he 
was, sauntering about the badly lighted streets of a town 
where his kenspeckle figure was familiar to every inhabitant.  
Call this fatalism if you will; but these were not the acts 
of a coward.  I told this story to a friend who was well 
'posted' in the club gossip of the day.  He laughed.

'Don't you know the meaning of Kinglake's spite against the 
Emperor?' said he.  'CHERCHEZ LA FEMME.  Both of them were in 
love with Mrs. - '

This is the way we write our histories.

Wishing to explore the grounds about the palace before anyone 
was astir, I went out one morning about half-past eight.  
Seeing what I took to be a mausoleum, I walked up to it, 
found the door opened, and peeped in.  It turned out to be a 
museum of Roman antiquities, and the Emperor was inside, 
arranging them.  I immediately withdrew, but he called to me 
to come in.

He was at this time busy with his Life of Caesar; and, in his 
enthusiasm, seemed pleased to have a listener to his 
instructive explanations; he even encouraged the curiosity 
which the valuable collection and his own remarks could not 
fail to awaken.

Not long ago, I saw some correspondence in the Times' and 
other papers about what Heine calls 'Das kleine 
welthistorische Hutchen,' which the whole of Europe knew so 
well, to its cost.  Some six or seven of the Buonaparte hats, 
so it appears, are still in existence.  But I noticed, that 
though all were located, no mention was made of the one in 
the Luxembourg.

When we left Compiegne for Paris we were magnificently 
furnished with orders for royal boxes at theatres, and for 
admission to places of interest not open to the public.  Thus 
provided, we had access to many objects of historical 
interest and of art - amongst the former, the relics of the 
great conqueror.  In one glass case, under lock and key, was 
the 'world-historical little hat.'  The official who 
accompanied us, having stated that we were the Emperor's 
guests, requested the keeper to take it out and show it to 
us.  I hope no Frenchman will know it, but, I put the hat 
upon my head.  In one sense it was a 'little' hat - that is 
to say, it fitted a man with a moderate sized skull - but the 
flaps were much larger than pictures would lead one to think, 
and such was the weight that I am sure it would give any 
ordinary man accustomed to our head-gear a still neck to wear 
it for an hour.  What has become of this hat if it is not 
still in the Luxembourg?



CHAPTER XLV



SOME few years later, while travelling with my family in 
Switzerland, we happened to be staying at Baveno on Lago 
Maggiore at the same time, and in the same hotel, as the 
Crown Prince and Princess of Germany.  Their Imperial 
Highnesses occupied a suite of apartments on the first floor.  
Our rooms were immediately above them.  As my wife was known 
to the Princess, occasional greetings passed from balcony to 
balcony.

One evening while watching two lads rowing from the shore in 
the direction of Isola Bella, I was aroused from my 
contemplation of a gathering storm by angry vociferations 
beneath me.  These were addressed to the youths in the boat.  
The anxious father had noted the coming tempest; and, with 
hands to his mouth, was shouting orders to the young 
gentlemen to return.  Loud and angry as cracked the thunder, 
the imperial voice o'ertopped it.  Commands succeeded 
admonitions, and as the only effect on the rowers was obvious 
recalcitrancy, oaths succeeded both:  all in those throat-
clearing tones to which the German language so consonantly 
lends itself.  In a few minutes the boat was immersed in the 
down-pour which concealed it.

The elder of the two oarsmen was no other than the future 
firebrand peacemaker, Miching Mallecho, our fierce little 
Tartarin de Berlin.  One wondered how he, who would not be 
ruled, would come in turn to rule?  That question is a 
burning one; and may yet set the world in flames to solve it.

A comic little incident happened here to my own children.  
There was but one bathing-machine.  This, the two - a 
schoolboy and his sister - used in the early morning.  Being 
rather late one day, they found it engaged; and growing 
impatient the boy banged at the door of the machine, with a 
shout in schoolboy's vernacular:  'Come, hurry up; we want to 
dip.'  Much to the surprise of the guilty pair, an answer, 
also in the best of English, came from the inside:  'Go away, 
you naughty boy.'  The occupant was the Imperial Princess.  
Needless to say the children bolted with a mingled sense of 
mischief and alarm.

About this time I joined a society for the relief of 
distress, of which Bromley Davenport was the nominal leader.  
The 'managing director,' so to speak, was Dr. Gilbert, father 
of Mr. W. S. Gilbert.  To him I went for instructions.  I 
told him I wanted to see the worst.  He accordingly sent me 
to Bethnal Green.  For two winters and part of a third I 
visited this district twice a week regularly.  What I saw in 
the course of those two years was matter for a thoughtful - 
ay, or a thoughtless - man to think of for the rest of his 
days.

My system was to call first upon the clergyman of the parish, 
and obtain from him a guide to the severest cases of 
destitution.  The guide would be a Scripture reader, and, as 
far as I remember, always a woman.  I do not know whether the 
labours of these good creatures were gratuitous - they 
themselves were certainly poor, yet singularly earnest and 
sympathetic.  The society supplied tickets for coal, 
blankets, and food.  Needless to say, had these supplies been 
a thousand-fold as great, they would have done as little 
permanent good as those at my command.

In Bethnal Green the principal industry is, or was, silk-
weaving by hand looms.  Nearly all the houses were ancient 
and dilapidated.  A weaver and his family would occupy part 
of a flat, consisting of two rooms perhaps, one of which 
would contain his loom.  The room might be about seven feet 
high, nearly dark, lighted only by a lattice window, half of 
the panes of which would be replaced by dirty rags or old 
newspaper.  As the loom was placed against the window the 
light was practically excluded.  The foulness of the air and 
filth which this entailed may be too easily imagined.  A 
couple of cases, taken almost at random, will sample scores 
as bad.

It is one of the darkest days of December.  The Thames is 
nearly frozen at Waterloo Bridge.  On the second floor of an 
old house in - Lane, in an unusually spacious room (or does 
it only look spacious because there is nothing in it save 
four human beings?) are a father, a mother, and a grown-up 
son and daughter.  They scowl at the visitor as the Scripture 
reader opens the door.  What is the meaning of the intrusion?  
Is he too come with a Bible instead of bread?  The four are 
seated side by side on the floor, leaning against the wall, 
waiting for - death.  Bedsteads, chairs, table, and looms 
have been burnt this week or more for fuel.  The grate is 
empty now, and lets the freezing draught blow down the 
chimney.  The temporary relief is accepted, but not with 
thanks.  These four stubbornly prefer death to the work-
house.

One other case.  It is the same hard winter.  The scene:  a 
small garret in the roof, a low slanting little skylight, now 
covered six inches deep in snow.  No fireplace here, no 
ventilation, so put your scented cambric to your nose, my 
noble Dives.  The only furniture a scanty armful of - what 
shall we call it?  It was straw once.  A starving woman and a 
baby are lying on it, notwithstanding.  The baby surely will 
not be there to-morrow.  It has a very bad cold - and the 
mucus, and the - pah!  The woman in a few rags - just a few - 
is gnawing a raw carrot.  The picture is complete.  There's 
nothing more to paint.  The rest - the whole indeed, that is 
the consciousness of it - was, and remains, with the Unseen.

You will say, 'Such things cannot be'; you will say, 'There 
are relieving officers, whose duty, etc., etc.'  May be.  I 
am only telling you what I myself have seen.  There is more 
goes on in big cities than even relieving officers can cope 
with.  And who shall grapple with the causes?  That's the 
point.

Here is something else that I have seen.  I have seen a 
family of six in one room.  Of these, four were brothers and 
sisters, all within, none over, their teens.  There were 
three beds between the six.  When I came upon them they were 
out of work, - the young ones in bed to keep warm.  I took 
them for very young married couples.  It was the Scripture 
reader who undeceived me.  This is not the exception to the 
rule, look you, but the rule itself.  How will you deal with 
it?  It is with Nature, immoral Nature and her heedless 
instincts that you have to deal.  With what kind of fork will 
you expel her?  It is with Nature's wretched children, the 
BETES HUMAINES,


Quos venerem incertam rapientes more ferarum,


that your account lies.  Will they cease to listen to her 
maddening whispers:  'Unissez-vous, multipliez, il n'est 
d'autre loi, d'autre but, que l'amour?'  What care they for 
her aside - 'Et durez apres, si vous le pouvez; cela ne me 
regarde plus'?  It doesn't regard them either.

The infallible panacea, so the 'Progressive' tell us, is 
education - lessons on the piano, perhaps?  Doctor Malthus 
would be more to the purpose; but how shall we administer his 
prescriptions?  One thing we might try to teach to advantage, 
and that is the elementary principles of hygiene.  I am heart 
and soul with the Progressive as to the ultimate remedial 
powers of education.  Moral advancement depends absolutely on 
the humanising influences of intellectual advancement.  The 
foreseeing of consequences is a question of intelligence.  
And the appreciation of consequences which follow is the 
basis of morality.  But we must not begin at the wrong end.  
The true foundation and condition of intellectual and moral 
progress postulates material and physical improvement.  The 
growth of artificial wants is as much the cause as the effect 
of civilisation:  they proceed PARI PASSU.  A taste of 
comfort begets a love of comfort.  And this kind of love 
militates, not impotently, against the other; for self-
interest is a persuasive counsellor, and gets a hearing when 
the blood is cool.  Life must be more than possible, it must 
be endurable; man must have some leisure, some repose, before 
his brain-needs have a chance with those of his belly.  He 
must have a coat to his back before he can stick a rose in 
its button-hole.  The worst of it is, he begins - in Bethnal 
Green at least - with the rose-bud; and indulges, poor devil! 
in a luxury which is just the most expensive, and - in our 
Bethnal Greens - the most suicidal he could resort to.

There was one method I adopted with a show of temporary 
success now and then.  It frequently happens that a man 
succumbs to difficulties for which he is not responsible, and 
which timely aid may enable him to overcome.  An artisan may 
have to pawn or sell the tools by which he earns his living.  
The redemption of these, if the man is good for anything, 
will often set him on his legs.  Thus, for example, I found a 
cobbler one day surrounded by a starving family.  His story 
was common enough, severe illness being the burden of it.  He 
was an intelligent little fellow, and, as far as one could 
judge, full of good intentions.  His wife seemed devoted to 
him, and this was the best of vouchers.  'If he had but a 
shilling or two to redeem his tools, and buy two or three old 
cast-off shoes in the rag-market which he could patch up and 
sell, he wouldn't ask anyone for a copper.'

We went together to the pawnbroker's, then to the rag-market, 
and the little man trotted home with an armful of old boots 
and shoes, some without soles, some without uppers; all, as I 
should have thought, picked out of dust-bins and rubbish 
heaps, his sunken eyes sparkling with eagerness and renovated 
hope.  I looked in upon him about three weeks later.  The 
family were sitting round a well provided tea-table, close to 
a glowing fire, the cheeks of the children smeared with jam, 
and the little cobbler hammering away at his last, too busy 
to partake of the bowl of hot tea which his wife had placed 
beside him.

The same sort of treatment was sometimes very successful with 
a skilful workman - like a carpenter, for instance.  Here a 
double purpose might be served.  Nothing more common in 
Bethnal Green than broken looms, and consequent disaster.  
There you had the ready-made job for the reinstated 
carpenter; and good could be done in a small way, at very 
little cost.  Of coarse much discretion is needed; still, the 
Scripture readers or the relieving officers would know the 
characters of the destitute, and the visitor himself would 
soon learn to discriminate.

A system similar to this was the basis of the aid rendered by 
the Royal Society for the Assistance of Discharged Prisoners, 
which was started by my friend, Mr. Whitbread, the present 
owner of Southill, and which I joined in its early days at 
his instigation.  The earnings of the prisoner were handed 
over by the gaols to the Society, and the Society employed 
them for his advantage - always, in the case of an artisan, 
by supplying him with the needful implements of his trade.  
But relief in which the pauper has no productive share, of 
which he is but a mere consumer, is of no avail.

One cannot but think that if instead of the selfish 
principles which govern our trades-unions, and which are 
driving their industries out of the country, trade-schools 
could be provided - such, for instance, as the cheap carving 
schools to be met with in many parts of Germany and the Tyrol 
- much might be done to help the bread-earners.  Why could 
not schools be organised for the instruction of shoemakers, 
tailors, carpenters, smiths of all kinds, and the scores of 
other trades which in former days were learnt by compulsory 
apprenticeship?  Under our present system of education the 
greater part of what the poor man's children learn is clean 
forgotten in a few years; and if not, serves mainly to create 
and foster discontent, which vents itself in a passion for 
mass-meetings and the fuliginous oratory of our Hyde Parks.

The emigration scheme for poor-law children as advocated by 
Mrs. Close is the most promising, in its way, yet brought 
before the public, and is deserving of every support.

In the absence of any such projects as these, the 
hopelessness of the task, and the depressing effect of the 
contact with much wretchedness, wore me out.  I had a nursery 
of my own, and was not justified in risking infectious 
diseases.  A saint would have been more heroic, and could 
besides have promised that sweetest of consolations to 
suffering millions - the compensation of Eternal Happiness.  
I could not give them even hope, for I had none to spare.  
The root-evil I felt to be the overcrowding due to the 
reckless intercourse of the sexes; and what had Providence to 
do with a law of Nature, obedience to which entailed 
unspeakable misery?



CHAPTER XLVI



IN the autumn following the end of the Franco-German war, Dr. 
Bird and I visited all the principal battlefields.  In 
England the impression was that the bloodiest battle was 
fought at Gravelotte.  The error was due, I believe, to our 
having no war correspondent on the spot.  Compared with that 
on the plains between St. Marie and St. Privat, Gravelotte 
was but a cavalry skirmish.  We were fortunate enough to meet 
a German artillery officer at St. Marie who had been in the 
action, and who kindly explained the distribution of the 
forces.  Large square mounds were scattered about the plain 
where the German dead were buried, little wooden crosses 
being stuck into them to denote the regiment they had 
belonged to.  At Gravelotte we saw the dogs unearthing the 
bodies from the shallow graves.  The officer told us he did 
not think there was a family in Germany unrepresented in the 
plains of St. Privat.

It was interesting so soon after the event, to sit quietly in 
the little summer-house of the Chateau de Bellevue, 
commanding a view of Sedan, where Bismarck and Moltke and 
General de Wimpfen held their memorable Council.  'Un 
terrible homme,' says the story of the 'Debacle,' 'ce general 
de Moltke, qui gagnait des batailles du fond de son cabinet a 
coups d'algebre.'

We afterwards made a walking tour through the Tyrol, and down 
to Venice.  On our way home, while staying at Lucerne, we 
went up the Rigi.  Soon after leaving the Kulm, on our 
descent to the railway, which was then uncompleted, we lost 
each other in the mist.  I did not get to Vitznau till late 
at night, but luckily found a steamer just starting for 
Lucerne.  The cabin was crammed with German students, each 
one smoking his pipe and roaring choruses to alternate 
singers.  All of a sudden, those who were on their legs were 
knocked off them.  The panic was instantaneous, for every one 
of us knew it was a collision.  But the immediate peril was 
in the rush for the deck.  Violent with terror, rough by 
nature, and full of beer, these wild young savages were 
formidable to themselves and others.  Having arrived late, I 
had not got further than the cabin door, and was up the 
companion ladder at a bound.  It was pitch dark, and piteous 
screams came up from the surrounding waters.  At first it was 
impossible to guess what had happened.  Were we rammed, or 
were we rammers?  I pulled off my coats ready for a swim.  
But it soon became apparent that we had run into and sunk 
another boat.

The next morning the doctor and I went on to England.  A week 
after I took up the 'Illustrated News.'  There was an account 
of the accident, with an illustration of the cabin of the 
sunken boat.  The bodies of passengers were depicted as the 
divers had found them.

On the very day the peace was signed I chanced to call on Sir 
Anthony Rothschild in New Court.  He took me across the court 
to see his brother Lionel, the head of the firm.  Sir Anthony 
bowed before him as though the great man were Plutus himself.   
He sat at a table alone, not in his own room, but in the 
immense counting-room, surrounded by a brigade of clerks.  
This was my first introduction to him.  He took no notice of 
his brother, but received me as Napoleon received the 
emperors and kings at Erfurt - in other words, as he would 
have received his slippers from his valet, or as he did 
receive the telegrams which were handed to him at the rate of 
about one a minute.

The King of Kings was in difficulties with a little slip of 
black sticking-plaster.  The thought of Gumpelino's 
Hyacinthos, ALIAS Hirsch, flashed upon me.  Behold! the 
mighty Baron Nathan come to life again; but instead of 
Hyacinthos paring his mightiness's HUHNERAUGEN, he himself, 
in paring his own nails, had contrived to cut his finger.

'Come to buy Spanish?' he asked, with eyes intent upon the 
sticking-plaster.

'Oh no,' said I, 'I've no money to gamble with.'

'Hasn't Lord Leicester bought Spanish?' - never looking off 
the sticking-plaster, nor taking the smallest notice of the 
telegrams.

'Not that I know of.  Are they good things?'

'I don't know; some people think so.'

Here a message was handed in, and something was whispered in 
his ear.

'Very well, put it down.'

'From Paris,' said Sir Anthony, guessing perhaps at its 
contents.

But not until the plaster was comfortably adjusted did Plutus 
read the message.  He smiled and pushed it over to me.  It 
was the terms of peace, and the German bill of costs.

'200,000,000 pounds!' I exclaimed.  'That's a heavy 
reckoning.  Will France ever be able to pay it?'

'Pay it?  Yes.  If it had been twice as much!'  And Plutus 
returned to his sticking-plaster.  That was of real 
importance.

Last autumn - 1904, the literary world was not a little 
gratified by an announcement in the 'Times' that the British 
Museum had obtained possession of the original manuscript of 
Keats's 'Hyperion.'  Let me tell the story of its discovery.  
During the summer of last year, my friend Miss Alice Bird, 
who was paying me a visit at Longford, gave me this account 
of it.

When Leigh Hunt's memoirs were being edited by his son 
Thornton in 1861, he engaged the services of three intimate 
friends of the family to read and collate the enormous mass 
of his father's correspondence.  Miss Alice Bird was one of 
the chosen three.  The arduous task completed, Thornton Hunt 
presented each of his three friends with a number of 
autographic letters, which, according to Miss Bird's 
description, he took almost at random from the eliminated 
pile.  Amongst the lot that fell to Miss Bird's share was a 
roll of stained paper tied up with tape.  This she was led to 
suppose - she never carefully examined it - might be either a 
copy or a draft of some friend's unpublished poem.

The unknown treasure was put away in a drawer with the rest.  
Here it remained undisturbed for forty-three years.  Having 
now occasion to remove these papers, she opened the forgotten 
scroll, and was at once struck both with the words of the 
'Hyperion,' and with the resemblance of the writing to 
Keats's.

She forthwith consulted the Keepers of the Manuscripts in the 
British Museum, with the result that her TROUVAILLE was 
immediately identified as the poet's own draft of the 
'Hyperion.'  The responsible authorities soon after, offered 
the fortunate possessor five hundred guineas for the 
manuscript, but courteously and honestly informed her that, 
were it put up to auction, some American collector would be 
almost sure to give a much larger sum for it.

Miss Bird's patriotism prevailed over every other 
consideration.  She expressed her wish that the poem should 
be retained in England; and generously accepted what was 
indubitably less than its market value.



CHAPTER XLVII



A MAN whom I had known from my school-days, Frederick 
Thistlethwayte, coming into a huge fortune when a subaltern 
in a marching regiment, had impulsively married a certain 
Miss Laura Bell.  In her early days, when she made her first 
appearance in London and in Paris, Laura Bell's extraordinary 
beauty was as much admired by painters as by men of the 
world.  Amongst her reputed lovers were Dhuleep Singh, the 
famous Marquis of Hertford, and Prince Louis Napoleon.  She 
was the daughter of an Irish constable, and began life on the 
stage at Dublin.  Her Irish wit and sparkling merriment, her 
cajolery, her good nature and her feminine artifice, were 
attractions which, in the eyes of the male sex, fully atoned 
for her youthful indiscretions.

My intimacy with both Mr. and Mrs. Thistlethwayte extended 
over many years; and it is but justice to her memory to aver 
that, to the best of my belief, no wife was ever more 
faithful to her husband.  I speak of the Thistlethwaytes here 
for two reasons - absolutely unconnected in themselves, yet 
both interesting in their own way.  The first is, that at my 
friend's house in Grosvenor Square I used frequently to meet 
Mr. Gladstone, sometimes alone, sometimes at dinner.  As may 
be supposed, the dinner parties were of men, but mostly of 
men eminent in public life.  The last time I met Mr. 
Gladstone there the Duke of Devonshire and Sir W. Harcourt 
were both present.  I once dined with Mrs. Thistlethwayte in 
the absence of her husband, when the only others were Munro 
of Novar - the friend of Turner, and the envied possessor of 
a splendid gallery of his pictures - and the Duke of 
Newcastle - then a Cabinet Minister.  Such were the 
notabilities whom the famous beauty gathered about her.

But it is of Mr. Gladstone that I would say a word.  The 
fascination which he exercised over most of those who came 
into contact with him is incontestable; and everyone is 
entitled to his own opinion, even though unable to account 
for it.  This, at least, must be my plea, for to me, Mr. 
Gladstone was more or less a Dr. Fell.  Neither in his public 
nor in his private capacity had I any liking for him.  Nobody 
cares a button for what a 'man in the street' like me says or 
thinks on subject matters upon which they have made up their 
minds.  I should not venture, even as one of the crowd, to 
deprecate a popularity which I believe to be fast passing 
away, were it not that better judges and wiser men think as I 
do, and have represented opinions which I sincerely share.  
'He was born,' says Huxley, 'to be a leader of men, and he 
has debased himself to be a follower of the masses.  If 
working men were to-day to vote by a majority that two and 
two made five, to-morrow Gladstone would believe it, and find 
them reasons for it which they had never dreamt of.'  Could 
any words be truer?  Yes; he was not born to be a leader of 
men.  He was born to be, what he was - a misleader of men.  
Huxley says he could be made to believe that two and two made 
five.  He would try to make others believe it; but would he 
himself believe it?  His friends will plead, 'he might 
deceive himself by the excessive subtlety of his mind.'  This 
is the charitable view to take.  But some who knew him long 
and well put another construction upon this facile self-
deception.  There were, and are, honourable men of the 
highest standing who failed to ascribe disinterested motives 
to the man who suddenly and secretly betrayed his colleagues, 
his party, and his closest friends, and tried to break up the 
Empire to satisfy an inordinate ambition, and an insatiable 
craving for power.  'He might have been mistaken, but he 
acted for the best'?   Was he acting conscientiously for the 
best in persuading the 'masses' to look upon the 'classes' - 
the war cries are of his coining - as their natural enemies, 
and worthy only of their envy and hatred?  Is this the part 
of a statesman, of a patriot?

And for what else shall we admire Mr. Gladstone?  Walter 
Bagehot, alluding to his egotism, wrote of him in his 
lifetime, 'He longs to pour forth his own belief; he cannot 
rest till he has contradicted everyone else.'  And what was 
that belief worth?  'He has scarcely,' says the same writer, 
'given us a sentence that lives in the memory.'

Even his eloquent advocate, Mr. Morley, confesses surprise at 
his indifference to the teaching of evolution; in other 
words, his ignorance of, and disbelief in, a scientific 
theory of nature which has modified the theological and moral 
creeds of the civilised world more profoundly than did the 
Copernican system of the Universe.

The truth is, Mr. Gladstone was half a century behind the age 
in everything that most deeply concerned the destiny of man.  
He was a politician, and nothing but a politician; and had it 
not been for his extraordinary gift of speech, we should 
never have heard of him save as a writer of scholia, or as a 
college don, perhaps.  Not for such is the temple of Fame.


Fama di loro il mondo esser non lassa.


Whatever may be thought now, Mr. Gladstone is not the man 
whom posterity will ennoble with the title of either 'great' 
or 'good.'

My second reason for mentioning Frederick Thistlethwayte was 
one which at first sight may seem trivial, and yet, when we 
look into it, is of more importance than the renown of an ex-
Prime Minister.  If these pages are ever read, what follows 
will be as distasteful to some of my own friends as the above 
remarks to Mr. Gladstone's.

Pardon a word about the writer himself - it is needed to 
emphasise and justify these OBITER DICTA.  I was brought up 
as a sportsman:  I cannot remember the days when I began to 
shoot.  I had a passion for all kinds of sport, and have had 
opportunities of gratifying it such as fall to the lot of 
few.  After the shootings of Glenquoich and Invergarry were 
lost to me through the death of Mr. Ellice, I became almost 
the sole guest of Mr. Thistlethwayte for twelve years at his 
Highland shooting of Kinlochmohr, not very far from Fort 
William.  He rented the splendid deer forest of Mamore, 
extensive grouse moors, and a salmon river within ten 
minutes' walk of the lodge.  His marriage and his 
eccentricities of mind and temper led him to shun all 
society.  We often lived in bothies at opposite ends of the 
forest, returning to the lodge on Saturday till Monday 
morning.  For a sportsman, no life could be more enjoyable.  
I was my own stalker, taking a couple of gillies for the 
ponies, but finding the deer for myself - always the most 
difficult part of the sport - and stalking them for myself.

I may here observe that, not very long after I married, 
qualms of conscience smote me as to the justifiability of 
killing, AND WOUNDING, animals for amusement's sake.  The 
more I thought of it, the less it bore thinking about.  
Finally I gave it up altogether.  But I went on several years 
after this with the deer-stalking; the true explanation of 
this inconsistency would, I fear, be that I had had enough of 
the one, but would never have enough of the other - one's 
conscience adapts itself without much difficulty to one's 
inclinations.

Between my host and myself, there was a certain amount of 
rivalry; and as the head forester was his stalker, the 
rivalry between our men aroused rancorous jealousy.  I think 
the gillies on either side would have spoilt the others' 
sport, could they have done so with impunity.  For two 
seasons, a very big stag used occasionally to find its way 
into our forest from the Black Mount, where it was also 
known.  Thistlethwayte had had a chance, and missed it; then 
my turn came.  I got a long snap-shot end on at the galloping 
stag.  It was an unsportsmanlike thing to do, but considering 
the rivalry and other temptations I fired, and hit the beast 
in the haunch.  It was late in the day, and the wounded 
animal escaped.

Nine days later I spied the 'big stag' again.  He was nearly 
in the middle of a herd of about twenty, mostly hinds, on the 
look-out.  They were on a large open moss at the bottom of a 
corrie, whence they could see a moving object on every side 
of them.  A stalk where they were was out of the question.  I 
made up my mind to wait and watch.

Now comes the moral of my story.  For hours I watched that 
stag.  Though three hundred yards or so away from me, I could 
through my glass see almost the expression of his face.  Not 
once did he rise or attempt to feed, but lay restlessly 
beating his head upon the ground for hour after hour.  I knew 
well enough what that meant.  I could not hear his groans.  
His plaints could not reach my ears, but they reached my 
heart.  The refrain varied little:  'How long shall I cry and 
Thou wilt not hear?' - that was the monotonous burden of the 
moans, though sometimes I fancied it changed to:  'Lord how 
long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?'

The evening came, and then, as is their habit, the deer began 
to feed up wind.  The wounded stag seemed loth to stir.  By 
degrees the last watchful hind fed quietly out of sight.  
With throbbing pulse and with the instincts of a fox - or 
prehistoric man, 'tis all the same - I crawled and dragged 
myself through the peat bog and the pools of water.  But 
nearer than two hundred yards it was impossible to get; even 
to raise my head or find a tussock whereon to rest the rifle 
would have started any deer but this one.  From the hollow I 
was in, the most I could see of him was the outline of his 
back and his head and neck.  I put up the 200 yards sight and 
killed him.

A vivid description of the body is not desirable.  It was 
almost fleshless, wasted away, except his wounded haunch.  
That was nearly twice its normal size; about one half of it 
was maggots.  The stench drove us all away.  This I had done, 
and I had done it for my pleasure!

After that year I went no more to Scotland.  I blame no one 
for his pursuit of sport.  But I submit that he must follow 
it, if at all, with Reason's eyes shut.  Happily, your true 
sportsman does not violate his conscience.  As a friend of 
mine said to me the other day, 'Unless you give a man of that 
kind something to kill, his own life is not worth having.'  
This, to be sure, is all he has to think about.



CHAPTER XLVIII



FOR eight or nine years, while my sons were at school, I 
lived at Rickmansworth.  Unfortunately the Leweses had just 
left it.  Moor Park belonged to Lord Ebury, my wife's uncle, 
and the beauties of its magnificent park and the amenities of 
its charming house were at all times open to us, and freely 
taken advantage of.  During those nine years I lived the life 
of a student, and wrote and published the book I have 
elsewhere spoken of, the 'Creeds of the Day.'

Of the visitors of note whose acquaintance I made while I was 
staying at Moor Park, by far the most illustrious was Froude.  
He was too reserved a man to lavish his intimacy when taken 
unawares; and if he suspected, as he might have done by my 
probing, that one wanted to draw him out, he was much too 
shrewd to commit himself to definite expressions of any kind 
until he knew something of his interviewer.  Reticence of 
this kind, on the part of such a man, is both prudent and 
commendable.  But is not this habit of cautiousness sometimes 
carried to the extent of ambiguity in his 'Short Studies on 
Great Subjects'?  The careful reader is left in no sort of 
doubt as to Froude's own views upon Biblical criticism, as to 
his theological dogmas, or his speculative opinions.  But the 
conviction is only reached by comparing him with himself in 
different moods, by collating essay with essay, and one part 
of an essay with another part of the same essay.  Sometimes 
we have an astute defence of doctrines worthy at least of a 
temperate apologist, and a few pages further on we wonder 
whether the writer was not masking his disdain for the 
credulity which he now exposes and laughs at.  Neither 
excessive caution nor timidity are implied by his editing of 
the Carlyle papers; and he may have failed - who that has 
done so much has not? - in keeping his balance on the swaying 
slack-rope between the judicious and the injudicious.  In his 
own line, however, he is, to my taste, the most scholarly, 
the most refined, and the most suggestive, of our recent 
essayists.  The man himself in manner and in appearance was 
in perfect keeping with these attractive qualities.

While speaking of Moor Park and its kind owner I may avail 
myself of this opportunity to mention an early reminiscence 
of Lord Ebury's concerning the Grosvenor estate in London.

Mr. Gladstone was wont to amuse himself with speculations as 
to the future dimensions of London; what had been its growth 
within his memory; what causes might arise to cheek its 
increase.  After listening to his remarks on the subject one 
day at dinner, I observed that I had heard Lord Ebury talk of 
shooting over ground which is now Eaton Square.  Mr. 
Gladstone of course did not doubt it; but some of the young 
men smiled incredulously.  I afterwards wrote to Lord Ebury 
to make sure that I had not erred.  Here is his reply:


'Moor Park, Rickmansworth:  January 9, 1883.

'MY dear Henry, - What you said I had told you about snipe-
shooting is quite true, though I think I ought to have 
mentioned a space rather nearer the river than Eaton Square.  
In the year 1815, when the battle of Waterloo was fought, 
there was nothing behind Grosvenor Place but the (-?) fields 
- so called, a place something like the Scrubbs, where the 
household troops drilled.  That part of Grosvenor Place where 
the Grosvenor Place houses now stand was occupied by the Lock 
Hospital and Chapel, and it ended where the small houses are 
now to be found.  A little farther, a somewhat tortuous lane 
called the King's Road led to Chelsea, and, I think, where 
now St. Peter's, Pimlico, was afterwards built.  I remember 
going to a breakfast at a villa belonging to Lady 
Buckinghamshire.  The Chelsea Waterworks Company had a sort 
of marshy place with canals and osier beds, now, I suppose, 
Ebury Street, and here it was that I was permitted to go and 
try my hand at snipe-shooting, a special privilege given to 
the son of the freeholder.

'The successful fox-hunt terminating in either Bedford or 
Russell Square is very strange, but quite appropriate, 
commemorated, I suppose, by the statue there erected.

Yours affectionately,

'E.'


The successful 'fox-hunt ' was an event of which I told Lord 
Ebury as even more remarkable than his snipe-shooting in 
Belgravia.  As it is still more indicative of the growth of 
London in recent times it may be here recorded.

In connection with Mr. Gladstone's forecasts, I had written 
to the last Lord Digby, who was a grandson of my father's, 
stating that I had heard - whether from my father or not I 
could not say - that he had killed a fox where now is Bedford 
Square, with his own hounds.

Lord Digby replied:


'Minterne, Dorset:  January 7, 1883.

'My dear Henry, - My grandfather killed a fox with his hounds 
either in Bedford or Russell Square.  Old Jones, the 
huntsman, who died at Holkham when you were a child, was my 
informant.  I asked my grandfather if it was correct.  He 
said "Yes" - he had kennels at Epping Place, and hunted the 
roodings of Essex, which, he said, was the best scenting-
ground in England.

'Yours affectionately,

'DIGBY.'


(My father was born in 1754.)


Mr. W. S. Gilbert had been a much valued friend of ours 
before we lived at Rickmansworth.  We had been his guests for 
the 'first night' of almost every one of his plays - plays 
that may have a thousand imitators, but the speciality of 
whose excellence will remain unrivalled and inimitable.  His 
visits to us introduced him, I think, to the picturesque 
country which he has now made his home.  When Mr. Gilbert 
built his house in Harrington Gardens he easily persuaded us 
to build next door to him.  This led to my acquaintance with 
his neighbour on the other side, Mr. Walter Cassels, now well 
known as the author of 'Supernatural Religion.'

When first published in 1874, this learned work, summarising 
and elaborately examining the higher criticism of the four 
Gospels up to date, created a sensation throughout the 
theological world, which was not a little intensified by the 
anonymity of its author.  The virulence with which it was 
attacked by Dr. Lightfoot, the most erudite bishop on the 
bench, at once demonstrated its weighty significance and its 
destructive force; while Mr. Morley's high commendation of 
its literary merits and the scrupulous equity of its tone, 
placed it far above the level of controversial diatribes.

In my 'Creeds of the Day' I had made frequent references to 
the anonymous book; and soon after my introduction to Mr. 
Cassels spoke to him of its importance, and asked him whether 
he had read it.  He hesitated for a moment, then said:

'We are very much of the same way of thinking on these 
subjects.  I will tell you a secret which I kept for some 
time even from my publishers - I am the author of 
"Supernatural Religion."'

From that time forth, we became the closest of allies.  I 
know no man whose tastes and opinions and interests are more 
completely in accord with my own than those of Mr. Walter 
Cassels.  It is one of my greatest pleasures to meet him 
every summer at the beautiful place of our mutual and 
sympathetic friend, Mrs. Robertson, on the skirts of the 
Ashtead forest, in Surrey.

The winter of 1888 I spent at Cairo under the roof of General 
Sir Frederick Stephenson, then commanding the English forces 
in Egypt.  I had known Sir Frederick as an ensign in the 
Guards.  He was adjutant of his regiment at the Alma, and at 
Inkerman.  He is now Colonel of the Coldstreams and Governor 
of the Tower.  He has often been given a still higher title, 
that of 'the most popular man in the army.'

Everybody in these days has seen the Pyramids, and has been 
up the Nile.  There is only one name I have to mention here, 
and that is one of the best-known in the world.  Mr. Thomas 
Cook was the son of the original inventor of the 'Globe-
trotter.'  But it was the extraordinary energy and powers of 
organisation of the son that enabled him to develop to its 
present efficiency the initial scheme of the father.

Shortly before the General's term expired, he invited Mr. 
Cook to dinner.  The Nile share of the Gordon Relief 
Expedition had been handed over to Cook.  The boats, the 
provisioning of them, and the river transport service up to 
Wady Halfa, were contracted for and undertaken by Cook.

A most entertaining account he gave of the whole affair.  He 
told us how the Mudir of Dongola, who was by way of rendering 
every possible assistance, had offered him an enormous bribe 
to wreck the most valuable cargoes on their passage through 
the Cataracts.

Before Mr. Cook took leave of the General, he expressed the 
regret felt by the British residents in Cairo at the 
termination of Sir Frederick's command; and wound up a pretty 
little speech by a sincere request that he might be allowed 
to furnish Sir Frederick GRATIS with all the means at his 
disposal for a tour through the Holy Land.  The liberal and 
highly complimentary offer was gratefully acknowledged, but 
at once emphatically declined.  The old soldier, (at least, 
this was my guess,) brave in all else, had not the courage to 
face the tourists' profanation of such sacred scenes.

Dr. Bird told me a nice story, a pendant to this, of Mr. 
Thomas Cook's liberality.  One day, before the Gordon 
Expedition, which was then in the air, Dr. Bird was smoking 
his cigarette on the terrace in front of Shepherd's Hotel, in 
company with four or five other men, strangers to him and to 
one another.  A discussion arose as to the best means of 
relieving Gordon.  Each had his own favourite general.  
Presently the doctor exclaimed:  'Why don't they put the 
thing into the hands of Cook?  I'll be bound to say he would 
undertake it, and do the job better than anyone else.'

'Do you know Cook, sir?' asked one of the smokers who had 
hitherto been silent.

'No, I never saw him, but everybody knows he has a genius for 
organisation; and I don't believe there is a general in the 
British Army to match him.'

When the company broke up, the silent stranger asked the 
doctor his name and address, and introduced himself as Thomas 
Cook.  The following winter Dr. Bird received a letter 
enclosing tickets for himself and Miss Bird for a trip to 
Egypt and back, free of expense, 'in return for his good 
opinion and good wishes.'

After my General's departure, and a month up the Nile, I - 
already disillusioned, alas! - rode through Syria, following 
the beaten track from Jerusalem to Damascus.  On my way from 
Alexandria to Jaffa I had the good fortune to make the 
acquaintance of an agreeable fellow-traveller, Mr. Henry 
Lopes, afterwards member for Northampton, also bound for 
Palestine.  We went to Constantinople and to the Crimea 
together, then through Greece, and only parted at Charing 
Cross.

It was easy to understand Sir Frederick Stephenson's 
(supposed) unwillingness to visit Jerusalem.  It was probably 
far from being what it is now, or even what it was when 
Pierre Loti saw it, for there was no railway from Jaffa in 
our time.  Still, what Loti pathetically describes as 'une 
banalite de banlieue parisienne,' was even then too painfully 
casting its vulgar shadows before it.  And it was rather with 
the forlorn eyes of the sentimental Frenchman than with the 
veneration of Dean Stanley, that we wandered about the ever-
sacred Aceldama of mortally wounded and dying Christianity.

One dares not, one could never, speak irreverently of 
Jerusalem.  One cannot think heartlessly of a disappointed 
love.  One cannot tear out creeds interwoven with the 
tenderest fibres of one's heart.  It is better to be silent.  
Yet is it a place for unwept tears, for the deep sadness and 
hard resignation borne in upon us by the eternal loss of 
something dearer once than life.  All we who are weary and 
heavy laden, in whom now shall we seek the rest which is not 
nothingness?

My story is told, but I fain would take my leave with words 
less sorrowful.  If a man has no better legacy to bequeath 
than bid his fellow-beings despair, he had better take it 
with him to his grave.


We know all this, we know!


But it is in what we do not know that our hope and our 
religion lies.  Thrice blessed are we in the certainty that 
here our range is infinite.  This infinite that makes our 
brains reel, that begets the feeling that makes us 'shrink,' 
is perhaps the most portentous argument in the logic of the 
sceptic.  Since the days of Laplace, we have been haunted in 
some form or other with the ghost of the MECANIQUE CELESTE.  
Take one or two commonplaces from the text-books of 
astronomy:

Every half-hour we are about ten thousand miles nearer to the 
constellation of Lyra.  'The sun and his system must travel 
at his present rate for far more than a million years (divide 
this into half-hours) before we have crossed the abyss 
between our present position and the frontiers of Lyra' 
(Ball's 'Story of the Heavens').

'Sirius is about one million times as far from us as the sun.  
If we take the distance of Sirius from the earth and 
subdivide it into one million equal parts, each of these 
parts would be long enough to span the great distance of 
92,700,000 miles from the earth to the sun,' yet Sirius is 
one of the NEAREST of the stars to us.

The velocity with which light traverses space is 186,300 
miles a second, at which rate it has taken the rays from 
Sirius which we may see to-night, nine years to reach us.  
The proper motion of Sirius through space is about one 
thousand miles a minute.  Yet 'careful alignment of the eye 
would hardly detect that Sirius was moving, in . . . even 
three or four centuries.'

'There may be, and probably are, stars from which Noah might 
be seen stepping into the Ark, Eve listening to the 
temptation of the serpent, or that older race, eating the 
oysters and leaving the shell-heaps behind them, when the 
Baltic was an open sea' (Froude's 'Science of History').

Facts and figures such as these simply stupefy us.  They 
vaguely convey the idea of something immeasurably great, but 
nothing further.  They have no more effect upon us than words 
addressed to some poor 'bewildered creature, stunned and 
paralysed by awe; no more than the sentence of death to the 
terror-stricken wretch at the bar.  Indeed, it is in this 
sense that the sceptic uses them for our warning.

'Seit Kopernikus,' says Schopenhauer, 'kommen die Theologen 
mit dem lieben Gott in Verlegenheit.'  'No one,' he adds, 
'has so damaged Theism as Copernicus.'  As if limitation and 
imperfection in the celestial mechanism would make for the 
belief in God; or, as if immortality were incompatible with 
dependence.  Des Cartes, for one, (and he counts for many,) 
held just the opposite opinion.

Our sun and all the millions upon millions of suns whose 
light will never reach us are but the aggregation of atoms 
drawn together by the same force that governs their orbit, 
and which makes the apple fall.  When their heat, however 
generated, is expended, they die to frozen cinders; possibly 
to be again diffused as nebulae, to begin again the eternal 
round of change.

What is life amidst this change?  'When I consider the work 
of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast 
ordained, what is man that Thou art mindful of him?'

But is He mindful of us?  That is what the sceptic asks.  Is 
He mindful of life here or anywhere in all this boundless 
space?  We have no ground for supposing (so we are told) that 
life, if it exists at all elsewhere, in the solar system at 
least, is any better than it is here?  'Analogy compels us to 
think,' says M. France, one of the most thoughtful of living 
writers, 'that our entire solar system is a gehenna where the 
animal is born for suffering. . . . This alone would suffice 
to disgust me with the universe.'  But M. France is too deep 
a thinker to abide by such a verdict.  There must be 
something 'behind the veil.'  'Je sens que ces immensites ne 
sont rien, et qu'enfin, s'il y a quelque chose, ce quelque 
chose n'est pas ce que nous voyons.'  That is it.  All these 
immensities are not 'rien,' but they are assuredly not what 
we take them to be.  They are the veil of the Infinite, 
behind which we are not permitted to see.


It were the seeing Him, no flesh shall dare.


The very greatness proves our impotence to grasp it, proves 
the futility of our speculations, and should help us best of 
all though outwardly so appalling, to stand calm while the 
snake of unbelief writhes beneath our feet.  The unutterable 
insignificance of man and his little world connotes the 
infinity which leaves his possibilities as limitless as 
itself.

Spectrology informs us that the chemical elements of matter 
are everywhere the same; and in a boundless universe where 
such unity is manifested there must be conditions similar to 
those which support life here.  It is impossible to doubt, on 
these grounds alone, that life does exist elsewhere.  Were we 
rashly to assume from scientific data that no form of animal 
life could obtain except under conditions similar to our own, 
would not reason rebel at such an inference, on the mere 
ground that to assume that there is no conscious being in the 
universe save man, is incomparably more unwarrantable, and in 
itself incredible?

Admitting, then, the hypothesis of the universal distribution 
of life, has anyone the hardihood to believe that this is 
either the best or worst of worlds?  Must we not suppose that 
life exists in every stage of progress, in every state of 
imperfection, and, conversely, of advancement?  Have we still 
the audacity to believe with the ancient Israelites, or as 
the Church of Rome believed only three centuries ago, that 
the universe was made for us, and we its centre?  Or must we 
not believe that - infinity given - the stages and degrees of 
life are infinite as their conditions?  And where is this to 
stop?  There is no halting place for imagination till we 
reach the ANIMA MUNDI, the infinite and eternal Spirit from 
which all Being emanates.

The materialist and the sceptic have forcible arguments on 
their side.  They appeal to experience and to common sense, 
and ask pathetically, yet triumphantly, whether aspiration, 
however fervid, is a pledge for its validity, 'or does being 
weary prove that he hath where to rest?'  They smile at the 
flights of poetry and imagination, and love to repeat:


Fools! that so often here
Happiness mocked our prayer,
I think might make us fear
A like event elsewhere;
Make us not fly to dreams, but moderate desire.


But then, if the other view is true, the Elsewhere is not the 
Here, nor is there any conceivable likeness between the two.  
It is not mere repugnance to truths, or speculations rather, 
which we dread, that makes us shrink from a creed so shallow, 
so palpably inept, as atheism.  There are many sides to our 
nature, and I see not that reason, doubtless our trustiest 
guide, has one syllable to utter against our loftiest hopes.  
Our higher instincts are just as much a part of us as any 
that we listen to; and reason, to the end, can never 
dogmatise with what it is not conversant.




End of the Project Gutenberg eText Tracks of a Rolling Stone

