
The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Ways of Men by Eliot Gregory

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Daisy Miller, by Henry James

January, 1995  [Etext #208]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Ways of Men by Eliot Gregory
*****This file should be named waymn10.txt or waymn10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, waymn11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, waymn10a.txt.

Scanned and proofed by David Price, ccx074@coventry.ac.uk
Notes for proofers are available - just email me. 
 

We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $4
million dollars per hour this year as we release some eight text
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from $2 million.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end
of the year 2001.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext95
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois
     Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*




Scanned and proofed by David Price, ccx074@coventry.ac.uk
Notes for proofers are available - just email me. 



***
THE WAYS OF MEN




Chapter 1 - "UNCLE SAM"


THE gentleman who graced the gubernatorial arm-chair of our 
state when this century was born happened to be an admirer of 
classic lore and the sonorous names of antiquity.

It is owing to his weakness in bestowing pompous cognomens on 
our embryo towns and villages that to-day names like Utica, 
Syracuse, and Ithaca, instead of evoking visions of historic 
pomp and circumstance, raise in the minds of most Americans 
the picture of cocky little cities, rich only in trolley-cars 
and Methodist meeting-houses.

When, however, this cultured governor, in his ardor, 
christened one of the cities Troy, and the hill in its 
vicinity Mount Ida, he little dreamed that a youth was living 
on its slopes whose name was destined to become a household 
word the world over, as the synonym for the proudest and 
wealthiest republic yet known to history, a sobriquet that 
would be familiar in the mouths of races to whose continents 
even the titles of Jupiter or Mars had never penetrated.

A little before this century began, two boys with packs bound 
on their stalwart shoulders walked from New York and 
established a brickyard in the neighborhood of what is now 
Perry Street, Troy.  Ebenezer and Samuel Wilson soon became 
esteemed citizens of the infant city, their kindliness and 
benevolence winning for them the affection and respect of the 
community.

The younger brother, Samuel, was an especial favorite with the 
children of the place, whose explorations into his deep 
pockets were generally rewarded by the discovery of some 
simple "sweet" or home-made toy.  The slender youth with the 
"nutcracker" face proving to be the merriest of playfellows, 
in their love his little band of admirers gave him the pet 
name of "Uncle Sam," by which he quickly became known, to the 
exclusion of his real name.  This is the kindly and humble 
origin of a title the mere speaking of which to-day quickens 
the pulse and moistens the eyes of millions of Americans with 
the same thrill that the dear old flag arouses when we catch 
sight of it, especially an unexpected glimpse in some foreign 
land.

With increasing wealth the brick-yard of the Wilson brothers 
was replaced by an extensive slaughtering business, in which 
more than a hundred men were soon employed - a vast 
establishment for that day, killing weekly some thousand head 
of cattle.  During the military operations of 1812 the 
brothers signed a contract to furnish the troops at Greenbush 
with meat, "packed in full bound barrels of white oak"; soon 
after, Samuel was appointed Inspector of Provisions for the 
army.

It is a curious coincidence that England also should have 
taken an ex-army-contractor as her patron saint, for if we are 
to believe tradition, St. George of Cappadocia filled that 
position unsatisfactorily before he passed through martyrdom 
to sainthood.

True prototype of the nation that was later to adopt him as 
its godfather, the shrewd and honest patriot, "Uncle Sam," not 
only lived loyally up to his contracts, giving full measure 
and of his best, but proved himself incorruptible, making it 
his business to see that others too fulfilled their 
engagements both in the letter and the spirit; so that the 
"U.S." (abbreviation of United States) which he pencilled on 
all provisions that had passed his inspection became in the 
eyes of officers and soldiers a guarantee of excellence.  
Samuel's old friends, the boys of Troy (now enlisted in the 
army), naively imagining that the mystic initials were an 
allusion to the pet name they had given him years before, 
would accept no meats but "Uncle Sam's," murmuring if other 
viands were offered them.  Their comrades without inquiry 
followed this example; until so strong did the prejudice for 
food marked "U.S." become, that other contractors, in order 
that their provisions should find favor with the soldiers, 
took to announcing "Uncle Sam" brands.

To the greater part of the troops, ignorant (as are most 
Americans to-day) of the real origin of this pseudonym, "Uncle 
Sam's" beef and bread meant merely government provisions, and 
the step from national belongings to an impersonation of our 
country by an ideal "Uncle Sam" was but a logical sequence.

In his vigorous old age, Samuel Wilson again lived on Mount 
Ida, near the estates of the Warren family, where as children 
we were taken to visit his house and hear anecdotes of the 
aged patriot's hospitality and humor.  The honor in which he 
was held by the country-side, the influence for good he 
exerted, and the informal tribunal he held, to which his 
neighbors came to get their differences straightened out by 
his common sense, are still talked of by the older 
inhabitants.  One story in particular used to charm our boyish 
ears.  It was about a dispute over land between the 
Livingstons and the Van Rensselaers, which was brought to an 
end by "Uncle Sam's" producing a barrel of old papers 
(confided to him by both families during the war, for safe 
keeping) and extracting from this original "strong box" title 
deeds to the property in litigation.

Now, in these troubled times of ours, when rumors of war are 
again in the air, one's thoughts revert with pleasure to the 
half-mythical figure on the threshold of the century, and to 
legends of the clear-eyed giant, with the quizzical smile and 
the tender, loyal heart, whose life's work makes him a more 
lovable model and a nobler example to hold up before the youth 
of to-day than all the mythological deities that ever 
disported themselves on the original Mount Ida.

There is a singular fitness in this choice of "Uncle Sam" as 
our patron saint, for to be honest and loyal and modest, to 
love little children, to do one's duty quietly in the heyday 
of life, and become a mediator in old age, is to fulfil about 
the whole duty of man; and every patriotic heart must wish the 
analogy may be long maintained, that our loved country, like 
its prototype, may continue the protector of the feeble and a 
peace-maker among nations.




Chapter 2 - Domestic Despots


THOSE who walk through the well-to-do quarters of our city, 
and glance, perhaps a little enviously as they pass, toward 
the cheerful firesides, do not reflect that in almost every 
one of these apparently happy homes a pitiless tyrant reigns, 
a misshapen monster without bowels of compassion or thought 
beyond its own greedy appetites, who sits like Sinbad's awful 
burden on the necks of tender women and distracted men.  
Sometimes this incubus takes the form of a pug, sometimes of a 
poodle, or simply a bastard cur admitted to the family bosom 
in a moment of unreflecting pity; size and pedigree are of no 
importance; the result is always the same.  Once Caliban is 
installed in his stronghold, peace and independence desert 
that roof.

We read daily of fathers tyrannizing over trembling families, 
of stepmothers and unnatural children turning what might be 
happy homes into amateur Infernos, and sigh, as we think of 
martyrdoms endured by overworked animals.

It is cheering to know that societies have been formed for the 
protection of dumb brutes and helpless children.  Will no 
attempt be made to alleviate this other form of suffering, 
which has apparently escaped the eye of the reformer?

The animal kingdom is divided - like all Gaul - into three 
divisions: wild beasts, that are obliged to hustle for 
themselves; laboring and producing animals, for which man 
provides because they are useful to him - and dogs!  Of all 
created things on our globe the canine race have the softest 
"snap."  The more one thinks about this curious exception in 
their favor the more unaccountable it appears.  We neglect 
such wild things as we do not slaughter, and exact toil from 
domesticated animals in return for their keep.  Dogs alone, 
shirking all cares and labor, live in idle comfort at man's 
expense.

When that painful family jar broke up the little garden party 
in Eden and forced our first parents to work or hunt for a 
living, the original Dog (equally disgusted with either 
alternative) hit on the luminous idea of posing as the 
champion of the disgraced couple, and attached himself to Adam 
and Eve; not that he approved of their conduct, but simply 
because he foresaw that if he made himself companionable and 
cosy he would be asked to stay to dinner.

From that day to the present, with the exception of 
occasionally watching sheep and houses - a lazy occupation at 
the best - and a little light carting in Belgium (dogs were 
given up as turn-spits centuries ago, because they performed 
that duty badly), no canine has raised a paw to do an honest 
day's work, neither has any member of the genus been known 
voluntarily to perform a useful act.

How then - one asks one's self in a wonder - did the myth 
originate that Dog was the friend of Man?  Like a multitude of 
other fallacies taught to innocent children, this folly must 
be unlearned later.  Friend of man, indeed!  Why, the "Little 
Brothers of the Rich" are guileless philanthropists in 
comparison with most canines, and unworthy to be named in the 
same breath with them.  Dogs discovered centuries ago that to 
live in luxury, it was only necessary to assume an exaggerated 
affection for some wealthy mortal, and have since proved 
themselves past masters in a difficult art in which few men 
succeed.  The number of human beings who manage to live on 
their friends is small, whereas the veriest mongrel cur 
contrives to enjoy food and lodging at some dupe's expense.

Facts such as these, however, have not over-thrown the great 
dog myth.  One can hardly open a child's book without coming 
across some tale of canine intelligence and devotion.  My 
tender youth was saddened by the story of one disinterested 
dog that refused to leave his master's grave and was found 
frozen at his post on a bleak winter's morning.  With the 
experience of years in pet dogs I now suspect that, instead of 
acting in this theatrical fashion, that pup trotted home from 
the funeral with the most prosperous and simple-minded couple 
in the neighborhood, and after a substantial meal went to 
sleep by the fire.  He must have been a clever dog to get so 
much free advertisement, so probably strolled out to his 
master's grave the next noon, when people were about to hear 
him, and howled a little to keep up appearances.

I have written "the richest and most simple minded couple," 
because centuries of self-seeking have developed in these 
beasts an especial aptitude for spotting possible victims at a 
glance.  You will rarely find dogs coquetting with the strong-
minded or wasting blandishments where there is not the 
probability of immediate profit; but once let even a puppy get 
a tenderhearted girl or aged couple under his influence, no 
pity will be shown the victims.

There is a house not a square away from Mr. Gerry's 
philanthropic headquarters, where a state of things exists 
calculated to extract tears from a custom-house official.  Two 
elderly virgins are there held in bondage by a Minotaur no 
bigger than your two fists.  These good dames have a taste for 
travelling, but change of climate disagrees with their tyrant.  
They dislike house-keeping and, like good Americans, would 
prefer hotel life, nevertheless they keep up an establishment 
in a cheerless side street, with a retinue of servants, 
because, forsooth, their satrap exacts a back yard where he 
can walk of a morning.  These spinsters, although loving 
sisters, no longer go about together, Caligula's nerves being 
so shaken that solitude upsets them.  He would sooner expire 
than be left alone with the servant, for the excellent reason 
that his bad temper and absurd airs have made him dangerous 
enemies below stairs - and he knows it!

Another household in this city revolves around two brainless, 
goggle-eyed beasts, imported at much expense from the slopes 
of Fuji-yama.  The care that is lavished on those heathen 
monsters passes belief.  Maids are employed to carry them up 
and down stairs, and men are called in the night to hurry for 
a doctor when Chi has over-eaten or Fu develops colic; yet 
their devoted mistress tells me, with tears in her eyes, that 
in spite of this care, when she takes her darlings for a walk 
they do not know her from the first stranger that passes, and 
will follow any boy who whistles to them in the street.

What revolts me in the character of dogs is that, not content 
with escaping from the responsibilities entailed on all the 
other inhabitants of our globe by the struggle for existence, 
these four-legged Pecksniffs have succeeded in making for 
themselves a fallacious reputation for honesty and devotion.  
What little lingering belief I had in canine fidelity 
succumbed then I was told that St. Bernards - those models of 
integrity and courage - have fallen into the habit of carrying 
the flasks of brandy that the kind monks provide for the 
succor of snowbound travellers, to the neighboring hamlets and 
exchanging the contents for - chops!

Will the world ever wake to the true character of these four-
legged impostors and realize that instead of being 
disinterested and sincere, most family pets are consummate 
hypocrites.  Innocent?  Pshaw!  Their pretty, coaxing ways and 
pretences of affection are unadulterated guile; their 
ostentatious devotion, simply a clever manoeuvre to excite 
interest and obtain unmerited praise.  It is useless, however, 
to hope that things will change.  So long as this giddy old 
world goes on waltzing in space, so long shall we continue to 
be duped by shams and pin our faith on frauds, confounding an 
attractive bearing with a sweet disposition and mistaking 
dishevelled hair and eccentric appearance for brains.  Even in 
the Orient, where dogs have been granted immunity from other 
labor on the condition that they organized an effective 
street-cleaning department, they have been false to their 
trust and have evaded their contracts quite as if they were 
Tammany braves, like whom they pass their days in slumber and 
their nights in settling private disputes, while the city 
remains uncleaned.

I nurse yet another grudge against the canine race!  That 
Voltaire of a whelp, who imposed himself upon our confiding 
first parents, must have had an important pull at 
headquarters, for he certainly succeeded in getting the decree 
concerning beauty and fitness which applies to all mammals, 
including man himself, reversed in favor of dogs, and handed 
down to his descendants the secret of making defects and 
deformities pass current as qualities.  While other animals 
are valued for sleek coats and slender proportions, canine 
monstrosities have always been in demand.  We do not admire 
squints or protruding under jaws in our own race, yet bulldogs 
have persuaded many weak-minded people that these defects are 
charming when combined in an individual of their breed.

The fox in the fable, who after losing his tail tried to make 
that bereavement the fashion, failed in his undertaking; Dutch 
canal-boat dogs have, however, been successful where the fox 
failed, and are to-day pampered and prized for a curtailment 
that would condemn any other animal (except perhaps a Manx 
cat) to a watery grave at birth.

I can only recall two instances where canine sycophants got 
their deserts; the first tale (probably apocryphal) is about a 
donkey, for years the silent victim of a little terrier who 
had been trained to lead him to water and back.  The dog - as 
might have been expected - abused the situation, while 
pretending to be very kind to his charge, never allowed him to 
roll on the grass, as he would have liked, or drink in peace, 
and harassed the poor beast in many other ways, getting, 
however, much credit from the neighbors for devotion and 
intelligence.  Finally, one day after months of waiting, the 
patient victim's chance came.  Getting his tormentor well out 
into deep water, the donkey quietly sat down on him.

The other tale is true, for I knew the lady who provided in 
her will that her entire establishment should be kept up for 
the comfort and during the life of the three fat spaniels that 
had solaced her declining years.  The heirs tried to break the 
will and failed; the delighted domestics, seeing before them a 
period of repose, proceeded (headed by the portly housekeeper) 
to consult a "vet" as to how the life of the precious legatees 
might be prolonged to the utmost.  His advice was to stop all 
sweets and rich food and give each of the animals at least 
three hours of hard exercise a day.  From that moment the lazy 
brutes led a dog's life.  Water and the detested "Spratt" 
biscuit, scorned in happier days, formed their meagre 
ordinary; instead of somnolent airings in a softly cushioned 
landau they were torn from chimney corner musings to be raced 
through cold, muddy streets by a groom on horseback.

Those two tales give me the keenest pleasure.  When I am 
received on entering a friend's room with a chorus of yelps 
and attacked in dark corners by snarling little hypocrites who 
fawn on me in their master's presence, I humbly pray that some 
such Nemesis may be in store for these FAUX BONHOMMES before 
they leave this world, as apparently no provision has been 
made for their punishment in the next.




Chapter 3 - Cyrano, Rostand, Coquelin


AMONG the proverbs of Spanish folk-lore there is a saying that 
good wine retains its flavor in spite of rude bottles and 
cracked cups.  The success of M. Rostand's brilliant drama, 
CYRANO DE BERGERAC, in its English dress proves once more the 
truth of this adage.  The fun and pathos, the wit and satire, 
of the original pierce through the halting, feeble translation 
like light through a ragged curtain, dazzling the spectators 
and setting their enthusiasm ablaze.

Those who love the theatre at its best, when it appeals to our 
finer instincts and moves us to healthy laughter and tears, 
owe a debt of gratitude to Richard Mansfield for his courage 
in giving us, as far as the difference of language and rhythm 
would allow, this CHEF D'OEUVRE unchanged, free from the 
mutilations of the adapter, with the author's wishes and the 
stage decorations followed into the smallest detail.  In this 
way we profit by the vast labor and study which Rostand and 
Coquelin gave to the original production.

Rumors of the success attained by this play in Paris soon 
floated across to us.  The two or three French booksellers 
here could not import the piece fast enough to meet the ever 
increasing demand of our reading public.  By the time spring 
came, there were few cultivated people who had not read the 
new work and discussed its original language and daring 
treatment.

On arriving in Paris, my first evening was passed at the Porte 
St. Martin.  After the piece was over, I dropped into 
Coquelin's dressing-room to shake this old acquaintance by the 
hand and give him news of his many friends in America.

Coquelin in his dressing-room is one of the most delightful of 
mortals.  The effort of playing sets his blood in motion and 
his wit sparkling.  He seemed as fresh and gay that evening as 
though there were not five killing acts behind him and the 
fatigue of a two-hundred-night run, uninterrupted even by 
Sundays, added to his "record."

After the operation of removing his historic nose had been 
performed and the actor had resumed his own clothes and 
features, we got into his carriage and were driven to his 
apartment in the Place de l'Etoile, a cosy museum full of 
comfortable chairs and priceless bric-a-brac.  The 
conversation naturally turned during supper on the piece and 
this new author who had sprung in a night from obscurity to a 
globe-embracing fame.  How, I asked, did you come across the 
play, and what decided you to produce it?

Coquelin's reply was so interesting that it will be better to 
repeat the actor's own words as he told his tale over the 
dismantled table in the tranquil midnight hours.

"I had, like most Parisians, known Rostand for some time as 
the author of a few graceful verses and a play (LES 
ROMANESQUES)which passed almost unnoticed at the Francais.

"About four years ago Sarah Bernhardt asked me to her `hotel' 
to hear M. Rostand read a play he had just completed for her.  
I accepted reluctantly, as at that moment we were busy at the 
theatre.  I also doubted if there could be much in the new 
play to interest me.  It was LA PRINCESSE LOINTAINE.  I shall 
remember that afternoon as long as I live!  From the first 
line my attention was riveted and my senses were charmed.  
What struck me as even more remarkable than the piece was the 
masterly power and finish with which the boyish author 
delivered his lines.  Where, I asked myself, had he learned 
that difficult art?  The great actress, always quick to 
respond to the voice of art, accepted the play then and there.

"After the reading was over I walked home with M. Rostand, and 
had a long talk with him about his work and ambitions.  When 
we parted at his door, I said: `In my opinion, you are 
destined to become the greatest dramatic poet of the age; I 
bind myself here and now to take any play you write (in which 
there is a part for me) without reading it, to cancel any 
engagements I may have on hand, and produce your piece with 
the least possible delay.' An offer I don't imagine many young 
poets have ever received, and which I certainly never before 
made to any author.

"About six weeks later my new acquaintance dropped in one 
morning to read me the sketch he had worked out for a drama, 
the title role of which he thought would please me.  I was 
delighted with the idea, and told him to go ahead.  A month 
later we met in the street.  On asking him how the play was 
progressing, to my astonishment he answered that he had 
abandoned that idea and hit upon something entirely different.  
Chance had thrown in his way an old volume of Cyrano de 
Bergerac's poems, which so delighted him that he had been 
reading up the life and death of that unfortunate poet.  From 
this reading had sprung the idea of making Cyrano the central 
figure of a drama laid in the city of Richelieu, d'Artagnan, 
and the PRECIEUSES RIDICULES, a seventeenth-century Paris of 
love and duelling.

"At first this idea struck me as unfortunate.  The elder Dumas 
had worked that vein so well and so completely, I doubted if 
any literary gold remained for another author.  It seemed 
foolhardy to resuscitate the THREE GUARDSMEN epoch - and I 
doubted if it were possible to carry out his idea and play an 
intense and pathetic role disguised with a burlesque nose.

"This contrasting of the grotesque and the sentimental was of 
course not new.  Victor Hugo had broken away from classic 
tradition when he made a hunchback the hero of a drama.  There 
remained, however, the risk of our Parisian public not 
accepting the new situation seriously.  It seemed to me like 
bringing the sublime perilously near the ridiculous.

"Fortunately, Rostand did not share this opinion or my doubts.  
He was full of enthusiasm for his piece and confident of its 
success.  We sat where we had met, under the trees of the 
Champs Elysees, for a couple of hours, turning the subject 
about and looking at the question from every point of view.  
Before we parted the poet had convinced me.  The role, as he 
conceived it, was certainly original, and therefore tempting, 
opening vast possibilities before my dazzled eyes.

"I found out later that Rostand had gone straight home after 
that conversation and worked for nearly twenty hours without 
leaving the study, where his wife found him at daybreak, fast 
asleep with his head on a pile of manuscript.  He was at my 
rooms the next day before I was up, sitting on the side of my 
bed, reading the result of his labor.  As the story unfolded 
itself I was more and more delighted.  His idea of 
resuscitating the quaint interior of the Hotel de Bourgogne 
Theatre was original, and the balcony scene, even in outline, 
enchanting.  After the reading Rostand dashed off as he had 
come, and for many weeks I saw no more of him.

"LA PRINCESSE LOINTAINE was, in the meantime, produced by 
Sarah, first in London and then in Paris.  In the English 
capital it was a failure; with us it gained a SUCCES D'ESTIME, 
the fantastic grace and lightness of the piece saving it from 
absolute shipwreck in the eyes of the literary public.

"Between ourselves," continued Coquelin, pushing aside his 
plate, a twinkle in his small eyes, "is the reason of this 
lack of success very difficult to discover?  The Princess in 
the piece is supposed to be a fairy enchantress in her 
sixteenth year.  The play turns on her youth and innocence.  
Now, honestly, is Sarah, even on the stage, any one's ideal of 
youth and innocence?"  This was asked so naively that I burst 
into a laugh, in which my host joined me.  Unfortunately, this 
grandmamma, like Ellen Terry, cannot be made to understand 
that there are roles she should leave alone, that with all the 
illusions the stage lends she can no longer play girlish parts 
with success.

"The failure of his play produced the most disastrous effect 
on Rostand, who had given up a year of his life to its 
composition and was profoundly chagrined by its fall.  He sank 
into a mild melancholy, refusing for more than eighteen months 
to put pen to paper.  On the rare occasions when we met I 
urged him to pull himself together and rise above 
disappointment.  Little by little, his friends were able to 
awaken his dormant interest and get him to work again on 
CYRANO.  As he slowly regained confidence and began taking 
pleasure once more in his work, the boyish author took to 
dropping in on me at impossible morning hours to read some 
scene hot from his ardent brain.  When seated by my bedside, 
he declaimed his lines until, lit at his flame, I would jump 
out of bed, and wrapping my dressing-gown hastily around me, 
seize the manuscript out of his hands, and, before I knew it, 
find my self addressing imaginary audiences, poker in hand, in 
lieu of a sword, with any hat that came to hand doing duty for 
the plumed headgear of our hero.  Little by little, line upon 
line, the masterpiece grew under his hands.  My career as an 
actor has thrown me in with many forms of literary industry 
and dogged application, but the power of sustained effort and 
untiring, unflagging zeal possessed by that fragile youth 
surpassed anything I had seen.

"As the work began taking form, Rostand hired a place in the 
country, so that no visitors or invitations might tempt him 
away from his daily toil.  Rich, young, handsome, married to a 
woman all Paris was admiring, with every door, social or 
Bohemian, wide open before his birth and talent, he 
voluntarily shut himself up for over a year in a dismal 
suburb, allowing no amusement to disturb his incessant toil.  
Mme. Rostand has since told me that at one time she seriously 
feared for his reason if not for his life, as he averaged ten 
hours a day steady work, and when the spell was on him would 
pass night after night at his study table, rewriting, cutting, 
modelling his play, never contented, always striving after a 
more expressive adjective, a more harmonious or original 
rhyme, casting aside a month's finished work without a second 
thought when he judged that another form expressed his idea 
more perfectly.

"That no success is cheaply bought I have long known; my 
profession above all others is calculated to teach one that 
truth.

"If Rostand's play is the best this century has produced, and 
our greatest critics are unanimous in pronouncing it equal, if 
not superior, to Victor Hugo's masterpieces, the young author 
has not stolen his laurels, but gained them leaf by leaf 
during endless midnight hours of brain-wringing effort - a 
price that few in a generation would be willing to give or 
capable of giving for fame.  The labor had been in proportion 
to the success; it always is!  I doubt if there is one word in 
his `duel' ballad that has not been changed again and again 
for a more fitting expression, as one might assort the shades 
of a mosaic until a harmonious whole is produced.  I have 
there in my desk whole scenes that he discarded because they 
were not essential to the action of the piece.  They will 
probably never be printed, yet are as brilliant and cost their 
author as much labor as any that the public applauded to-
night.

"As our rehearsals proceeded I saw another side of Rostand's 
character; the energy and endurance hidden in his almost 
effeminate frame astonished us all.  He almost lived at the 
theatre, drilling each actor, designing each costume, ordering 
the setting of each scene.  There was not a dress that he did 
not copy from some old print, or a PASSADE that he did not 
indicate to the humblest member of the troop.  The marvellous 
diction that I had noticed during the reading at Sarah's 
served him now and gave the key to the entire performance.  I 
have never seen him peevish or discouraged, but always 
courteous and cheerful through all those weary weeks of 
repetition, when even the most enthusiastic feel their courage 
oozing away under the awful grind of afternoon and evening 
rehearsal, the latter beginning at midnight after the regular 
performance was over.

"The news was somehow spread among the theatre-loving public 
that something out if the ordinary was in preparation.  The 
papers took up the tale and repeated it until the whole 
capital was keyed up to concert pitch.  The opening night was 
eagerly awaited by the critics, the literary and the artistic 
worlds.  When the curtain rose on the first act there was the 
emotion of a great event floating in the air."  Here 
Coquelin's face assumed an intense expression I had rarely 
seen there before.  He was back on the stage, living over 
again the glorious hours of that night's triumph.  His breath 
was coming quick and his eyes aglow with the memory of that 
evening.  "Never, never have I lived through such an evening.  
Victor Hugo's greatest triumph, the first night of HERNANI, 
was the only theatrical event that can compare to it.  It, 
however, was injured by the enmity of a clique who 
persistently hissed the new play.  There is but one phrase to 
express the enthusiasm at our first performance - UNE SALLE EN 
DELIRE gives some idea of what took place.  As the curtain 
fell on each succeeding act the entire audience would rise to 
its feet, shouting and cheering for ten minutes at a time.  
The coulisse and the dressing-rooms were packed by the critics 
and the author's friends, beside themselves with delight.  I 
was trembling so I could hardly get from one costume into 
another, and had to refuse my door to every one.  Amid all 
this confusion Rostand alone remained cool and seemed 
unconscious of his victory.  He continued quietly giving last 
recommendations to the figurants, overseeing the setting of 
the scenes, and thanking the actors as they came off the 
stage, with the same self-possessed urbanity he had shown 
during the rehearsals.  Finally, when the play was over, and 
we had time to turn and look for him, our author had 
disappeared, having quietly driven off with his wife to their 
house in the country, from which he never moved for a week."

It struck two o'clock as Coquelin ended.  The sleepless city 
had at last gone to rest.  At our feet, as we stood by the 
open window, the great square around the Arc de Triomphe lay 
silent and empty, its vast arch rising dimly against the night 
sky.

As I turned to go, Coquelin took my hand and remarked, 
smiling: "Now you have heard the story of a genius, an actor, 
and a masterpiece."




Chapter 4 - Machine-made Men


AMONG the commonplace white and yellow envelopes that compose 
the bulk of one's correspondence, appear from time to time 
dainty epistles on tinted paper, adorned with crests or 
monograms.  "Ha! ha!" I think when one of these appears, "here 
is something worth opening!"  For between ourselves, reader 
mine, old bachelors love to receive notes from women.  It's so 
flattering to be remembered by the dear creatures, and recalls 
the time when life was beginning, and POULETS in feminine 
writing suggested such delightful possibilities.

Only this morning an envelope of delicate Nile green caused me 
a distinct thrill of anticipation.  To judge by appearances it 
could contain nothing less attractive than a declaration, so, 
tearing it hurriedly open, I read: "Messrs. Sparks & Splithers 
take pleasure in calling attention to their patent suspenders 
and newest designs in reversible paper collars!"

Now, if that's not enough to put any man in a bad humor for 
twenty-four hours, I should like to know what is?  Moreover, I 
have "patents" in horror, experience having long ago revealed 
the fact that a patent is pretty sure to be only a new way of 
doing fast and cheaply something that formerly was 
accomplished slowly and well.

Few people stop to think how quickly this land of ours is 
degenerating into a paradise of the cheap and nasty, but allow 
themselves to be heated and cooled and whirled about the 
streets to the detriment of their nerves and digestions, under 
the impression that they are enjoying the benefits of modern 
progress.

So complex has life become in these later days that the very 
beds we lie on and the meals we eat are controlled by patents.  
Every garment and piece of furniture now pays a "royalty" to 
some inventor, from the hats on our heads to the carpets under 
foot, which latter are not only manufactured, but cleaned and 
shaken by machinery, and (be it remarked EN PASSANT) lose 
their nap prematurely in the process.  To satisfy our national 
love of the new, an endless and nameless variety of trifles 
appears each season, so-called labor and time-saving 
combinations, that enjoy a brief hour of vogue, only to make 
way for a newer series of inventions.

As long as our geniuses confined themselves to making life one 
long and breathless scramble, it was bad enough, but a line 
should have been drawn where meddling with the sanctity of the 
toilet began.  This, alas! was not done.  Nothing has remained 
sacred to the inventor.  In consequence, the average up-to-
date American is a walking collection of Yankee notions, an 
ingenious illusion, made up of patents, requiring as nice 
adjustment to put together and undo as a thirteenth-century 
warrior, and carrying hardly less metal about his person than 
a Crusader of old.

There are a number of haberdashery shops on Broadway that have 
caused me to waste many precious minutes gazing into their 
windows and wondering what the strange instruments of steel 
and elastic could be, that were exhibited alongside of the 
socks and ties.  The uses of these would, in all probability, 
have remained wrapped in mystery but for the experience of one 
fateful morning (after a night in a sleeping-car), when 
countless hidden things were made clear, as I sat, an awe-
struck witness to my fellow-passengers' - toilets? - No!  
Getting their machinery into running order for the day, would 
be a more correct expression.

Originally, "tags" were the backbone of the toilet, different 
garments being held together by their aid.  Later, buttons and 
attendant button-holes were evolved, now replaced by the 
devices used in composing the machine-made man.  As far as I 
could see (I have overcome a natural delicacy in making my 
discoveries public, because it seems unfair to keep all this 
information to myself), nothing so archaic as a button-hole is 
employed at the present time by our patent-ridden compatriots.  
The shirt, for instance, which was formerly such a simple-
minded and straightforward garment, knowing no guile, has 
become, in the hands of the inventors, a mere pretence, a 
frail scaffold, on which an elaborate superstructure of shams 
is erected.

The varieties of this garment that one sees in the shop 
windows, exposing virgin bosoms to the day, are not what they 
seem!  Those very bosoms are fakes, and cannot open, being 
instead pierced by eyelets, into which bogus studs are fixed 
by machinery.  The owner is obliged to enter into those 
deceptive garments surreptitiously from the rear, by 
stratagem, as it were.  Why all this trouble, one asks, for no 
apparent reason, except that old-fashioned shirts opened in 
front, and no Yankee will wear a non-patented garment - if he 
can help it?

There was not a single accessory to the toilet in that car 
which behaved in a normal way.  Buttons mostly backed into 
place, tail-end foremost (like horses getting between shafts), 
where some hidden mechanism screwed or clinched them to their 
moorings.

Collars and cuffs (integral parts of the primitive garment) 
are now a labyrinth, in which all but the initiated must lose 
themselves, being double-decked, detachable, reversible, and 
made of every known substance except linen.  The cuff most in 
favor can be worn four different ways, and is attached to the 
shirt by a steel instrument three inches long, with a nipper 
at each end.  The amount of white visible below the coat-
sleeve is regulated by another contrivance, mostly of elastic, 
worn further up the arm, around the biceps.  Modern collars 
are retained in position by a system of screws and levers.  
Socks are attached no longer with the old-fashioned garter, 
but by aid of a little harness similar to that worn by pug-
dogs.

One traveller, after lacing his shoes, adjusted a contrivance 
resembling a black beetle on the knot to prevent its untying.  
He also wore "hygienic suspenders," a discovery of great 
importance (over three thousand patents have been taken out 
for this one necessity of the toilet!).  This brace performs 
several tasks at the same time, such as holding unmentionable 
garments in place, keeping the wearer erect, and providing a 
night-key guard.  It is also said to cure liver and kidney 
disease by means of an arrangement of pulleys which throw the 
strain according to the wearer's position - I omit the rest of 
its qualities!

The watches of my companions, I noticed with astonishment, all 
wore India-rubber ruffs around their necks.  Here curiosity 
getting the better of discretion, I asked what purpose that 
invention served.  It was graciously explained to me how such 
ruffs prevented theft.  They were so made that it was 
impossible to draw your watch out of a pocket unless you knew 
the trick, which struck me as a mitigated blessing.  In fact, 
the idea kept occurring that life might become terribly 
uncomfortable under these complex conditions for absent-minded 
people.

Pencils, I find, are no longer put into pockets or slipped 
behind the ear.  Every commercial "gent" wears a patent on his 
chest, where his pen and pencil nestle in a coil of wire.  
Eyeglasses are not allowed to dangle aimlessly about, as of 
old, but retire with a snap into an oval box, after the 
fashion of roller shades.  Scarf-pins have guards screwed on 
from behind, and undergarments - but here modesty stops my 
pen.

Seeing that I was interested in their make-up, several 
travelling agents on the train got out their boxes and showed 
me the latest artifices that could be attached to the person.  
One gentleman produced a collection of rings made to go on the 
finger with a spring, like bracelets, an arrangement, he 
explained, that was particularly convenient for people 
afflicted with enlarged joints!

Another tempted me with what he called a "literary shirt 
front," - it was in fact a paper pad, from which for 
cleanliness a leaf could be peeled each morning; the "wrong" 
side of the sheet thus removed contained a calendar, much 
useful information, and the chapters of a "continued" story, 
which ended when the "dickey" was used up.

A third traveller was "pushing" a collar-button that plied as 
many trades as Figaro, combining the functions of cravat-
holder, stud, and scarf-pin.  Not being successful in selling 
me one of these, he brought forward something "without which," 
he assured me, "no gentleman's wardrobe was complete"!  It 
proved to be an insidious arrangement of gilt wire, which he 
adjusted on his poor, overworked collar-button, and then tied 
his cravat through and around it.  "No tie thus made," he 
said, "would ever slip or get crooked."  He had been so civil 
that it was embarrassing not to buy something of him; I 
invested twenty-five cents in the cravat-holder, as it seemed 
the least complicated of the patents on exhibition; not, 
however, having graduated in a school of mechanics I have 
never been able to make it work.  It takes an hour to tie a 
cravat with its aid, and as long to get it untied.  Most of 
the men in that car, I found, got around the difficulty by 
wearing ready-made ties which fastened behind with a clasp.

It has been suggested that the reason our compatriots have 
such a strained and anxious look is because they are all 
trying to remember the numbers of their streets and houses, 
the floor their office is on, and the combination of their 
safes.  I am inclined to think that the hunted look we wear 
comes from an awful fear of forgetting the secrets of our 
patents and being unable to undo ourselves in an emergency!

Think for a moment of the horror of coming home tired and 
sleepy after a convivial evening, and finding that some of 
your hidden machinery had gone wrong; that by a sudden 
movement you had disturbed the nice balance of some lever 
which in revenge refused to release its prey!  The inventors 
of one well-known cuff-holder claim that it had a "bull-dog 
grip."  Think of sitting dressed all night in the embrace of 
that mechanical canine until the inventor could be called in 
to set you free!

I never doubted that bravery was the leading characteristic of 
the American temperament; since that glimpse into the secret 
composition of my compatriots, admiration has been vastly 
increased.  The foolhardy daring it must require - dressed as 
those men were - to go out in a thunder-storm makes one 
shudder: it certainly could not be found in any other race.  
The danger of cross-country hunting or bull-fighting is as 
nothing compared to the risk a modern American takes when he 
sits in a trolley-car, where the chances of his machinery 
forming a fatal "short circuit" must be immense.  The utter 
impossibility in which he finds himself of making a toilet 
quickly on account of so many time-saving accessories must 
increase his chances of getting "left" in an accident about 
fifty per cent.  Who but one of our people could contemplate 
with equanimity the thought of attempting the adjustment of 
such delicate and difficult combinations while a steamer was 
sinking and the life-boats being manned?

Our grandfathers contributed the wooden nutmeg to 
civilization, and endowed a grateful universe with other 
money-saving devices.  To-day the inventor takes the American 
baby from his cradle and does not release him even at the 
grave.  What a treat one of the machine-made men of to-day 
will be to the archeologists of the year 3000, when they 
chance upon a well-preserved specimen, with all his patents 
thick upon I him!  With a prophetic eye one can almost see the 
kindly old gentleman of that day studying the paraphernalia 
found in the tomb and attempting to account for the different 
pieces.  Ink will flow and discussions rage between the camp 
maintaining that cuff-holders were tutelar deities buried with 
the dead by pious relatives and the croup asserting that the 
little pieces of steel were a form of pocket money in the year 
1900.  Both will probably misquote Tennyson and Kipling in 
support of their theories.

The question has often been raised, What side of our 
nineteenth-century civilization will be most admired by future 
generations?  In view of the above facts there can remain 
little doubt that when the secrets of the paper collar and the 
trouser-stretcher have become lost arts, it will be those 
benefits that remote ages will envy us, and rare specimens of 
"ventilated shoes" and "reversible tissue-paper undergarments" 
will form the choicest treasures of the collector.




Chapter 5 - Parnassus


MANY years ago, a gentleman with whom I was driving in a 
distant quarter of Paris took me to a house on the rue 
Montparnasse, where we remained an hour or more, he chatting 
with its owner, and I listening to their conversation, and 
wondering at the confusion of books in the big room.  As we 
drove away, my companion turned to me and said, "Don't forget 
this afternoon.  You have seen one of the greatest writers our 
century has produced, although the world does not yet realize 
it.  You will learn to love his works when you are older, and 
it will be a satisfaction to remember that you saw and spoke 
with him in the flesh! "

When I returned later to Paris the little house had changed 
hands, and a marble tablet stating that Sainte-Beuve had lived 
and died there adorned its facade.  My student footsteps took 
me many times through that quiet street, but never without a 
vision of the poet-critic flashing back, as I glanced up at 
the window where he had stood and talked with us; as my friend 
predicted, Sainte-Beuve's writings had become a precious part 
of my small library, the memory of his genial face adding a 
vivid interest to their perusal.

I made a little Pilgrimage recently to the quiet old garden 
where, after many years' delay, a bust of this writer has been 
unveiled, with the same companion, now very old, who thirty 
years ago presented me to the original.

There is, perhaps, in all Paris no more exquisite corner than 
the Garden of the Luxembourg.  At every season it is 
beautiful.  The winter sunlight seems to linger on its stately 
Italian terraces after it has ceased to shine elsewhere.  The 
first lilacs bloom here in the spring, and when midsummer has 
turned all the rest of Paris into a blazing, white wilderness, 
these gardens remain cool and tranquil in the heart of 
turbulent "Bohemia," a bit of fragrant nature filled with the 
song of birds and the voices of children.  Surely it was a 
gracious inspiration that selected this shady park as the 
"Poets' Corner" of great, new Paris.  Henri Murger, Leconte de 
Lisle, Theodore de Banville, Paul Verlaine, are here, and now 
Sainte-Beuve has come back to his favorite haunt.  Like 
Francois Coppee and Victor Hugo, he loved these historic 
ALLEES, and knew the stone in them as he knew the "Latin 
Quater," for his life was passed between the bookstalls of the 
quays and the outlying street where he lived.

As we sat resting in the shade, my companion, who had been one 
of Sainte-Beuve's pupils, fell to talking of his master, his 
memory refreshed by the familiar surroundings.  "Can anything 
be sadder," he said, "than finding a face one has loved turned 
into stone, or names that were the watch-words of one's youth 
serving as signs at street corners - la rue Flaubert or 
Theodore de Banville?  How far away they make the past seem!  
Poor Sainte-Beuve, that bust yonder is but a poor reward for a 
life of toil, a modest tribute to his encyclopaedic brain!  
His works, however, are his best monument; he would be the 
last to repine or cavil.

"The literary world of my day had two poles, between which it 
vibrated.  The little house in the rue Montparnasse was one, 
the rock of Guernsey the other.  We spoke with awe of `Father 
Hugo' and mentioned `Uncle Beuve' with tenderness.  The 
Goncourt brothers accepted Sainte-Beuve's judgment on their 
work as the verdict of a `Supreme Court.'  Not a poet or 
author of that day but climbed with a beating heart the narrow 
staircase that led to the great writer's library.  Paul 
Verlaine regarded as his literary diploma a letter from this 
`Balzac de la critique.' "

"At the entrance of the quaint Passage du Commerce, under the 
arch that leads into the rue Saint-Andre-des-Arts, stands a 
hotel, where for years Sainte-Beuve came daily to work (away 
from the importunate who besieged his dwelling) in a room 
hired under the assumed name of Delorme.  It was there that we 
sent him a basket of fruit one morning addressed to Mr. 
Delorme, NE Sainte-Beuve.  It was there that most of his 
enormous labor was accomplished.

"A curious corner of old Paris that Cour du Commerce!  Just 
opposite his window was the apartment where Danton lived.  If 
one chose to seek for them it would not be hard to discover on 
the pavement of this same passage the marks made by a young 
doctor in decapitating sheep with his newly invented machine.  
The doctor's name was Guillotin.

"The great critic loved these old quarters filled with 
history.  He was fond of explaining that Montparnasse had been 
a hill where the students of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries came to amuse themselves.  In 1761 the slope was 
levelled and the boulevard laid out, but the name was 
predestined, he would declare, for the habitation of the 
`Parnassiens.'

"His enemies pretended that you had but to mention Michelet, 
Balzac, and Victor Hugo to see Sainte-Beuve in three degrees 
of rage.  He had, it is true, distinct expressions on hearing 
those authors discussed.  The phrase then much used in 
speaking of an original personality, `He is like a character 
out of Balzac,' always threw my master into a temper.  I 
cannot remember, however, having seen him in one of those 
famous rages which made Barbey d'Aurevilly say that `Sainte-
Beuve was a clever man with the temper of a turkey!'  The 
former was much nearer the truth when he called the author of 
LES LUNDIS a French Wordsworth, or compared him to a lay 
BENEDICTIN.  He had a way of reading a newly acquired volume 
as he walked through the streets that was typical of his life.  
My master was always studying and always advancing.

"He never entirely recovered from his mortification at being 
hissed by the students on the occasion of his first lecture at 
the College de France.  Returning home he loaded two pistols, 
one for the first student who should again insult him, and the 
other to blow out his own brains.  It was no idle threat.  The 
man Guizot had nicknamed `Werther' was capable of executing 
his plan, for this causeless unpopularity was anguish to him.  
After his death, I found those two pistols loaded in his 
bedroom, but justice had been done another way.  All 
opposition had vanished.  Every student in the `Quarter' 
followed the modest funeral of their Senator, who had become 
the champion of literary liberty in an epoch when poetry was 
held in chains.

"The Empire which made him Senator gained, however, but an 
indocile recruit.  On his one visit to Compiegne in 1863, the 
Emperor, wishing to be particularly gracious, said to him, `I 
always read the MONITEUR on Monday, when your article 
appears.'  Unfortunately for this compliment, it was the 
CONSTITUTIONNEL that had been publishing the NOUVEAUX LUNDIS 
for more than four years.  In spite of the united efforts of 
his friends, Sainte-Beuve could not be brought to the point of 
complimenting Napoleon III. on his LIFE OF CAESAR.

The author of LES CONSOLATIONS remained through life the 
proudest and most independent of men, a bourgeois, enemy of 
all tyranny, asking protection of no one.  And what a worker!  
Reading, sifting, studying, analyzing his subject before 
composing one of his famous LUNDIS, a literary portrait which 
he aimed at making complete and final.  One of these articles 
cost him as much labor as other authors give to the 
composition of a volume.

"By way of amusement on Sunday evenings, when work was 
temporarily laid aside, he loved the theatre, delighting in 
every kind of play, from the broad farces of the Palais Royal 
to the tragedies of Racine, and entertaining comedians in 
order, as he said, `to keep young'!  One evening Theophile 
Gautier brought a pretty actress to dinner.  Sainte-Beuve, who 
was past-master in the difficult art of conversation, and on 
whom a fair woman acted as an inspiration, surpassed himself 
on this occasion, surprising even the Goncourts with his 
knowledge of the Eighteenth century and the women of that 
time, Mme. de Boufflers, Mlle. de Lespinasse, la Marechale de 
Luxembourg.  The hours flew by unheeded by all of his guests 
but one.  The DEBUTANTE was overheard confiding, later in the 
evening, to a friend at the Gymnase, where she performed in 
the last act, `Ouf!  I'm glad to get here.  I`ve been dining 
with a stupid old Senator.  They told me he would be amusing, 
but I've been bored to death.'  Which reminded me of my one 
visit to England, when I heard a young nobleman declare that 
he had been to `such a dull dinner to meet a duffer called 
"Renan!" '

"Sainte-Beuve's LARMES DE RACINE was given at the Theatre 
Francais during its author's last illness.  His disappointment 
at not seeing the performance was so keen that M. Thierry, 
then ADMINISTRATEUR of La Comedie, took Mlle. Favart to the 
rue Montparnasse, that she might recite his verses to the 
dying writer.  When the actress, then in the zenith of her 
fame and beauty, came to the lines-


Jean Racine, le grand poete,
Le poete aimant et pieux,
Apres que sa lyre muette
Se fut voilee a tous les yeux,
Renoncant a la gloire humaine,
S'il sentait en son ame pleine
Le flot contenu murmurer,
Ne savait que fondre en priere,
Pencher l'urne dans la poussiere
Aux pieds du Seigneur, et pleurer!


the tears of Sainte-Beuve accompanied those of Racine!"

There were tears also in the eyes my companion turned toward 
me as he concluded.  The sun had set while he had been 
speaking.  The marble of the statues gleamed white against the 
shadows of the sombre old garden.  The guardians were closing 
the gates and warning the lingering visitors as we strolled 
toward the entrance.

It seemed as if we had been for an hour in the presence of the 
portly critic; and the circle of brilliant men and witty women 
who surrounded him - Flaubert, Tourgueneff, Theophile Gautier, 
Renan, George Sand - were realities at that moment, not 
abstractions with great names.  It was like returning from 
another age, to step out again into the glare and bustle of 
the Boulevard St. Michel.




Chapter 6 - Modern Architecture


IF a foreign tourist, ignorant of his whereabouts, were to 
sail about sunset up our spacious bay and view for the first 
time the eccentric sky-line of lower New York, he would rub 
his eyes and wonder if they were not playing him a trick, for 
distance and twilight lend the chaotic masses around the 
Battery a certain wild grace suggestive of Titan strongholds 
or prehistoric abodes of Wotan, rather than the business part 
of a practical modern city.

"But," as John Drew used to say in THE MASKED BALL, "what a 
difference in the morning!" when a visit to his banker takes 
the new arrival down to Wall Street, and our uncompromising 
American daylight dispels his illusions.

Years ago SPIRITUAL Arthur Gilman mourned over the decay of 
architecture in New York and pointed out that Stewart's shop, 
at Tenth Street, bore about the same relation to Ictinus' 
noble art as an iron cooking stove!  It is well death removed 
the Boston critic before our city entered into its present 
Brobdingnagian phase.  If he considered that Stewart's and the 
Fifth Avenue Hotel failed in artistic beauty, what would have 
been his opinion of the graceless piles that crowd our island 
to-day, beside which those older buildings seem almost 
classical in their simplicity?

One hardly dares to think what impression a student familiar 
with the symmetry of Old World structures must receive on 
arriving for the first time, let us say, at the Bowling Green, 
for the truth would then dawn upon him that what appeared from 
a distance to be the ground level of the island was in reality 
the roof line of average four-story buildings, from among 
which the keeps and campaniles that had so pleased him (when 
viewed from the Narrows) rise like gigantic weeds gone to seed 
in a field of grass.

It is the heterogeneous character of the buildings down town 
that renders our streets so hideous.  Far from seeking 
harmony, builders seem to be trying to "go" each other "one 
story better"; if they can belittle a neighbor in the process 
it is clear gain, and so much advertisement.  Certain blocks 
on lower Broadway are gems in this way!  Any one who has 
glanced at an auctioneer's shelves when a "job lot" of books 
is being sold, will doubtless have noticed their resemblance 
to the sidewalks of our down town streets.  Dainty little 
duodecimo buildings are squeezed in between towering in-
folios, and richly bound and tooled octavos chum with cheap 
editions.  Our careless City Fathers have not even given 
themselves the trouble of pushing their stone and brick 
volumes into the same line, but allow them to straggle along 
the shelf - I beg pardon, the sidewalk - according to their 
own sweet will.

The resemblance of most new business buildings to flashy books 
increases the more one studies them; they have the proportions 
of school atlases, and, like them, are adorned only on their 
backs (read fronts).  The modern builder, like the frugal 
binder, leaves the sides of his creations unadorned, and 
expends his ingenuity in decorating the narrow strip which he 
naively imagines will be the only part seen, calmly ignoring 
the fact that on glancing up or down a street the sides of 
houses are what we see first.  It is almost impossible to get 
mathematically opposite a building, yet that is the only point 
from which these new constructions are not grotesque.

It seems as though the rudiments of common sense would suggest 
that under existing circumstances the less decoration put on a 
facade the greater would be the harmony of the whole.  But 
trifles like harmony and fitness are splendidly ignored by the 
architects of to-day, who, be it remarked in passing, have 
slipped into another curious habit for which I should greatly 
like to see an explanation offered.  As long as the ground 
floors and the tops of their creations are elaborate, the 
designer evidently thinks the intervening twelve or fifteen 
stories can shift for themselves.  One clumsy mass on the 
Bowling Green is an excellent example of this weakness.  Its 
ground floor is a playful reproduction of the tombs of Egypt.  
About the second story the architect must have become 
discouraged - or perhaps the owner's funds gave out - for the 
next dozen floors are treated in the severest "tenement house" 
manner; then, as his building terminates well up in the sky, a 
top floor or two are, for no apparent reason, elaborately 
adorned.  Indeed, this desire for a brilliant finish pervades 
the neighborhood.  The Johnson Building on Broad Street (to 
choose one out of the many) is sober and discreet in design 
for a dozen stories, but bursts at its top into a Byzantine 
colonnade.  Why? one asks in wonder.

Another new-comer, corner of Wall and Nassau Streets, is a 
commonplace structure, with a fairly good cornice, on top of 
which - an afterthought, probably - a miniature State Capitol 
has been added, with dome and colonnade complete.  The result 
recalls dear, absent-minded Miss Matty (in Mrs. Gaskell's 
charming story), when she put her best cap on top of an old 
one and sat smiling at her visitors from under the double 
headdress!

Nowhere in the world - not even in Moscow, that city of domes 
- can one see such a collection of pagodas, cupolas, kiosks, 
and turrets as grace the roofs of our office buildings!  
Architects evidently look upon such adornments as 
compensations!  The more hideous the structure, the finer its 
dome!  Having perpetrated a blot upon the city that cries to 
heaven in its enormity, the repentant owner adds a pagoda or 
two, much in the same spirit, doubtless, as prompts an Italian 
peasant to hang a votive heart on some friendly shrine when a 
crime lies heavy on his conscience.

What would be thought of a book-collector who took to standing 
inkstands or pepperboxes on the tops of his tallest volumes by 
way of adornment?  Yet domes on business buildings are every 
bit as appropriate.  A choice collection of those 
monstrosities graces Park Row, one much-gilded offender 
varying the monotony by looking like a yellow stopper in a 
high-shouldered bottle!  How modern architects with the 
exquisite City Hall before them could have wandered so far 
afield in their search for the original must always remain a 
mystery.

When a tall, thin building happens to stand on a corner, the 
likeness to an atlas is replaced by a grotesque resemblance to 
a waffle iron, of which one structure just finished on Rector 
Street skilfully reproduces' the lines.  The rows of little 
windows were evidently arranged to imitate the indentations on 
that humble utensil, and the elevated road at the back seems 
in this case to do duty as the handle.  Mrs. Van Rensselaer 
tells us in her delightful GOEDE VROUW OF MANA-HA-TA that 
waffle irons used to be a favorite wedding present among the 
Dutch settlers of this island, and were adorned with monograms 
and other devices, so perhaps it is atavism that makes us so 
fond of this form in building!  As, however, no careful 
HAUSFRAU would have stood her iron on its edge, architects 
should hesitate before placing their buildings in that 
position, as the impression of instability is the same in each 
case.

After leaving the vicinity of the City Hall, the tall slabs 
that like magnified milestones mark the progress of 
Architecture up Broadway become a shade less objectionable, 
although one meets some strange freaks in so-called decoration 
by the way.  Why, for instance, were those Titan columns 
grouped around the entrance to the American Surety Company's 
building?  They do not support anything (the "business" of 
columns in architecture) except some rather feeble statuary, 
and do seriously block the entrance.  Were they added with the 
idea of fitness?  That can hardly be, for a portico is as 
inappropriate to such a building as it would be to a parlor 
car, and almost as inconvenient.

Farther up town our attention is arrested by another misplaced 
adornment.  What purpose can that tomb with a railing round it 
serve on top of the New York Life Insurance building?  It 
looks like a monument in Greenwood, surmounted by a rat-trap, 
but no one is interred there, and vermin can hardly be 
troublesome at that altitude.

How did this craze for decoration originate?  The inhabitants 
of Florence and Athens did not consider it necessary.  There 
must, I feel sure, be a reason for its use in this city; 
American land-lords rarely spend money without a purpose; 
perhaps they find that rococo detail draws business and 
inspires confidence!

I should like to ask the architects of New York one question: 
Have they not been taught that in their art, as in every 
other, pretences are vulgar, that things should be what they 
seem?  Then why do they continue to hide steel and fire-brick 
cages under a veneer of granite six inches thick, causing them 
to pose as solid stone buildings?  If there is a demand for 
tall, light structures, why not build them simply (as bridges 
are constructed), and not add a poultice of bogus columns and 
zinc cornices that serve no purpose and deceive no one?

Union Square possesses blocks out of which the Jackson and 
Decker buildings spring with a noble disregard of all rules 
and a delicious incongruity that reminds one of Falstaff's 
corps of ill-drilled soldiers.  Madison Square, however, is 
FACILE PRINCEPS, with its annex to the Hoffman House, a 
building which would make the fortune of any dime museum that 
could fence it in and show it for a fee!  Long contemplation 
of this structure from my study window has printed every comic 
detail on my brain.  It starts off at the ground level to be 
an imitation of the Doge's Palace (a neat and appropriate idea 
in itself for a Broadway shop).  At the second story, 
following the usual New York method, it reverts to a design 
suggestive of a county jail (the Palace and the Prison), with 
here and there a balcony hung out, emblematical, doubtless, of 
the inmates' wash and bedding.  At the ninth floor the 
repentant architect adds two more stories in memory of the 
Doge's residence.  Have you ever seen an accordion 
(concertina, I believe, is the correct name) hanging in a shop 
window?  The Twenty-fifth Street Doge's Palace reminds me of 
that humble instrument.  The wooden part, where the keys and 
round holes are, stands on the sidewalk.  Then come an 
indefinite number of pleats, and finally the other wooden end 
well up among the clouds.  So striking is this resemblance 
that at times one expects to hear the long-drawn moans 
peculiar to the concertina issuing from those portals.  Alas! 
even the most original designs have their drawbacks!  After 
the proprietor of the Venetian accordion had got his 
instrument well drawn out and balanced on its end, he 
perceived that it dwarfed the adjacent buildings, so cast 
about in his mind for a scheme to add height and dignity to 
the rest of the block.  One day the astonished neighborhood 
saw what appeared to be a "roomy suburban villa" of iron 
rising on the roof of the old Hoffman House.  The results 
suggests a small man who, being obliged to walk with a giant, 
had put on a hat several times too large in order to equalize 
their heights!

How astonished Pericles and his circle of architects and 
sculptors would be could they stand on the corner of Broadway 
and Twenty-eighth Street and see the miniature Parthenon that 
graces the roof of a pile innocent of other Greek ornament?  
They would also recognize their old friends, the ladies of the 
Erechtheum, doing duty on the Reveillon Building across the 
way, pretending to hold up a cornice, which, being in 
proportion to the building, is several hundred times too big 
for them to carry.  They can't be seen from the sidewalk, - 
the street is too narrow for that, - but such trifles don't 
deter builders from decorating when the fit is on them.  
Perhaps this one got his caryatides at a bargain, and had to 
work them in somewhere; so it is not fair to be hard on him.

If ever we take to ballooning, all these elaborate tops may 
add materially to our pleasure.  At the present moment the 
birds, and angels, it is to be hoped, appreciate the effort.  
I, perhaps, of all the inhabitants of the city, have seen 
those ladies face to face, when I have gone on a semi-monthly 
visit to my roof to look for leaks!

"It's all very well to carp and cavil," many readers will say, 
"but `Idler' forgets that our modern architects have had to 
contend with difficulties that the designers of other ages 
never faced, demands for space and light forcing the 
nineteenth-century builders to produce structures which they 
know are neither graceful nor in proportion!"

If my readers will give themselves the trouble to glance at 
several office buildings in the city, they will realize that 
the problem is not without a solution.  In almost every case 
where the architect has refrained from useless decoration and 
stuck to simple lines, the result, if not beautiful, has at 
least been inoffensive.  It is where inappropriate elaboration 
is added that taste is offended.  Such structures as the 
Singer building, corner of Liberty Street and Broadway, and 
the home of LIFE, in Thirty-first Street, prove that beauty 
and grace of facade can be adapted to modern business wants.

Feeling as many New Yorkers do about this defacing of what 
might have been the most beautiful of modern cities, it is 
galling to be called upon to admire where it is already an 
effort to tolerate.

A sprightly gentleman, writing recently in a scientific 
weekly, goes into ecstasies of admiration over the advantages 
and beauty of a steel mastodon on Park Row, a building that 
has the proportions of a carpenter's plane stood on end, 
decorated here and there with balconies and a colonnade 
perched on brackets up toward its fifteenth story.  He 
complacently gives us its weight and height as compared with 
the pyramids, and numerous other details as to floor space and 
ventilation, and hints in conclusion that only old fogies and 
dullards, unable to keep pace with the times, fail to 
appreciate the charm of such structures in a city.  One of the 
"points" this writer makes is the quality of air enjoyed by 
tenants, amusingly oblivious of the fact that at least three 
facades of each tall building will see the day only so long as 
the proprietors of adjacent land are too poor or too busy to 
construct similar colossi!

When all the buildings in a block are the same height, seven 
eighths of the rooms in each will be without light or 
ventilation.  It's rather poor taste to brag of advantages 
that are enjoyed only through the generosity of one's 
neighbors.

Business demands may force us to bow before the necessity of 
these horrors, but it certainly is "rubbing it in" to ask our 
applause.  When the Eiffel Tower was in course of 
construction, the artists and literary lights of Paris raised 
a tempest of protest.  One wonders why so little of the kind 
has been done here.  It is perhaps rather late in the day to 
suggest reform, yet if more New Yorkers would interest 
themselves in the work, much might still be done to modify and 
improve our metropolis.

One hears with satisfaction that a group of architects have 
lately met and discussed plans for the embellishment of our 
neglected city.  There is a certain poetical justice in the 
proposition coming from those who have worked so much of the 
harm.  Remorse has before now been known to produce good 
results.  The United States treasury yearly receives large 
sums of "conscience money."




Chapter 7 - Worldly Color-Blindness


MYRIADS of people have no ear for music and derive but little 
pleasure from sweet sounds.  Strange as it may appear, many 
gifted and sensitive mortals have been unable to distinguish 
one note from another, Apollo's harmonious art remaining for 
them, as for the elder Dumas, only an "expensive noise."

Another large class find it impossible to discriminate between 
colors.  Men afflicted in this way have even become painters 
of reputation.  I knew one of the latter, who, when a friend 
complimented him on having caught the exact shade of a pink 
toilet in one of his portraits, answered, "Does that dress 
look pink to you?  I thought it was green!" and yet he had 
copied what he saw correctly.

Both these classes are to be pitied, but are not the cause of 
much suffering to others.  It is annoying, I grant you, to be 
torn asunder in a collision, because red and green lights on 
the switches combined into a pleasing harmony before the 
brakeman's eyes.  The tone-deaf gentleman who insists on 
whistling a popular melody is almost as trying as the lady 
suffering from the same weakness, who shouts, "Ninon, Ninon, 
que fais-tu de la vie!" until you feel impelled to cry, "Que 
faites-vous, madame, with the key?"

Examinations now keep daltonic gentlemen out of locomotives, 
and ladies who have lost their "keys" are apt to find their 
friends' pianos closed.  What we cannot guard against is a 
variety of the genus HOMO which suffers from "social color-
blindness."  These well-meaning mortals form one of the 
hardest trials that society is heir to; for the disease is 
incurable, and as it is almost impossible to escape from them, 
they continue to spread dismay and confusion along their path 
to the bitter end.

This malady, which, as far as I know, has not been diagnosed, 
invades all circles, and is, curiously enough, rampant among 
well-born and apparently well-bred people.

Why is it that the entertainments at certain houses are always 
dull failures, while across the way one enjoys such agreeable 
evenings?  Both hosts are gentlemen, enjoying about the same 
amount of "unearned increment," yet the atmosphere of their 
houses is radically different.  This contrast cannot be traced 
to the dulness or brilliancy of the entertainer and his wife.  
Neither can it be laid at the door of inexperience, for the 
worst offenders are often old hands at the game.

The only explanation possible is that the owners of houses 
where one is bored are socially color-blind, as cheerfully 
unconscious of their weakness as the keyless lady and the 
whistling abomination.

Since increasing wealth has made entertaining general and 
lavish, this malady has become more and more apparent, until 
one is tempted to parody Mme. Roland's dying exclamation and 
cry, "Hospitality! hospitility! what crimes are committed in 
thy name!"

Entertaining is for many people but an excuse for ostentation.  
For others it is a means to an end; while a third variety 
apparently keep a debit and credit account with their 
acquaintances - in books of double entry, so that no errors 
may occur - and issue invitations like receipts, only in 
return for value received.

We can rarely tell what is passing in the minds of people 
about us.  Some of those mentioned above may feel a vague 
pleasure when their rooms are filled with a chattering crowd 
of more or less well-assorted guests; if that is denied them, 
can find consolation for the outlay in an indefinite sensation 
of having performed a duty, - what duty, or to whom, they 
would, however, find it difficult to define.

Let the novice flee from the allurements of such a host.  Old 
hands know him and have got him on their list, escaping when 
escape is possible; for he will mate the green youth with the 
red frump, or like a premature millennium force the lion and 
the lamb to lie down together, and imagine he has given 
unmixed pleasure to both.

One would expect that great worldly lights might learn by 
experience how fatal bungled entertainments can be, but such 
is not the case.  Many well-intentioned people continue 
sacrificing their friends on the altar of hospitality year 
after year with never a qualm of conscience or a sensation of 
pity for their victims.  One practical lady of my acquaintance 
asks her guests alphabetically, commencing the season and the 
first leaf of her visiting list simultaneously and working 
steadily on through both to "finis."  If you are an A, you 
will meet only A's at her table, with perhaps one or two B's 
thrown in to fill up; you may sit next to your mother-in-law 
for all the hostess cares.  She has probably never heard that 
the number of guests at table should not exceed that of the 
muses; or if by any chance she has heard it, does not care, 
and considers such a rule old-fashioned and not appropriate to 
our improved modern methods of entertaining.

One wonders what possible satisfaction a host can derive from 
providing fifty people with unwholesome food and drink at a 
fixed date.  It is a physical impossibility for him to have 
more than a passing word with his guests, and ten to one the 
unaccustomed number has upset the internal arrangements of his 
household, so that the dinner will, in consequence, be poor 
and the service defective.

A side-light on this question came to me recently when an 
exceedingly frank husband confided to a circle of his friends 
at the club the scheme his wife, who, though on pleasure bent, 
was of a frugal mind, had adopted to balance her social 
ledger.

"As we dine out constantly through the year," remarked 
Benedict, "some return is necessary.  So we wait until the 
height of the winter season, when everybody is engaged two 
weeks in advance, then send out our invitations at rather 
short notice for two or three consecutive dinners.  You'd be 
surprised," he remarked, with a beaming smile, "what a number 
refuse; last winter we cancelled all our obligations with two 
dinners, the flowers and entrees being as fresh on the second 
evening as the first!  It's wonderful!" he remarked in 
conclusion, "how simple entertaining becomes when one knows 
how!"  Which reminded me of an ingenious youth I once heard 
telling some friends how easy he had found it to write the 
book he had just published.  After his departure we agreed 
that if he found it so easy it would not be worth our while to 
read his volume.

Tender-hearted people generally make bad hosts.  They have a 
way of collecting the morally lame, halt, and blind into their 
drawing-rooms that gives those apartments the air of a 
convalescent home.  The moment a couple have placed themselves 
beyond the social pale, these purblind hosts conceive an 
affection for and lavish hospitality upon them.  If such a 
host has been fortunate enough to get together a circle of 
healthy people, you may feel confident that at the last moment 
a leper will be introduced.  This class of entertainers fail 
to see that society cannot he run on a philanthropic basis, 
and so insist on turning their salons into hospitals.

It would take too long to enumerate the thousand 
idiosyncrasies of the color-blind; few, however, are more 
amusing than those of the impulsive gentlemen who invite 
people to their homes indiscriminately, because they happen to 
feel in a good humor or chance to be seated next them at 
another house, - invitations which the host regrets half an 
hour later, and would willingly recall.  "I can't think why I 
asked the So-and-sos!" he will confide to you.  " I can't 
abide them; they are as dull as the dropsy!"  Many years ago 
in Paris, we used to call a certain hospitable lady's 
invitations "soup tickets," so little individuality did they 
possess.

The subtle laws of moral precedence are difficult reading for 
the most intelligent, and therefore remain sealed books to the 
afflicted mortals mentioned here.  The delicate tact that, 
with no apparent effort, combines congenial elements into a 
delightful whole is lacking in their composition.  The nice 
discrimination that presides over some households is replaced 
by a jovial indifference to other persons' feelings and 
prejudices.

The idea of placing pretty Miss Debutante next young 
Strongboys instead of giving her over into the clutches of old 
Mr. Boremore will never enter these obtuse entertainers' 
heads, any more than that of trying to keep poor, defenceless 
Mrs. Mouse out of young Tom Cat's claws.

It is useless to enumerate instances; people have suffered too 
severely at the hands of careless and incompetent hosts not to 
know pretty well what the title of this paper means.  So many 
of us have come away from fruitless evenings, grinding our 
teeth, and vowing never to enter those doors again while life 
lasts, that the time seems ripe for a protest.

If the color-blind would only refrain from painting, and the 
tone-deaf not insist on inviting one to their concerts, the 
world would be a much more agreeable place.  If people would 
only learn what they can and what they can't do, and leave the 
latter feats alone, a vast amount of unnecessary annoyance 
would be avoided and the tiresome old grindstone turn to a 
more cheerful tune.




Chapter 8 - Idling in Mid-Ocean


TO those fortunate mortals from whom Poseidon exacts no 
tribute in crossing his broad domain, a transatlantic voyage 
must afford each year an ever new delight.  The cares and 
worries of existence fade away and disappear in company with 
the land, in the deep bosom of the ocean buried.  One no 
longer feels like the bored mortal who has all winter turned 
the millstone of work and pleasure, but seems to have 
transmigrated into a new body, endowed with a ravenous 
appetite and perfectly fresh sensations.

Perhaps it is only the novelty of the surroundings; but as I 
lie somnolent in my chair, tucked into a corner of the white 
deck, watching the jade-colored water rush past below, and the 
sea-gulls circle gayly overhead, the SUMMUM BONUM of earthly 
contentment seems attained.  The book chosen with care remains 
uncut; the sense of physical and mental rest is too exquisite 
to be broken by any effort, even the reading of a favorite 
author.

Drowsy lapses into unconsciousness obscure the senses, like 
the transparent clouds that from time to time dim the 
sunlight.  A distant bell in the wheel-house chimes the lazy 
half-hours.  Groups of people come and go like figures on a 
lantern-slide.  A curiously detached reeling makes the scene 
and the actors in it as unreal as a painted ship manned by a 
shadowy crew.  The inevitable child tumbles on its face and is 
picked up shrieking by tender parents; energetic youths 
organize games of skill or discover whales on the horizon, 
without disturbing one's philosophic calm.

I congratulate myself on having chosen a foreign line.  For a 
week at least no familiar name will be spoken, no accustomed 
face appear.  The galling harness of routine is loosened; one 
breathes freely again conscious of the unoccupied hours in 
perspective.

The welcome summons to luncheon comes as a pleasant shock.  Is 
it possible that the morning has passed?  It seems to have but 
commenced.  I rouse myself and descend to the cabin.  Toward 
the end of the meal a rubicund Frenchman opposite makes the 
startling proposition that if I wish to send a message home he 
will undertake to have it delivered.  It is not until I notice 
the little square of oiled paper he is holding out to me that 
I understand this reference to the "pigeon post" with which 
the Compagnie Transatlantique is experimenting.  At the 
invitation of this new acquaintance I ascend to the upper deck 
and watch his birds depart.

The tiny bits of paper on which we have written (post-card 
fashion) message and address are rolled two or three together, 
and inserted into a piece of quill less than two inches long, 
which, however, they do not entirely fill.  While a pigeon is 
held by one man, another pushes one of the bird's tail-
feathers well through the quill, which is then fastened in its 
place by two minute wooden wedges.  A moment later the pigeon 
is tossed up into the air, and we witness the working of that 
mysterious instinct which all our modern science leaves 
unexplained.  After a turn or two far up in the clear sky, the 
bird gets its bearings and darts off on its five-hundred-mile 
journey across unknown seas to an unseen land - a voyage that 
no deviation or loitering will lengthen, and only fatigue or 
accident interrupt, until he alights at his cote.

Five of these willing messengers were started the first day 
out, and five more will leave to-morrow, poor little aerial 
postmen, almost predestined to destruction (in the latter 
case), for we shall then be so far from land that their one 
chance of life and home must depend on finding some friendly 
mast where an hour's rest may be taken before the bird starts 
again on his journey.

In two or three days, according to the weather, we shall begin 
sending French pigeons on ahead of us toward Havre.  The 
gentleman in charge of them tells me that his wife received 
all the messages he sent to her during his westward trip, the 
birds appearing each morning at her window (where she was in 
the habit feeding them) with their tidings from mid-ocean.  He 
also tells me that the French fleet in the Mediterranean 
recently received messages from their comrades in the Baltic 
on the third day by these feathered envoys.

It is hoped that in future ocean steamers will be able to keep 
up communication with the land at least four out of the seven 
days of their trips, so that, in case of delay or accident, 
their exact position and circumstances can be made known at 
headquarters.  It is a pity, the originator of the scheme 
remarked, that sea-gulls are such hopeless vagabonds, for they 
can fly much greater distances than pigeons, and are not 
affected by dampness, which seriously cripples the present 
messengers.

Later in the day a compatriot, inspired doubtless by the 
morning's experiment, confided to me that he had hit on "a 
great scheme," which he intends to develop on arriving.  His 
idea is to domesticate families of porpoises at Havre and New 
York, as that fish passes for having (like the pigeon) the 
homing instinct.  Ships provided with the parent fish can free 
one every twenty-four hours, charged with the morning's mail.  
The inventor of this luminous idea has already designed the 
letter-boxes that are to be strapped on the fishes' backs, and 
decided on a neat uniform for his postmen.

It is amusing during the first days "out" to watch the people 
whom chance has thrown together into such close quarters.  The 
occult power that impels a pigeon to seek its kind is feeble 
in comparison with the faculty that travellers develop under 
these circumstances for seeking out congenial spirits.  Twelve 
hours do not pass before affinities draw together; what was 
apparently a homogeneous mass has by that time grouped and 
arranged itself into three or four distinct circles.

The "sporty" gentlemen in loud clothes have united in the 
bonds of friendship with the travelling agents and have chosen 
the smoking-room as their headquarters.  No mellow sunset or 
serene moonlight will tempt these comrades from the subtleties 
of poker; the pool on the run is the event of their day.

A portly prima donna is the centre of another circle.  Her 
wraps, her dogs, her admirers, and her brand-new husband (a 
handsome young Hungarian with a voice like two Bacian bulls) 
fill the sitting-room, where the piano gets but little rest.  
Neither sunshine nor soft winds can draw them to the deck.  
Although too ill for the regular meals, this group eat and 
drink during fifteen out of the twenty-four hours.

The deck, however, is not deserted; two fashionable 
dressmakers revel there.  These sociable ladies asked the 
COMMISSAIRE at the start "to introduce all the young unmarried 
men to them," as they wanted to be jolly.  They have a 
numerous court around them, and champagne, like the 
conversation, flows freely.  These ladies have already become 
expert at shuffleboard, but their "sea legs" are not so good 
as might be expected, and the dames require to be caught and 
supported by their admirers at each moment to prevent them 
from tripping - an immense joke, to judge by the peals of 
laughter that follow.

The American wife of a French ambassador sits on the captain's 
right.  A turn of the diplomatic wheel is taking the lady to 
Madrid, where her position will call for supreme tact and 
self-restraint.  One feels a thrill of national pride on 
looking at her high-bred young face and listening as she chats 
in French and Spanish, and wonders once more at the marvellous 
faculty our women have of adapting themselves so graciously 
and so naturally to difficult positions, which the women of 
other nations rarely fill well unless born to the purple.  It 
is the high opinion I have of my countrywomen that has made me 
cavil, before now, on seeing them turned into elaborately 
dressed nullities by foolish and too adoring husbands.

The voyage is wearing itself away.  Sunny days are succeeded 
by gray mornings, as exquisite in their way, when one can feel 
the ship fight against contending wind and wave, and shiver 
under the blows received in a struggle which dashes the salt 
spray high over the decks.  There is an aroma in the air then 
that breathes new life into jaded nerves, and stirs the drop 
of old Norse blood, dormant in most American veins, into 
quivering ecstasy.  One dreams of throwing off the trammels of 
civilized existence and returning to the free life of older 
days.

But here is Havre glittering in the distance against her 
background of chalk cliffs.  People come on deck in strangely 
conventional clothes and with demure citified airs.  
Passengers of whose existence you were unaware suddenly make 
their appearance.  Two friends meet near me for the first 
time.  "Hallo, Jones!" says one of them, "are you crossing?"

"Yes," answers Jones, "are you?"

The company's tug has come alongside by this time, bringing 
its budget of letters and telegrams.  The brief holiday is 
over.  With a sigh one comes back to the positive and the 
present, and patiently resumes the harness of life.




Chapter 9 - "Climbers" in England


THE expression "Little Englander," much used of late to 
designate an inhabitant of the Mother Isle in contra-
distinction to other subjects of Her Majesty, expresses neatly 
the feeling of our insular cousins not only as regards 
ourselves, but also the position affected toward their 
colonial brothers and sisters.

Have you ever noticed that in every circle there is some 
individual assuming to do things better than his comrades - to 
know more, dress better, run faster, pronounce more correctly?  
Who, unless promptly suppressed, will turn the conversation 
into a monologue relating to his own exploits and opinions.  
To differ is to bring down his contempt upon your devoted 
head!  To argue is time wasted!

Human nature is, however, so constituted that a man of this 
type mostly succeeds in hypnotizing his hearers into sharing 
his estimate of himself, and impressing upon them the 
conviction that he is a rare being instead of a commonplace 
mortal.  He is not a bad sort of person at bottom, and ready 
to do one a friendly turn - if it does not entail too great 
inconvenience.  In short, a good fellow, whose principal 
defect is the profound conviction that he was born superior to 
the rest of mankind.

What this individual is to his environment, Englishmen are to 
the world at large.  It is the misfortune, not the fault, of 
the rest of the human race, that they are not native to his 
island; a fact, by the way, which outsiders are rarely allowed 
to lose sight of, as it entails a becoming modesty on their 
part.

Few idiosyncrasies get more quickly on American nerves or are 
further from our hearty attitude toward strangers.  As we are 
far from looking upon wandering Englishmen with suspicion, it 
takes us some time to realize that Americans who cut away from 
their countrymen and settle far from home are regarded with 
distrust and reluctantly received.  When a family of this kind 
prepares to live in their neighborhood, Britons have a formula 
of three questions they ask themselves concerning the new-
comers: "Whom do they know?  How much are they worth?" and 
"What amusement (or profit) are we likely to get out of them?"  
If the answer to all or any of the three queries is 
satisfactory, my lord makes the necessary advances and becomes 
an agreeable, if not a witty or original, companion.

Given this and a number of other peculiarities, it seems 
curious that a certain class of Americans should be so anxious 
to live in England.  What is it tempts them?  It cannot be the 
climate, for that is vile; nor the city of London, for it is 
one of the ugliest in existence; nor their "cuisine" - for 
although we are not good cooks ourselves, we know what good 
food is and could give Britons points.  Neither can it be art, 
nor the opera, - one finds both better at home or on the 
Continent than in England.  So it must be society, and here 
one's wonder deepens!

When I hear friends just back from a stay over there enlarging 
on the charms of "country life," or a London "season," I look 
attentively to see if they are in earnest, so incomparably 
dull have I always found English house parties or town 
entertainments.  At least that side of society which the 
climbing stranger mostly affects.  Other circles are charming, 
if a bit slow, and the "Bohemia" and semi-Bohemia of London 
have a delicate flavor of their own.

County society, that ideal life so attractive to American 
readers of British novels, is, taken on the whole, the most 
insipid existence conceivable.  The women lack the sparkle and 
charm of ours; the men, who are out all day shooting or 
hunting according to the season, get back so fagged that if 
they do not actually drop asleep at the dinner-table, they 
will nap immediately after, brightening only when the ladies 
have retired, when, with evening dress changed for comfortable 
smoking suits, the hunters congregate in the billiard-room for 
cigars and brandy and seltzer.

A particularly agreeable American woman, whose husband insists 
on going every winter to Melton-Mowbray for the hunting, was 
describing the other day the life there among the women, and 
expressing her wonder that those who did not hunt could 
refrain from blowing out their brains, so awful was the 
dulness and monotony!  She had ended by not dining out at all, 
having discovered that the conversation never by any chance 
deviated far from the knees of the horses and the height of 
the hedges!

Which reminds one of Thackeray relating how he had longed to 
know what women talked about when they were alone after 
dinner, imagining it to be on mysterious and thrilling 
subjects, until one evening he overheard such a conversation 
and found it turned entirely on children and ailments!  As 
regards wit, the English are like the Oriental potentate who 
at a ball in Europe expressed his astonishment that the guests 
took the trouble to dance and get themselves hot and 
dishevelled, explaining that in the East he paid people to do 
that for him.  In England "amusers" are invited expressly to 
be funny; anything uttered by one of these delightful 
individuals is sure to be received with much laughter.  It is 
so simple that way!  One is prepared and knows when to laugh.  
Whereas amateur wit is confusing.  When an American I knew, 
turning over the books on a drawing-room table and finding 
Hare's WALKS IN LONDON, in two volumes, said, "So you part 
your hair in the middle over here," the remark was received in 
silence, and with looks of polite surprise.

It is not necessary, however, to accumulate proofs that this 
much described society is less intelligent than our own.  
Their authors have acknowledged it, and well they may.  For 
from Scott and Dickens down to Hall Caine, American 
appreciation has gone far toward establishing the reputation 
of English writers at home.

In spite of lack of humor and a thousand other defects which 
ought to make English swelldom antagonistic to our countrymen, 
the fact remains that "smart" London tempts a certain number 
of Americans and has become a promised land, toward which they 
turn longing eyes.  You will always find a few of these 
votaries over there in the "season," struggling bravely up the 
social current, making acquaintances, spending money at 
charity sales, giving dinners and fetes, taking houses at 
Ascot and filling them with their new friends' friends.  With 
more or less success as the new-comers have been able to 
return satisfactory answers to the three primary questions.

What Americans are these, who force us to blush for them 
infinitely more than for the unlettered tourists trotting 
conscientiously around the country, doing the sights and 
asking for soda-water and buckwheat cakes at the hotels!

Any one who has been an observer of the genus "Climber" at 
home, and wondered at their way and courage, will recognize 
these ambitious souls abroad; five minutes' conversation is 
enough.  It is never about a place that they talk, but of the 
people they know.  London to them is not the city of Dickens.  
It is a place where one may meet the Prince of Wales and 
perhaps obtain an entrance into his set.

One description will cover most climbers.  They are, as a 
rule, people who start humbly in some small city, then when 
fortune comes, push on to New York and Newport, where they 
carry all before them and make their houses centres and 
themselves powers.  Next comes the discovery that the circle 
into which they have forced their way is not nearly as 
attractive as it appeared from a distance.  Consequently that 
vague disappointment is felt which most of us experience on 
attaining a long desired goal - the unsatisfactoriness of 
success!  Much the same sensation as caused poor Du Maurier to 
answer, when asked shortly before his death why he looked so 
glum, "I'm soured by success!"

So true is this of all human nature that the following recipe 
might be given for the attainment of perfect happiness: "Begin 
far down in any walk of life.  Rise by your efforts higher 
each year, and then be careful to die before discovering that 
there is nothing at the top.  The excitement of the struggle - 
`the rapture of the chase' - are greater joys than 
achievement."

Our ambitious friends naturally ignore this bit of philosophy.  
When it is discovered that the "world" at home has given but 
an unsatisfactory return for cash and conniving, it occurs to 
them that the fault lies in the circle, and they assume that 
their particular talents require a larger field.  Having 
conquered all in sight, these social Alexanders pine for a new 
world, which generally turns out to be the "Old," so a 
crossing is made, and the "Conquest of England" begun with all 
the enthusiasm and push employed on starting out from the 
little native city twenty years before.

It is in Victoria's realm that foemen worthy of their steel 
await the conquerors.  Home society was a too easy prey, 
opening its doors and laying down its arms at the first 
summons.  In England the new-comers find that their little 
game has been played before; and, well, what they imagined was 
a discovery proves to be a long-studied science with "DONNANT! 
DONNANT!" as its fundamental law.  Wily opponents with trump 
cards in their hands and a profound knowledge of "Hoyle" 
smilingly offer them seats.  Having acquired in a home game a 
knowledge of "bluff," our friends plunge with delight into the 
fray, only to find English society so formed that, climb they 
never so wisely, the top can never be reached.  Work as hard 
as they may, succeed even beyond their fondest hopes, there 
will always remain circles above, toward which to yearn - 
people who will refuse to know them, houses they will never be 
invited to enter.  Think of the charm, the attraction such a 
civilization must have for the real born climber, and you, my 
reader, will understand why certain of our compatriots enjoy 
living in England, and why when once the intoxicating draught 
(supplied to the ambitious on the other side) has been tasted, 
all home concoctions prove insipid.




Chapter 10 - CALVE at Cabrieres


WHILE I was making a "cure" last year at Lamalou, an obscure 
Spa in the Cevennes Mountains, Madame Calve, to whom I had 
expressed a desire to see her picturesque home, telegraphed an 
invitation to pass the day with her, naming the train she 
could meet, which would allow for the long drive to her 
chateau before luncheon.  It is needless to say the invitation 
was accepted.  As my train drew up at the little station, 
Madame Calve, in her trap, was the first person I saw, and no 
time was lost in getting EN ROUTE.

During the hour passed on the poplar-bordered road that leads 
straight and white across the country I had time to appreciate 
the transformation in the woman at my side.  Was this gray-
clad, nunlike figure the passionate, sensuous Carmen of 
Bizet's masterpiece?  Could that calm, pale face, crossed by 
innumerable lines of suffering, as a spider's web lies on a 
flower, blaze and pant with Sappho's guilty love?

Something of these thoughts must have appeared on my face, for 
turning with a smile, she asked, "You find me changed?  It's 
the air of my village.  Here I'm myself.  Everywhere else I'm 
different.  On the stage I am any part I may be playing, but 
am never really happy away from my hill there."  As she spoke, 
a sun-baked hamlet came in sight, huddled around the base of 
two tall towers that rose cool and gray in the noonday heat.

"All that wing," she added, "is arranged for the convalescent 
girls whom I have sent down to me from the Paris hospitals for 
a cure of fresh air and simple food.  Six years ago, just 
after I had bought this place, a series of operations became 
necessary which left me prostrated and anaemic.  No tonics 
were of benefit.  I grew weaker day by day, until the doctors 
began to despair of my life.  Finally, at the advice of an old 
woman here who passes for being something of a curer, I tried 
the experiment or lying five or six hours a day motionless in 
the sunlight.  It wasn't long before I felt life creeping back 
to my poor feeble body.  The hot sun of our magic south was a 
more subtle tonic than any drug.  When the cure was complete, 
I made up my mind that each summer the same chance should be 
offered to as many of my suffering sisters as this old place 
could be made to accommodate."

The bells on the shaggy Tarbes ponies she was driving along 
the Languedoc road drew, on nearing her residence, a number of 
peasant children from their play.

As the ruddy urchins ran shouting around our carriage wheels 
and scrambled in the dust for the sous we threw them, my 
hostess pointed laughing to a scrubby little girl with tomato-
colored cheeks and tousled dark hair, remarking, "I looked 
like that twenty years ago and performed just those antics on 
this very road.  No punishment would keep me off the highway.  
Those pennies, if I'm not mistaken, will all be spent at the 
village pastry cook's within an hour."

This was said with such a tender glance at the children that 
one realized the great artist was at home here, surrounded by 
the people she loved and understood.  True to the "homing" 
instinct of the French peasant, Madame Calve, when fortune 
came to her, bought and partially restored the rambling 
chateau which at sunset casts its shadow across the village of 
her birth.  Since that day every moment of freedom from 
professional labor and every penny of her large income are 
spent at Cabrieres, building, planning, even farming, when her 
health permits.

"I think," she continued, as we approached the chateau, "that 
the happiest day of my life - and I have, as you know, passed 
some hours worth living, both on and off the stage - was when, 
that wing completed, a Paris train brought the first occupants 
for my twenty little bedrooms; no words can tell the delight 
it gives me now to see the color coming back to my patients' 
pale lips and hear them laughing and singing about the place.  
As I am always short of funds, the idea of abandoning this 
work is the only fear the future holds for me."

With the vivacity peculiar to her character, my companion then 
whipped up her cobs and turned the conversation into gayer 
channels.  Five minutes later we clattered over a drawbridge 
and drew up in a roomy courtyard, half blinding sunlight and 
half blue shadow, where a score of girls were occupied with 
books and sewing.

The luncheon bell was ringing as we ascended the terrace 
steps.  After a hurried five minutes for brushing and washing, 
we took our places at a long table set in the cool stone hall, 
guests stopping in the chateau occupying one end around the 
chatelaine, the convalescents filling the other seats.

Those who have only seen the capricious diva on the stage or 
in Parisian salons can form little idea of the proprietress of 
Cabrieres.  No shade of coquetry blurs the clear picture of 
her home life.  The capped and saboted peasant women who 
waited on us were not more simple in their ways.  Several 
times during the meal she left her seat to inquire after the 
comfort of some invalid girl or inspect the cooking in the 
adjacent kitchen.  These wanderings were not, however, allowed 
to disturb the conversation, which flowed on after the mellow 
French fashion, enlivened by much wit and gay badinage.  One 
of our hostess's anecdotes at her own expense was especially 
amusing.

"When in Venice," she told us, "most prima donnas are carried 
to and from the opera in sedan chairs to avoid the risk of 
colds from the draughty gondolas.  The last night of my 
initial season there, I was informed, as the curtain fell, 
that a number of Venetian nobles were planning to carry me in 
triumph to the hotel.  When I descended from my dressing-room 
the courtyard of the theatre was filled with men in dress 
clothes, bearing lanterns, who caught up the chair as soon as 
I was seated and carried it noisily across the city to the 
hotel.  Much moved by this unusual honor, I mounted to the 
balcony of my room, from which elevation I bowed my thanks, 
and threw all the flowers at hand to my escort.

"Next morning the hotel proprietor appeared with my coffee, 
and after hesitating a moment, remarked: `Well, we made a 
success of it last night.  It has been telegraphed to all the 
capitals of Europe!  I hope you will not think a thousand 
francs too much, considering the advertisement!'  In blank 
amazement, I asked what he meant.  `I mean the triumphal 
progress,' he answered.  `I thought you understood!  We always 
organize one for the "stars" who visit Venice.  The men who 
carried your chair last night were the waiters from the 
hotels.  We hire them on account of their dress clothes'!  
Think of the disillusion," added Calve, laughing, "and my 
disgust, when I thought of myself naively throwing kisses and 
flowers to a group of Swiss garcons at fifteen francs a head.  
There was nothing to do, however, but pay the bill and swallow 
my chagrin!"

How many pretty women do you suppose would tell such a joke 
upon themselves?  Another story she told us is characteristic 
of her peasant neighbors.

"When I came back here after my first season in St. Petersburg 
and London the CURE requested me to sing at our local fete.  I 
gladly consented, and, standing by his side on the steps of 
the MAIRIE, gave the great aria from the HUGUENOTS in my best 
manner.  To my astonishment the performance was received in 
complete silence.  `Poor Calve,' I heard an old friend of my 
mother's murmur.  `Her voice used to be so nice, and now it's 
all gone!'  Taking in the situation at a glance, I threw my 
voice well up into my nose and started off on a well-known 
provincial song, in the shrill falsetto of our peasant women.  
The effect was instantaneous!  Long before the end the 
performance was drowned in thunders of applause.  Which proves 
that to be popular a singer must adapt herself to her 
audience."

Luncheon over, we repaired for cigarettes and coffee to an 
upper room, where Calve was giving Dagnan-Bouveret some 
sittings for a portrait, and lingered there until four 
o'clock, when our hostess left us for her siesta, and a 
"break" took those who cared for the excursion across the 
valley to inspect the ruins of a Roman bath.  A late dinner 
brought us together again in a small dining room, the 
convalescents having eaten their simple meal and disappeared 
an hour before.  During this time, another transformation had 
taken place in our mercurial hostess!  It was the Calve of 
Paris, Calve the witch, Calve the CAPITEUSE, who presided at 
the dainty, flower-decked table and led the laughing 
conversation.

A few notes struck on a guitar by one of the party, as we sat 
an hour later on the moonlit terrace, were enough to start off 
the versatile artist, who was in her gayest humor.  She sang 
us stray bits of opera, alternating her music with scenes 
burlesqued from recent plays.  No one escaped her inimitable 
mimicry, not even the "divine Sarah," Calve giving us an 
unpayable impersonation of the elderly TRAGEDIENNE as 
Lorenzaccio, the boy hero of Alfred de Musset's drama.  
Burlesquing led to her dancing some Spanish steps with an 
abandon never attempted on the stage!  Which in turn gave 
place to an imitation of an American whistling an air from 
CARMEN, and some "coon songs" she had picked up during her 
stay at New York.  They, again, were succeeded by a superb 
rendering of the imprecation from Racine's CAMILLE, which made 
her audience realize that in gaining a soprano the world has 
lost, perhaps, its greatest TRAGEDIENNE.

At eleven o'clock the clatter of hoofs in the court warned us 
that the pleasant evening had come to an end.  A journalist EN 
ROUTE for Paris was soon installed with me in the little 
omnibus that was to take us to the station, Calve herself 
lighting our cigars and providing the wraps that were to keep 
out the cool night air.

As we passed under the low archway of the entrance amid a 
clamor of "adieu" and "au revoir," the young Frenchman at my 
side pointed up to a row of closed windows overhead.  "Isn't 
it a lesson," he said, "for all of us, to think of the 
occupants of those little rooms, whom the generosity and care 
of that gracious artist are leaning by such pleasant paths 
back to health and courage for their toilsome lives?"




Chapter 11 - A Cry For Fresh Air


"ONCE upon a time," reads the familiar nursery tale, while the 
fairies, invited by a king and queen to the christening of 
their daughter, were showering good gifts on the baby 
princess, a disgruntled old witch, whom no one had thought of 
asking to the ceremony, appeared uninvited on the scene and 
revenged herself by decreeing that the presents of the good 
fairies, instead of proving beneficial, should bring only 
trouble and embarrassment to the royal infant.

A telling analogy might be drawn between that unhappy princess 
over whose fate so many youthful tears have been shed, and the 
condition of our invention-ridden country; for we see every 
day how the good gifts of those nineteenth century fairies, 
Science and Industry, instead of proving blessings to mankind, 
are being turned by ignorance and stupidity into veritable 
afflictions.

If a prophetic gentleman had told Louis Fourteenth's shivering 
courtiers - whom an iron etiquette forced on winter mornings 
into the (appropriately named) Galerie des Glaces, stamping 
their silk-clad feet and blowing on their blue fingers, until 
the king should appear - that within a century and a half one 
simple discovery would enable all classes of people to keep 
their shops and dwellings at a summer temperature through the 
severest winters, the half-frozen nobles would have flouted 
the suggestion as an "iridescent dream," a sort of too-good-
to-be-true prophecy.

What was to those noblemen an unheard-of luxury has become 
within the last decade one of the primary necessities of our 
life.

The question arises now: Are we gainers by the change?  Has 
the indiscriminate use of heat been of advantage, either 
mentally or physically, to the nation?

The incubus of caloric that sits on our gasping country is 
particularly painful at this season, when nature undertakes to 
do her own heating.

In other less-favored lands, the first spring days, the 
exquisite awakening of the world after a long winter, bring to 
the inhabitants a sensation of joy and renewed vitality.  We, 
however, have discounted that enjoyment.  Delicate gradations 
of temperature are lost on people who have been stewing for 
six months in a mixture of steam and twice-breathed air.

What pleasure can an early April day afford the man who has 
slept in an over-heated flat and is hurrying to an office 
where eighty degrees is the average all the year round?  Or 
the pale shop-girl, who complains if a breath of morning air 
strays into the suburban train where she is seated?

As people who habitually use such "relishes" as Chutney and 
Worcestershire are incapable of appreciating delicately 
prepared food, so the "soft" mortals who have accustomed 
themselves to a perpetual August are insensible to fine 
shadings of temperature.

The other day I went with a friend to inspect some rooms he 
had been decorating in one of our public schools.  The morning 
had been frosty, but by eleven o'clock the sun warmed the air 
uncomfortably.  On entering the school we were met by a blast 
of heated air that was positively staggering.  In the 
recitation rooms, where, as in all New York schoolrooms, the 
children were packed like dominoes in a box, the temperature 
could not have been under eighty-five.

The pale, spectacled spinster in charge, to whom we complained 
of this, was astonished and offended at what she considered 
our interference, and answered that "the children liked it 
warm," as for herself she "had a cold and could not think of 
opening a window."  If the rooms were too warm it was the 
janitor's fault, and he had gone out!

Twelve o'clock struck before we had finished our tour of 
inspection.  It is to be doubted if anywhere else in the world 
could there be found such a procession of pasty-faced, dull-
eyed youngsters as trooped past us down the stairs.  Their 
appearance was the natural result of compelling children 
dressed for winter weather to sit many hours each day in 
hothouses, more suited to tropical plants than to growing 
human beings.

A gentleman with us remarked with a sigh, "I have been in 
almost every school in the city and find the same condition 
everywhere.  It is terrible, but there doesn't seem to be any 
remedy for it."  The taste for living in a red-hot atmosphere 
is growing on our people; even public vehicles have to be 
heated now to please the patrons.

When tiresome old Benjamin Franklin made stoves popular he 
struck a terrible blow at the health of his compatriots; the 
introduction of steam heat and consequent suppression of all 
health-giving ventilation did the rest; the rosy cheeks of 
American children went up the chimney with the last whiff of 
wood smoke, and have never returned.  Much of our home life 
followed; no family can be expected to gather in cheerful 
converse around a "radiator."

How can this horror of fresh air among us be explained?  If 
people really enjoy living in overheated rooms with little or 
no ventilation, why is it that we hear so much complaining, 
when during the summer months the thermometer runs up into the 
familiar nineties?  Why are children hurried out of town, and 
why do wives consider it a necessity to desert their husbands?

It's rather inconsistent, to say the least, for not one of 
those deserters but would "kick" if the theatre or church they 
attend fell below that temperature in December.

It is impossible to go into our banks and offices and not 
realize that the air has been breathed again and again, heated 
and cooled, but never changed, - doors and windows fit too 
tightly for that.

The pallor and dazed expression of the employees tell the same 
tale.  I spoke to a youth the other day in an office about his 
appearance and asked if he was ill.  "Yes," he answered, "I 
have had a succession of colds all winter.  You see, my desk 
here is next to the radiator, so I am in a perpetual 
perspiration and catch cold as soon as I go out.  Last winter 
I passed three months in a farmhouse, where the water froze in 
my room at night, and we had to wear overcoats to our meals.  
Yet I never had a cold there, and gained in weight and 
strength."

Twenty years ago no "palatial private residence" was 
considered complete unless there was a stationary washstand 
(forming a direct connection with the sewer) in each bedroom.  
We looked pityingly on foreigners who did not enjoy these 
advantages, until one day we realized that the latter were in 
the right, and straightway stationary washstands disappeared.

How much time must pass and how many victims be sacrificed 
before we come to our senses on the great radiator question?

As a result of our population living in a furnace, it happens 
now that when you rebel on being forced to take an impromptu 
Turkish bath at a theatre, the usher answers your complaint 
with "It can't be as warm as you think, for a lady over there 
has just told me she felt chilly and asked for more heat!"

Another invention of the enemy is the "revolving door."  By 
this ingenious contrivance the little fresh air that formerly 
crept into a building is now excluded.  Which explains why on 
entering our larger hotels one is taken by the throat, as it 
were, by a sickening long-dead atmosphere - in which the 
souvenir of past meals and decaying flowers floats like a 
regret - such as explorers must find on opening an Egyptian 
tomb.

Absurd as it may seem, it has become a distinction to have 
cool rooms.  Alas, they are rare!  Those blessed households 
where one has the delicious sensation of being chilly and can 
turn with pleasure toward crackling wood!  The open fire has 
become, within the last decade, a test of refinement, almost a 
question of good breeding, forming a broad distinction between 
dainty households and vulgar ones, and marking the line which 
separates the homes of cultivated people from the parlors of 
those who care only for display.

A drawing-room filled with heat, the source of which remains 
invisible, is as characteristic of the parvenu as clanking 
chains on a harness or fine clothes worn in the street.

An open fire is the "eye" of a room, which can no more be 
attractive without it than the human face can be beautiful if 
it lacks the visual organs.  The "gas fire" bears about the 
same relation to the real thing as a glass eye does to a 
natural one, and produces much the same sensation.  Artificial 
eyes are painful necessities in some cases, and therefore 
cannot be condemned; but the household which gathers 
complacently around a "gas log" must have something radically 
wrong with it, and would be capable of worse offences against 
taste and hospitality.

There is a tombstone in a New England grave-yard the 
inscription on which reads: "I was well, I wanted to be 
better.  Here I am."

As regards heating of our houses, it's to be feared that we 
have gone much the same road as the unfortunate New Englander.  
I don't mean to imply that he is now suffering from too much 
heat, but we, as a nation, certainly are.

Janitors and parlor-car conductors have replaced the wicked 
fairies of other days, but are apparently animated by their 
malignant spirit, and employ their hours of brief authority as 
cruelly.  No witch dancing around her boiling cauldron was 
ever more joyful than the fireman of a modern hotel, as he 
gleefully turns more and more steam upon his helpless victims.  
Long acquaintance with that gentleman has convinced me that he 
cannot plead ignorance as an excuse for falling into these 
excesses.  It is pure, unadulterated perversity, else why 
should he invariably choose the mildest mornings to show what 
his engines can do?

Many explanations have been offered for this love of a high 
temperature by our compatriots.  Perhaps the true one has not 
yet been found.  Is it not possible that what appears to be 
folly and almost criminal negligence of the rules of health, 
may be, after all, only a commendable ambition to renew the 
exploits of those biblical heroes, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego?




Chapter 12 - The Paris of our Grandparents


WE are apt to fall into the error of assuming that only 
American cities have displaced their centres and changed their 
appearance during the last half-century.

The "oldest inhabitant," with his twice-told tales of 
transformations and changes, is to a certain extent 
responsible for this; by contrast, we imagine that the 
capitals of Europe have always been just as we see them.  So 
strong is this impression that it requires a serious effort of 
the imagination to reconstruct the Paris that our grandparents 
knew and admired, few as the years are that separate their day 
from ours.

It is, for instance, difficult to conceive of a Paris that 
ended at the rue Royale, with only waste land and market 
gardens beyond the Madeleine, where to-day so many avenues 
open their stately perspectives; yet such was the case!  The 
few fine residences that existed beyond that point faced the 
Faubourg Saint-Honore, with gardens running back to an unkempt 
open country called the Champs Elysees, where an unfinished 
Arc de Triomphe stood alone in a wilderness that no one ever 
dreamed of traversing.

The fashionable ladies of that time drove in the afternoon 
along the boulevards from the Madeleine to the Chateau d'Eau, 
and stopped their ponderous yellow barouches at Tortoni's, 
where ices were served to them in their carriages, while they 
chatted with immaculate dandies in skin-tight nankeen 
unmentionables, blue swallow-tailed coats, and furry `beaver" 
hats.

While looking over some books in the company of an old lady 
who from time to time opens her store of treasures and recalls 
her remote youth at my request, and whose SPIRITUEL and 
graphic language gives to her souvenirs the air of being stray 
chapters from some old-fashioned romance, I received a vivid 
impression of how the French capital must have looked fifty 
years ago.

Emptying in her company a chest of books that had not seen the 
light for several decades, we came across a "Panorama of the 
Boulevards," dated 1845, which proved when unfolded to be a 
colored lithograph, a couple of yards long by five or six 
inches high, representing the line of boulevards from the 
Madeleine to the Place de la Bastille.  Each house, almost 
each tree, was faithfully depicted, together with the crowds 
on the sidewalks and the carriages in the street.  The whole 
scene was as different from the effect made by that 
thoroughfare to-day as though five hundred and not fifty years 
had elapsed since the little book was printed.  The picture 
breathed an atmosphere of calm and nameless quaintness that 
one finds now only in old provincial cities which have escaped 
the ravages of improvement.

My companion sat with the book unfolded before her, in a 
smiling trance.  Her mind had turned back to the far-away days 
when she first trod those streets a bride, with all the 
pleasures and few of the cares of life to think about.

I watched her in silence (it seemed a sacrilege to break in on 
such a train of thought), until gradually her eyes lost their 
far-away expression, and, turning to me with a smile, she 
exclaimed: "How we ever had the courage to appear in the 
street dressed as we were is a mystery!  Do you see that 
carriage?" pointing in the print to a high-swung family 
vehicle with a powdered coachman on the box, and two sky-blue 
lackeys standing behind.  "I can remember, as if it were 
yesterday, going to drive with Lady B-, the British 
ambassadress, in just such a conveyance.  She drove four 
horses with feathers on their heads, when she used to come to 
Meurice's for me.  I blush when I think that my frock was so 
scant that I had to raise the skirt almost to my knees in 
order to get into her carriage.

"Why we didn't all die of pneumonia is another marvel, for we 
wore low-necked dresses and the thinnest of slippers in the 
street, our heads being about the only part that was 
completely covered.  I was particularly proud of a turban 
surmounted with a bird of paradise, but Lady B- affected poke 
bonnets, then just coming into fashion, so large and so deep 
that when one looked at her from the side nothing was visible 
except two curls, `as damp and as black as leeches.'  In other 
ways our toilets were absurdly unsuited for every-day wear; we 
wore light scarves over our necks, and rarely used furlined 
pelisses."

Returning to an examination of the panorama, my companion 
pointed out to me that there was no break in the boulevards, 
where the opera-house, with its seven radiating avenues, now 
stands, but a long line of Hotels, dozing behind high walls, 
and quaint two-storied buildings that undoubtedly dated from 
the razing of the city wall and the opening of the new 
thoroughfare under Louis XV.

A little farther on was the world-famous Maison Doree, where 
one almost expected to see Alfred de Musset and le docteur 
Veron dining with Dumas and Eugene Sue.

"What in the name of goodness is that?" I exclaimed, pointing 
to a couple of black and yellow monstrosities on wheels, which 
looked like three carriages joined together with a "buggy" 
added on in front.

"That's the diligence just arrived from Calais; it has been 
two days EN ROUTE, the passengers sleeping as best they could, 
side by side, and escaping from their confinement only when 
horses were changed or while stopping for meals.  That high 
two-wheeled trap with the little `tiger' standing up behind is 
a tilbury.  We used to see the Count d'Orsay driving one like 
that almost every day.  He wore butter-colored gloves, and the 
skirts of his coat were pleated full all around, and stood out 
like a ballet girl's.  It is a pity they have not included 
Louis Philippe and his family jogging off to Neuilly in the 
court `carryall,' - the `Citizen King,' with his blue umbrella 
between his knees, trying to look like an honest bourgeois, 
and failing even in that attempt to please the Parisians.

"We were in Paris in '48; from my window at Meurice's I saw 
poor old JUSTE MILIEU read his abdication from the historic 
middle balcony of the Tuileries, and half an hour later we 
perceived the Duchesse d'Orleans leave the Tuileries on foot, 
leading her two sons by the hand, and walk through the gardens 
and across the Place de la Concorde to the Corps Legislatif, 
in a last attempt to save the crown for her son.  Futile 
effort!  That evening the `Citizen King' was hurried through 
those same gardens and into a passing cab, EN ROUTE for a life 
exile.

"Our balcony at Meurice's was a fine point of observation from 
which to watch a revolution.  With an opera-glass we could see 
the mob surging to the sack of the palace, the priceless 
furniture and bric-a-brac flung into the street, court dresses 
waved on pikes from the tall windows, and finally the throne 
brought out, and carried off to be burned.  There was no 
keeping the men of our party in after that.  They rushed off 
to have a nearer glimpse of the fighting, and we saw no more 
of them until daybreak the following morning when, just as we 
were preparing to send for the police, two dilapidated, 
ragged, black-faced mortals appeared, in whom we barely 
recognized our husbands.  They had been impressed into service 
and passed their night building barricades.  My better half, 
however, had succeeded in snatching a handful of the gold 
fringe from the throne as it was carried by, an act of prowess 
that repaid him for all his troubles and fatigue.

"I passed the greater part of forty-eight hours on our 
balcony, watching the mob marching by, singing LA 
MARSEILLAISE, and camping at night in the streets.  It was all 
I could do to tear myself away from the window long enough to 
eat and write in my journal.

"There was no Avenue de l'Opera then.  The trip from the 
boulevards to the Palais-Royal had to be made by a long detour 
across the Place Vendome (where, by the bye, a cattle market 
was held) or through a labyrinth of narrow, bad-smelling 
little streets, where strangers easily lost their way.  Next 
to the boulevards, the Palais-Royal was the centre of the 
elegant and dissipated life in the capital.  It was there we 
met of an afternoon to drink chocolate at the `Rotonde,' or to 
dine at `Les Trois Freres Provencaux,' and let our husbands 
have a try at the gambling tables in the Passage d'Orleans.

"No one thought of buying jewelry anywhere else.  It was from 
the windows of its shops that the fashions started on their 
way around the world.  When Victoria as a bride was visiting 
Louis Philippe, she was so fascinated by the aspect of the 
place that the gallant French king ordered a miniature copy of 
the scene, made IN PAPIER-MACHE, as a present for his guest, a 
sort of gigantic dolls' house in which not only the palace and 
its long colonnades were reproduced, but every tiny shop and 
the myriad articles for sale were copied with Chinese 
fidelity.  Unfortunately the pear-headed old king became 
England's uninvited guest before this clumsy toy was finished, 
so it never crossed the Channel, but can be seen to-day by any 
one curious enough to examine it, in the Musee Carnavalet.

"Few of us realize that the Paris of Charles X. and Louis 
Philippe would seem to us now a small, ill-paved, and worse-
lighted provincial town, with few theatres or hotels, 
communicating with the outer world only by means of a horse-
drawn `post,' and practically farther from London than 
Constantinople is to-day.  One feels this isolation in the 
literature of the time; brilliant as the epoch was, the 
horizon of its writers was bounded by the boulevards and the 
Faubourg Saint-Germain."

Dumas says laughingly, in a letter to a friend: "I have never 
ventured into the unexplored country beyond the Bastille, but 
am convinced that it shelters wild animals and savages."  The 
wit and brains of the period were concentrated into a small 
space.  Money-making had no more part in the programme of a 
writer then than an introduction into "society."  Catering to 
a foreign market and snobbishness were undreamed-of 
degradations.  Paris had not yet been turned into the FOIRE DU 
MONDE that she has since become, with whole quarters given 
over to the use of foreigners, - theatres, restaurants, and 
hotels created only for the use of a polyglot population that 
could give lessons to the people around Babel's famous 
"tower."




Chapter 13 - Some American Husbands


UNTIL the beginning of this century men played the BEAU ROLE 
in life's comedy.  As in the rest of the animal world, our 
males were the brilliant members of the community, flaunting 
their gaudy plumage at home and abroad, while the women-folk 
remained in seclusion, tending their children, directing the 
servants, or ministering to their lords' comfort.

In those happy days the husband ruled supreme at his own 
fireside, receiving the homage of the family, who bent to his 
will and obeyed his orders.

During the last century, however, the "part" of better half 
has become less and less attractive in America, one 
prerogative after another having been whisked away by 
enterprising wives.  Modern Delilahs have yearly snipped off 
more and more of Samson's luxuriant curls, and added those 
ornaments to their own COIFFURES, until in the majority of 
families the husband finds himself reduced to a state of 
bondage compared with which the biblical hero enjoyed a 
pampered idleness.  Times have indeed changed in America since 
the native chief sat in dignified repose bedizened with all 
the finery at hand, while the ladies of the family waited 
tremblingly upon him.  To-day it is the American husband who 
turns the grindstone all the year round, and it is his pretty 
tyrant who enjoys the elegant leisure that a century ago was 
considered a masculine luxury.

To America must be given the credit of having produced the 
model husband, a new species, as it were, of the GENUS HOMO.

In no role does a compatriot appear to such advantage as in 
that of Benedict.  As a boy he is often too advanced for his 
years or his information; in youth he is conspicuous neither 
for his culture nor his unselfishness.  But once in 
matrimonial harness this untrained animal becomes bridle-wise 
with surprising rapidity, and will for the rest of life go 
through his paces, waltzing, kneeing, and saluting with hardly 
a touch of the whip.  Whether this is the result of superior 
horse-womanship on the part of American wives or a trait 
peculiar to sons of "Uncle Sam," is hard to say, but the fact 
is self-evident to any observer that our fair equestrians 
rarely meet with a rebellious mount.

Any one who has studied marital ways in other lands will 
realize that in no country have the men effaced themselves so 
gracefully as with us.  In this respect no foreign production 
can compare for a moment with the domestic article.  In 
English, French, and German families the husband is still all-
powerful.  The house is mounted, guests are asked, and the 
year planned out to suit his occupations and pleasure.  Here 
papa is rarely consulted until such matters have been decided 
upon by the ladies, when the head of the house is called in to 
sign the checks.

I have had occasion more than once to bewail the shortcomings 
of the American man, and so take pleasure in pointing out the 
modesty and good temper with which he fills this role.  He is 
trained from the beginning to give all and expect nothing in 
return, an American girl rarely bringing any DOT to her 
husband, no matter how wealthy her family may be.  If, as 
occasionally happens, an income is allowed a bride by her 
parents, she expects to spend it on her toilets or pleasures.  
This condition of the matrimonial market exists in no other 
country; even in England, where MARIAGES DE CONVENANCE are 
rare, "settlements" form an inevitable prelude to conjugal 
bliss.

The fact that she contributes little or nothing to the common 
income in no way embarrasses an American wife; her pretensions 
are usually in an inverse proportion to her personal means.  A 
man I knew some years ago deliberately chose his bride from an 
impecunious family (in the hope that her simple surroundings 
had inculcated homely taste), and announced to an incredulous 
circle of friends, at his last bachelor dinner, that he 
intended, in future, to pass his evenings at his fireside, 
between his book and his pretty spouse.  Poor, innocent, 
confiding mortal!  The wife quickly became a belle of the 
fastest set in town.  Having had more than she wanted of 
firesides and quiet evenings before her marriage, her idea was 
to go about as much as possible, and, when not so occupied, to 
fill her house with company.  It may be laid down as a maxim 
in this connection that a man marries to obtain a home, and a 
girl to get away from one; hence disappointment on both sides.

The couple in question have in all probability not passed an 
evening alone since they were married, the lady rarely 
stopping in the round of her gayeties until she collapses from 
fatigue.  Their home is typical of their life, which itself 
can be taken as a good example of the existence that most of 
our "smart" people lead.  The ground floor and the first floor 
are given up to entertaining.  The second is occupied by the 
spacious sitting, bath, and sleeping rooms of the lady.  A 
ten-by-twelve chamber suffices for my lord, and the only den 
he can rightly call his own is a small room near the front 
door, about as private as the sidewalk, which is turned into a 
cloak-room whenever the couple receive, making it impossible 
to keep books or papers of value there, or even to use it as a 
smoking-room after dinner, so his men guests sit around the 
dismantled dining-table while the ladies are enjoying a suite 
of parlors above.

At first the idea of such an unequal division of the house 
shocks our sense of justice, until we reflect that the 
American husband is not expected to remain at home.  That's 
not his place!  If he is not down town making money, fashion 
dictates that he must be at some club-house playing a game.  A 
man who should remain at home, and read or chat with the 
ladies of his family, would be considered a bore and unmanly.  
There seems to be no place in an American house for its head.  
More than once when the friend I have referred to has asked 
me, at the club, to dine informally with him, we have found, 
on arriving, that Madame, having an evening off, had gone to 
bed and forgotten to order any dinner, so we were obliged to 
return to the club for our meal.  When, however, his wife is 
in good health, she expects her weary husband to accompany her 
to dinner, opera, or ball, night after night, oblivious of the 
work the morrow holds in store for him.

In one family I know, paterfamilias goes by the name of the 
"purse."  The more one sees of American households the more 
appropriate that name appears.  Everything is expected of the 
husband, and he is accorded no definite place in return.  He 
leaves the house at 8.30.  When he returns, at five, if his 
wife is entertaining a man at tea, it would be considered the 
height of indelicacy for him to intrude upon them, for his 
arrival would cast a chill on the conversation.  When a couple 
dine out, the husband is always LA BETE NOIRE of the hostess, 
no woman wanting to sit next to a married man, if she can help 
it.

The few Benedicts who have had the courage to break away from 
these conditions and amuse themselves with yachts, salmon 
rivers, or "grass-bachelor" trips to Europe, while secretly 
admired by the women, are frowned upon in society as dangerous 
examples, likely to sow the seeds of discontent among their 
comrades; although it is the commonest thing in the world for 
an American wife to take the children and go abroad on a tour.

Imagine a German or Italian wife announcing to her spouse that 
she had decided to run over to England for a year with her 
children, that they might learn English.  The mind recoils in 
horror from the idea of the catastrophe that would ensue.

Glance around a ball-room, a dinner party, or the opera, if 
you have any doubts as to the unselfishness of our married 
men.  How many of them do you suppose are present for their 
own pleasure?  The owner of an opera box rarely retains a seat 
in his expensive quarters.  You generally find him idling in 
the lobbies looking at his watch, or repairing to a 
neighboring concert hall to pass the weary hours.  At a ball 
it is even worse.  One wonders why card-rooms are not provided 
at large balls (as is the custom abroad), where the bored 
husbands might find a little solace over "bridge," instead of 
yawning in the coat-room or making desperate signs to their 
wives from the doorway, - signals of distress, by the bye, 
that rarely produce any effect.

It is the rebellious husband who is admired and courted, 
however.  A curious trait of human nature compels admiration 
for whatever is harmful, and forces us, in spite of our better 
judgment, to depreciate the useful and beneficent.  The coats-
of-arms of all countries are crowded with eagles and lions, 
that never yet did any good, living or dead; orators enlarge 
on the fine qualities of these birds and beasts, and hold them 
up as models, while using as terms of reproach the name of the 
goose or the cow, creatures that minister in a hundred ways to 
our wants.  Such a spirit has brought helpful, productive 
"better halves" to the humble place they now occupy in the 
eyes of our people.

As long as men passed their time in fighting and carousing 
they were heroes; as soon as they became patient bread-winners 
all the romance evaporated from their atmosphere.  The Jewish 
Hercules had his revenge in the end and made things 
disagreeable for his tormentors.  So far, however, there are 
no signs of a revolt among the shorn lambs in this country.  
They patiently bend their necks to the collar - the kindest, 
most loving and devoted helpmates that ever plodded under the 
matrimonial yoke.

When in the East, one watches with admiration the part a 
donkey plays in the economy of those primitive lands.  All the 
work is reserved for that industrious animal, and little play 
falls to his share.  The camel is always bad-tempered, and 
when overladen lies down, refusing to move until relieved of 
its burden.  The Turk is lazy and selfish, the native women 
pass their time in chattering and giggling, the children play 
and squabble, the ubiquitous dog sleeps in the sun; but from 
daybreak to midnight the little mouse-colored donkeys toil 
unceasingly.  All burdens too bulky or too cumbersome for man 
are put on his back; the provender which horses and camels 
have refused becomes his portion; he is the first to begin the 
day's labor, and the last to turn in.  It is impossible to 
live long in the Orient or the south of France without 
becoming attached to those gentle, willing animals.  The role 
which honest "Bourico" fills so well abroad is played on this 
side of the Atlantic by the American husband.

I mean no disrespect to my married compatriots; on the 
contrary, I admire them as I do all docile, unselfish beings.  
It is well for our women, however, that their lords, like the 
little Oriental donkeys, ignore their strength, and are 
content to toil on to the end of their days, expecting neither 
praise nor thanks in return.




Chapter 14 - "CAROLUS"


IN the early seventies a group of students - dissatisfied with 
the cut-and-dried instruction of the Paris art school and 
attracted by certain qualities of color and technique in the 
work of a young Frenchman from the city of Lille, who was just 
beginning to attract the attention of connoisseurs - went in a 
body to his studio with the request that he would oversee 
their work and direct their studies.  The artist thus chosen 
was Carolus-Duran.  Oddly enough, a majority of the youths who 
sought him out and made him their master were Americans.

The first modest workroom on the Boulevard Montparnasse was 
soon too small to hold the pupils who crowded under this newly 
raised banner, and a move was made to more commodious quarters 
near the master's private studio.  Sargent, Dannat, Harrison, 
Beckwith, Hinckley, and many others whom it is needless to 
mention here, will - if these lines come under their notice - 
doubtless recall with a thrill of pleasure the roomy one-
storied structure in the rue Notre-Dame des Champs where we 
established our ATELIER D'ELEVES, a self-supporting 
cooperative concern, each student contributing ten francs a 
month toward rent, fire, and models, "Carolus" - the name by 
which this master is universally known abroad - not only 
refusing all compensation, according to the immutable custom 
of French painters of distinction, but, as we discovered 
later, contributing too often from his own pocket to help out 
the MASSIER at the end of a difficult season, or smooth the 
path of some improvident pupil.

Those were cloudless, enchanted days we passed in the tumbled 
down old atelier: an ardent springtime of life when the future 
beckons gayly and no doubts of success obscure the horizon.  
Our young master's enthusiasm fired his circle of pupils, who, 
as each succeeding year brought him increasing fame, revelled 
in a reflected glory with the generous admiration of youth, in 
which there is neither calculation nor shadow of envy.

A portrait of Madame de Portalais, exhibited about this time, 
drew all art-loving Paris around the new celebrity's canvas.  
Shortly after, the government purchased a painting (of our 
master's beautiful wife), now known as LA FEMME AU GANT, for 
the Luxembourg Gallery.

It is difficult to overestimate the impetus that a master's 
successes impart to the progress of his pupils.  My first 
studious year in Paris had been passed in the shadow of an 
elderly painter, who was comfortably dozing on the laurels of 
thirty years before.  The change from that sleepy environment 
to the vivid enthusiasm and dash of Carolus-Duran's studio was 
like stepping out of a musty cloister into the warmth and 
movement of a market-place.

Here, be it said in passing, lies perhaps the secret of the 
dry rot that too often settles on our American art schools.  
We, for some unknown reason, do not take the work of native 
painters seriously, nor encourage them in proportion to their 
merit.  In consequence they retain but a feeble hold upon 
their pupils.

Carolus, handsome, young, successful, courted, was an ideal 
leader for a band of ambitious, high-strung youths, repaying 
their devotion with an untiring interest and lifting clever 
and dull alike on the strong wings of his genius.  His visits 
to the studio, on which his friend Henner often accompanied 
him, were frequent and prolonged; certain Tuesdays being 
especially appreciated by us, as they were set apart for his 
criticism of original compositions.

When our sketches (the subject for which had been given out in 
advance) were arranged, and we had seated ourselves in a big 
half-circle on the floor, Carolus would install himself on a 
tall stool, the one seat the studio boasted, and chat A PROPOS 
of the works before him on composition, on classic art, on the 
theories of color and clair-obscur.  Brilliant talks, inlaid 
with much wit and incisive criticism, the memory of which must 
linger in the minds of all who were fortunate enough to hear 
them.  Nor was it to the studio alone that our master's 
interest followed us.  He would drop in at the Louvre, when we 
were copying there, and after some pleasant words of advice 
and encouragement, lead us off for a stroll through the 
galleries, interrupted by stations before his favorite 
masterpieces.

So important has he always considered a constant study of 
Renaissance art that recently, when about to commence his 
TRIUMPH OF BACCHUS, Carolus copied one of Rubens's larger 
canvases with all the naivete of a beginner.

An occasion soon presented itself for us to learn another side 
of our trade by working with our master on a ceiling ordered 
of him by the state for the Palace of the Luxembourg.  The 
vast studios which the city of Paris provides on occasions of 
this kind, with a liberality that should make our home 
corporations reflect, are situated out beyond the Exhibition 
buildings, in a curious, unfrequented quarter, ignored alike 
by Parisians and tourists, where the city stores compromising 
statues and the valuable debris of her many revolutions.  
There, among throneless Napoleons and riderless bronze steeds, 
we toiled for over six months side by side with our master, on 
gigantic APOTHEOSIS OF MARIE DE MEDICIS, serving in turn as 
painter and painted, and leaving the imprint of our hands and 
the reflection of our faces scattered about the composition.  
Day after day, when work was over, we would hoist the big 
canvas by means of a system of ropes and pulleys, from a 
perpendicular to the horizontal position it was to occupy 
permanently, and then sit straining our necks and discussing 
the progress of the work until the tardy spring twilight 
warned us to depart.

The year 1877 brought Carolus-Duran the MEDAILLE D'HONNEUR, a 
crowning recompense that set the atelier mad with delight.  We 
immediately organized a great (but economical) banquet to 
commemorate the event, over which our master presided, with 
much modesty, considering the amount of incense we burned 
before him, and the speeches we made.  One of our number even 
burst into some very bad French verses, asserting that the 
painters of the world in general fell back before him -


. . . EPOUVANTES - 
CRAIGNANT EGALEMENT SA BROSSE ET SON EPEE.


This allusion to his proficiency in fencing was considered 
particularly neat, and became the favorite song of the studio, 
to be howled in and out of season.

Curiously enough, there is always something in Carolus-Duran's 
attitude when at work which recalls the swordsman.  With an 
enormous palette in one hand and a brush in the other, he has 
a way of planting himself in front of his sitter that is 
amusingly suggestive of a duel.  His lithe body sways to and 
fro, his fine leonine face quivers with the intense study of 
his model; then with a sudden spring forward, a few rapid 
touches are dashed on the canvas (like home strokes in the 
enemy's weakest spot) with a precision of hand acquired only 
by long years of fencing.

An order to paint the king and queen of Portugal was the next 
step on the road to fame, another rung on the pleasant ladder 
of success.  When this work was done the delighted sovereign 
presented the painter with the order of "Christ of Portugal," 
together with many other gifts, among which a caricature of 
the master at work, signed by his sitter, is not the least 
valued.

When the great schism occurred several years ago which rent 
the art world of France, Carolus-Duran was elected vice-
president of the new school under Meissonier, to whose office 
he succeeded on that master's death; and now directs and 
presides over the yearly exhibition known as the SALON DU 
CHAMP DE MARS.

At his chateau near Paris or at Saint Raphael, on the 
Mediterranean, the master lives, like Leonardo of old, the 
existence of a grand seigneur, surrounded by his family, 
innumerable guests, and the horses and dogs he loves, - a 
group of which his ornate figure and expressive face form the 
natural centre.  Each year he lives more away from the world, 
but no more inspiriting sight can be imagined than the welcome 
the president receives of a "varnishing" day, when he makes 
his entry surrounded by his pupils.  The students cheer 
themselves hoarse, and the public climbs on everything that 
comes to hand to see him pass.  It is hard to realize then 
that this is the same man who, not content with his youthful 
progress, retired into an Italian monastery that he might 
commune face to face with nature undisturbed.

The works of no other painter give me the same sensation of 
quivering vitality, except the Velasquez in the Madrid Gallery 
and, perhaps, Sargent at his best; and one feels all through 
the American painter's work the influence of his first and 
only master.

"TOUT CE QUI N'EST PAS INDISPENSABLE EST NUISIBLE," a phrase 
which is often on Carolus-Duran's lips, may be taken as the 
keynote of his work, where one finds a noble simplicity of 
line and color scheme, an elimination of useless detail, a 
contempt for tricks to enforce an effect, and above all a 
comprehension and mastery of light, vitality, and texture - 
those three unities of the painter's art - that bring his 
canvases very near to those of his self-imposed Spanish 
master.

Those who know the French painter's more important works and 
his many splendid studies from the nude, feel it a pity that 
such masterpieces as the equestrian portrait of Mlle. 
Croisette, of the Comedie Francaise, the REVEIL, the superb 
full length of Mme. Pelouse on the Terrace of Chenonceau, and 
the head of Gounod in the Luxembourg, could not be collected 
into one exhibition, that lovers of art here in America might 
realize for themselves how this master's works are of the 
class that typify a school and an epoch, and engrave their 
author's name among those destined to become household words 
in the mouths of future generations.




Chapter 15 - The Grand Opera Fad


WITHOUT being more curious than my neighbors, there are 
several social mysteries that I should like to fathom, among 
others, the real reasons that induce the different classes of 
people one sees at the opera to attend that form of 
entertainment.

A taste for the theatre is natural enough.  It is also easy to 
understand why people who are fond of sport and animals enjoy 
races and dog shows.  But the continued vogue of grand opera, 
and more especially of Wagner's long-drawn-out compositions, 
among our restless, unmusical compatriots, remains 
unexplained.

The sheeplike docility of our public is apparent in numberless 
ways; in none, however, more strikingly than in their choice 
of amusements.  In business and religion, people occasionally 
think for themselves; in the selection of entertainments, 
never! but are apparently content to receive their opinions 
and prejudices ready-made from some unseen and omnipotent 
Areopagus.

The careful study of an opera audience from different parts of 
our auditorium has brought me to the conclusion that the 
public there may be loosely divided into three classes - 
leaving out reporters of fashionable intelligence, dressmakers 
in search of ideas, and the lady inhabitants of "Crank Alley" 
(as a certain corner of the orchestra is called), who sit in 
perpetual adoration before the elderly tenor.

First - but before venturing further on dangerously thin ice, 
it may be as well to suggest that this subject is not treated 
in absolute seriousness, and that all assertions must not be 
taken AU PIED DE LA LETTRE.  First, then, and most important, 
come the stockholders, for without them the Metropolitan would 
close.  The majority of these fortunate people and their 
guests look upon the opera as a social function, where one can 
meet one's friends and be seen, an entertaining antechamber in 
which to linger until it's time to "go on," her Box being to-
day as necessary a part of a great lady's outfit as a country 
house or a ball-room.

Second are those who attend because it has become the correct 
thing to be seen at the opera.  There is so much wealth in 
this city and so little opportunity for its display, so many 
people long to go about who are asked nowhere, that the opera 
has been seized upon as a centre in which to air rich apparel 
and elbow the "world."  This list fills a large part of the 
closely packed parquet and first balcony.

Third, and last, come the lovers of music, who mostly inhabit 
greater altitudes.

The motive of the typical box-owner is simple.  Her night at 
the opera is the excuse for a cosy little dinner, one woman 
friend (two would spoil the effect of the box) and four men, 
without counting the husband, who appears at dinner, but 
rarely goes further.  The pleasant meal and the subsequent 
smoke are prolonged until 9 or 9.30, when the men are finally 
dragged murmuring from their cigars.  If she has been 
fortunate and timed her arrival to correspond with an 
ENTR'ACTE, my lady is radiant.  The lights are up, she can see 
who are present, and the public can inspect her toilet and 
jewels as she settles herself under the combine d gaze of the 
house, and proceeds to hold an informal reception for the rest 
of the evening.  The men she has brought with her quickly cede 
their places to callers, and wander yawning in the lobby or 
invade the neighboring boxes and add their voices to the 
general murmur.

Although there is much less talking than formerly, it is the 
toleration of this custom at all by the public that indicates 
(along with many other straws) that we are not a music-loving 
people.  Audible conversation during a performance would not 
be allowed for a moment by a Continental audience.  The little 
visiting that takes place in boxes abroad is done during the 
ENTR'ACTES, when people retire to the salons back of their 
LOGES to eat ices and chat.  Here those little parlors are 
turned into cloak-rooms, and small talk goes on in many boxes 
during the entire performance.  The joke or scandal of the day 
is discussed; strangers in town, or literary and artistic 
lights - "freaks," they are discriminatingly called - are 
pointed out, toilets passed in review, and those dreadful two 
hours passed which, for some undiscovered reason, must elapse 
between a dinner and a dance.  If a favorite tenor is singing, 
and no one happens to be whispering nonsense over her 
shoulder, my lady may listen in a distrait way.  It is not 
safe, however, to count on prolonged attention or ask her 
questions about the performance.  She is apt to be a bit hazy 
as to who is singing, and with the exception of FAUST and 
CARMEN, has rudimentary ideas about plots.  Singers come and 
go, weep, swoon, or are killed, without interfering with her 
equanimity.  She has, for instance, seen the HUGUENOTS and the 
RHEINGOLD dozens of times, but knows no more why Raoul is 
brought blindfolded to Chenonceaux, or what Wotan and Erda say 
to each other in their interminable scenes, than she does of 
the contents of the Vedas.  For the matter of that, if three 
or four principal airs were suppressed from an opera and the 
scenery and costumes changed, many in that chattering circle 
would, I fear, not know what they were listening to.

Last winter, when Melba sang in AIDA, disguised by dark hair 
and a brown skin, a lady near me vouchsafed the opinion that 
the "little black woman hadn't a bad voice;" a gentleman (to 
whom I remarked last week "that as Sembrich had sung Rosina in 
the BARBER, it was rather a shock to see her appear as that 
lady's servant in the MARIAGE DE FIGARO") looked his blank 
amazement until it was explained to him that one of those 
operas was a continuation of the other.  After a pause he 
remarked, "They are not by the same composer, anyway!  Because 
the first's by Rossini, and the MARIAGE is by Bon Marche.  
I've been at his shop in Paris."

The presence of the second category - the would-be fashionable 
people - is not so easily accounted for.  Their attendance can 
hardly be attributed to love of melody, as they are, if 
anything, a shade less musical than the box-dwellers, who, by 
the bye, seem to exercise an irresistible fascination, to 
judge by the trend of conversation and direction of glasses.  
Although an imposing and sufficiently attentive throng, it 
would be difficult to find a less discriminating public than 
that which gathers nightly in the Metropolitan parterre.  One 
wonders how many of those people care for music and how many 
attend because it is expensive and "swell."

They will listen with the same bland contentment to either bad 
or good performances so long as a world-renowned artist (some 
one who is being paid a comfortable little fortune for the 
evening) is on the stage.  The orchestra may be badly led (it 
often is); the singers may flat - or be out of voice; the 
performance may go all at sixes and sevens - there is never a 
murmur of dissent.  Faults that would set an entire audience 
at Naples or Milan hissing are accepted herewith ignorant 
approval.

The unfortunate part of it is that this weakness of ours has 
become known.  The singers feel they can give an American 
audience any slipshod performance.  I have seen a favorite 
soprano shrug her shoulders as she entered her dressing-room 
and exclaim: "MON DIEU!  How I shuffled through that act!  
They'd have hooted me off the stage in Berlin, but here no one 
seems to care.  Did you notice the baritone to-night?  He 
wasn't on the key once during our duo.  I cannot sing my best, 
try as I will, when I hear the public applauding good and bad 
alike!"

It is strange that our pleasure-loving rich people should have 
hit on the opera as a favorite haunt.  We and the English are 
the only race who will attend performances in a foreign 
language which we don't understand.  How can intelligent 
people who don't care for music go on, season after season, 
listening to operas, the plots of which they ignore, and which 
in their hearts they find dull?

Is it so very amusing to watch two middle-aged ladies nagging 
each other, at two o'clock in the morning, on a public square, 
as they do in LOHENGRIN?  Do people find the lecture that 
Isolde's husband delivers to the guilty lovers entertaining?  
Does an opera produce any illusion on my neighbors?  I wish it 
did on me!  I see too plainly the paint on the singers' hot 
faces and the cords straining in their tired throats!  I sit 
on certain nights in agony, fearing to see stout Romeo roll on 
the stage in apoplexy!  The sopranos, too, have a way, when 
about to emit a roulade, that is more suggestive of a 
dentist's chair, and the attendant gargle, than of a love 
phrase.

When two celebrities combine in a final duo, facing the public 
and not each other, they give the impression of victims whom 
an unseen inquisitor is torturing.  Each turn of his screw 
draws out a wilder cry.  The orchestra (in the pay of the 
demon) does all it can to prevent their shrieks from reaching 
the public.  The lovers in turn redouble their efforts; they 
are purple in the face and glistening with perspiration.  
Defeat, they know, is before them, for the orchestra has the 
greater staying power!  The flutes bleat; the trombones grunt; 
the fiddles squeal; an epileptic leader cuts wildly into the 
air about him.  When, finally, their strength exhausted, the 
breathless human beings, with one last ear-piercing note, give 
up the struggle and retire, the public, excited by the unequal 
contest, bursts into thunders of applause.

Why wouldn't it be a good idea, in order to avoid these 
painful exhibitions, to have an arrangement of screens, with 
the singing people behind and a company of young and 
attractive pantomimists going through the gestures and 
movements in front?  Otherwise, how can the most imaginative 
natures lose themselves at an opera?  Even when the singers 
are comely, there is always that eternal double row of stony-
faced witnesses in full view, whom no crimes astonish and no 
misfortunes melt.  It takes most of the poetry out of Faust's 
first words with Marguerite, to have that short interview 
interrupted by a line of old, weary women shouting, "Let us 
whirl in the waltz o'er the mount and the plain!"  Or when 
Scotch Lucy appears in a smart tea-gown and is good enough to 
perform difficult exercises before a half-circle of Italian 
gentlemen in pantalets and ladies in court costumes, does she 
give any one the illusion of an abandoned wife dying of a 
broken heart alone in the Highlands?  Broken heart, indeed!  
It's much more likely she'll die of a ruptured blood-vessel!

Philistines in matters musical, like myself, unfortunate 
mortals whom the sweetest sounds fail to enthrall when 
connected with no memory or idea, or when prolonged beyond a 
limited period, must approach the third group with hesitation 
and awe.  That they are sincere, is evident.  The rapt 
expressions of their faces, and their patience, bear testimony 
to this fact.  For a long time I asked myself, "Where have I 
seen that intense, absorbed attitude before?"  Suddenly one 
evening another scene rose in my memory.

Have you ever visited Tangiers?  In the market-place of that 
city you will find the inhabitants crouched by hundreds around 
their native musicians.  When we were there, one old duffer - 
the Wagner, doubtless, of the place - was having an immense 
success.  No matter at what hour of the day we passed through 
that square, there was always the same spellbound circle of 
half-clad Turks and Arabs squatting silent while "Wagner" 
tinkled to them on a three-stringed lute and chanted in a 
high-pitched, dismal whine - like the squeaking of an 
unfastened door in the wind.  At times, for no apparent 
reason, the never-varying, never-ending measure would be 
interrupted by a flutter of applause, but his audience 
remained mostly sunk in a hypnotic apathy.  I never see a 
"Ring" audience now without thinking of that scene outside the 
Bab-el-Marsa gate, which has led me to ask different people 
just what sensations serious music produced upon them.  The 
answers have been varied and interesting.  One good lady who 
rarely misses a German opera confessed that sweet sounds acted 
upon her like opium.  Neither scenery nor acting nor plot were 
of any importance.  From the first notes of the overture to 
the end, she floated in an ecstatic dream, oblivious of time 
and place.  When it was over she came back to herself faint 
with fatigue.  Another professed lover of Wagner said that his 
greatest pleasure was in following the different "motives" as 
they recurred in the music.  My faith in that gentleman was 
shaken, however, when I found the other evening that he had 
mistaken Van Dyck for Jean de Reszke through an entire 
performance.  He may be a dab at recognizing his friends the 
"motives," but his discoveries don't apparently go as far as 
tenors!

No one doubts that hundreds of people unaffectedly love German 
opera, but that as many affect to appreciate it in order to 
appear intellectual is certain.

Once upon a time the unworthy member of an ultra-serious 
"Browning" class in this city, doubting the sincerity of her 
companions, asked permission to read them a poem of the 
master's which she found beyond her comprehension.  When the 
reading was over the opinion of her friends was unanimous.  
"Nothing could be simpler!  The lines were lucidity itself!  
Such close reasoning etc."  But dismay fell upon them when the 
naughty lady announced, with a peal of laughter, that she had 
been reading alternate lines from opposite pages.  She no 
longer disturbs the harmony of that circle!

Bearing this tale in mind, I once asked a musician what 
proportion of the audience at a "Ring" performance he thought 
would know if alternate scenes were given from two of Wagner's 
operas, unless the scenery enlightened them.  His estimate was 
that perhaps fifty per cent might find out the fraud.  He put 
the number of people who could give an intelligent account of 
those plots at about thirty per hundred.

The popularity of music, he added, is largely due to the fact 
that it saves people the trouble of thinking.  Pleasant sounds 
soothe the nerves, and, if prolonged long enough in a darkened 
room will, like the Eastern tom-toms, lull the senses into a 
mild form of trance.  This must be what the gentleman meant 
who said he wished he could sleep as well in a "Wagner" car as 
he did at one of his operas!

Being a tailless old fox, I look with ever-increasing 
suspicion on the too-luxuriant caudal appendages of my 
neighbors, and think with amusement of the multitudes who 
during the last ten years have sacrificed themselves upon the 
altar of grand opera - simple, kindly souls, with little or no 
taste for classical music, who have sat in the dark (mentally 
and physically), applauding what they didn't understand, and 
listening to vague German mythology set to sounds that appear 
to us outsiders like music sunk into a verbose dotage.  I am 
convinced the greater number would have preferred a jolly 
performance of MME. ANGOT or the CLOCHES DE CORNEVILLE, cut in 
two by a good ballet.

It is, however, so easy to be mistaken on subjects of this 
kind that generalizing is dangerous.  Many great authorities 
have liked tuneless music.  One of the most telling arguments 
in its favor was recently advanced by a foreigner.  The 
Chinese ambassador told us last winter in a club at Washington 
that Wagner's was the only European music that he appreciated 
and enjoyed.  "You see," he added, "music is a much older art 
with us than in Europe, and has naturally reached a far 
greater perfection.  The German school has made a long step in 
advance, and I can now foresee a day not far distant when, 
under its influence, your music will closely resemble our 
own."




Chapter 16 - The Poetic CABARETS of Paris


THOSE who have not lived in France can form little idea of the 
important place the CAFE occupies in the life of an average 
Frenchman, clubs as we know them or as they exist in England 
being rare, and when found being, with few exceptions, but 
gambling-houses in disguise.  As a Frenchman rarely asks an 
acquaintance, or even a friend, to his apartment, the CAFE has 
become the common ground where all meet, for business or 
pleasure.  Not in Paris only, but all over France, in every 
garrison town, provincial city, or tiny village, the CAFE is 
the chief attraction, the centre of thought, the focus toward 
which all the rays of masculine existence converge.

For the student, newly arrived from the provinces, to whose 
modest purse the theatres and other places of amusement are 
practically closed, the CAFE is a supreme resource.  His mind 
is moulded, his ideas and opinions formed, more by what he 
hears and sees there than by any other influence.  A 
restaurant is of little importance.  One may eat anywhere.  
But the choice of his CAFE will often give the bent to a young 
man's career, and indicate his exact shade of politics and his 
opinions on literature, music, or art.  In Paris, to know a 
man at all is to know where you can find him at the hour of 
the APERITIF - what Baudelaire called


L'HEURE SAINTE
DE L'ABSINTHE.


When young men form a society among themselves, a CAFE is 
chosen as their meeting-place.  Thousands of establishments 
exist only by such patronage, as, for example, the Cafe de la 
Regence, Place du Theatre Francais, which is frequented 
entirely by men who play chess.

Business men transact their affairs as much over their coffee 
as in their offices.  The reading man finds at his CAFE the 
daily and weekly papers; a writer is sure of the undisturbed 
possession of pen, ink, and paper.  Henri Murger, the author, 
when asked once why he continued to patronize a certain 
establishment notorious for the inferior quality of its beer, 
answered, "Yes, the beer is poor, but they keep such good 
INK!"

The use of a CAFE does not imply any great expenditure, a 
CONSUMMATION costing but little.  With it is acquired the 
right to use the establishment for an indefinite number of 
hours, the client being warmed, lighted, and served.  From 
five to seven, and again after dinner, the HABITUES stroll in, 
grouping themselves about the small tables, each new-comer 
joining a congenial circle, ordering his drink, and settling 
himself for a long sitting.  The last editorial, the newest 
picture, or the fall of a ministry is discussed with a 
vehemence and an interest unknown to Anglo-Saxon natures.  
Suddenly, in the excitement of the discussion, some one will 
rise in his place and begin speaking.  If you happen to drop 
in at that moment, the lady at the desk will welcome you with, 
"You are just in time!  Monsieur So-and-So is speaking; the 
evening promises to be interesting."  She is charmed; her 
establishment will shine with a reflected light, and new 
patrons be drawn there, if the debates are brilliant.  So 
universal is this custom that there is hardly an orator to-day 
at the French bar or in the Senate, who has not broken his 
first lance in some such obscure tournament, under the smiling 
glances of the DAME DU COMPTOIR.

Opposite the Palace of the Luxembourg, in the heart of the old 
Latin Quarter, stands a quaint building, half hotel, half 
CAFE, where many years ago Joseph II. resided while visiting 
his sister, Marie Antoinette.  It is known now as Foyot's; 
this name must awaken many happy memories in the hearts of 
American students, for it was long their favorite meeting-
place.  In the early seventies a club, formed among the 
literary and poetic youth of Paris, selected Foyot's as their 
"home" during the winter months.  Their summer vacations were 
spent in visiting the university towns of France, reciting 
verses, or acting in original plays at Nancy, Bordeaux, Lyons, 
or Caen.  The enthusiasm these youthful performances created 
inspired one of their number with the idea of creating in 
Paris, on a permanent footing, a centre where a limited public 
could meet the young poets of the day and hear them recite 
their verses and monologues in an informal way.

The success of the original "Chat Noir," the first CABARET of 
this kind, was largely owing to the sympathetic and attractive 
nature of its founder, young Salis, who drew around him, by 
his sunny disposition, shy personalities who, but for him, 
would still be "mute, inglorious Miltons."  Under his kindly 
and discriminating rule many a successful literary career has 
started.  Salis's gifted nature combined a delicate taste and 
critical acumen with a rare business ability.  His first 
venture, an obscure little CAFE on the Boulevard Rochechouart, 
in the outlying quarter beyond the Place Pigalle, quickly 
became famous, its ever-increasing vogue forcing its happy 
proprietor to seek more commodious quarters in the rue Victor 
Masse, where the world-famous "Chat Noir" was installed with 
much pomp and many joyous ceremonies.

The old word CABARET, corresponding closely to our English 
"inn," was chosen, and the establishment decorated in 
imitation of a Louis XIII. HOTELLERIE.  Oaken beams supported 
the low-studded ceilings: The plaster walls disappeared behind 
tapestries, armor, old FAIENCE.  Beer and other liquids were 
served in quaint porcelain or pewter mugs, and the waiters 
were dressed (merry anachronism) in the costume of members of 
the Institute (the Immortal Forty), who had so long led poetry 
in chains.  The success of the "Black Cat" in her new quarters 
was immense, all Paris crowding through her modest doors.  
Salis had founded Montmartre! - the rugged old hill giving 
birth to a generation of writers and poets, and nourishing 
this new school at her granite breasts.

It would be difficult to imagine a form of entertainment more 
tempting than was offered in this picturesque inn.  In 
addition to the first, the entire second floor of the building 
had been thrown into one large room, the walls covered with a 
thousand sketches, caricatures, and crayon drawings by hands 
since celebrated the world over.  A piano, with many chairs 
and tables, completed the unpretending installation.  Here, 
during a couple of hours each evening, either by the piano or 
simply standing in their places, the young poets gave 
utterance to the creations of their imagination, the musicians 
played their latest inspirations, the RACONTEUR told his 
newest story.  They called each other and the better known 
among the guests by their names, and joked mutual weaknesses, 
eliminating from these gatherings every shade of a perfunctory 
performance.

It is impossible to give an idea of the delicate flavor of 
such informal evenings - the sensation of being at home that 
the picturesque surroundings produced, the low murmur of 
conversation, the clink of glasses, the swing of the waltz 
movement played by a master hand, interrupted only when some 
slender form would lean against the piano and pour forth 
burning words of infinite pathos, - the inspired young face 
lighted up by the passion and power of the lines.  The burst 
of applause that his talent called forth would hardly have 
died away before another figure would take the poet's place, a 
wave of laughter welcoming the new-comer, whose twinkling eyes 
and demure smile promised a treat of fun and humor.  So the 
evening would wear gayly to its end, the younger element in 
the audience, full of the future, drinking in long draughts of 
poetry and art, the elders charmed to live over again the days 
of their youth and feel in touch once more with the present.

In this world of routine and conventions an innovation as 
brilliantly successful as this could hardly be inaugurated 
without raising a whirlwind of jealousy and opposition.  The 
struggle was long and arduous.  Directors of theatres and 
concert halls, furious to see a part of their public tempted 
away, raised the cry of immorality against the new-comers, and 
called to their aid every resource of law and chicanery.  At 
the end of the first year Salis found himself with over eight 
hundred summonses and lawsuits on his hands.  After having 
made every effort, knocked at every door, in his struggle for 
existence, he finally conceived the happy thought of appealing 
directly to Grevy, then President of the Republic, and in his 
audience with the latter succeeded in charming and interesting 
him, as he had so many others.  The influence of the head of 
the state once brought to bear on the affair, Salis had the 
joy of seeing opposition crushed and the storm blow itself 
out.

From this moment, the poets, feeling themselves appreciated 
and their rights acknowledged and defended, flocked to the 
"Sacred Mountain," as Montmartre began to be called; other 
establishments of the same character sprang up in the 
neighborhood.  Most important among these were the "4 z'Arts," 
Boulevard de Clichy, the "Tambourin," and La Butte.

Trombert, who, together with Fragerolle, Goudezki, and Marcel 
Lefevre, had just ended an artistic voyage in the south of 
France, opened the "4 z'Arts," to which the novelty-loving 
public quickly found its way, crowding to applaud Coquelin 
CADET, Fragson, and other budding celebrities.  It was here 
that the poets first had the idea of producing a piece in 
which rival CABARETS were reviewed and laughingly criticised.  
The success was beyond all precedent, in spite of the 
difficulty of giving a play without a stage, without scenery 
or accessories of any kind, the interest centring in the 
talent with which the lines were declaimed by their authors, 
who next had the pleasant thought of passing in review the 
different classes of popular songs, Clovis Hugues, at the same 
time poet and statesman, discoursing on each subject, and 
introducing the singer; Brittany local songs, Provencal 
ballads, ant the half Spanish, half French CHANSONS of the 
Pyrenees were sung or recited by local poets with the charm 
and abandon of their distinctive races.

The great critics did not disdain to attend these informal 
gatherings, nor to write columns of serious criticism on the 
subject in their papers.

At the hour when all Paris takes its APERITIF the "4 z'Arts" 
became the meeting-place of the painters, poets, and writers 
of the day.  Montmartre gradually replaced the old Latin 
Quarter; it is there to-day that one must seek for the gayety 
and humor, the pathos and the makeshifts of Bohemia.

The "4 z'Arts," next to the "Chat Noir," has had the greatest 
influence on the taste of our time, - the pleiad of poets that 
grouped themselves around it in the beginning, dispersing 
later to form other centres, which, in their turn, were to 
influence the minds and moods of thousands.

Another charming form of entertainment inaugurated by this 
group of men is that of "shadow pictures," conceived 
originally by Caran d'Ache, and carried by him to a marvellous 
perfection.  A medium-sized frame filled with ground glass is 
suspended at one end of a room and surrounded by sombre 
draperies.  The room is darkened; against the luminous 
background of the glass appear small black groups (shadows 
cast by figures cut out of cardboard).  These figures move, 
advancing and retreating, grouping or separating themselves to 
the cadence of the poet's verses, for which they form the most 
original and striking illustrations.  Entire poems are given 
accompanied by these shadow pictures.

One of Caran d'Ache's greatest successes in this line was an 
EPOPEE DE NAPOLEON, - the great Emperor appearing on foot and 
on horseback, the long lines of his army passing before him in 
the foreground or small in the distance.  They stormed 
heights, cheered on by his presence, or formed hollow squares 
to repulse the enemy.  During their evolutions, the clear 
voice of the poet rang out from the darkness with thrilling 
effect.

The nicest art is necessary to cut these little figures to the 
required perfection.  So great was the talent of their 
inventor that, when he gave burlesques of the topics of the 
day, or presented the celebrities of the hour to his public, 
each figure would be recognized with a burst of delighted 
applause.  The great Sarah was represented in poses of 
infinite humor, surrounded by her menagerie or receiving the 
homage of the universe.  Political leaders, foreign 
sovereigns, social and operatic stars, were made to pass 
before a laughing public.  None were spared.  Paris went mad 
with delight at this new "art," and for months it was 
impossible to find a seat vacant in the hall.

At the Boite a Musique, the idea was further developed.  By an 
ingenious arrangement of lights, of which the secret has been 
carefully kept, landscapes are represented in color; all the 
gradations of light are given, from the varied twilight hues 
to purple night, until the moon, rising, lights anew the 
picture.  During all these variations of color little groups 
continue to come and go, acting out the story of a poem, which 
the poet delivers from the surrounding obscurity as only an 
author can render his own lines.

One of the pillars of this attractive centre was Jules Jouy, 
who made a large place for himself in the hearts of his 
contemporaries - a true poet, whom neither privations nor the 
difficult beginnings of an unknown writer could turn from his 
vocation.  His songs are alternately tender, gay, and bitingly 
sarcastic.  Some of his better-known ballads were written for 
and marvellously interpreted by Yvette Guilbert.  The 
difficult critics, Sarcey and Jules Lemaitre, have sounded his 
praise again and again.

A CABARET of another kind which enjoyed much celebrity, more 
on account of the personality of the poet who founded it than 
from any originality or picturesqueness in its intallation, 
was the "Mirliton," opened by Aristide Bruant in the little 
rooms that had sheltered the original "Chat Noir."

To give an account of the "Mirliton" is to tell the story of 
Bruant, the most popular ballad-writer in France to-day.  This 
original and eccentric poet is as well-known to a Parisian as 
the boulevards or the Arc de Triomphe.  His costume of shabby 
black velvet, Brittany waistcoat, red shirt, top-boots, and 
enormous hat is a familiar feature in the caricatures and 
prints of the day.  His little CABARET remains closed during 
the day, opening its doors toward evening.  The personality of 
the ballad-writer pervades the atmosphere.  He walks about the 
tiny place hailing his acquaintances with some gay epigram, 
receiving strangers with easy familiarity or chilling disdain, 
as the humor takes him; then in a moment, with a rapid change 
of expression, pouring out the ringing lines of one of his 
ballads - always the story of the poor and humble, for he has 
identified himself with the outcast and the disinherited.  His 
volumes DANS LA RUE and SUR LA ROUTE have had an enormous 
popularity, their contents being known and sung all over 
France.

In 1892 Bruant was received as a member of the society of GENS 
DE LETTRES.  It may be of interest to recall a part of the 
speech made by Francois Coppee on the occasion: "It is with 
the greatest pleasure that I present to my confreres my good 
friend, the ballad-writer, Aristide Bruant.  I value highly 
the author of DANS LA RUE.  When I close his volume of sad and 
caustic verses it is with the consoling thought that even vice 
and crime have their conscience: that if there is suffering 
there is a possible redemption.  He has sought his inspiration 
in the gutter, it is true, but he has seen there a reflection 
of the stars."

In the Avenue Trudaine, not far from the other CABARETS, the 
"Ane Rouge" was next opened, in a quiet corner of the immense 
suburb, its shady-little garden, on which the rooms open, 
making it a favorite meeting-place during the warm months.  Of 
a summer evening no more congenial spot can be found in all 
Paris.  The quaint chambers have been covered with mural 
paintings or charcoal caricatures of the poets themselves, or 
of familiar faces among the clients and patrons of the place.

One of the many talents that clustered around this quiet 
little garden was the brilliant Paul Verlaine, the most 
Bohemian of all inhabitants of modern Prague, whose death has 
left a void, difficult to fill.  Fame and honors came too 
late.  He died in destitution, if not absolutely of hunger; 
to-day his admirers are erecting a bronze bust of him in the 
Garden of the Luxembourg, with money that would have gone far 
toward making his life happy.

In the old hotel of the Lesdiguieres family, rue de la Tour 
d'Auvergne, the "Carillon" opened its doors in 1893, and 
quickly conquered a place in the public favor, the inimitable 
fun and spirits of Tiercy drawing crowds to the place.

The famous "Treteau de Tabarin," which today holds undisputed 
precedence over all the CABARETS of Paris, was among the last 
to appear.  It was founded by the brilliant Fursy and a group 
of his friends.  Here no pains have been spared to form a 
setting worthy of the poets and their public.

Many years ago, in the days of the good king Louis XIII., a 
strolling poet-actor, Tabarin, erected his little canvas-
covered stage before the statue of Henry IV., on the Pont-
Neuf, and drew the court and the town by his fun and pathos.  
The founders of the latest and most complete of Parisian 
CABARETS have reconstructed, as far as possible, this historic 
scene.  On the wall of the room where the performances are 
given, is painted a view of old Paris, the Seine and its 
bridges, the towers of Notre Dame in the distance, and the 
statue of Louis XIII.'s warlike father in the foreground.  In 
front of this painting stands a staging of rough planks, 
reproducing the little theatre of Tabarin.  Here, every 
evening, the authors and poets play in their own pieces, 
recite their verses, and tell their stories.  Not long ago a 
young musician, who has already given an opera to the world, 
sang an entire one-act operetta of his composition, changing 
his voice for the different parts, imitating choruses by 
clever effects on the piano.

Montmartre is now sprinkled with attractive CABARETS, the 
taste of the public for such informal entertainments having 
grown each year; with reason, for the careless grace of the 
surroundings, the absence of any useless restraint or 
obligation as to hour or duration, has a charm for thousands 
whom a long concert or the inevitable five acts at the 
Francais could not tempt.  It would be difficult to overrate 
the influence such an atmosphere, breathed in youth, must have 
on the taste and character.  The absence of a sordid spirit, 
the curse of our material day and generation, the contact with 
intellects trained to incase their thoughts in serried verse 
or crisp and lucid prose, cannot but form the hearer's mind 
into a higher and better mould.  It is both a satisfaction and 
a hope for the future to know that these influences are being 
felt all over the capital and throughout the length and 
breadth of France.  There are at this moment in Paris alone 
three or four hundred poets, ballad writers, and RACONTEURS 
who recite their works in public.

It must be hard for the untravelled Anglo-Saxon to grasp the 
idea that a poet can, without loss of prestige, recite his 
lines in a public CAFE before a mixed audience.  If such 
doubting souls could, however, be present at one of these 
NOCTES AMBROSIANAE, they would acknowledge that the Latin 
temperament can throw a grace and child-like abandon around an 
act that would cause an Englishman or an American to appear 
supremely ridiculous.  One's taste and sense of fitness are 
never shocked.  It seems the most natural thing in the world 
to be sitting with your glass of beer before you, while some 
rising poet, whose name ten years later may figure among the 
"Immortal Forty," tells to you his loves and his ambition, or 
brings tears into your eyes with a description of some humble 
hero or martyr.

From the days of Homer poetry has been the instructor of 
nations.  In the Orient to-day the poet story-teller holds his 
audience spellbound for hours, teaching the people their 
history and supplying their minds with food for thought, 
raising them above the dull level of the brutes by the charm 
of his verse and the elevation of his ideas.  The power of 
poetry is the same now as three thousand years ago.  Modern 
skeptical Paris, that scoffs at all creeds and chafes 
impatiently under any rule, will sit to-day docile and 
complaisant, charmed by the melody of a poet's voice; its 
passions lulled or quickened, like Alexander's of old, at the 
will of a modern Timotheus.




Chapter 17 - Etiquette At Home and Abroad


READING that a sentinel had been punished the other day at St. 
Petersburg for having omitted to present arms, as her Imperial 
Highness, the Grand Duchess Olga, was leaving the winter 
palace - in her nurse's arms - I smiled at what appeared to be 
needless punctilio; then, as is my habit, began turning the 
subject over, and gradually came to the conclusion that while 
it could doubtless be well to suppress much of the ceremonial 
encumbering court life, it might not be amiss if we engrafted 
a little more etiquette into our intercourse with strangers 
and the home relations.  In our dear free and easy-going 
country there is a constant tendency to loosen the ties of 
fireside etiquette until any manners are thought good enough, 
as any toilet is considered sufficiently attractive for home 
use.  A singular impression has grown up that formal 
politeness and the saying of gracious and complimentary things 
betray the toady and the hypocrite, both if whom are abhorrent 
to Americans.

By the force of circumstances most people are civil enough in 
general society; while many fail to keep to their high 
standard in the intimacy of home life and in their intercourse 
with inferiors, which is a pity, as these are the two cases 
where self-restraint and amenity are most required.  
Politeness is, after all, but the dictate of a kind heart, and 
supplies the oil necessary to make the social machinery run 
smoothly.  In home life, which is the association during many 
hours each day of people of varying dispositions, views, and 
occupations, friction is inevitable; and there is especial 
need of lubrication to lessen the wear and tear and eliminate 
jarring.

Americans are always much shocked to learn that we are not 
popular on the Continent.  Such a discovery comes to either a 
nation or an individual like a douche of cold water on nice, 
warm conceit, and brings with it a feeling of discouragement, 
of being unjustly treated, that is painful, for we are very 
"touchy" in America, and cry out when a foreigner expresses 
anything but admiration for our ways, yet we are the last to 
lend ourselves to foreign customs.

It has been a home thrust for many of us to find that our dear 
friends the French sympathized warmly with Spain in the recent 
struggle, and had little but sneers for us.  One of the 
reasons for this partiality is not hard to discover.

The Spanish who travel are mostly members of an aristocracy 
celebrated for its grave courtesy, which has gone a long way 
toward making them popular on the Continent, while we have for 
years been riding rough-shod over the feelings and prejudices 
of the European peoples, under the pleasing but fallacious 
illusion that the money we spent so lavishly in foreign lands 
would atone for all our sins.  The large majority of our 
travelling compatriots forget that an elaborate etiquette 
exists abroad regulating the intercourse between one class and 
another, the result of centuries of civilization, and as the 
Medic and Persian laws for durability.  In our ignorance we 
break many of these social laws and give offence where none 
was intended.

A single illustration will explain my meaning.  A young 
American girl once went to the mistress of a PENSION where she 
was staying and complained that the CONCIERGE of the house had 
been impertinent.  When the proprietress asked the CONCIERGE 
what this meant, the latter burst out with her wrongs.  "Since 
Miss B. has been in this house, she has never once bowed to 
me, or addressed a word to either my husband or myself that 
was not a question or an order; she walks in and out of my 
LOGE to look for letters or take her key as though my room 
were the street; I won't stand such treatment from any one, 
much less from a girl.  The duchess who lives AU QUATRIEME 
never passes without a kind word or an inquiry after the 
children or my health."

Now this American girl had erred through ignorance of the fact 
that in France servants are treated as humble friends.  The 
man who brings your matutinal coffee says "Good morning" on 
entering the room, and inquires if "Monsieur has slept well," 
expecting to be treated with the same politeness he shows to 
you.

The lady who sits at the CAISSE of the restaurant you frequent 
is as sure of her position as her customers are of theirs, and 
exacts a courteous salutation from every one entering or 
leaving her presence; logically, for no gentleman would enter 
a ladies' drawing-room without removing his hat.  The fact 
that a woman is obliged to keep a shop in no way relieves him 
of this obligation.

People on the Continent know their friends' servants by name, 
and speak to them on arriving at a house, and thank them for 
an opened door or offered coat; if a tip is given it is 
accompanied by a gracious word.  So rare is this form of 
civility in America and England (for Britons err as gravely in 
this matter as ourselves) that our servants are surprised and 
inclined to resent politeness, as in the case of an English 
butler who recently came to his master and said he should be 
"obliged to leave."  On being questioned it came out that one 
of the guests was in the habit of chatting with him, "and," 
added the Briton, "I won't stand being took liberties with by 
no one."

Some years ago I happened to be standing in the vestibule of 
the Hotel Bristol as the Princess of Wales and her daughters 
were leaving.  Mr. Morlock, the proprietor, was at the foot of 
the stairs to take leave of those ladies, who shook hands with 
and thanked him for his attention during their stay, and for 
the flowers he had sent.  Nothing could have been more 
gracious and freer from condescension than their manner, and 
it undoubtedly produced the best impression.  The waiter who 
served me at that time was also under their charm, and 
remarked several times that "there had never been ladies so 
easy to please or so considerate of the servants."

My neighbor at dinner the other evening confided to me that 
she was "worn out being fitted."  "I had such an unpleasant 
experience this morning," she added.  "The JUPIERE could not 
get one of my skirts to hang properly.  After a dozen attempts 
I told her to send for the forewoman, when, to my horror, the 
girl burst out crying, and said she should lose her place if I 
did.  I was very sorry for her, but what else could I do?"  It 
does not seem as if that lady could be very popular with 
inferiors, does it?

That it needs a lighter hand and more tact to deal with 
tradespeople than with equals is certain, and we are sure to 
be the losers when we fail.  The last time I was in the East a 
friend took me into the bazaars to see a carpet he was anxious 
to buy.  The price asked was out of all proportion to its 
value, but we were gravely invited by the merchant to be 
seated and coffee was served, that bargaining (which is the 
backbone of Oriental trade) might be carried on at leisure.  
My friend, nervous and impatient, like all our race, turned to 
me and said, "What's all this tomfoolery?  Tell him I'll give 
so much for his carpet; he can take it or leave it."  When 
this was interpreted to the bearded tradesman, he smiled and 
came down a few dollars in his price, and ordered more coffee.  
By this time we were outside his shop, and left without the 
carpet simply because my friend could not conform to the 
customs of the country he was visiting.  The sale of his 
carpet was a big affair for the Oriental; he intended to carry 
it through with all the ceremony the occasion required, and 
would sooner not make a sale than be hustled out of his 
stately routine.

It is not only in intercourse with inferiors that tact is 
required.  The treatment of children and young people in a 
family calls for delicate handling.  The habit of taking 
liberties with young relations is a common form of a relaxed 
social code and the besetting sin of elderly people, who, 
having little to interest them in their own lives, imagine 
that their mission is to reform the ways and manners of their 
family.  Ensconced behind the respect which the young are 
supposed to pay them, they give free vent to inclination, and 
carp, cavil, and correct.  The victims may have reached 
maturity or even middle age, but remain always children to 
these social policemen, to be reproved and instructed in and 
out of season.  "I am doing this for your own good," is an 
excuse that apparently frees the veterans from the necessity 
of respecting the prejudices and feelings of their pupils, and 
lends a gloss of unselfishness to actions which are simply 
impertinent.  Oddly enough, amateur "schoolmarms" who fall 
into this unpleasant habit are generally oversensitive, and 
resent as a personal affront any restlessness under criticism 
on the part of their victims.  It is easy, once the habit is 
acquired, to carry the suavity and consideration of general 
society into the home circle, yet how often is it done?  I 
should like to see the principle that ordered presentation of 
arms to the infant princess applied to our intimate relations, 
and the rights of the young and dependent scrupulously 
respected.

In the third act of CASTE, when old Eccles steals the "coral" 
from his grandson's neck, he excuses the theft by a 
grandiloquent soliloquy, and persuades himself that he is 
protecting "the weak and the humble" (pointing to himself) 
"against the powerful and the strong" (pointing to the baby).  
Alas, too many of us take liberties with those whom we do not 
fear, and excuse our little acts of cowardice with arguments 
as fallacious as those of drunken old Eccles.




Chapter 18 - What is "Art"?


IN former years, we inquiring youngsters in foreign studios 
were much bewildered by the repetition of a certain phrase.  
Discussion of almost any picture or statue was (after other 
forms of criticism had been exhausted) pretty sure to conclude 
with, "It's all very well in its way, but it's not Art."  Not 
only foolish youths but the "masters" themselves constantly 
advanced this opinion to crush a rival or belittle a friend.  
To ardent minds seeking for the light and catching at every 
thread that might serve as a guide out of perplexity, this 
vague assertion was confusing.  According to one master, the 
eighteenth-century "school" did not exist.  What had been 
produced at that time was pleasing enough to the eye, but "was 
not Art!"  In the opinion of another, Italian music might 
amuse or cheer the ignorant, but could not be recognized by 
serious musicians.

As most of us were living far from home and friends for the 
purpose of acquiring the rudiments of art, this continual 
sweeping away of our foundations was discouraging.  What was 
the use, we sometimes asked ourselves, of toiling, if our work 
was to be cast contemptuously aside by the next "school" as a 
pleasing trifle, not for a moment to be taken seriously?  How 
was one to find out the truth?  Who was to decide when doctors 
disagreed?  Where was the rock on which an earnest student 
might lay his cornerstone without the misgiving that the next 
wave in public opinion would sap its base and cast him and his 
ideals out again at sea?

The eighteenth-century artists and the Italian composers had 
been sincere and convinced that they were producing works of 
art.  In our own day the idol of one moment becomes the jest 
of the next.  Was there, then, no fixed law?

The short period, for instance, between 1875 and the present 
time has been long enough for the talent of one painter 
(Bastien-Lepage) to be discovered, discussed, lauded, 
acclaimed, then gradually forgotten and decried.  During the 
years when we were studying in Paris, that young painter's 
works were pronounced by the critics and their following to be 
the last development of Art.  Museums and amateurs vied with 
each other in acquiring his canvases.  Yet, only this spring, 
while dining with two or three art critics in the French 
capital, I heard Lepage's name mentioned and his works 
recalled with the smile that is accorded to those who have 
hoodwinked the public and passed off spurious material as the 
real thing.

If any one doubts the fleeting nature of a reputation, let him 
go to a sale of modern pictures and note the prices brought by 
the favorites of twenty years ago.  The paintings of that 
arch-priest, Meissonier, no longer command the sums that eager 
collectors paid for them a score of years back.  When a great 
European critic dares assert, as one has recently, of the 
master's "1815," that "everything in the picture appears 
metallic, except the cannon and the men's helmets," the mighty 
are indeed fallen!  It is much the same thing with the old 
masters.  There have been fashions in them as in other forms 
of art.  Fifty years ago Rembrandt's work brought but small 
prices, and until Henri Rochefort (during his exile) began to 
write up the English school, Romneys, Lawrences, and 
Gainsboroughs had little market value.

The result is that most of us are as far away from the 
solution of that vexed question "What is Art?" at forty as we 
were when boys.  The majority have arranged a compromise with 
their consciences.  We have found out what we like (in itself 
no mean achievement), and beyond such personal preference, are 
shy of asserting (as we were fond of doing formerly) that such 
and such works are "Art," and such others, while pleasing and 
popular, lack the requisite qualities.

To enquiring minds, sure that an answer to this question 
exists, but uncertain where to look for it, the fact that one 
of the thinkers of the century has, in a recent "Evangel," 
given to the world a definition of "Art," the result of many 
years' meditation, will be received with joy.  "Art," says 
Tolstoi, "is simply a condition of life.  It is any form of 
expression that a human being employs to communicate an 
emotion he has experienced to a fellow-mortal."

An author who, in telling his hopes and sorrows, amuses or 
saddens a reader, has in just so much produced a work of art.  
A lover who, by the sincerity of his accent, communicates the 
flame that is consuming him to the object of his adoration; 
the shopkeeper who inspires a purchaser with his own 
admiration for an object on sale; the baby that makes its joy 
known to a parent - artists! artists!  Brown, Jones, or 
Robinson, the moment he has consciously produced on a 
neighbor's ear or eye the sensation that a sound or a 
combination of colors has effected on his own organs, is an 
artist!

Of course much of this has been recognized through all time.  
The formula in which Tolstoi has presented his meditations to 
the world is, however, so fresh that it comes like a 
revelation, with the additional merit of being understood, 
with little or no mental effort, by either the casual reader, 
who, with half-attention attracted by a headline, says to 
himself, "`What is art?'  That looks interesting!" and skims 
lightly down the lines, or the thinker who, after perusing 
Tolstoi's lucid words, lays down the volume with a sigh, and 
murmurs in his humiliation, "Why have I been all these years 
seeking in the clouds for what was lying ready at my hand?"

The wide-reaching definition of the Russian writer has the 
effect of a vigorous blow from a pickaxe at the foundations of 
a shaky and too elaborate edifice.  The wordy superstructure 
of aphorisms and paradox falls to the ground, disclosing fair 
"Truth," so long a captive within the temple erected in her 
honor.  As, however, the newly freed goddess smiles on the 
ignorant and the pedants alike, the result is that with one 
accord the aesthetes raise a howl!  "And the `beautiful,'" 
they say, "the beautiful?  Can there be any `Art' without the 
`Beautiful'?  What! the little greengrocer at the corner is an 
artist because, forsooth, he has arranged some lettuce and 
tomatoes into a tempting pile!  Anathema!  Art is a secret 
known only to the initiated few; the vulgar can neither 
understand nor appreciate it!  We are the elect!  Our mission 
is to explain what Art is and point out her beauty to a coarse 
and heedless world.  Only those with a sense of the 
`beautiful' should be allowed to enter into her sacred 
presence."

Here the expounders of "Art" plunge into a sea of words, 
offering a dozen definitions each more obscure than its 
predecessor, all of which have served in turn as watchwords of 
different "schools."  Tolstoi's sweeping truth is too far-
reaching to please these gentry.  Like the priests of past 
religions, they would have preferred to keep such knowledge as 
they had to themselves and expound it, little at a time, to 
the ignorant.  The great Russian has kicked away their altar 
and routed the false gods, whose acolytes will never forgive 
him.

Those of my readers who have been intimate with painters, 
actors, or musicians, will recall with amusement how lightly 
the performances of an associate are condemned by the 
brotherhood as falling short of the high standard which 
according to these wiseacres, "Art" exacts, and how sure each 
speaker is of understanding just where a brother carries his 
"mote."

Voltaire once avoided giving a definition of the beautiful by 
saying, "Ask a toad what his ideas of beauty are.  He will 
indicate the particular female toad he happens to admire and 
praise her goggle-eyes and yellow belly as the perfection of 
beauty!"  A negro from Guiana will make much the same 
unsatisfactory answer, so the old philosopher recommends us 
not to be didactic on subjects where judgments are relative, 
and at the same time without appeal.

Tolstoi denies that an idea as subtle as a definition of Art 
can be classified by pedants, and proceeds to formulate the 
following delightful axiom: "A principle upon which no two 
people can agree does not exist."  A truth is proved by its 
evidence to all.  Discussion outside of that is simply beating 
the air.  Each succeeding "school" has sounded its death-knell 
by asserting that certain combinations alone produced beauty - 
the weakness of to-day being an inclination to see art only in 
the obscure and the recondite.  As a result we drift each hour 
further from the truth.  Modern intellectuality has formed 
itself into a scornful aristocracy whose members, esteeming 
themselves the elite, withdraw from the vulgar public, and 
live in a world of their own, looking (like the Lady of 
Shalott) into a mirror at distorted images of nature and 
declaring that what they see is art!

In literature that which is difficult to understand is much 
admired by the simple-minded, who also decry pictures that 
tell their own story!  A certain class of minds enjoy being 
mystified, and in consequence writers, painters, and musicians 
have appeared who are willing to juggle for their amusement.  
The simple definition given to us by the Russian writer comes 
like a breath of wholesome air to those suffocating in an 
atmosphere of perfumes and artificial heat.  Art is our common 
inheritance, not the property of a favored few.  The wide 
world we love is full of it, and each of us in his humble way 
is an artist when with a full heart he communicates his 
delight and his joy to another.  Tolstoi has given us back our 
birthright, so long withheld, and crowned with his aged hands 
the true artist.




Chapter 19 - The Genealogical Craze


THERE undoubtedly is something in the American temperament 
that prevents our doing anything in moderation.  If we take up 
an idea, it is immediately run to exaggeration and then 
abandoned, that the nation may fly at a tangent after some new 
fad.  Does this come from our climate, or (as I am inclined to 
think) from the curiously unclassified state of society in our 
country, where so few established standards exist and so few 
are sure of their own or their neighbors' standing?  In 
consequence, if Mrs. Brown starts anything, Mrs. Jones, for 
fear of being left behind, immediately "goes her one better" 
to be in turn "raised" by Mrs. Robinson.

In other lands a reasonable pride of birth has always been one 
of the bonds holding communities together, and is estimated at 
its just value.  We, after having practically ignored the 
subject for half a century, suddenly rush to the other 
extreme, and develop an entire forest of genealogical trees at 
a growth.

Chagrined, probably, at the small amount of consideration that 
their superior birth commanded, a number of aristocratically 
minded matrons united a few years ago as "Daughters of the 
Revolution," restricting membership to women descended from 
officers of Washington's army.  There may have been a reason 
for the formation of this society.  I say "may" because it 
does not seem quite clear what its aim was.  The originators 
doubtless imagined they were founding an exclusive circle, but 
the numbers who clamored for admittance quickly dispelled this 
illusion.  So a small group of the elect withdrew in disgust 
and banded together under the cognomen of "Colonial Dames."

The only result of these two movements was to awaken envy, 
hatred, and malice in the hearts of those excluded from the 
mysterious rites, which to outsiders seemed to consist in 
blackballing as many aspirants as possible.  Some victims of 
this bad treatment, thirsting for revenge, struck on the happy 
thought of inaugurating an "Aztec" society.  As that title 
conveyed absolutely no idea to any one, its members were 
forced to explain that only descendants of officers who fought 
in the Mexican War were eligible.  What the elect did when 
they got into the circle was not specified.

The "Social Order of Foreign Wars" was the next creation, its 
authors evidently considering the Mexican campaign as a 
domestic article, a sort of family squabble.  Then the 
"Children of 1812" attracted attention, both groups having 
immediate success.  Indeed, the vogue of these enterprises has 
been in inverse ratio to their usefulness or RAISON D'ETRE, 
people apparently being ready to join anything rather than get 
left out in the cold.

Jealous probably of seeing women enjoying all the fun, their 
husbands and brothers next banded together as "Sons of the 
Revolution."  The wives retaliated by instituting the 
"Granddaughters of the Revolution" and "The Mayflower Order," 
the "price of admission" to the latter being descent from some 
one who crossed in that celebrated ship - whether as one of 
the crew or as passenger is not clear.

It was not, however, in the American temperament to rest 
content with modest beginnings, the national motto being, "The 
best is good enough for me."  So wind was quickly taken out of 
the Mayflower's sails by "The Royal Order of the Crown," to 
which none need apply who were not prepared to prove descent 
from one or more royal ancestors.  It was not stated in the 
prospectus whether Irish sovereigns and Fiji Island kings 
counted, but I have been told that bar sinisters form a class 
apart, and are deprived of the right to vote or hold office.

Descent from any old king was, however, not sufficient for the 
high-toned people of our republic.  When you come to think of 
it, such a circle might be "mixed." One really must draw the 
line somewhere (as the Boston parvenu replied when asked why 
he had not invited his brother to a ball).  So the founders of 
the "Circle of Holland Dames of the New Netherlands" drew the 
line at descent from a sovereign of the Low Countries.  It 
does not seem as if this could be a large society, although 
those old Dutch pashas had an unconscionable number of 
children.

The promoters of this enterprise seem nevertheless to have 
been fairly successful, for they gave a fete recently and 
crowned a queen.  To be acclaimed their sovereign by a group 
of people all of royal birth is indeed an honor.  Rumors of 
this ceremony have come to us outsiders.  It is said that they 
employed only lineal descendants of Vatel to prepare their 
banquet, and I am assured that an offspring of Gambrinus acted 
as butler.

But it is wrong to joke on this subject.  The state of affairs 
is becoming too serious.  When sane human beings form a 
"Baronial Order of Runnymede," and announce in their 
prospectus that only descendants through the male line from 
one (or more) of the forty noblemen who forced King John to 
sign the Magna Charta are what our Washington Mrs. Malaprop 
would call "legible," the action attests a diseased condition 
of the community.  Any one taking the trouble to remember that 
eight of the original barons died childless, and that the Wars 
of the Roses swept away nine tenths of what families the 
others may have had, that only one man in England (Lord de 
Ros) can at the present day PROVE male descent further back 
than the eleventh century, must appreciate the absurdity of 
our compatriots' pretensions.  Burke's Peerage is acknowledged 
to be the most "faked" volume in the English language, but the 
descents it attributes are like mathematical demonstrations 
compared to the "trees" that members of these new American 
orders climb.

When my class was graduated from Mr. McMullen's school, we 
little boys had the brilliant idea of uniting in a society, 
but were greatly put about for an effective name, hitting 
finally upon that of Ancient Seniors' Society.  For a group of 
infants, this must be acknowledged to have been a luminous 
inspiration.  We had no valid reason for forming that society, 
not being particularly fond of each other.  Living in several 
cities, we rarely met after leaving school and had little to 
say to each other when we did.  But it sounded so fine to be 
an "Ancient Senior," and we hoped in our next school to 
impress new companions with that title and make them feel 
proper respect for us in consequence.  Pride, however, 
sustained a fall when it was pointed out that the initials 
formed the ominous word "Ass."

I have a shrewd suspicion that the motives which prompted our 
youthful actions are not very different from those now 
inciting children of a larger growth to band together, 
blackball their friends, crown queens, and perform other 
senseless mummeries, such as having the weathercock of a 
departed meeting-house brought in during a banquet, and 
dressing restaurant waiters in knickerbockers for "one night 
only."

This malarial condition of our social atmosphere accounts for 
the quantity of genealogical quacks that have taken to sending 
typewritten letters, stating that the interest they take in 
your private affairs compels them to offer proof of your 
descent from any crowned head to whom you may have taken a 
fancy.  One correspondent assured me only this month that he 
had papers in his possession showing beyond a doubt that I 
might claim a certain King McDougal of Scotland for an 
ancestor.  I have misgivings, however, as to the quality of 
the royal blood in my veins, for the same correspondent was 
equally confident six months ago that my people came in direct 
line from Charlemagne.  As I have no desire to "corner" the 
market in kings, these letters have remained unanswered.

Considering the mania to trace descent from illustrious men, 
it astonishes me that a Mystic Band, consisting of lineal 
descendants from the Seven Sages of Greece, has not before now 
burst upon an astonished world.  It has been suggested that if 
some one wanted to organize a truly restricted circle, "The 
Grandchildren of our Tripoli War" would be an excellent title.  
So few Americans took part in that conflict - and still fewer 
know anything about it - that the satisfaction of joining the 
society would be immense to exclusively-minded people.

There is only one explanation that seems in any way to account 
for this vast tomfoolery.  A little sentence, printed at the 
bottom of a prospectus recently sent to me, lets the ambitious 
cat out of the genealogical bag.  It states that "social 
position is assured to people joining our order."  Thanks to 
the idiotic habit some newspapers have inaugurated of 
advertising, gratis, a number of self-elected society 
"leaders," many feeble-minded people, with more ambition than 
cash, and a larger supply of family papers than brains, have 
been bitten with a social madness, and enter these traps, 
thinking they are the road to position and honors.  The number 
of fools is larger than one would have believed possible, if 
the success of so many "orders," "circles," "commanderies," 
and "regencies" were not there to testify to the unending 
folly of the would-be "smart."

This last decade of the century has brought to light many 
strange fads and senseless manias.  This "descent" craze, 
however, surpasses them all in inanity.  The keepers of insane 
asylums will tell you that one of the hopeless forms of 
madness is LA FOLIE DES GRANDEURS.  A breath of this delirium 
seems to be blowing over our country.  Crowns and sceptres 
haunt the dreams of simple republican men and women, troubling 
their slumbers and leading them a will-o'-the-wisp dance back 
across the centuries.




Chapter 20 - As the Twig is Bent


I KNEW, in my youth, a French village far up among the 
Cevennes Mountains, where the one cultivated man of the place, 
saddened by the unlovely lives of the peasants around him and 
by the bare walls of the village school, organized evening 
classes for the boys.  During these informal hours, he talked 
to them of literature and art and showed them his prints and 
paintings.  When the youths' interest was aroused he lent them 
books, that they might read about the statues and buildings 
that had attracted their attention.  At first it appeared a 
hopeless task to arouse any interest among these peasants in 
subjects not bearing on their abject lives.  To talk with boys 
of the ideal, when their poor bodies were in need of food and 
raiment, seemed superfluous; but in time the charm worked, as 
it always will.  The beautiful appealed to their simple 
natures, elevating and refining them, and opening before their 
eager eyes perspectives of undreamed-of interest.  The self-
imposed task became a delight as his pupils' minds responded 
to his efforts.  Although death soon ended his useful life, 
the seed planted grew and bore fruit in many humble homes.

At this moment I know men in several walks of life who revere 
with touching devotion the memory of the one human being who 
had brought to them, at the moment when they were most 
impressionable, the gracious message that existence was not 
merely a struggle for bread.  The boys he had gathered around 
him realize now that the encouragement and incentive received 
from those evening glimpses of noble works existing in the 
world was the mainspring of their subsequent development and a 
source of infinite pleasure through all succeeding years.

This reference to an individual effort toward cultivating the 
poor has been made because other delicate spirits are 
attempting some such task in our city, where quite as much as 
in the French village schoolchildren stand in need of some 
message of beauty in addition to the instruction they receive, 
- some window opened for them, as it were, upon the fields of 
art, that their eyes when raised from study or play may rest 
on objects more inspiring than blank walls and the graceless 
surroundings of street or schoolroom.

We are far too quick in assuming that love of the beautiful is 
confined to the highly educated; that the poor have no desire 
to surround themselves with graceful forms and harmonious 
colors.  We wonder at and deplore their crude standards, 
bewailing the general lack of taste and the gradual reducing 
of everything to a commonplace money basis.  We smile at the 
efforts toward adornment attempted by the poor, taking it too 
readily for granted that on this point they are beyond 
redemption.  This error is the less excusable as so little has 
been done by way of experiment before forming an opinion, - 
whole classes being put down as inferior beings, incapable of 
appreciation, before they have been allowed even a glimpse of 
the works of art that form the daily mental food of their 
judges.

The portly charlady who rules despotically in my chambers is 
an example.  It has been a curious study to watch her growing 
interest in the objects that have here for the first time come 
under her notice; the delight she has come to take in dusting 
and arranging my belongings, and her enthusiasm at any new 
acquisition.  Knowing how bare her own home was, I felt at 
first only astonishment at her vivid interest in what seemed 
beyond her comprehension, but now realize that in some blind 
way she appreciates the rare and the delicate quite as much as 
my more cultivated visitors.  At the end of one laborious 
morning, when everything was arranged to her satisfaction, she 
turned to me her poor, plain face, lighted up with an 
expression of delight, and exclaimed, "Oh, sir, I do love to 
work in these rooms!  I'm never so happy as when I'm arranging 
them elegant things!"  And, although my pleasure in her 
pleasure was modified by the discovery that she had taken an 
eighteenth-century comb to disentangle the fringes of a rug, 
and broken several of its teeth in her ardor, that she 
invariably placed a certain Whister etching upside down, and 
then stood in rapt admiration before it, still, in watching 
her enthusiasm, I felt a thrill of satisfaction at seeing how 
her untaught taste responded to a contact with good things.

Here in America, and especially in our city, which we have 
been at such pains to make as hideous as possible, the 
schoolrooms, where hundreds of thousands of children pass many 
hours daily, are one degree more graceless than the town 
itself; the most artistically inclined child can hardly 
receive any but unfortunate impressions.  The other day a 
friend took me severely to task for rating our American women 
on their love of the big shops, and gave me, I confess, an 
entirely new idea on the subject.  "Can't you see," she said, 
"that the shops here are what the museums abroad are to the 
poor?  It is in them only that certain people may catch 
glimpses of the dainty and exquisite manufactures of other 
countries.  The little education their eyes receive is 
obtained during visits to these emporiums."

If this proves so, and it seems probable, it only proves how 
the humble long for something more graceful than their meagre 
homes afford.

In the hope of training the younger generations to better 
standards and less vulgar ideals, a group of ladies are making 
an attempt to surround our schoolchildren during their 
impressionable youth with reproductions of historic 
masterpieces, and have already decorated many schoolrooms in 
this way.  For a modest sum it is possible to tint the bare 
walls an attractive color - a delight in itself - and adorn 
them with plaster casts of statues and solar prints of 
pictures and buildings.  The transformation that fifty or 
sixty dollars judiciously expended in this way produces in a 
school-room is beyond belief, and, as the advertisements say, 
"must be seen to be appreciated," giving an air of 
cheerfulness and refinement to the dreariest apartment.

It is hard to make people understand the enthusiasm these 
decorations have excited in both teachers and pupils.  The 
directress of one of our large schools was telling me of the 
help and pleasure the prints and casts had been to her; she 
had given them as subjects for the class compositions, and 
used them in a hundred different ways as object-lessons.  As 
the children are graduated from room to room, a great variety 
of high-class subjects can be brought to their notice by 
varying the decorations.

It is by the eye principally that taste is educated.  "We 
speak with admiration of the eighth sense common among 
Parisians, and envy them their magic power of combining simple 
materials into an artistic whole.  The reason is that for 
generations the eyes of those people have been unconsciously 
educated by the harmonious lines of well-proportioned 
buildings, finely finished detail of stately colonnade, and 
shady perspective of quay and boulevard.  After years of this 
subtle training the eye instinctively revolts from the vulgar 
and the crude.  There is little in the poorer quarters of our 
city to rejoice or refine the senses; squalor and all-
pervading ugliness are not least among the curses that poverty 
entails.

If you have a subject of interest in your mind, it often 
happens that every book you open, every person you speak with, 
refers to that topic.  I never remember having seen an 
explanation offered of this phenomenon.

The other morning, while this article was lying half finished 
on my desk, I opened the last number of a Paris paper and 
began reading an account of the drama, LES MAUVAIS BERGERS 
(treating of that perilous subject, the "strikes"), which 
Sarah Bernhardt had just had the courage to produce before the 
Paris public.  In the third act, when the owner of the factory 
receives the disaffected hands, and listens to their 
complaints, the leader of the strike (an intelligent young 
workman), besides shorter hours and increased pay, demands 
that recreation rooms be built where the toilers, their wives, 
and their children may pass unoccupied hours in the enjoyment 
of attractive surroundings, and cries in conclusion: "We, the 
poor, need some poetry and some art in our lives, man does not 
live by bread alone.  He has a right, like the rich, to things 
of beauty!"

In commending the use of decoration as a means of bringing 
pleasure into dull, cramped lives, one is too often met by the 
curious argument that taste is innate.  "Either people have it 
or they haven't," like a long nose or a short one, and it is 
useless to waste good money in trying to improve either.  "It 
would be much more to the point to spend your money in giving 
the poor children a good roast-beef dinner at Christmas than 
in placing the bust of Clytie before them."  That argument has 
crushed more attempts to elevate the poor than any other ever 
advanced.  If it were listened to, there would never be any 
progress made, because there are always thousands of people 
who are hungry.

When we reflect how painfully ill-arranged rooms or ugly 
colors affect our senses, and remember that less fortunate 
neighbors suffer as much as we do from hideous environments, 
it seems like keeping sunlight from a plant, or fresh air out 
of a sick-room, to refuse glimpses of the beautiful to the 
poor when it is in our power to give them this satisfaction 
with a slight effort.  Nothing can be more encouraging to 
those who occasionally despair of human nature than the good 
results already obtained by this small attempt in the schools.

We fall into the error of imagining that because the Apollo 
Belvedere and the Square of St. Mark's have become stale to us 
by reproduction they are necessarily so to others.  The great 
and the wealthy of the world form no idea of the longing the 
poor feel for a little variety in their lives.  They do not 
know what they want.  They have no standards to guide them, 
but the desire is there.  Let us offer ourselves the 
satisfaction, as we start off for pleasure trips abroad or to 
the mountains, of knowing that at home the routine of study is 
lightened for thousands of children by the counterfeit 
presentment of the scenes we are enjoying; that, as we float 
up the Golden Horn or sit in the moonlight by the Parthenon, 
far away at home some child is dreaming of those fair scenes 
as she raises her eyes from her task, and is unconsciously 
imbibing a love of the beautiful, which will add a charm to 
her humble life, and make the present labors lighter.  If the 
child never lives to see the originals, she will be happier 
for knowing that somewhere in the world domed mosques mirror 
themselves in still waters, and marble gods, the handiwork of 
long-dead nations, stand in the golden sunlight and silently 
preach the gospel of the beautiful.




Chapter 21 - Seven Small Duchesses


SINCE those "precious" days when the habitues of the Hotel 
Rambouillet first raised social intercourse to the level of a 
fine art, the morals and manners, the amusements and intrigues 
of great French ladies have interested the world and 
influenced the ways of civilized nations.  Thanks to Memoirs 
and Maxims, we are able to reconstruct the life of a 
seventeenth or eighteenth century noblewoman as completely as 
German archeologists have rebuilt the temple of the Wingless 
Victory on the Acropolis from surrounding debris.

Interest in French society has, however, diminished during 
this century, ceasing almost entirely with the Second Empire, 
when foreign women gave the tone to a parvenu court from which 
the older aristocracy held aloof in disgust behind the closed 
gates of their "hotels" and historic chateaux.

With the exception of Balzac, few writers have drawn authentic 
pictures of nineteenth-century noblewomen in France; and his 
vivid portrayals are more the creations of genius than correct 
descriptions of a caste.

During the last fifty years French aristocrats have ceased to 
be factors even in matters social, the sceptre they once held 
having passed into alien hands, the daughters of Albion to a 
great extent replacing their French rivals in influencing the 
ways of the "world," - a change, be it remarked in passing, 
that has not improved the tone of society or contributed to 
the spread of good manners.

People like the French nobles, engaged in sulking and 
attempting to overthrow or boycott each succeeding regime, 
must naturally lose their influence.  They have held aloof so 
long - fearing to compromise themselves by any advances to the 
powers that be, and restrained by countless traditions from 
taking an active part in either the social or political strife 
- that little by little they have been passed by and ignored; 
which is a pity, for amid the ruin of many hopes and ambitions 
they have remained true to their caste and handed down from 
generation to generation the secret of that gracious urbanity 
and tact which distinguished the Gallic noblewoman in the last 
century from the rest of her kind and made her so deft in the 
difficult art of pleasing - and being pleased.

Within the last few years there have, however, been signs of a 
change.  Young members of historic houses show an amusing 
inclination to escape from their austere surroundings and 
resume the place their grandparents abdicated.  If it is 
impossible to rule as formerly, they at any rate intend to get 
some fun out of existence.

This joyous movement to the front is being made by the young 
matrons enlisted under the "Seven little duchesses'" banner.  
Oddly enough, a baker's half-dozen of ducal coronets are worn 
at this moment, in France, by small and sprightly women, who 
have shaken the dust of centuries from those ornaments and 
sport them with a decidedly modern air!

It is the members of this clique who, in Paris during the 
spring, at their chateaux in the summer and autumn, and on the 
Riviera after Christmas, lead the amusements and strike the 
key for the modern French world.

No one of these light-hearted ladies takes any particular 
precedence over the others.  All are young, and some are 
wonderfully nice to look at.  The Duchesse d'Uzes is, perhaps, 
the handsomest, good looks being an inheritance from her 
mother, the beautiful and wayward Duchesse de Chaulme.

There is a vivid grace about the daughter, an intense vitality 
that suggests some beautiful being of the forest.  As she 
moves and speaks one almost expects to hear the quick breath 
coming and going through her quivering nostrils, and see foam 
on her full lips.  Her mother's tragic death has thrown a 
glamor of romance around the daughter's life that heightens 
the witchery of her beauty.

Next in good looks comes an American, the Duchesse de la 
Rochefoucauld, although marriage (which, as de Maupassant 
remarked, is rarely becoming) has not been propitious to that 
gentle lady.  By rights she should have been mentioned first, 
as her husband outranks, not only all the men of his age, but 
also his cousin, the old Duc de la Rochefoucauld-Doudeauville, 
to whom, however, a sort of brevet rank is accorded on account 
of his years, his wealth, and the high rank of his two wives.  
It might almost be asserted that our fair compatriot wears the 
oldest coronet in France.  She certainly is mistress of three 
of the finest chateaux in that country, among which is 
Miromail, where the family live, and Liancourt, a superb 
Renaissance structure, a delight to the artist's soul.

The young Duchesse de Brissac runs her two comrades close as 
regards looks.  Brissac is the son of Mme. de Tredern, whom 
Newporters will remember two years ago, when she enjoyed some 
weeks of our summer season.  Their chateau was built by the 
Brissac of Henri IV.'s time and is one of the few that escaped 
uninjured through the Revolution, its vast stone corridors and 
massive oak ceilings, its moat and battlements, standing to-
day unimpaired amid a group of chateaux including Chaumont, 
Rochecotte, Azay-le-Rideau, Usse, Chenonceau, within "dining" 
distance of each other, that form a centre of gayety next in 
importance to Paris and Cannes.  In the autumn these spacious 
castles are filled with joyous bands and their ample stables 
with horses.  A couple of years ago, when the king of Portugal 
and his suite were entertained at Chaumont for a week of stag-
hunting, over three hundred people, servants, and guests, 
slept under its roof, and two hundred horses were housed in 
its stables.

The Duc de Luynes and his wife, who was Mlle. de Crussol 
(daughter of the brilliant Duchesse d'Uzes of Boulanger fame), 
live at Dampierre, another interesting pile filled with rare 
pictures, bric-a-brac, and statuary, first among which is Jean 
Goujon's life-sized statue (in silver) of Louis XIII., 
presented by that monarch to his favorite, the founder of the 
house.  This gem of the Renaissance stands in an octagonal 
chamber hung in dark velvet, unique among statues.  It has 
been shown but once in public, at the Loan Exhibition in 1872, 
when the patriotic nobility lent their treasures to collect a 
fund for the Alsace-Lorraine exiles.

The Duchesse de Noailles, NEE Mlle. de Luynes, is another of 
this coterie and one of the few French noblewomen who has 
travelled.  Many Americans will remember the visit she made 
here with her mother some years ago, and the effect her 
girlish grace produced at that time.  The de Noailles' chateau 
of Maintenon is an inheritance from Louis XIV.'s prudish 
favorite, who founded and enriched the de Noailles family.  
The Duc and Duchesse d'Uzes live near by at Bonnelle with the 
old Duc de Doudeauville, her grandfather, who is also the 
grandfather of Mme. de Noailles, these two ladies being 
descended each from a wife of the old duke, the former from 
the Princesse de Polignac and the latter from the Princesse de 
Ligne.

The Duchesse de Bisaccia, NEE Princesse Radziwill, and the 
Duchesse d'Harcourt, who complete the circle of seven, also 
live in this vicinity, where another group of historic 
residences, including Eclimont and Rambouillet, the summer 
home of the president, rivals in gayety and hospitality the 
chateaux of the Loire.

No coterie in England or in this country corresponds at all to 
this French community.  Much as they love to amuse themselves, 
the idea of meeting any but their own set has never passed 
through their well-dressed heads.  They differ from their 
parents in that they have broken away from many antiquated 
habits.  Their houses are no longer lay hermitages, and their 
opera boxes are regularly filled, but no foreigner is ever 
received, no ambitious parvenu accepted among them.  Ostracism 
here means not a ten years' exile, but lifelong banishment.

The contrast is strong between this rigor and the enthusiasm 
with which wealthy new-comers are welcomed into London society 
or by our own upper crust, so full of unpalatable pieces of 
dough.  This exclusiveness of the titled French reminds me - 
incongruously enough - of a certain arrangement of graves in a 
Lenox cemetery, where the members of an old New England family 
lie buried in a circle with their feet toward its centre.  
When I asked, many years ago, the reason for this arrangement, 
a wit of that day - a daughter, by the bye, of Mrs. Stowe - 
replied, "So that when they rise at the Last Day only members 
of their own family may face them!"

One is struck by another peculiarity of these French men and 
women - their astonishing proficiency in LES ARTS D'AGREMENT.  
Every Frenchwoman of any pretensions to fashion backs her 
beauty and grace with some art in which she is sure to be 
proficient.  The dowager Duchesse d'Uzes is a sculptor of 
mark, and when during the autumn Mme. de Tredern gives opera 
at Brissac, she finds little difficulty in recruiting her 
troupe from among the youths and maidens under her roof whose 
musical education has been thorough enough to enable them to 
sing difficult music in public.

Love of the fine arts is felt in their conversation, in the 
arrangement and decoration of their homes, and in the interest 
that an exhibition of pictures or old furniture will excite.  
Few of these people but are HABITUES of the Hotel Drouot and 
conversant with the value and authenticity of the works of art 
daily sold there.  Such elements combine to form an atmosphere 
that does not exist in any other country, and lends an 
interest to society in France which it is far from possessing 
elsewhere.

There is but one way that an outsider can enter this Gallic 
paradise.  By marrying into it!  Two of the seven ladies in 
question lack the quarterings of the rest.  Miss Mitchell was 
only a charming American girl, and the mother of the Princesse 
Radziwill was Mlle. Blanc of Monte Carlo.  However, as in most 
religions there are ceremonies that purify, so in this case 
the sacrament of marriage is supposed to have reconstructed 
these wives and made them genealogically whole.

There is something incongruous to most people in the idea of a 
young girl hardly out of the schoolroom bearing a ponderous 
title.  The pomp and circumstance that surround historic names 
connect them (through our reading) with stately matrons 
playing the "heavy female" roles in life's drama, much as Lady 
Macbeth's name evokes the idea of a raw-boned mother-in-law 
sort of person, the reverse of attractive, and quite the last 
woman in the world to egg her husband on to a crime - unless 
it were wife murder!

Names like de Chevreuse, or de la Rochefoucauld, seem 
appropriate only to the warlike amazons of the Fronde, or 
corpulent kill-joys in powder and court trains of the Mme. 
Etiquette school; it comes as a shock, on being presented to a 
group of girlish figures in the latest cut of golfing skirts, 
who are chattering odds on the Grand Prix in faultless 
English, to realize that these light-hearted GAMINES are the 
present owners of sonorous titles.  One shudders to think what 
would have been the effect on poor Marie Antoinette's priggish 
mentor could she have foreseen her granddaughter, clad in 
knickerbockers, running a petroleum tricycle in the streets of 
Paris, or pedalling "tandem" across country behind some young 
cavalry officer of her connection.

Let no simple-minded American imagine, however, that these up-
to-date women are waiting to welcome him and his family to 
their intimacy.  The world outside of France does not exist 
for a properly brought up French aristocrat.  Few have 
travelled; from their point of view, any man with money, born 
outside of France, is a "Rasta," unless he come with 
diplomatic rank, in which case his position at home is 
carefully ferreted out before he is entertained.  Wealthy 
foreigners may live for years in Paris, without meeting a 
single member of this coterie, who will, however, join any new 
club that promises to be amusing; but as soon as the "Rastas" 
get a footing, "the seven" and their following withdraw.  
Puteaux had its day, then the "Polo Club" in the Bois became 
their rendezvous.  But as every wealthy American and "smart" 
Englishwoman passing the spring in Paris rushed for that too 
open circle, like tacks toward a magnet, it was finally cut by 
the "Duchesses," who, together with such attractive aides-de-
camp as the Princesse de Poix, Mmes. de Murat, de Morny, and 
de Broglie, inaugurated last spring "The Ladies' Club of the 
Acacias," on a tiny island belonging to the "Tir aux Pigeons," 
which, for the moment, is the fad of its founders.

It must be a surprise to those who do not know French family 
pride to learn that exclusive as these women are there are 
cliques in France today whose members consider the ladies we 
have been speaking of as lacking in reserve.  Men like Guy de 
Durfort, Duc de Lorges, or the Duc de Massa, and their 
womenkind, hold themselves aloof on an infinitely higher 
plane, associating with very few and scorning the vulgar herd 
of "smart" people!

It would seem as if such a vigorous weeding out of the 
unworthy would result in a rather restricted comradeship.  Who 
the "elect" are must become each year more difficult to 
discern.

Their point of view in this case cannot differ materially from 
that of the old Methodist lady, who, while she was quite sure 
no one outside of her own sect could possibly be saved, had 
grave fears concerning the future of most of the congregation.  
She felt hopeful only of the clergyman and herself, adding: 
"There are days when I have me doubts about the minister!"




Chapter 22 - Growing Old Ungracefully


THERE comes, we are told, a crucial moment, "a tide" in all 
lives, that taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.  An 
assertion, by the bye, which is open to doubt.  What does come 
to every one is an hour fraught with warning, which, if 
unheeded, leads on to folly.  This fateful date coincides for 
most of us with the discovery that we are turning gray, or 
that the "crow's feet" or our temples are becoming visible 
realities.  The unpleasant question then presents itself: Are 
we to slip meekly into middle age, or are arms be taken up 
against our insidious enemy, and the rest of life become a 
losing battle, fought inch by inch?

In other days it was the men who struggled the hardest against 
their fate.  Up to this century, the male had always been the 
ornamental member of a family.  Caesar, we read, coveted a 
laurel crown principally because it would help to conceal his 
baldness.  The wigs of the Grand Monarque are historical.  It 
is characteristic of the time that the latter's attempts at 
rejuvenation should have been taken as a matter of course, 
while a few years later poor Madame de Pompadour's artifices 
to retain her fleeting youth were laughed at and decried.

To-day the situation is reversed.  The battle, given up by the 
men - who now accept their fate with equanimity - is being 
waged by their better halves with a vigor heretofore unknown.  
So general has this mania become that if asked what one 
weakness was most characteristic of modern women, what 
peculiarity marked them as different from their sisters in 
other centuries, I should unhesitatingly answer, "The desire 
to look younger than their years."

That people should long to be handsomer or taller or better 
proportioned than a cruel Providence has made them, is natural 
enough; but that so much time and trouble should be spent 
simply in trying to look "young," does seem unreasonable, 
especially when it is evident to everybody that such efforts 
must, in the nature of things, be failures.  The men or women 
who do not look their age are rare.  In each generation there 
are exceptions, people who, from one cause or another - 
generally an excellent constitution - succeed in producing the 
illusion of youth for a few years after youth itself has 
flown.

A curious fatality that has the air of a nemesis pursues those 
who succeed in giving this false appearance.  When pointing 
them out to strangers, their admirers (in order to make the 
contrast more effective) add a decade or so to the real age.  
Only last month I was sitting at dinner opposite a famous 
French beauty, who at fifty succeeds in looking barely thirty.  
During the meal both my neighbors directed attention to her 
appearance, and in each case said: "Isn't she a wonder!  You 
know she's over sixty!"  So all that poor lady gained by 
looking youthful was ten years added to her age!

The desire to remain attractive as long as possible is not 
only a reasonable but a commendable ambition.  Unfortunately 
the stupid means most of our matrons adopt to accomplish this 
end produce exactly the opposite result.

One sign of deficient taste in our day is this failure to 
perceive that every age has a charm of its own which can be 
enhanced by appropriate surroundings, but is lost when placed 
in an incongruous setting.  It saddens a lover of the 
beautiful to see matrons going so far astray in their desire 
to please as to pose for young women when they no longer can 
look the part.

Holmes, in MY MAIDEN AUNT, asks plaintively: -


WHY WILL SHE TRAIN THAT WINTRY CURL IN SUCH A SPRINGLIKE WAY?


That this folly is in the air to-day, few will dispute.  It 
seems to be perpetrated unconsciously by the greater number, 
with no particular object in view, simply because other people 
do it.  An unanswerable argument when used by one of the fair 
sex!

Few matrons stop to think for themselves, or they would 
realize that by appearing in the same attire as their 
daughters they challenge a comparison which can only be to 
their disadvantage, and should be if possible avoided.  Is 
there any disillusion more painful than, on approaching what 
appeared from a distance to be a young girl, to find one's 
self face to face with sixty years of wrinkles?  That is a 
modern version of the saying, "an old head on young 
shoulders," with a vengeance!  If mistaken sexagenarians could 
divine the effect that tired eyes smiling from under false 
hair, aged throats clasped with collars of pearls, and 
rheumatic old ribs braced into a semblance of girlish grace, 
produce on the men for whose benefit such adornments have been 
arranged, reform would quickly follow.  There is something 
absolutely uncanny in the illusion.  The more successful it 
is, the more weird the effect.

No one wants to see Polonius in the finery of Mercutio.  What 
a sense of fitness demands is, on the contrary, a "make up" in 
keeping with the role, which does not mean that a woman is to 
become a frump, but only that she is to make herself 
attractive in another way.

During the ANCIEN REGIME in France, matters of taste were 
considered all-important; an entire court would consult on the 
shade of a brocade, and hail a new coiffure as an event.  The 
great ladies who had left their youth behind never then 
committed the blunder, so common among our middle-aged ladies, 
of aping the maidens of the day.  They were far too clever for 
that, and appreciated the advantages to be gained from sombre 
stuffs and flattering laces.  Let those who doubt study 
Nattier's exquisite portrait of Maria Leczinska.  Nothing in 
the pose or toilet suggests a desire on the painter's part to 
rejuvenate his sitter.  If anything, the queen's age is 
emphasized as something honorable.  The gray hair is simply 
arranged and partly veiled with black lace, which sets off her 
delicate, faded face to perfection, but without flattery or 
fraud.

We find the same view taken of age by the masters of the 
Renaissance, who appreciated its charm and loved to reproduce 
its grace.

Queen Elizabeth stands out in history as a woman who struggled 
ungracefully against growing old.  Her wigs and hoops and 
farthingales served only to make her ridiculous, and the fact 
that she wished to be painted without shadows in order to 
appear "young," is recorded as an aberration of a great mind.

Are there no painters to-day who will whisper to our wives and 
mothers the secret of looking really lovely, and persuade them 
to abandon their foolish efforts at rejuvenation?

Let us see some real old ladies once more, as they look at us 
from miniature and portrait.  Few of us, I imagine, but 
cherish the memory of some such being in the old home, a soft-
voiced grandmother, with silvery hair brushed under a discreet 
and flattering cap, with soft, dark raiment and tulle-wrapped 
throat.  There are still, it is to be hoped, many such lovable 
women in our land, but at times I look about me in dismay, and 
wonder who is to take their places when they are gone.  Are 
there to be no more "old ladies"?  Will the next generation 
have to look back when the word "grandmother" is mentioned, to 
a stylish vision in Parisian apparel, decollete and decked in 
jewels, or arrayed in cocky little bonnets, perched on tousled 
curls, knowing jackets, and golfing skirts?

The present horror of anything elderly comes, probably, from 
the fact that the preceding generation went to the other 
extreme, young women retiring at forty into becapped old age.  
Knowing how easily our excitable race runs to exaggeration, 
one trembles to think what surprises the future may hold, or 
what will be the next decree of Dame Fashion.  Having 
eliminated the "old lady" from off the face of the earth, how 
fast shall we continue down the fatal slope toward the 
ridiculous?  Shall we be compelled by a current stronger than 
our wills to array ourselves each year (the bare thought makes 
one shudder) in more and more youthful apparel, until 
corpulent senators take to running about in "sailor suits," 
and octogenarian business men go "down town" in "pinafores," 
while belles of sixty or seventy summers appear in Kate 
Greenaway costumes, and dine out in short-sleeved bibs, which 
will allow coy glimpses of their cunning old ankles to appear 
over their socks?




Chapter 23 - Around a Spring


THE greatest piece of good luck that can befall a Continental 
village is the discovery, within its limits, of a spring 
supplying some kind of malodorous water.  From that moment the 
entire community, abandoning all other plans, give themselves 
over to hatching their golden egg, experience having taught 
them that no other source of prosperity can compare with a 
SOURCE THERMALE.  If the water of the newfound spring, besides 
having an unpleasant smell, is also hot, then Providence has 
indeed blessed the township.

The first step is to have the fluid analyzed by a celebrity, 
and its medicinal qualities duly set forth in a certificate.  
The second is to get official recognition from the government 
and the authorization to erect a bath house.  Once these 
preliminaries accomplished, the way lies plain before the 
fortunate village; every citizen, from the mayor down to the 
humblest laborer, devotes himself to solving the all-important 
problem how to attract strangers to the place and keep and 
amuse them when they have been secured.

Multicolored pamphlets detailing the local attractions are 
mailed to the four corners of the earth, and brilliant chromos 
of the village, with groups of peasants in the foreground, 
wearing picturesque costumes, are posted in every available 
railway station and booking-office, regardless of the fact 
that no costumes have been known in the neighborhood for half 
a century, except those provided by the hotel proprietors for 
their housemaids.  A national dress, however, has a fine 
effect in the advertisement, and gives a local color to the 
scene.  What, for instance, would Athens be without that 
superb individual in national get-up whom one is sure to see 
before the hotel on alighting from the omnibus?  I am 
convinced that he has given as much pleasure as the Acropolis 
to most travellers; the knowledge that the hotel proprietors 
share the expenses of his keep and toilet cannot dispel the 
charm of those scarlet embroideries and glittering arms.

After preparing their trap, the wily inhabitants of a new 
watering-place have only to sit down and await events.  The 
first people to appear on the scene are, naturally, the 
English, some hidden natural law compelling that race to 
wander forever in inexpensive by-ways and serve as pioneers 
for other nations.  No matter how new or inaccessible the 
spring, you are sure to find a small colony of Britons 
installed in the half-finished hotels, reading week-old 
editions of the TIMES, and grumbling over the increase in 
prices since the year before.

As soon as the first stray Britons have developed into an 
"English colony," the municipality consider themselves 
authorized to construct a casino and open avenues, which are 
soon bordered by young trees and younger villas.  In the wake 
of the English come invalids of other nationalities.  If a 
wandering "crowned head" can be secured for a season, a great 
step is gained, as that will attract the real paying public 
and the Americans, who as a general thing are the last to 
appear on the scene.

At this stage of its evolution, the "city fathers" build a 
theatre in connection with their casino, and (persuading the 
government to wink at their evasion of the gambling laws) add 
games of chance to the other temptations of the place.

There is no better example of the way a spring can be 
developed by clever handling, and satisfactory results 
obtained from advertising and judicious expenditure, than Aix-
les-Bains, which twenty years ago was but a tiny mountain 
village, and to-day ranks among the wealthiest and most 
brilliant EAUX in Europe.  In this case, it is true, they had 
tradition to fall back on, for Aquae Gratinae was already a 
favorite watering-place in the year 30 B.C., when Caesar took 
the cure.

There is little doubt in my mind that when the Roman Emperor 
first arrived he found a colony of spinsters and retired army 
officers (from recently conquered Britain) living around this 
spring in POPINAE (which are supposed to have corresponded to 
our modern boarding-house), wearing waterproof togas and 
common-sense cothurni, with double cork soles.

The wife of another Caesar fled hither in 1814.  The little 
inn where she passed a summer in the company of her one-eyed 
lover - while the fate of her husband and son was being 
decided at Vienna and Waterloo - is still standing, and serves 
as the annex of a vast new hotel.

The way in which a watering-place is "run" abroad, where 
tourists are regarded as godsends, to be cherished, spoiled, 
and despoiled, is amusingly different from the manner of our 
village populations when summer visitors (whom they look upon 
as natural enemies) appear on the scene.  Abroad the entire 
town, together with the surrounding villages, hamlets, and 
farmhouses, rack their brains and devote their time to 
inventing new amusements for the visitor, and original ways of 
enticing the gold from his pocket - for, mind you, on both 
continents the object is the same.  In Europe the rural 
Machiavellis have had time to learn that smiling faces and 
picturesque surroundings are half the battle.

Another point which is perfectly understood abroad is that a 
cure must be largely mental; that in consequence boredom 
retards recovery.  So during every hour of the day and evening 
a different amusement is provided for those who feel inclined 
to be amused.  At Aix, for instance, Colonne's orchestra plays 
under the trees at the Villa des Fleurs while you are sipping 
your after-luncheon coffee.  At three o'clock "Guignol" 
performs for the youngsters.  At five o'clock there is another 
concert in the Casino.  At eight o'clock an operetta is given 
at the villa, and a comedy in the Casino, both ending 
discreetly at eleven o'clock.  Once a week, as a variety, the 
park is illuminated and fireworks help to pass the evening.

If neither music nor Guignol tempts you, every form of trap 
from a four-horse break to a donkey-chair (the latter much in 
fashion since the English queen's visit) is standing ready in 
the little square.  On the neighboring lake you have but to 
choose between a dozen kinds of boats.  The hire of all these 
modes of conveyance being fixed by the municipality, and 
plainly printed in boat or carriage, extortions or discussions 
are impossible.  If you prefer a ramble among the hills, the 
wily native is lying in wait for you there also.  When you 
arrive breathless at your journey's end, a shady arbor offers 
shelter where you may cool off and enjoy the view.  It is not 
by accident that a dish of freshly gathered strawberries and a 
bowl of milk happen to be standing near by.

When bicycling around the lake you begin to feel how nice a 
half hour's rest would be.  Presto! a terrace overhanging the 
water appears, and a farmer's wife who proposes brewing you a 
cup of tea, supplementing it with butter and bread of her own 
making.  Weak human nature cannot withstand such 
blandishments.  You find yourself becoming fond of the people 
and their smiling ways, returning again and again to shores 
where you are made so welcome.  The fact that "business" is at 
the bottom of all this in no way interferes with one's 
enjoyment.  On the contrary, to a practical mind it is 
refreshing to see how much can be made of a little, and what a 
fund of profit and pleasure can be extracted from small 
things, if one goes to work in the right way.

The trick can doubtless be overdone: at moments one feels the 
little game is worked a bit too openly.  The other evening, 
for instance, when we entered the dining-room of our hotel and 
found it decorated with flags and flowers, because, forsooth, 
it was the birthday of "Victoria R. and I.," when champagne 
was offered at dessert and the band played "God Save the 
Queen," while the English solemnly stood up in their places, 
it did seem as if the proprietor was poking fun at his guests 
in a sly way.

I was apparently the only person, however, who felt this.  The 
English were much flattered by the attention, so I snubbed 
myself with the reflection that if the date had been July 4, I 
doubtless should have considered the flags and music most A 
PROPOS.

There are also moments when the vivid picturesqueness of this 
place comes near to palling on one.  Its beauty is so 
suspiciously like a set scene that it gives the impression of 
having been arranged by some clever decorator with an eye to 
effect only.

One is continually reminded of that inimitable chapter in 
Daudet's TARTARIN SUR LES ALPES, when the hero discovers that 
all Switzerland is one enormous humbug, run to attract 
tourists; that the cataracts are "faked," and avalanches 
arranged beforehand to enliven a dull season.  Can anything be 
more delicious than the disillusion of Tartarin and his 
friends, just back from a perilous chamois hunt, on 
discovering that the animal they had exhausted themselves in 
following all day across the mountains, was being refreshed 
with hot wine in the kitchen of the hotel by its peasant 
owner?

When one visits the theatrical abbey across the lake and 
inspects the too picturesque tombs of Savoy's sovereigns, or 
walks in the wonderful old garden, with its intermittent 
spring, the suspicion occurs, in spite of one's self, that the 
whole scene will be folded up at sunset and the bare-footed 
"brother" who is showing us around with so much unction will, 
after our departure, hurry into another costume, and appear 
later as one of the happy peasants who are singing and 
drinking in front of that absurdly operatic little inn you 
pass on the drive home.

There is a certain pink cottage, with a thatched roof and 
overhanging vines, about which I have serious doubts, and 
fully expect some day to see Columbine appear on that 
pistache-green balcony (where the magpie is hanging in a 
wicker cage), and, taking Arlequin's hand, disappear into the 
water-butt while Clown does a header over the half-door, and 
the cottage itself turns into a gilded coach, with Columbine 
kissing her hand from the window.

A problem which our intelligent people have not yet set 
themselves to solve, is being worked out abroad.  The little 
cities of Europe have discovered that prosperity comes with 
the tourist, that with increased facilities of communication 
the township which expends the most in money and brains in 
attracting rich travellers to its gates is the place that will 
grow and prosper.  It is a simple lesson, and one that I would 
gladly see our American watering-places learn and apply.




Chapter 24 - The Better Part


AS I watch, year after year, the flowers of our aristocratic 
hothouses blooming behind the glass partitions of their 
conservatories, tended always by the same gardeners, admired 
by the same amateurs, and then, for the most part, withering 
unplucked on their virgin stems, I wonder if the wild flowers 
appreciate the good luck that allows them to taste the storm 
and the sunshine untrammelled and disperse perfume according 
to their own sweet will.

To drop a cumbersome metaphor, there is not the shadow of a 
doubt that the tamest and most monotonous lives in this 
country are those led by the women in our "exclusive" sets, 
for the good reason that they are surrounded by all the 
trammels of European society without enjoying any of its 
benefits, and live in an atmosphere that takes the taste out 
of existence too soon.

Girls abroad are kept away from the "world" because their 
social life only commences after marriage.  In America, on the 
contrary, a woman is laid more or less on the shelf the day 
she becomes a wife, so that if she has not made hay while her 
maiden sunshine lasted, the chances are she will have but 
meagrely furnished lofts; and how, I ask, is a girl to harvest 
always in the same field?

When in this country, a properly brought up young aristocrat 
is presented by her mamma to an admiring circle of friends, 
she is quite a BLASEE person.  The dancing classes she has 
attended for a couple of years before her debut (that she 
might know the right set of youths and maidens) have taken the 
bloom off her entrance into the world.  She and her friends 
have already talked over the "men" of their circle, and 
decided, with a sigh, that there were matches going about.  A 
juvenile Newporter was recently overheard deploring (to a 
friend of fifteen summers), "By the time we come out there 
will only be two matches in the market," meaning, of course, 
millionnaires who could provide their brides with country and 
city homes, yachts, and the other appurtenances of a brilliant 
position.  Now, the unfortunate part of the affair is, that 
such a worldly-minded maiden will in good time be obliged to 
make her debut, dine, and dance through a dozen seasons 
without making a new acquaintance.  Her migrations from town 
to seashore, or from one country house to another, will be but 
changes of scene: the actors will remain always the same.  
When she dines out, she can, if she cares to take the trouble, 
make a fair guess as to who the guests will be before she 
starts, for each entertainment is but a new shuffle of the too 
well-known pack.  She is morally certain of being taken in to 
dinner by one of fifty men whom she has known since her 
childhood, and has met on an average twice a week since she 
was eighteen.

Of foreigners such a girl sees little beyond a stray 
diplomatist or two, in search of a fortune, and her glimpses 
of Paris society are obtained from the windows of a hotel on 
the Place Vendome.  In London or Rome she may be presented in 
a few international salons, but as she finds it difficult to 
make her new acquaintances understand what an exalted position 
she occupies at home, the chances are that pique at seeing 
some Daisy Miller attract all the attention will drive my lady 
back to the city where she is known and appreciated, nothing 
being more difficult for an American "swell" than explaining 
to the uninitiated in what way her position differs from that 
of the rest of her compatriots.

When I see the bevies of highly educated and attractive girls 
who make their bows each season, I ask myself in wonder, "Who, 
in the name of goodness, are they to marry?"

In the very circle where so much stress is laid on a girl's 
establishing herself brilliantly, the fewest possible husbands 
are to be found.  Yet, limited as such a girl's choice is, she 
will sooner remain single than accept a husband out of her 
set.  She has a perfectly distinct idea of what she wants, and 
has lived so long in the atmosphere of wealth that existence 
without footmen and male cooks, horses and French clothes, 
appears to her impossible.  Such large proportions do these 
details assume in her mind that each year the husband himself 
becomes of less importance, and what he can provide the 
essential point.

If an outsider is sufficiently rich, my lady may consent to 
unite her destinies to his, hoping to get him absorbed into 
her own world.

It is pathetic, considering the restricted number of eligible 
men going about, to see the trouble and expense that parents 
take to keep their daughters EN EVIDENCE.  When one reflects 
on the number of people who are disturbed when such a girl 
dines out, the horses and men and women who are kept up to 
convey her home, the time it has taken her to dress, the cost 
of the toilet itself, and then see the man to whom she will be 
consigned for the evening, - some bored man about town who has 
probably taken her mother in to dinner twenty years before, 
and will not trouble himself to talk with his neighbor, or a 
schoolboy, breaking in his first dress suit, - when one 
realizes that for many maidens this goes on night after night 
and season after season, it seems incredible that they should 
have the courage, or think it worth their while to keep up the 
game.

The logical result of turning eternally in the same circle is 
that nine times out of ten the men who marry choose girls out 
of their own set, some pretty stranger who has burst on their 
jaded vision with all the charm of the unknown.  A 
conventional society maiden who has not been fortunate enough 
to meet and marry a man she loves, or whose fortune tempts 
her, during the first season or two that she is "out," will in 
all probability go on revolving in an ever-narrowing circle 
until she becomes stationary in its centre.

In comparison with such an existence the life of the average 
"summer girl" is one long frolic, as varied as that of her 
aristocratic sister is monotonous.  Each spring she has the 
excitement of selecting a new battle-ground for her 
manoeuvres, for in the circle in which she moves, parents 
leave such details to their children.  Once installed in the 
hotel of her choice, mademoiselle proceeds to make the 
acquaintance of an entirely new set of friends, delightful 
youths just arrived, and bent on making the most of their 
brief holidays, with whom her code of etiquette allows her to 
sail all day, and pass uncounted evening hours in remote 
corners of piazza or beach.

As the words "position" and "set" have no meaning to her young 
ears, and no one has ever preached to her the importance of 
improving her social standing, the acquaintances that chance 
throws in her path are accepted without question if they 
happen to be good-looking and amusing.  She has no prejudice 
as to standing, and if her supply of partners runs short, she 
will dance and flirt with the clerk from the desk in perfect 
good humor - in fact, she stands rather in awe of that 
functionary, and admires the "English" cut of his clothes and 
his Eastern swagger.  A large hotel is her dream of luxury, 
and a couple of simultaneous flirtations her ideal of bliss.  
No long evenings of cruel boredom, in order to be seen at 
smart houses, will cloud the maiden's career, no agonized 
anticipation of retiring partnerless from cotillion or supper 
will disturb her pleasure.

In the city she hails from, everybody she knows lives in about 
the same style.  Some are said to be wealthier than others, 
but nothing in their way of life betrays the fact; the art of 
knowing how to enjoy wealth being but little understood 
outside of our one or two great cities.  She has that tranquil 
sense of being the social equal of the people she meets, the 
absence of which makes the snob's life a burden.

During her summers away from home our "young friend" will meet 
other girls of her age, and form friendships that result in 
mutual visiting during the ensuing winter, when she will 
continue to add more new names to the long list of her 
admirers, until one fine morning she writes home to her 
delighted parents that she has found the right man at last, 
and engaged herself to him.

Never having penetrated to those sacred centres where birth 
and wealth are considered all-important, and ignoring the 
supreme importance of living in one set, the plan of life that 
such a woman lays out for herself is exceedingly simple.  She 
will coquette and dance and dream her pleasant dream until 
Prince Charming, who is to awaken her to a new life, comes and 
kisses away the dew of girlhood and leads his bride out into 
the work-a-day world.  The simple surroundings and ambitions 
of her youth will make it easy for this wife to follow the man 
of her choice, if necessary, to the remote village where he is 
directing a factory or to the mining camp where the 
foundations of a fortune lie.  Life is full of delicious 
possibilities for her.  Men who are forced to make their way 
in youth often turn out to be those who make "history" later, 
and a bride who has not become prematurely BLASEE to all the 
luxuries or pleasures of existence will know the greatest 
happiness that can come into a woman's life, that of rising at 
her husband's side, step by step, enjoying his triumphs as she 
shared his poverty.




Chapter 25 - La Comedie Francaise a Orange


IDLING up through the south of France, in company with a 
passionate lover of that fair land, we learned on arriving at 
Lyons, that the actors of the Comedie Francaise were to pass 
through there the next day, EN ROUTE for Orange, where a 
series of fetes had been arranged by "Les Felibres."  This 
society, composed of the writers and poets of Provence, have 
the preservation of the Roman theatre at Orange (perhaps the 
most perfect specimen of classical theatrical architecture in 
existence) profoundly at heart, their hope being to restore 
some of its pristine beauty to the ruin, and give from time to 
time performances of the Greek masterpieces on its disused 
stage.

The money obtained by these representations will be spent in 
the restoration of the theatre, and it is expected in time to 
make Orange the centre of classic drama, as Beyreuth is that 
of Wagnerian music.

At Lyons, the CORTEGE was to leave the Paris train and take 
boats down the Rhone, to their destination.  Their programme 
was so tempting that the offer of places in one of the craft 
was enough to lure us away from our prearranged route.

By eight o'clock the following morning, we were on foot, as 
was apparently the entire city.  A cannon fired from Fort 
Lamothe gave the signal of our start.  The river, covered with 
a thousand gayly decorated craft, glinted and glittered in the 
morning light.  It world be difficult to forget that scene, - 
the banks of the Rhone were lined with the rural population, 
who had come miles in every direction to acclaim the passage 
of their poets.

Everywhere along our route the houses were gayly decorated and 
arches of flowers had been erected.  We float past Vienne, a 
city once governed by Pontius Pilate, and Tournon, with its 
feudal chateau, blue in the distance, then Saint Peray, on a 
verdant vine-clad slope.  As we pass under the bridge at 
Montelimar, an avalanche of flowers descends on us from above.

The rapid current of the river soon brings our flotilla 
opposite Vivier, whose Gothic cathedral bathes its feet in the 
Rhone.  Saint Esprit and its antique bridge appear next on the 
horizon.  Tradition asserts that the Holy Spirit, disguised as 
a stone mason, directed its construction; there were thirteen 
workmen each day, but at sunset, when the men gathered to be 
paid, but twelve could be counted.

Here the mayor and the municipal council were to have received 
us and delivered an address, but were not on hand.  We could 
see the tardy CORTEGE hastening towards the bridge as we shot 
away down stream.

On nearing Orange, the banks and quays of the river are alive 
with people.  The high road, parallel with the stream, is 
alive with a many-colored throng.  On all sides one hears the 
language of Mistral, and recognizes the music of Mireille sung 
by these pilgrims to an artistic Mecca, where a miracle is to 
be performed - and classic art called forth from its winding-
sheet.

The population of a whole region is astir under the ardent 
Provencal sun, to witness a resurrection of the Drama in the 
historic valley of the Rhone, through whose channel the 
civilization and art and culture of the old world floated up 
into Europe to the ceaseless cry of the CIGALES.

Chateaurenard! our water journey is ended.  Through the leafy 
avenues that lead to Orange, we see the arch of Marius and the 
gigantic proscenium of the theatre, rising above the roofs of 
the little city.

So few of our compatriots linger in the south of France after 
the spring has set in, or wander in the by-ways of that 
inexhaustible country, that a word about the representations 
at Orange may be of interest, and perchance create a desire to 
see the masterpieces of classic drama (the common inheritance 
of all civilized races) revived with us, and our stage put to 
its legitimate use, cultivating and elevating the taste of the 
people.

One would so gladly see a little of the money that is 
generously given for music used to revive in America a love 
for the classic drama.

We are certainly not inferior to our neighbors in culture or 
appreciation, and yet such a performance as I witnessed at 
Orange (laying aside the enchantment lent by the surroundings) 
would not be possible here.  Why?  But to return to my 
narrative.

The sun is setting as we toil, ticket in hand, up the Roman 
stairway to the upper rows of seats; far below the local 
GENDARMERIE who mostly understand their orders backwards are 
struggling with the throng, whose entrance they are apparently 
obstructing by every means in their power.  Once seated, and 
having a wait of an hour before us, we amused ourselves 
watching the crowd filling in every corner of the vast 
building, like a rising tide of multi-colored water.

We had purposely chosen places on the highest and most remote 
benches, to test the vaunted acoustic qualities of the 
auditorium, and to obtain a view of the half-circle of 
humanity, the gigantic wall back of the stage, and the 
surrounding country.

As day softened into twilight, and twilight deepened into a 
luminous Southern night; the effect was incomparable.  The 
belfries and roofs of mediaeval Orange rose in the clear air, 
overtopping the half ruined theatre in many places.  The arch 
of Marius gleamed white against the surrounding hills, 
themselves violet and purple in the sunset, their shadow 
broken here and there by the outline of a crumbling chateau or 
the lights of a village.

Behind us the sentries paced along the wall, wrapped in their 
dark cloaks; and over all the scene, one snowtopped peak rose 
white on the horizon, like some classic virgin assisting at an 
Olympian solemnity.

On the stage, partly cleared of the debris of fifteen hundred 
years, trees had been left where they had grown, among fallen 
columns, fragments of capital and statue; near the front a 
superb rose-laurel recalled the Attic shores.  To the right, 
wild grasses and herbs alternated with thick shrubbery, among 
which Orestes hid later, during the lamentations of his 
sister.  To the left a gigantic fig-tree, growing again the 
dark wall, threw its branches far out over the stage.

It was from behind its foliage that "Gaul," "Provence," and 
"France," personated by three actresses of the "Francais," 
advanced to salute Apollo, seated on his rustic throne, in the 
prologue which began the performance.

Since midday the weather had been threatening.  At seven 
o'clock there was almost a shower - a moment of terrible 
anxiety.  What a misfortune if it should rain, just as the 
actors were to appear, here, where it had not rained for 
nearly four months!  My right-hand neighbor, a citizen of 
Beaucaire, assures me, "It will be nothing, only a strong 
`mistral' for to-morrow."  An electrician is putting the 
finishing touches to his arrangements.  He tries vainly to 
concentrate some light on the box where the committee is to 
sit, which is screened by a bit of crumbling wall, but finally 
gives it up.

Suddenly the bugles sound; the orchestra rings out the 
Marseillaise; it is eight o'clock.  The sky is wild and 
threatening.  An unseen hand strikes the three traditional 
blows.  The Faun Lybrian slips down from a branch of a great 
elm, and throws himself on the steps that later are to 
represent the entrance to the palace of Agamemnon, and 
commences the prologue (an invocation to Apollo), in the midst 
of such confusion that we hear hardly a word.  Little by 
little, however, the crowd quiets down, and I catch Louis 
Gallet's fine lines, marvellously phrased by Mesdames Bartet, 
Dudlay, Moreno, and the handsome Fenoux as Apollo.

The real interest of the public is only aroused, however, when 
THE ERYNNIES begins.  This powerful adaptation from the 
tragedy of AEschylus is THE CHEF D'OEUVRE of Leconte de Lisle.  
The silence is now complete.  One feels in the air that the 
moment so long and so anxiously awaited has come, that a great 
event is about to take place.  Every eye is fixed on the 
stage, waiting to see what will appear from behind the dark 
arches of the proscenium.  A faint, plaintive strain of music 
floats out on the silence.  Demons crawl among the leafy 
shadows.  Not a light is visible, yet the centre of the stage 
is in strong relief, shading off into a thousand fantastic 
shadows.  The audience sits in complete darkness.  Then we see 
the people of Argos, winding toward us from among the trees, 
lamenting, as they have done each day for ten years, the long 
absence of their sons and their king.  The old men no longer 
dare to consult the oracles, fearing to learn that all is 
lost.  The beauty of this lament roused the first murmur of 
applause, each word, each syllable, chiming out across that 
vast semicircle with a clearness and an effect impossible to 
describe.

Now it is the sentinel, who from his watch-tower has caught 
the first glimpse of the returning army.  We hear him dashing 
like a torrent down the turret stair; at the doorway, his 
garments blown by the wind, his body bending forward in a 
splendid pose of joy and exultation, he announces in a voice 
of thunder the arrival of the king.

So completely are the twenty thousand spectators under the 
spell of the drama that at this news one can feel a thrill 
pass over the throng, whom the splendid verses hold 
palpitating under their charm, awaiting only the end of the 
tirade to break into applause.

From that moment the performance is one long triumph.  
Clytemnestra (Madame Lerou) comes with her suite to receive 
the king (Mounet-Sully), the conqueror!  I never realized 
before all the perfection that training can give the speaking 
voice.  Each syllable seemed to ring out with a bell-like 
clearness.  As she gradually rose in the last act to the scene 
with Orestes, I understood the use of the great wall behind 
the actors.  It increased the power of the voices and lent 
them a sonority difficult to believe.  The effect was 
overwhelming when, unable to escape death, Clytemnestra cries 
out her horrible imprecations.

Mounet-Sully surpassed himself.  Paul Mounet gave us the 
complete illusion of a monster thirsting for blood, even his 
mother's!  When striking her as she struck his father, he 
answers her despairing query, "Thou wouldst not slay thy 
mother?"  "Woman, thou hast ceased to be a mother!"  Dudlay 
(as Cassandra) reaches a splendid climax when she prophesies 
the misfortune hanging over her family, which she is powerless 
to avert.

It is impossible in feeble prose to give any idea of the 
impression those lines produce in the stupendous theatre, 
packed to its utmost limits - the wild night, with a storm in 
the air, a stage which seems like a clearing in some forest 
inhabited by Titans, the terrible tragedy of AEschylus 
following the graceful fete of Apollo.

After the unavoidable confusion at the beginning, the vast 
audience listen in profound silence to an expression of pure 
art.  They are no longer actors we hear, but demi-gods.  With 
voices of the storm, possessed by some divine afflatus, 
thundering out verses of fire - carried out of themselves in a 
whirlwind of passion, like antique prophets and Sibyls 
foretelling the misfortunes of the world!

That night will remain immutably fixed in my memory, if I live 
to be as old as the theatre itself.  We were so moved, my 
companion and I, and had seen the crowd so moved, that fearing 
to efface the impression if we returned the second night to 
see ANTIGONE, we came quietly away, pondering over it all, and 
realizing once again that a thing of beauty is a source of 
eternal delight.




Chapter 26 - Pre-palatial Newport


THE historic Ocean House of Newport is a ruin.  Flames have 
laid low the unsightly structure that was at one time the 
best-known hotel in America.  Its fifty-odd years of 
existence, as well as its day, are over.  Having served a 
purpose, it has departed, together with the generation and 
habits of life that produced it, into the limbo where old 
houses, old customs, and superannuated ideas survive, - the 
memory of the few who like to recall other days and wander 
from time to time in a reconstructed past.

There was a certain appropriateness in the manner of its 
taking off.  The proud old structure had doubtless heard 
projects of rebuilding discussed by its owners (who for some 
years had been threatening to tear it down); wounded doubtless 
by unflattering truths, the hotel decided that if its days 
were numbered, an exit worthy of a leading role was at least 
possible.  "Pull me down, indeed!  That is all very well for 
ordinary hostleries, but from an establishment of my 
pretensions, that has received the aristocracy of the country, 
and countless foreign swells, something more is expected!"

So it turned the matter over and debated within its shaky old 
brain (Mrs.  Skewton fashion) what would be the most becoming 
and effective way of retiring from the social whirl.  Balls 
have been overdone; people are no longer tempted by 
receptions; a banquet was out of the question.  Suddenly the 
wily building hit on an idea.  "I'll give them a FEU 
D'ARTIFICE.  There hasn't been a first-class fire here since I 
burned myself down fifty-three years ago!  That kind of 
entertainment hasn't been run into the ground like everything 
else in these degenerate days!  I'll do it in the best and 
most complete way, and give Newport something to talk about, 
whenever my name shall be mentioned in the future!"

Daudet, in his L'IMMORTEL, shows us how some people are born 
lucky.  His "Loisel of the Institute," although an 
insignificant and commonplace man, succeeded all through life 
in keeping himself before the public, and getting talked about 
as a celebrity.  He even arranged (to the disgust and envy of 
his rivals) to die during a week when no event of importance 
was occupying public attention.  In consequence, reporters, 
being short of "copy," owing to a dearth of murders and "first 
nights," seized on this demise and made his funeral an event.

The truth is, the Ocean House had lived so long in an 
atmosphere of ostentatious worldliness that, like many 
residents of the summer city, it had come to take itself and 
its "position" seriously, and imagine that the eyes of the 
country were fixed upon and expected something of it.

The air of Newport has always proved fatal to big hotels.  One 
after another they have appeared and failed, the Ocean House 
alone dragging out a forlorn existence.  As the flames worked 
their will and the careless crowd enjoyed the spectacle, one 
could not help feeling a vague regret for the old place, more 
for what it represented than for any intrinsic value of its 
own.  Without greatly stretching a point it might be taken to 
represent a social condition, a phase, as it were, in our 
development.  In a certain obscure way, it was an epoch-
marking structure.  Its building closed the era of primitive 
Newport, its decline corresponded with the end of the pre-
palatial period - an era extending from 1845 to 1885.

During forty years Newport had a unique existence, unknown to 
the rest of America, and destined to have a lasting influence 
on her ways, an existence now as completely forgotten as the 
earlier boarding-house MATINEE DANSANTE time. *  The sixties, 
seventies, and eighties in Newport were pleasant years that 
many of us regret in spite of modern progress.  Simple, 
inexpensive days, when people dined at three (looking on the 
newly introduced six o'clock dinners as an English innovation 
and modern "frill"), and "high-teaed" together dyspeptically 
off "sally lunns" and "preserves," washed down by coffee and 
chocolate, which it was the toilsome duty of a hostess to 
dispense from a silver-laden tray; days when "rockaways" drawn 
by lean, long-tailed horses and driven by mustached darkies 
were, if not the rule, far from being an exception.

* "Newport of the Past," WORLDLY WAYS AND BY-WAYS.

"Dutch treat" picnics, another archaic amusement, flourished 
then, directed by a famous organizer at his farm, each guest 
being told what share of the eatables it was his duty to 
provide, an edict from which there was no appeal.

Sport was little known then, young men passing their 
afternoons tooling solemnly up and down Bellevue Avenue in 
top-hats and black frock-coats under the burning August sun.

This was the epoch when the Town and Country Club was young 
and full of vigor.  We met at each other's houses or at 
historic sites to hear papers read on serious subjects.  One 
particular afternoon is vivid in my memory.  We had all driven 
out to a point on the shore beyond the Third Beach, where the 
Norsemen were supposed to have landed during their apocryphal 
visit to this continent.  It had been a hot drive, but when we 
stopped, a keen wind was blowing in from the sea.  During a 
pause in the prolix address that followed, a coachman's voice 
was heard to mutter, "If he jaws much longer all the horses 
will be foundered," which brought the learned address to an 
ignominious and hasty termination.

Newport during the pre-palatial era affected culture, and a 
whiff of Boston pervaded the air, much of which was tiresome, 
yet with an under-current of charm and refinement.  Those who 
had the privilege of knowing Mrs. Julia Ward Howe, will 
remember the pleasant "teas" and sparkling conversation she 
offered her guests in the unpretending cottage where the 
beauty of the daughter was as brilliant as the mother's wit.

Two estates on Bellevue Avenue are now without the hostesses 
who, in those days, showed the world what great ladies America 
could produce.  It was the foreign-born husband of one of 
these women who gave Newport its first lessons in luxurious 
living.  Until then Americans had travelled abroad and seen 
elaborately served meals and properly appointed stables 
without the ambition of copying such things at home.  Colonial 
and revolutionary state had died out, and modern extravagance 
had not yet appeared.  In the interregnum much was neglected 
that might have added to the convenience and grace of life.

In France, under Louis Philippe, and in England, during 
Victoria's youth, taste reached an ebb tide; in neither of 
those countries, however, did the general standard fall so low 
as here.  It was owing to the SAVOIR FAIRE of one man that 
Newporters and New York first saw at home what they had 
admired abroad, - liveried servants in sufficient numbers, 
dinners served A LA RUSSE, and breeched and booted grooms on 
English-built traps, innovations quickly followed by his 
neighbors, for the most marked characteristic of the American 
is his ability to "catch on."

When, during the war of the secession, our Naval Academy was 
removed from Annapolis and installed in the empty Atlantic 
House (corner of Bellevue Avenue and Pelham Street), hotel 
life had already begun to decline; but the Ocean House, which 
was considered a vast enterprise at that time, inherited from 
the older hotels the custom of giving Saturday evening "hops," 
the cottagers arriving at these informal entertainments toward 
nine o'clock and promenading up and down the corridors or 
dancing in the parlor, to the admiration of a public collected 
to enjoy the spectacle.  At eleven the doors of the dining-
room opened, and a line of well-drilled darkies passed ices 
and lemonade.  By half-past eleven (the hour at which we now 
arrive at a dance) every one was at home and abed.

One remembers with a shudder the military manoeuvres that 
attended hotel meals in those days, the marching and 
countermarching, your dinner cooling while the head waiter 
reviewed his men.  That idiotic custom has been abandoned, 
like many better and worse.  Next to the American ability to 
catch on comes the facility with which he can drop a fad.

In this peculiarity the history of Newport has been an epitome 
of the country, every form of amusement being in turn taken 
up, run into the ground, and then abandoned.  At one time it 
was the fashion to drive to Fort Adams of an afternoon and 
circle round and round the little green to the sounds of a 
military band; then, for no visible reason, people took to 
driving on the Third Beach, an inaccessible and lonely point 
which for two or three summers was considered the only correct 
promenade.

I blush to recall it, but at that time most of the turnouts 
were hired hacks.  Next, Graves Point, on the Ocean Drive, 
became the popular meeting-place.  Then society took to 
attending polo of an afternoon, a sport just introduced from 
India.  This era corresponded with the opening of the Casino 
(the old reading-room dating from 1854).  For several years 
every one crowded during hot August mornings onto the airless 
lawns and piazzas of the new establishment.  It seems on 
looking back as if we must have been more fond of seeing each 
other in those days than we are now.  To ride up and down a 
beach and bow filled our souls with joy, and the "cake walk" 
was an essential part of every ball, the guests parading in 
pairs round and round the room between the dances instead of 
sitting quietly "out."  The opening promenade at the New York 
Charity Ball is a survival of this inane custom.

The disappearance of the Ocean House "hops" marked the last 
stage in hotel life.  Since then better-class watering places 
all over the country have slowly but surely followed Newport's 
lead.  The closed caravansaries of Bar Harbor and elsewhere 
bear silent testimony to the fact that refined Americans are 
at last awakening to the charms of home life during their 
holidays, and are discarding, as fast as finances will permit, 
the pernicious herding system.  In consequence the hotel has 
ceased to be, what it undoubtedly was twenty years ago, the 
focus of our summer life.

Only a few charred rafters remain of the Ocean House.  A few 
talkative old duffers like myself alone survive the day it 
represents.  Changing social conditions have gradually placed 
both on the retired list.  A new and palatial Newport has 
replaced the simpler city.  Let us not waste too much time 
regretting the past, or be too sure that it was better than 
the present.  It is quite possible, if the old times we are 
writing so fondly about should return, we might discover that 
the same thing was true of them as a ragged urchin asserted 
the other afternoon of the burning building:

"Say, Tom, did ye know there was the biggest room in the world 
in that hotel?"

"No; what room?"

"Room for improvement, ya!"




Chapter 27 - SARDOU at Marly-le-Roy


NEAR the centre of that verdant triangle formed by Saint 
Cloud, Versailles, and Saint Germain lies the village of 
Marly-le-Roy, high up on a slope above the lazy Seine - an 
entrancing corner of the earth, much affected formerly by 
French crowned heads, and by the "Sun King" in particular, who 
in his old age grew tired of Versailles and built here one of 
his many villas (the rival in its day of the Trianons), and 
proceeded to amuse himself therein with the same solemnity 
which had already made vice at Versailles more boresome than 
virtue elsewhere.

Two centuries and four revolutions have swept away all trace 
of this kingly caprice and the art treasures it contained.  
Alone, the marble horses of Coustou, transported later to the 
Champs Elysees, remain to attest the splendor of the past.

The quaint village of Marly, clustered around its church, 
stands, however - with the faculty that insignificant things 
have of remaining unchanged - as it did when the most polished 
court of Europe rode through it to and from the hunt.  On the 
outskirts of this village are now two forged and gilded 
gateways through which the passer-by can catch a glimpse of 
trim avenues, fountains, and well-kept lawns.

There seems a certain poetical justice in the fact that 
Alexandre Dumas FILS and Victorien Sardou, the two giants of 
modern drama, should have divided between them the inheritance 
of Louis XIV., its greatest patron.  One of the gates is 
closed and moss-grown.  Its owner lies in Pere-la-Chaise.  At 
the other I ring, and am soon walking up the famous avenue 
bordered by colossal sphinxes presented to Sardou by the late 
Khedive.  The big stone brutes, connected in one's mind with 
heat and sandy wastes, look oddly out of place here in this 
green wilderness - a bite, as it were, out of the forest 
which, under different names, lies like a mantle over the 
country-side.

Five minutes later I am being shown through a suite of antique 
salons, in the last of which sits the great playwright.  How 
striking the likeness is to Voltaire, - the same delicate 
face, lit by a half cordial, half mocking smile; the same 
fragile body and indomitable spirit.  The illusion is enhanced 
by our surroundings, for the mellow splendor of the room where 
we stand might have served as a background for the Sage of 
Ferney.

Wherever one looks, works of eighteenth-century art meet the 
eye.  The walls are hung with Gobelin tapestries that fairly 
take one's breath away, so exquisite is their design and their 
preservation.  They represent a marble colonnade, each column 
of which is wreathed with flowers and connected to its 
neighbor with garlands.

Between them are bits of delicate landscape, with here and 
there a group of figures dancing or picnicking in the shadow 
of tall trees or under fantastical porticos.  The furniture of 
the room is no less marvellous than its hangings.  One turns 
from a harpsichord of vernis-martin to the clock, a relic from 
Louis XIV.'s bedroom in Versailles; on to the bric-a-brac of 
old Saxe or Sevres in admiring wonder.  My host drifts into 
his showman manner, irresistibly comic in this writer.

The pleasures of the collector are apparently divided into 
three phases, without counting the rapture of the hunt.  
First, the delight a true amateur takes in living among rare 
and beautiful things.  Second, the satisfaction of showing 
one's treasures to less fortunate mortals, and last, but 
perhaps keenest of all, the pride which comes from the fact 
that one has been clever enough to acquire objects which other 
people want, at prices below their market value.  Sardou 
evidently enjoys these three sensations vividly.  That he 
lives with and loves his possessions is evident, and the smile 
with which he calls your attention to one piece after another, 
and mentions what they cost him, attests that the two other 
joys are not unknown to him.  He is old enough to remember the 
golden age when really good things were to be picked up for 
modest sums, before every parvenu considered it necessary to 
turn his house into a museum, and factories existed for the 
production of "antiques" to be sold to innocent amateurs.

In calling attention to a set of carved and gilded furniture, 
covered in Beauvais tapestry, such as sold recently in Paris 
at the Valencay sale - Talleyrand collection - for sixty 
thousand dollars, Sardou mentions with a laugh that he got his 
fifteen pieces for fifteen hundred dollars, the year after the 
war, from an old chateau back of Cannes!  One unique piece of 
tapestry had cost him less than one-tenth of that sum.  He 
discovered it in a peasant's stable under a two-foot layer of 
straw and earth, where it had probably been hidden a hundred 
years before by its owner, and then all record of it lost by 
his descendants.

The mention of Cannes sets Sardou off on another train of 
thought.  His family for three generations have lived there.  
Before that they were Sardinian fishermen.  His great-
grandfather, he imagines, was driven by some tempest to the 
shore near Cannes and settled where he found himself.  Hence 
the name!  For in the patois of Provencal France an inhabitant 
of Sardinia is still called UN SARDOU.

The sun is off the front of the house by this time, so we 
migrate to a shady corner of the lawn for our APERITIF, the 
inevitable vermouth or "bitters" which Frenchmen take at five 
o'clock.  Here another surprise awaits the visitor, who has 
not realized, perhaps, to what high ground the crawling local 
train has brought him.  At our feet, far below the lawn and 
shade trees that encircle the chateau, lies the Seine, 
twisting away toward Saint Germain, whose terrace and 
dismantled palace stand outlined against the sky.  To our 
right is the plain of Saint Denis, the cathedral in its midst 
looking like an opera-glass on a green table.  Further still 
to the right, as one turns the corner of the terrace, lies 
Paris, a white line on the horizon, broken by the mass of the 
Arc de Triomphe, the roof of the Opera, and the Eiffel Tower, 
resplendent in a fresh coat of yellow lacquer!

The ground where we stand was occupied by the feudal castle of 
Les Sires de Marly; although all traces of that stronghold 
disappeared centuries ago, the present owner of the land 
points out with pride that the extraordinary beauty of the 
trees around his house is owing to the fact that their roots 
reach deep down to the rich loam collected during centuries in 
the castle's moat.

The little chateau itself, built during the reign of Louis 
XIV. for the GRAND-VENEUR of the forest of Marly, is intensely 
French in type, - a long, low building on a stone terrace, 
with no trace of ornament about its white facade or on its 
slanting roof.  Inside, all the rooms are "front," 
communicating with each other EN SUITE, and open into a 
corridor running the length of the building at the back, 
which, in turn, opens on a stone court.  Two lateral wings at 
right angles to the main building form the sides of this 
courtyard, and contain LES COMMUNS, the kitchen, laundry, 
servants' rooms, and the other annexes of a large 
establishment.  This arrangement for a summer house is for 
some reason neglected by our American architects.  I can 
recall only one home in America built on this plan.  It is 
Giraud Foster's beautiful villa at Lenox.  You may visit five 
hundred French chateaux and not find one that differs 
materially from this plan.  The American idea seems on the 
contrary to be a square house with a room in each corner, and 
all the servants' quarters stowed away in a basement.  Cottage 
and palace go on reproducing that foolish and inconvenient 
arrangement indefinitely.

After an hour's chat over our drinks, during host has rippled 
on from one subject to another with the lightness of touch of 
a born talker, we get on to the subject of the grounds, and 
his plans for their improvement.

Good luck has placed in Sardou's hands an old map of the 
gardens as they existed in the time of Louis XV., and several 
prints of the chateau dating from about the same epoch have 
found their way into his portfolios.  The grounds are, under 
his care, slowly resuming the appearance of former days.  Old 
avenues reopen, statues reappear on the disused pedestals, 
fountains play again, and clipped hedges once more line out 
the terraced walks.

In order to explain how complete this work will be in time, 
Sardou hurries me off to inspect another part of his 
collection.  Down past the stables, in an unused corner of the 
grounds, long sheds have been erected, under which is stored 
the debris of a dozen palaces, an assortment of eighteenth-
century art that could not be duplicated even in France.

One shed shelters an entire semicircle of TREILLAGE, pure 
Louis XV., an exquisite example of a lost art.  Columns, 
domes, panels, are packed away in straw awaiting resurrection 
in some corner hereafter to be chosen.  A dozen seats in rose-
colored marble from Fontainebleau are huddled together near by 
in company with a row of gigantic marble masques brought 
originally from Italy to decorate Fouquet's fountains at his 
chateau of Vaux in the short day of its glory.  Just how this 
latter find is to be utilized their owner has not yet decided.  
The problem, however, to judge from his manner, is as 
important to the great playwright as the plot of his next 
drama.

That the blood of an antiquarian runs in Sardou's veins is 
evident in the subdued excitement with which he shows you his 
possessions - statues from Versailles, forged gates and 
balconies from Saint Cloud, the carved and gilded wood-work 
for a dozen rooms culled from the four corners of France.  
Like the true dramatist, he has, however, kept his finest 
effect for the last.  In the centre of a circular rose garden 
near by stands, alone in its beauty, a column from the facade 
of the Tuileries, as perfect from base to flower-crowned 
capital as when Philibert Delorme's workmen laid down their 
tools.

Years ago Sardou befriended a young stone mason, who through 
this timely aid prospered, and, becoming later a rich builder, 
received in 1882 from the city of Paris the contract to tear 
down the burned ruins of the Tuileries.  While inspecting the 
palace before beginning the work of demolition, he discovered 
one column that had by a curious chance escaped both the 
flames of the Commune and the patriotic ardor of 1793, which 
effaced all royal emblems from church and palace alike.  
Remembering his benefactor's love for antiquities with 
historical associations, the grateful contractor appeared one 
day at Marly with this column on a dray, and insisted on 
erecting it where it now stands, pointing out to Sardou with 
pride the crowned "H," of Henri Quatre, and the entwined "M. 
M." of Marie de Medicis, topped by the Florentine lily in the 
flutings of the shaft and on the capital.

A question of mine on Sardou's manner of working led to our 
abandoning the gardens and mounting to the top floor of the 
chateau, where his enormous library and collection of prints 
are stored in a series of little rooms or alcoves, lighted 
from the top and opening on a corridor which runs the length 
of the building.  In each room stands a writing-table and a 
chair; around the walls from floor to ceiling and in huge 
portfolios are arranged his books and engravings according to 
their subject.  The Empire alcove, for instance, contains 
nothing but publications and pictures relating to that epoch.  
Roman and Greek history have their alcoves, as have mediaeval 
history and the reigns of the different Louis.  Nothing could 
well be conceived more conducive to study than this 
arrangement, and it makes one realize how honest was the 
master's reply when asked what was his favorite amusement.  
"Work!" answered the author.

Our conversation, as was fated, soon turned to the enormous 
success of ROBESPIERRE in London - a triumph that even 
Sardou's many brilliant victories had not yet equalled.

It is characteristic of the French disposition that neither 
the author nor any member of his family could summon courage 
to undertake the prodigious journey from Paris to London in 
order to see the first performance.  Even Sardou's business 
agent, M. Roget, did not get further than Calais, where his 
courage gave out.  "The sea was so terrible!"  Both those 
gentlemen, however, took it quite as a matter of course that 
Sardou's American agent should make a three-thousand-mile 
journey to be present at the first night.

The fact that the French author resisted Sir Henry Irving's 
pressing invitations to visit him in no way indicates a lack 
of interest in the success of the play.  I had just arrived 
from London, and so had to go into every detail of the 
performance, a rather delicate task, as I had been discouraged 
with the acting of both Miss Terry and Irving, who have 
neither of them the age, voice, nor temperament to represent 
either the revolutionary tyrant or the woman he betrayed.  As 
the staging had been excellent, I enlarged on that side of the 
subject, but when pressed into a corner by the author, had to 
acknowledge that in the scene where Robespierre, alone at 
midnight in the Conciergerie, sees the phantoms of his victims 
advance from the surrounding shadows and form a menacing 
circle around him, Irving had used his poor voice with so 
little skill that there was little left for the splendid 
climax, when, in trying to escape from his ghastly visitors, 
Robespierre finds himself face to face with Marie Antoinette, 
and with a wild cry, half of horror, half of remorse, falls 
back insensible.

In spite of previous good resolutions, I must have given the 
author the impression that Sir Henry spoke too loud at the 
beginning of this scene and was in consequence inadequate at 
the end.

"What!" cried Sardou.  "He raised his voice in that act!  Why, 
it's a scene to be played with the soft pedal down!  This is 
the way it should be done!"  Dropping into a chair in the 
middle of the room my host began miming the gestures and 
expression of Robespierre as the phantoms (which, after all, 
are but the figments of an over-wrought brain) gather around 
him.  Gradually he slipped to the floor, hiding his face with 
his upraised elbow, whispering and sobbing, but never raising 
his voice until, staggering toward the portal to escape, he 
meets the Queen face to face.  Then the whole force of his 
voice came out in one awful cry that fairly froze the blood in 
my veins!

"What a teacher you would make!" instinctively rose to my lips 
as he ended.

With a careless laugh, Sardou resumed his shabby velvet cap, 
which had fallen to the floor, and answered: "Oh, it's 
nothing!  I only wanted to prove to you that the scene was not 
a fatiguing one for the voice if played properly.  I'm no 
actor and could not teach, but any one ought to know enough 
not to shout in that scene!"

This with some bitterness, as news had arrived that Irving's 
voice had given out the night before, and he had been replaced 
by his half-baked son in the title role, a change hardly 
calculated to increase either the box-office receipts or the 
success of the new drama.

Certain ominous shadows which, like Robespierre's visions, had 
been for some time gathering in the corners of the room warned 
me that the hour had come for my trip back to Paris.  
Declining reluctantly an invitation to take potluck with my 
host, I was soon in the Avenue of the Sphinx again.  As we 
strolled along, talking of the past and its charm, a couple of 
men passed us, carrying a piece of furniture rolled in 
burlaps.

"Another acquisition?" I asked.  "What epoch has tempted you 
this time?"

"I'm sorry you won't stop and inspect it," answered Sardou 
with a twinkle in his eye.  "It's something I bought yesterday 
for my bedroom.  An armchair!  Pure Loubet!"




Chapter 28 - Inconsistencies


THE dinner had been unusually long and the summer evening 
warm.  During the wait before the dancing began I must have 
dropped asleep in the dark corner of the piazza where I had 
installed myself, to smoke my cigar, away from the other men 
and their tiresome chatter of golf and racing.  Through the 
open window groups of women could be seen in the ball-room, 
and the murmur of their conversation floated out, mingling 
with the laughter of the men.

Suddenly, in that casual way peculiar to dreams, I found 
myself conversing with a solemn young Turk, standing in all 
the splendor of fez and stambouline beside my chair.

"Pardon, Effendi," he was murmuring.  "Is this an American 
ball?  I was asked at nine o'clock; it is now past eleven.  Is 
there not some mistake?"

"None," I answered.  "When a hostess puts nine o'clock on her 
card of invitation she expects her guests at eleven or half-
past, and would be much embarrassed to be taken literally."

As we were speaking, our host rose.  The men, reluctantly 
throwing away their cigars, began to enter the ball-room 
through the open windows.  On their approach the groups of 
women broke up, the men joining the girls where they sat, or 
inviting them out to the lantern-lit piazza, where the couples 
retired to dim, palm-embowered corners.

"Are you sure I have not made a mistake?" asked my 
interlocutor, with a faint quiver of the eyelids.  "It is my 
intention, while travelling, to remain faithful to my harem."

I hastened to reassure him and explain that he was in an 
exclusive and reserved society.

"Indeed," he murmured incredulously.  "When I was passing 
through New York last winter a lady was pointed out to me as 
the owner of marvellous jewels and vast wealth, but with 
absolutely no social position.  My informant added that no 
well-born woman would receive her or her husband.

"It's foolish, of course, but the handsome woman with the 
crown on sitting in the centre of that circle, looks very like 
the woman I mean.  Am I right?"

"It's the same lady," I answered, wearily.  "You are speaking 
of last year.  No one could be induced to call on the couple 
then.  Now we all go to their house, and entertain them in 
return."

"They have doubtless done some noble action, or the reports 
about the husband have been proved false?"

"Nothing of the kind has taken place.  She's a success, and no 
one asks any questions!  In spite of that, you are in a 
society where the standard of conduct is held higher than in 
any country of Europe, by a race of women more virtuous, in 
all probability, than has yet been seen.  There is not a man 
present," I added, "who would presume to take, or a woman who 
would permit, a liberty so slight even as the resting of a 
youth's arm across the back of her chair."

While I was speaking, an invisible orchestra began to sigh out 
the first passionate bars of a waltz.  A dozen couples rose, 
the men clasping in their arms the slender matrons, whose 
smiling faces sank to their partners' shoulders.  A blond 
mustache brushed the forehead of a girl as she swept by us to 
the rhythm of the music, and other cheeks seemed about to 
touch as couples glided on in unison.

The sleepy Oriental eyes of my new acquaintance opened wide 
with astonishment.

"This, you must understand," I continued, hastily, "is quite 
another matter.  Those people are waltzing.  It is considered 
perfectly proper, when the musicians over there play certain 
measures, for men to take apparent liberties.  Our women are 
infinitely self-respecting, and a man who put his arm around a 
woman (in public) while a different measure was being played, 
or when there was no music, would be ostracized from polite 
society."

"I am beginning to understand," replied the Turk.  "The 
husbands and brothers of these women guard them very 
carefully.  Those men I see out there in the dark are 
doubtless with their wives and sisters, protecting them from 
the advances of other men.  Am I right?"

"Of course you're not right," I snapped out, beginning to lose 
my temper at his obtuseness.  "No husband would dream of 
talking to his wife in public, or of sitting with her in a 
corner.  Every one would be laughing at them.  Nor could a 
sister be induced to remain away from the ball-room with her 
brother.  Those girls are `sitting out' with young men they 
like, indulging in a little innocent flirtation."

"What is that?" he asked.  "Flirtation?"

"An American custom rather difficult to explain.  It may, 
however, be roughly defined as the art of leading a man a long 
way on the road to - nowhere!"

"Women flirt with friends or acquaintances, never with members 
of their family?"

"The husbands are those dejected individuals wandering 
aimlessly about over there like lost souls.  They are mostly 
rich men, who, having married beautiful girls for love, wear 
themselves out maintaining elaborate and costly establishments 
for them.  In return for his labor a husband, however, enjoys 
but little of his wife's society, for a really fashionable 
woman can rarely be induced to go home until she has collapsed 
with fatigue.  In consequence, she contributes little but 
`nerves' and temper to the household.  Her sweetest smiles, 
like her freshest toilets, are kept for the public.  The 
husband is the last person considered in an American 
household.  If you doubt what I say, look behind you.  There 
is a newly married man speaking with his wife, and trying to 
persuade her to leave before the cotillion begins.  Notice his 
apologetic air!  He knows he is interrupting a tender 
conversation and taking an unwarrantable liberty.  Nothing 
short of extreme fatigue would drive him to such an extremity.  
The poor millionnaire has hardly left his desk in Wall Street 
during the week, and only arrived this evening in time to 
dress for dinner.  He would give a fair slice of his income 
for a night's rest.  See!  He has failed, and is lighting 
another cigar, preparing, with a sigh, for a long wait.  It 
will be three before my lady is ready to leave."

After a silence of some minutes, during which he appeared to 
be turning these remarks over in his mind, the young Oriental 
resumed: "The single men who absorb so much of your women's 
time and attention are doubtless the most distinguished of the 
nation,  - writers, poets, and statesmen?"

I was obliged to confess that this was not the case; that, on 
the contrary, the dancing bachelors were for the most part 
impecunious youths of absolutely no importance, asked by the 
hostess to fill in, and so lightly considered that a woman did 
not always recognize in the street her guests of the evening 
before.

At this moment my neighbor's expression changed from 
bewilderment to admiration, as a young and very lovely matron 
threw herself, panting, into a low chair at his side.  Her 
decollete was so daring that the doubts of half an hour before 
were evidently rising afresh in his mind.  Hastily resuming my 
task of mentor, I explained that a decollete corsage was an 
absolute rule for evening gatherings.  A woman who appeared in 
a high bodice or with her neck veiled would be considered 
lacking in politeness to her hostess as much if she wore a 
bonnet.

"With us, women go into the world to shine and charm.  It is 
only natural they should use all the weapons nature has given 
them."

"Very good!" exclaimed the astonished Ottoman.  "But where 
will all this end?  You began by allowing your women to appear 
in public with their faces unveiled, then you suppressed the 
fichu and the collarette, and now you rob them of half their 
corsage.  Where, O Allah, will you stop?"

"Ah!" I answered, laughing, "the tendency of civilization is 
to simplify; many things may yet disappear."

"I understand perfectly.  You have no prejudice against women 
wearing in public toilets that we consider fitted only for 
strict intimacy.  In that case your ladies may walk about the 
streets in these costumes?"

"Not at all!" I cried.  "It would provoke a scandal if a woman 
were to be seen during the daytime in such attire, either at 
home or abroad.  The police and the law courts would 
interfere.  Evening dress is intended only for reunions in 
private houses, or at most, to be worn at entertainments where 
the company is carefully selected and the men asked from lists 
prepared by the ladies themselves.  No lady would wear a ball 
costume or her jewels in a building where the general public 
was admitted.  In London great ladies dine at restaurants in 
full evening dress, but we Americans, like the French, 
consider that vulgar."

"Yet, last winter," he said, "when passing through New York, I 
went to a great theatre, where there were an orchestra and 
many singing people.  Were not those respectable women I saw 
in the boxes?  There were no MOUCHARABIES to screen them from 
the eyes of the public.  Were all the men in that building 
asked by special invitation?  That could hardly be possible, 
for I paid an entrance fee at the door.  From where I sat I 
could see that, as each lady entered her box, opera-glasses 
were fixed on her, and her `points,' as you say, discussed by 
the crowd of men in the corridors, who, apparently, belonged 
to quite the middle class."

"My poor, innocent Padischa, you do not understand at all.  
That was the opera, which makes all the difference.  The 
husbands of those women pay enormous prices, expressly that 
their wives may exhibit themselves in public, decked in jewels 
and suggestive toilets.  You could buy a whole harem of fair 
Circassians for what one of those little square boxes costs.  
A lady whose entrance caused no sensation would feel bitterly 
disappointed.  As a rule, she knows little about music, and 
cares still less, unless some singer is performing who is paid 
a fabulous price, which gives his notes a peculiar charm.  
With us most things are valued by the money they have cost.  
Ladies attend the opera simply and solely to see their friends 
and be admired.

"It grieves me to see that you are forming a poor opinion of 
our woman kind, for they are more charming and modest than any 
foreign women.  A girl or matron who exhibits more of her 
shoulders than you, with your Eastern ideas, think quite 
proper, would sooner expire than show an inch above her ankle.  
We have our way of being modest as well as you, and that is 
one of our strongest prejudices."

"Now I know you are joking," he replied, with a slight show of 
temper, "or trying to mystify me, for only this morning I was 
on the beach watching the bathing, and I saw a number of 
ladies in quite short skirts - up to their knees, in fact - 
with the thinnest covering on their shapely extremities.  Were 
those women above suspicion?"

"Absolutely," I assured him, feeling inclined to tear my hair 
at such stupidity.  "Can't you see the difference?  That was 
in daylight.  Our customs allow a woman to show her feet, and 
even a little more, in the morning.  It would be considered 
the acme of indecency to let those beauties be seen at a ball.  
The law allows a woman to uncover her neck and shoulders at a 
ball, but she would be arrested if she appeared decollete on 
the beach of a morning."

A long silence followed, broken only by the music and laughter 
from the ball-room.  I could see my dazed Mohammedan remove 
his fez and pass an agitated hand through his dark hair; then 
he turned, and saluting me gravely, murmured:

"It is very kind of you to have taken so much trouble with me.  
I do not doubt that what you have said is full of the wisdom 
and consistency of a new civilization, which I fail to 
appreciate."  Then, with a sigh, he added: "It will be better 
for me to return to my own country, where there are fewer 
exceptions to rules."

With a profound salaam the gentle youth disappeared into the 
surrounding darkness, leaving me rubbing my eyes and asking 
myself if, after all, the dreamland Oriental was not about 
right.  Custom makes many inconsistencies appear so logical 
that they no longer cause us either surprise or emotion.  But 
can we explain them?




Chapter 29 - Modern "Cadets de Gascogne"


AFTER witnessing the performance given by the Comedie 
Francaise in the antique theatre at Orange, we determined - my 
companion and I - if ever another opportunity of the kind 
offered, to attend, be the material difficulties what they 
might.

The theatrical "stars" in their courses proved favorable to 
the accomplishment of this vow.  Before the year ended it was 
whispered to us that the "Cadets de Gascogne" were planning a 
tram through the Cevennes Mountains and their native Languedoc 
- a sort of lay pilgrimage to famous historic and literary 
shrines, a voyage to be enlivened by much crowning of busts 
and reciting of verses in the open air, and incidentally, by 
the eating of Gascony dishes and the degustation of delicate 
local wines; the whole to culminate with a representation in 
the arena at Beziers of DEJANIRE, Louis Gallet's and Saint-
Saens's latest work, under the personal supervision of those 
two masters.

A tempting programme, was it not, in these days of cockney 
tours and "Cook" couriers?  At any rate, one that we, with 
plenty of time on our hands and a weakness for out-of-the-way 
corners and untrodden paths, found it impossible to resist.

Rostand, in CYRANO DE BERGERAC, has shown us the "Cadets" of 
Moliere's time, a fighting, rhyming, devil-may-care band, who 
wore their hearts on their sleeves and chips on their stalwart 
shoulders; much such a brotherhood, in short, as we love to 
imagine that Shakespeare, Kit Marlowe, Greene, and their 
intimates formed when they met at the "Ship" to celebrate a 
success or drink a health to the drama.

The men who compose the present society (which has now for 
many years borne a name only recently made famous by M. 
Rostand's genius) come delightfully near realizing the happy 
conditions of other days, and - less the fighting - form as 
joyous and picturesque a company as their historic elders.  
They are for the most part Southern-born youths, whose 
interests and ambitions centre around the stage, devotees at 
the altar of Melpomene, ardent lovers of letters and kindred 
arts, and proud of the debt that literary France owes to 
Gascony.

It is the pleasant custom of this coterie to meet on winter 
evenings in unfrequented CAFES, transformed by them for the 
time into clubs, where they recite new-made verses, discuss 
books and plays, enunciate paradoxes that make the very 
waiters shudder, and, between their "bocks," plan vast 
revolutions in the world of literature.

As the pursuit of "letters" is, if anything, less lucrative in 
France than in other countries, the question of next day's 
dinner is also much discussed among these budding Molieres, 
who are often forced to learn early in their careers, when 
meals have been meagre, to satisfy themselves with rich rhymes 
and drink their fill of flowing verse.

From time to time older and more successful members of the 
corporation stray back into the circle, laying aside their 
laurel crowns and Olympian pose, in the society of the new-
comers to Bohemia.  These honorary members enjoy nothing more 
when occasion offers than to escape from the toils of 
greatness and join the "Cadets" in their summer journeys to 
and fro in France, trips which are made to combine the 
pleasures of an outing with the aims of a literary campaign.  
It was an invitation to join one of these tramps that tempted 
my friend and me away from Paris at the season when that city 
is at its best.  Being unable, on account of other 
engagements, to start with the cohort from the capital, we 
made a dash for it and caught them up at Carcassonne during 
the fetes that the little Languedoc city was offering to its 
guests.

After having seen Aigues Mortes, it was difficult to believe 
that any other place in Europe could suggest more vividly the 
days of military feudalism.  St. Louis's tiny city is, 
however, surpassed by Carcassonne!

Thanks to twenty years of studious restoration by Viollet le 
Duc, this antique jewel shines in its setting of slope and 
plain as perfect to-day (seen from the distance) as when the 
Crusaders started from its crenelated gates for the conquest 
of the Holy Sepulchre.  The acropolis of Carcassonne is 
crowned with Gothic battlements, the golden polygon of whose 
walls, rising from Roman foundations and layers of ruddy 
Visigoth brick to the stately marvel of its fifty towers, 
forms a whole that few can view unmoved.

We found the Cadets lunching on the platform of the great 
western keep, while a historic pageant organized in their 
honor was winding through the steep mediaeval streets - a 
cavalcade of archers, men at arms, and many-colored 
troubadours, who, after effecting a triumphal entrance to the 
town over lowered drawbridges, mounted to unfurl their banner 
on our tower.  As the gaudy standard unfolded on the evening 
air, Mounet-Sully's incomparable voice breathed the very soul 
of the "Burgraves" across the silent plain and down through 
the echoing corridors below.  While we were still under the 
impression of the stirring lines, he changed his key and 
whispered:-


LE SOIR TOMBE. . . . L'HEURE DOUCE
QUI S'ELOIGNE SANS SECOUSSE,
POSE A PEINE SUR LA MOUSSE
SES PIEDS.
UN JOUR INDECIS PERSISTE,
ET LE CREPUSCULE TRISTE
OUVRE SES YEUX D'AMETHYSTE
MOUILLES.


Night came on ere the singing and reciting ended, a balmy 
Southern evening, lit by a thousand fires from tower and 
battlement and moat, the old walls glowing red against the 
violet sky.

Picture this scene to yourself, reader mine, and you will 
understand the enthusiasm of the artists and writers in our 
clan.  It needed but little imagination then to reconstruct 
the past and fancy one's self back in the days when the 
"Trancavel" held this city against the world.

Sleep that night was filled with a strange phantasmagoria of 
crenelated chateaux and armored knights, until the bright 
Provencal sunlight and the call for a hurried departure 
dispelled such illusions.  By noon we were far away from 
Carcassonne, mounting the rocky slopes of the Cevennes amid a 
wild and noble landscape; the towering cliffs of the 
"Causses," zebraed by zig-zag paths, lay below us, disclosing 
glimpses of fertile valley and vine-engarlanded plain.

One asks one's self in wonder why these enchanting regions are 
so unknown.  EN ROUTE our companions were like children fresh 
from school, taking haphazard meals at the local inns and 
clambering gayly into any conveyance that came to hand.  As 
our way led us through the Cevennes country, another charm 
gradually stole over the senses.

"I imagine that Citheron must look like this," murmured 
Catulle Mendes, as we stood looking down from a sun-baked 
eminence, "with the Gulf of Corinth there where you see that 
gleam of water."  As he spoke he began declaiming the passage 
from Sophocles's OEDIPUS THE KING descriptive if that classic 
scene.

Two thousand feet below lay Ispanhac in a verdant valley, the 
River Tarn gleaming amid the cultivated fields like a cimeter 
thrown on a Turkish carpet.  Our descent was an avalanche of 
laughing, singing "Cadets," who rolled in the fresh-cut grass 
and chased each other through the ripening vineyards, shouting 
lines from tragedies to groups of open-mouthed farm-hands, and 
invading the tiny inns on the road with song and tumult.  As 
we neared our goal its entire population, headed by the cure, 
came out to meet us and offer the hospitality of the town.

In the market-place, one of our number, inspired by the 
antique solemnity of the surroundings, burst into the noble 
lines of Hugo's DEVANT DIEU, before which the awestruck 
population uncovered and crossed themselves, imagining, 
doubtless, that it was a religious ceremony.

Another scene recurs vividly to my memory.  We were at St. 
Enimie.  I had opened my window to breathe the night air after 
the heat and dust of the day and watch the moonlight on the 
quaint bridge at my feet.  Suddenly from out the shadows there 
rose (like sounds in a dream) the exquisite tone of Sylvain's 
voice, alternating with the baritone of d'Esparbes.  They were 
seated at the water's edge, intoxicated by the beauty of the 
scene and apparently oblivious of all else.

The next day was passed on the Tarn, our ten little boats 
following each other single file on the narrow river, winding 
around the feet of mighty cliffs, or wandering out into sunny 
pasture lands where solitary peasants, interrupted in their 
labors, listened in astonishment to the chorus thundered from 
the passing boats, and waved us a welcome as we moved by.

Space is lacking to give more than a suggestion of those days, 
passed in every known conveyance from the antique diligence to 
the hissing trolley, in company with men who seemed to have 
left their cares and their years behind them in Paris.

Our last stop before arriving at Beziers was at La Case, where 
luncheon was served in the great hall of the chateau.  Armand 
Sylvestre presided at the repast; his verses alternated with 
the singings of Emma Calve, who had come from her neighboring 
chateau to greet her old friends and compatriots, the 
"Cadets."

As the meal terminated, more than one among the guests, I 
imagine, felt his heart heavy with the idea that to-morrow 
would end this pleasant ramble and send him back to the 
realities of life and the drudgery of daily bread-winning.

The morning of the great day dawned cloudless and cool.  A 
laughing, many-colored throng early invaded the arena, the 
women's gay toilets lending it some resemblance to a parterre 
of fantastic flowers.  Before the bell sounded its three 
strokes that announced the representation, over ten thousand 
spectators had taken their places and were studying the 
gigantic stage and its four thousand yards of painted canvas.  
In the foreground a cluster of Greek palaces and temples 
surround a market-place; higher up and further back the city 
walls, manned by costumed sentinels, rise against mountains so 
happily painted that their outlines blend with nature's own 
handiwork in the distance, - a worthy setting for a stately 
drama and the valiant company of actors who have travelled 
from the capital for this solemnity.

Three hundred hidden musicians, divided into wind and chord 
orchestras, accompany a chorus of two hundred executants, and 
furnish the music for a ballet of seventy dancers.

As the third stroke dies away, the Muse, Mademoiselle 
Rabuteau, enters and declaims the salutation addressed by 
Louis Gallet to the City of Beziers.  At its conclusion the 
tragedy begins.

This is not the place to describe or criticise at length so 
new an attempt at classic restoration.  The author follows the 
admirable fable of antiquity with a directness and simplicity 
worthy of his Greek model.  The story of Dejanira and Hercules 
is too familiar to be repeated here.  The hero's infidelity 
and the passion of a neglected woman are related through five 
acts logically and forcibly, with the noble music of Saint-
Saens as a background.

We watch the growing affection of the demi-god for the gentle 
Iole.  We sympathize with jealous, desperate Dejanira when in 
a last attempt to gain back the love of Hercules she persuades 
the unsuspecting Iole to offer him a tunic steeped in Nessus's 
blood, which Dejanira has been told by Centaur will when 
warmed in the sun restore the wearer to her arms.

At the opening of the fifth act we witness the nuptial fetes.  
Religious dances and processions circle around the pyre laid 
for a marriage sacrifice.  Dejanira, hidden in the throng, 
watches in an agony of hope for the miracle to be worked.

Hercules accepts the fatal garment from the hands of his bride 
and calls upon the sun-god to ignite the altars.  The pyre 
flames, the heat warms the clinging tunic, which wraps 
Hercules in its folds of torture.  Writhing in agony, he 
flings himself upon the burning pyramid, followed by Dejanira, 
who, in despair, sees too late that she has been but a tool in 
the hands of Nessus.

No feeble prose, no characters of black or white, can do 
justice to the closing scenes of this performance.  The roar 
of the chorus, the thunder of the actors' voices, the 
impression of reality left on the breathless spectators by the 
open-air reality of the scene, the ardent sun, the rustling 
wind, the play of light and shade across the stage, the 
invocation of Hercules addressed to the real heavens, not to a 
painted firmament, combined an effect that few among that vast 
concourse will forget.

At the farewell banquet in the arena after the performance, 
Georges Leygues, the captain of the Cadets, in answer to a 
speech from the Prefect, replied: "You ask about our aims and 
purposes and speak in admiration of the enthusiasm aroused by 
the passage of our band!

"Our aims are to vivify the traditions and language of our 
native land, and the memory of a glorious ancestry, to foster 
the love of our little province at the same time as patriotism 
for the greater country.  We are striving for a 
decentralization of art, for the elevation of the stage; but 
above all, we preach a gospel of gayety and healthy laughter, 
the science of remaining young at heart, would teach pluck and 
good humor in the weary struggle of existence, characteristics 
that have marked our countrymen through history!  We have 
borrowed a motto from Lope de Vega (that Gascon of another 
race), and inscribe `PAR LA LANGUA ET PAR L'EPEE' upon our 
banner, that these purposes may be read by the world as it 
runs."




Chapter 30 - The Dinner and the Drama


CLAUDE FROLLO, holding the first printed book he had seen in 
one hand, and pointing with the other to the gigantic mass of 
Notre Dame, dark against the sunset, prophesied "CECI TUERA 
CELA."  One might to-day paraphrase the sentence which Victor 
Hugo put into his archdeacon's mouth, and pointing to the 
elaborately appointed dinner-tables of our generation, assert 
that the Dinner was killing the Drama.

New York undoubtedly possesses at this moment more and better 
constructed theatres, in proportion to its population, than 
any other city on the globe, and, with the single exception of 
Paris, more money is probably spent at the theatre by our 
people than in any other metropolis.  Yet curiously enough, 
each decade, each season widens the breach between our 
discriminating public and the stage.  The theatre, instead of 
keeping abreast with the intellectual movement of our country, 
has for the last thirty years been slowly but steadily 
declining, until at this moment there is hardly a company 
playing in legitimate comedy, tragedy, or the classic 
masterpieces of our language.

In spite of the fact that we are a nation in full literary 
production, boasting authors who rank with the greatest of 
other countries, there is hardly one poet or prose-writer to-
day, of recognized ability, who works for the stage, nor can 
we count more than one or two high-class comedies or lyric 
dramas of American origin.

It is not my intention here to criticise the contemporary 
stage, although the condition of the drama in America is so 
unique and so different from its situation in other countries 
that it might well attract the attention of inquiring minds; 
but rather to glance at the social causes which have produced 
this curious state of affairs, and the strained relations 
existing between our elite (here the word is used in its 
widest and most elevated sense) and our stage.

There can be little doubt that the deterioration in the class 
of plays produced at our theatres has been brought about by 
changes in our social conditions.  The pernicious "star" 
system, the difficulty of keeping stock companies together, 
the rarity of histrionic ability among Americans are 
explanations which have at different times been offered to 
account for these phenomena.  Foremost, however, among the 
causes should be placed an exceedingly simple and prosaic fact 
which seems to have escaped notice.  I refer to the 
displacement of the dinner hour, and the ceremony now 
surrounding that meal.

Forty years ago dinner was still a simple affair, taken at 
hours varying from three to five o'clock, and uniting few but 
the members of a family, holidays and fetes being the rare 
occasions when guests were asked.  There was probably not a 
hotel in this country at that time where a dinner was served 
later than three o'clock, and Delmonico's, newly installed in 
Mr. Moses Grinnell's house, corner of Fourteenth Street and 
Fifth Avenue, was the only establishment of its kind in 
America, and the one restaurant in New York where ladies could 
be taken to dine.  In those tranquil days when dinner parties 
were few and dances a rarity, theatre-going was the one ripple 
on the quiet stream of home life.  Wallack's, at the corner of 
Thirteenth Street and Broadway, Booth's in Twenty-third 
Street, and Fechter's in Fourteenth Street were the homes of 
good comedy and high-class tragedy.

Along about 1870 the more aristocratically-minded New Yorkers 
took to dining at six or six-thirty o'clock; since then each 
decade has seen the dinner recede further into the night, 
until it is a common occurrence now to sit down to that repast 
at eight or even nine o'clock.  Not only has the hour changed, 
but the meal itself has undergone a radical transformation, in 
keeping with the general increase of luxurious living, 
becoming a serious although hurried function.  In consequence, 
to go to the theatre and be present at the rising of the 
curtain means, for the majority possessing sufficient means to 
go often to the play and culture enough to be discriminating, 
the disarrangement of the entire machinery of a household as 
well as the habits of its inmates.

In addition to this, dozens of sumptuous establishments have 
sprung up where the pleasure of eating is supplemented by 
allurements to the eye and ear.  Fine orchestras play nightly, 
the air is laden with the perfume of flowers, a scenic 
perspective of palm garden and marble corridor flatters the 
senses.  The temptation, to a man wearied by a day of business 
or sport, to abandon the idea of going to a theatre, and 
linger instead over his cigar amid these attractive 
surroundings, is almost irresistible.

If, however, tempted by some success, he hurries his guests 
away from their meal, they are in no condition to appreciate a 
serious performance.  The pressure has been too high all day 
for the overworked man and his ENERVEE wife to desire any but 
the lightest tomfoolery in an entertainment.  People engaged 
in the lethargic process of digestion are not good critics of 
either elevated poetry or delicate interpretation, and in 
consequence crave amusement rather than a mental stimulant.

Managers were quick to perceive that their productions were no 
longer taken seriously, and that it was a waste of time and 
money to offer high-class entertainments to audiences whom any 
nonsense would attract.  When a play like THE SWELL MISS 
FITZWELL will pack a New York house for months, and then float 
a company on the high tide of success across the continent, it 
would be folly to produce anything better.  New York 
influences the taste of the country; it is in New York really 
that the standard has been lowered.

In answer to these remarks, the question will doubtless be 
raised, "Are not the influences which it is asserted are 
killing the drama in America at work in England or on the 
Continent, where people also dine late and well?"

Yes, and no!  People abroad dine as well, undoubtedly; as 
elaborately?  Certainly not!  With the exception of the 
English (and even among them dinner-giving has never become so 
universal as with us), no other people entertain for the 
pleasure of hospitality.  On the Continent, a dinner-party is 
always an "axe-grinding" function.  A family who asked people 
to dine without having a distinct end in view for such an 
outlay would be looked upon by their friends and relatives as 
little short of lunatics.  Diplomatists are allowed certain 
sums by their governments for entertaining, and are formally 
dined in return by their guests.  A great French lady who is 
asked to dine out twice a week considers herself fortunate; a 
New York woman of equal position hardly dines at home from 
December 1 to April 15, unless she is receiving friends at her 
own table.

Parisian ladies rarely go to restaurants.  In London there are 
not more than three or four places where ladies can be taken 
to dine, while in this city there are hundreds; our people 
have caught the habit of dining away from home, a custom 
singularly in keeping with the American temperament; for, 
although it costs more, it is less trouble!

The reason why foreigners do not entertain at dinner is 
because they have found other and more satisfactory ways of 
spending their money.  This leaves people abroad with a number 
of evenings on their hands, unoccupied hours that are 
generally passed at the theatre.  Only the other day a 
diplomatist said to me, "I am surprised to see how small a 
place the theatre occupies in your thoughts and conversation.  
With us it is the pivot around which life revolves."

From one cause or another, not only the wealthy, but the 
thoughtful and cultivated among us, go less each year to the 
theatre.  The abstinence of this class is the most 
significant, for well-read, refined, fastidious citizens are 
the pride of a community, and their influence for good is far-
reaching.  Of this elite New York has more than its share, but 
you will not meet them at the play, unless Duse or Jefferson, 
Bernhardt or Coquelin is performing.  The best only tempts 
such minds.  It was by the encouragement of this class that 
Booth was enabled to give HAMLET one hundred consecutive 
evenings, and Fechter was induced to linger here and build a 
theatre.

In comparison with the verdicts of such people, the opinions 
of fashionable sets are of little importance.  The latter long 
ago gave up going to the play in New York, except during two 
short seasons, one in the autumn, "before things get going," 
and again in the spring, after the season is over, before they 
flit abroad or to the country.  During these periods "smart" 
people generally attend in bands called "theatre parties," an 
infliction unknown outside of this country, an arrangement 
above all others calculated to bring the stage into contempt, 
as such parties seldom arrive before the middle of the second 
act, take ten minutes to get seated, and then chat gayly among 
themselves for the rest of the evening.

The theatre, having ceased to form an integral part of our 
social life, has come to be the pastime of people with nothing 
better to do, - the floating population of our hotels, the 
shop-girl and her young man enjoying an evening out.  The 
plays produced by the gentlemen who, I am told, control the 
stage in this country for the moment, are adapted to the 
requirements of an audience that, having no particular 
standard from which to judge the literary merits of a play, 
the training, accent, or talent of the actors, are perfectly 
contented so long as they are amused.  To get a laugh, at any 
price, has become the ambition of most actors and the dream of 
managers.

A young actress in a company that played an American 
translation of MME.  SANS GENE all over this continent asked 
me recently what I thought of their performance.  I said I 
thought it "a burlesque of the original!"  "If you thought it 
a burlesque here in town," she answered, "it's well you didn't 
see us on the road.  There was no monkey trick we would not 
play to raise a laugh."

If one of my readers doubts the assertion that the better 
classes have ceased to attend our theatres, except on rare 
occasions, let him inquire about, among the men and women 
whose opinions he values and respects, how many of last 
winter's plays they considered intellectual treats, or what 
piece tempted them to leave their cosy dinner-tables a second 
time.  It is surprising to find the number who will answer in 
reply to a question about the merits of a play EN VOGUE, "I 
have not seen it.  In fact I rarely go to a theatre unless I 
am in London or on the Continent!"

Little by little we have taken to turning in a vicious and 
ever-narrowing circle.  The poorer the plays, the less clever 
people will make the effort necessary to see them, and the 
less such elite attend, the poorer the plays will become.

That this state of affairs is going to last, however, I do not 
believe.  The darkest hour is ever the last before the dawn.  
As it would he difficult for the performances in most of our 
theatres to fall any lower in the scale of frivolity or 
inanity, we may hope for a reaction that will be deep and far-
reaching.  At present we are like people dying of starvation 
because they do not know how to combine the flour and water 
and yeast before them into wholesome bread.  The materials for 
a brilliant and distinctly national stage undoubtedly exist in 
this country.  We have men and women who would soon develop 
into great actors if they received any encouragement to devote 
themselves to a higher class of work, and certainly our great 
city does not possess fewer appreciative people than it did 
twenty years ago.

The great dinner-giving mania will eat itself out; and 
managers, feeling once more that they can count on 
discriminating audiences, will no longer dare to give garbled 
versions of French farces or feeble dramas as compiled from 
English novels, but, turning to our own poets and writers, 
will ask them to contribute towards the formation of an 
American stage literature.

When, finally, one of our poets gives us a lyric drama like 
CYRANO DE BERGERAC, the attractions of the dinner-table will 
no longer be strong enough to keep clever people away from the 
theatre, and the following conversation, which sums up the 
present situation, will become impossible.

BANKER (to Crushed Tragedian). - No, I haven't seen you act.  
I have not been inside a theatre for two years!

C.T. - It's five years since I've been inside a bank!




Chapter 31 - The Modern ASPASIA


MOST of the historic cities of Europe have a distinct local 
color, a temperament, if one may be allowed the expression, of 
their own.  The austere calm of Bruges or Ghent, the sensuous 
beauty of Naples, attract different natures.  Florence has 
passionate devotees, who are insensible to the artistic grace 
of Venice or the stately quiet of Versailles.  In Cairo one 
experiences an exquisite BIEN ETRE, a mindless, ambitionless 
contentment which, without being languor, soothes the nerves 
and tempts to indolent lotus-eating.  Like a great hive, Rome 
depends on the memories that circle around her, storing, like 
bees, the centuries with their honey.  Each of these cities 
must therefore leave many people unmoved, who after a passing 
visit, wander away, wondering at the enthusiasm of the 
worshippers.

Paris alone seems to possess the charm that bewitches all 
conditions, all ages, all degrees.  To hold the frivolous-
minded she paints her face and dances, leading them a round of 
folly, exhaustive alike to health and purse.  For the student 
she assumes another mien, smiling encouragement, and urging 
him upward towards the highest standards, while posing as his 
model.  She takes the dreaming lover of the past gently by the 
hand, and leading him into quiet streets and squares where she 
has stored away a wealth of hidden treasure, enslaves him as 
completely as her more sensual admirers.

Paris is no less adored by the vacant-minded, to whom neither 
art nor pleasure nor study appeal.  Her caprices in fashion 
are received by the wives and daughters of the universe as 
laws, and obeyed with an unwavering faith, a mute obedience 
that few religions have commanded.  Women who yawn through 
Italy and the East have, when one meets them in the French 
capital, the intense manner, the air of separation from things 
mundane, that is observable in pilgrims approaching the shrine 
of their deity.  Mohammedans at Mecca must have some such 
look.  In Paris women find themselves in the presence of those 
high priests whom they have long worshipped from a distance.  
It is useless to mention other subjects to the devotee, for 
they will not fix her attention.  Her thoughts are with her 
heart, and that is far away.

When visiting other cities one feels that they are like honest 
married women, living quiet family lives, surrounded by their 
children.  The French Aspasia, on the contrary, has never been 
true to any vow, but has, at the dictate of her passions, 
changed from royal and imperial to republican lovers, and back 
again, ruled by no laws but her caprices, and discarding each 
favorite in turn with insults when she has wearied of him.  
Yet sovereigns are her slaves, and leave their lands to linger 
in her presence; and rich strangers from the four corners of 
the earth come to throw their fortunes at her feet and bask a 
moment in her smiles.

Like her classic prototype, Paris is also the companion of the 
philosophers and leads the arts in her train.  Her palaces are 
the meeting-places of the poets, the sculptors, the 
dramatists, and the painters, who are never weary of 
celebrating her perfections, nor of working for her adornment 
and amusement.

Those who live in the circle of her influence are caught up in 
a whirlwind of artistic production, and consume their brains 
and bodies in the vain hope of pleasing their idol and 
attracting her attention.  To be loved by Paris is an ordeal 
that few natures can stand, for she wrings the lifeblood from 
her devotees and then casts them aside into oblivion.  Paris, 
said one of her greatest writers, "AIME A BRISER SES IDOLES!"  
As Ulysses and his companions fell, in other days, a prey to 
the allurements of Circe, so our powerful young nation has 
fallen more than any other under the influence of the French 
siren, and brings her a yearly tribute of gold which she 
receives with avidity, although in her heart there is little 
fondness for the giver.

Americans who were in Paris two years ago had an excellent 
opportunity of judging the sincerity of Parisian affection, 
and of sounding the depth and unselfishness of the love that 
this fickle city gives us in return for our homage.  Not for 
one moment did she hesitate, but threw the whole weight of her 
influence and wit into the scale for Spain.  If there is not 
at this moment a European alliance against America it is not 
from any lack of effort on her part towards that end.

The stand taken by LA VILLA LUMIERE in that crisis caused many 
naive Americans, who believed that their weakness for the 
French capital was returned, a painful surprise.  They 
imagined in the simplicity of their innocent hearts that she 
loved them for themselves, and have awakened, like other rich 
lovers, to the humiliating knowledge that a penniless neighbor 
was receiving the caresses that Croesus paid for.  Not only 
did the entire Parisian press teem at that moment with covert 
insults directed towards us, but in society, at the clubs and 
tables of the aristocracy, it was impossible for an American 
to appear with self-respect, so persistently were our actions 
and our reasons for undertaking that war misunderstood and 
misrepresented.  In the conversation of the salons and in the 
daily papers it was assumed that the Spanish were a race of 
noble patriots, fighting in the defence of a loved and loyal 
colony, while we were a horde of blatant cowards, who had long 
fermented a revolution in Cuba in order to appropriate that 
coveted island.

When the Spanish authorities allowed an American ship 
(surprised in one of her ports by the declaration of war) to 
depart unharmed, the fact was magnified into an act of almost 
ideal generosity; on the other hand, when we decided not to 
permit privateering, that announcement was received with 
derisive laughter as a pretentious pose to cover hidden 
interests.  There is reason to believe, however, that this 
feeling in favor of Spain goes little further than the press 
and the aristocratic circles so dear to the American 
"climber"; the real heart of the French nation is as true to 
us as when a century ago she spent blood and treasure in our 
cause.  It is the inconstant capital alone that, false to her 
role of liberator, has sided with the tyrant.

Yet when I wander through her shady parks or lean over her 
monumental quays, drinking in the beauty of the first spring 
days, intoxicated by the perfume of the flowers that the night 
showers have kissed into bloom; or linger of an evening over 
my coffee, with the brilliant life of the boulevards passing 
like a carnival procession before my eyes; when I sit in her 
theatres, enthralled by the genius of her actors and 
playwrights, or stand bewildered before the ten thousand 
paintings and statues of the Salon, I feel inclined, like a 
betrayed lover, to pardon my faithless mistress: she is too 
lovely to remain long angry with her.  You realize she is 
false and will betray you again, laughing at you, insulting 
your weakness; but when she smiles all faults are forgotten; 
the ardor of her kisses blinds you to her inconstancy; she 
pours out a draught that no other hands can brew, and clasps 
you in arms so fair that life outside those fragile barriers 
seems stale and unprofitable.




Chapter 32 - A Nation in a Hurry


IN early days of steam navigation on the Mississippi, the 
river captains, it is said, had the playful habit, when 
pressed for time or enjoying a "spurt" with a rival, of 
running their engines with a darky seated on the safety-valve.

One's first home impression after a season of lazy Continental 
travelling and visiting in somnolent English country houses, 
is that an emblematical Ethiopian should be quartered on our 
national arms.

Zola tells us in NOUVELLE CAMPAGNE that his vivid impressions 
are all received during the first twenty-four hours in a new 
surrounding, - the mind, like a photographic film, quickly 
losing its sensibility.

This fleeting receptiveness makes returning Americans 
painfully conscious of nerves in the home atmosphere, and the 
headlong pace at which our compatriots are living.

The habit of laying such faults to the climate is but a poor 
excuse.  Our grandparents and their parents lived peaceful 
lives beneath these same skies, undisturbed by the morbid 
influences that are supposed to key us to such a painful 
concert pitch.

There was an Indian summer languor in the air as we steamed up 
the bay last October, that apparently invited repose; yet no 
sooner had we set foot on our native dock, and taken one good 
whiff of home air, than all our acquired calm disappeared.  
People who ten days before would have sat (at a journey's end) 
contentedly in a waiting-room, while their luggage was being 
sorted by leisurely officials, now hustle nervously about, 
nagging the custom-house officers and egging on the porters, 
as though the saving of the next half hour were the prime 
object of existence.

Considering how extravagant we Americans are in other ways it 
seems curious that we should be so economical of time!  It was 
useless to struggle against the current, however, or to 
attempt to hold one's self back.  Before ten minutes on shore 
had passed, the old, familiar, unpleasant sensation of being 
in a hurry took possession of me!  It was irresistible and 
all-pervading; from the movements of the crowds in the streets 
to the whistle of the harbor tugs, everything breathed of 
haste.  The very dogs had apparently no time to loiter, but 
scurried about as though late for their engagements.

The transit from dock to hotel was like a visit to a new 
circle in the INFERNO, where trains rumble eternally overhead, 
and cable cars glide and block around a pale-faced throng of 
the damned, who are forced, in expiation of their sins, to 
hasten forever toward an unreachable goal.

A curious curse has fallen upon our people; an "influence" is 
at work which forces us to attempt in an hour just twice as 
much as can be accomplished in sixty minutes.  "Do as well as 
you can," whispers the "influence," "but do it quickly!"  That 
motto might be engraved upon the fronts of our homes and 
business buildings.

It is on account of this new standard that rapidity in a 
transaction on the Street is appreciated more than correctness 
of detail.  A broker to-day will take more credit for having 
received and executed an order for Chicago and returned an 
answer within six minutes, than for any amount of careful 
work.  The order may have been ill executed and the details 
mixed, but there will have been celerity of execution to boast 
of

The young man who expects to succeed in business to-day must 
be a "hustler," have a snap-shot style in conversation, 
patronize rapid transit vehicles, understand shorthand, and 
eat at "breathless breakfasts."

Being taken recently to one of these establishments for "quick 
lunch," as I believe the correct phrase is, to eat buckwheat 
cakes (and very good they were), I had an opportunity of 
studying the ways of the modern time-saving young man.

It is his habit upon entering to dash for the bill-of-fare, 
and give an order (if he is adroit enough to catch one of the 
maids on the fly) before removing either coat or hat.  At 
least fifteen seconds may be economized in this way.  Once 
seated, the luncher falls to on anything at hand; bread, cold 
slaw, crackers, or catsup.  When the dish ordered arrives, he 
gets his fork into it as it appears over his shoulder, and has 
cleaned the plate before the sauce makes its appearance, so 
that is eaten by itself or with bread.

Cups of coffee or tea go down in two swallows.  Little piles 
of cakes are cut in quarters and disappear in four mouthfuls, 
much after the fashion of children down the ogre's throat in 
the mechanical toy, mastication being either a lost art or 
considered a foolish waste of energy.

A really accomplished luncher can assimilate his last quarter 
of cakes, wiggle into his coat, and pay his check at the desk 
at the same moment.  The next, he is down the block in pursuit 
of a receding trolley.

To any one fresh from the Continent, where the entire 
machinery of trade comes to a stand-still from eleven to one 
o'clock, that DEJEUNER may be taken in somnolent tranquillity, 
the nervous tension pervading a restaurant here is prodigious, 
and what is worse - catching!  During recent visits to the 
business centres of our city, I find that the idea of eating 
is repugnant.  It seems to be wrong to waste time on anything 
so unproductive.  Last week a friend offered me a "luncheon 
tablet" from a box on his desk.  "It's as good as a meal," he 
said, "and so much more expeditious!"

The proprietor of one down-town restaurant has the stock 
quotations exhibited on a black-board at the end of his room; 
in this way his patrons can keep in touch with the "Street" as 
they hurriedly stoke up.

A parlor car, toward a journey's end, is another excellent 
place to observe our native ways.  Coming from Washington the 
other day my fellow-passengers began to show signs of 
restlessness near Newark.  Books and papers were thrown aside; 
a general "uprising, unveiling" followed, accompanied by our 
objectionable custom of having our clothes brushed in each 
other's faces.  By the time Jersey City appeared on the 
horizon, every man, woman, and child in that car was jammed, 
baggage in hand, into the stuffy little passage which precedes 
the entrance, swaying and staggering about while the train 
backed and delayed.

The explanation of this is quite simple.  The "influence" was 
at work, preventing those people from acting like other 
civilized mortals, and remaining seated until their train had 
come to a standstill.

Being fresh from the "other side," and retaining some of my 
acquired calm, I sat in my chair!  The surprise on the faces 
of the other passengers warned me, however, that it would not 
be safe to carry this pose too far.  The porter, puzzled by 
the unaccustomed sight, touched me kindly on the shoulder, and 
asked if I "felt sick"!  So now, to avoid all affectation of 
superiority, I struggled into my great-coat, regardless of 
eighty degrees temperature in the car, and meekly joined the 
standing army of martyrs, to hurry, scampering with them from 
the still-moving car to the boat, and on to the trolley before 
the craft had been moored to its landing pier.

In Paris, on taking an omnibus, you are given a number and the 
right to the first vacant seat.  When the places in a "bus" 
are all occupied it receives no further occupants.  Imagine a 
traction line attempting such a reform here!  There would be a 
riot, and the conductors hanged to the nearest trolley-poles 
in an hour!

To prevent a citizen from crowding into an over-full vehicle, 
and stamping on its occupants in the process, would be to 
infringe one of his dearest privileges, not to mention his 
chance of riding free.

A small boy of my acquaintance tells me he rarely finds it 
necessary to pay in a New York car.  The conductors are too 
hurried and too preoccupied pocketing their share of the 
receipts to keep count.  "When he passes, I just look blank!" 
remarked the ingenious youth.

Of all the individuals, however, in the community, our idle 
class suffer the most acutely from lack of time, though, like 
Charles Lamb's gentleman, they have all there is.

From the moment a man of leisure, or his wife, wakens in the 
morning until they drop into a fitful slumber at night, their 
day is an agitated chase.  No matter where or when you meet 
them, they are always on the wing.

"Am I late again?" gasped a thin little woman to me the other 
evening, as she hurried into the drawing-room, where she had 
kept her guests and dinner waiting.  "I've been so driven all 
day, I'm a wreck!"  A glance at her hatchet-faced husband 
revealed the fact that he, too, was chasing after a stray 
half-hour lost somewhere in his youth.  His color and most of 
his hair had gone in its pursuit, while his hands had acquired 
a twitch, as though urging on a tired steed.

Go and ask that lady for a cup of tea at twilight; ten to one 
she will receive you with her hat on, explaining that she has 
not had time to take it off since breakfast.  If she writes to 
you, her notes are signed, "In great haste," or "In a tearing 
hurry."  She is out of her house by half-past eight on most 
mornings, yet when calling she sits on the edge of her chair, 
and assures you that she has not a moment to stay, "has only 
run in," etc.

Just what drives her so hard is a mystery, for beyond a vague 
charity meeting or two and some calls, she accomplishes 
little.  Although wealthy and childless, with no cares and few 
worries, she succumbs to nervous prostration every two or 
three years, "from overwork."

Listen to a compatriot's account of his European trip!  He 
will certainly tell you how short the ocean crossing was, 
giving hours and minutes with zest, as though he had got ahead 
of Father Time in a transaction.  Then follows a list of the 
many countries seen during his tour.

I know a lady lying ill to-day because she would hurry herself 
and her children, in six weeks last summer, through a 
Continental tour that should have occupied three months.  She 
had no particular reason for hurrying; indeed, she got ahead 
of her schedule, and had to wait in Paris for the steamer; a 
detail, however, that in no way diminished madame's pleasure 
in having done so much during her holiday.  This same lady 
deplores lack of leisure hours, yet if she finds by her 
engagement book that there is a free week ahead, she will run 
to Washington or Lakewood, "for a change," or organize a party 
to Florida.

To realize how our upper ten scramble through existence, one 
must also contrast their fidgety way of feeding with the 
bovine calm in which a German absorbs his nourishment and the 
hours Italians can pass over their meals; an American dinner 
party affords us the opportunity.

There is an impression that the fashion for quickly served 
dinners came to us from England.  If this is true (which I 
doubt; it fits too nicely with our temperament to have been 
imported), we owe H.R.H. a debt of gratitude, for nothing is 
so tiresome as too many courses needlessly prolonged.

Like all converts, however, we are too zealous.  From oysters 
to fruit, dinners now are a breathless steeplechase, during 
which we take our viand hedges and champagne ditches at a dead 
run, with conversation pushed at much the same speed.  To be 
silent would be to imply that one was not having a good time, 
so we rattle and gobble on toward the finger-bowl winning-
post, only to find that rest is not there!

As the hostess pilots the ladies away to the drawing-room, she 
whispers to her spouse, "You won't smoke long, will you?"  So 
we are mulcted in the enjoyment of even that last resource of 
weary humanity, the cigar, and are hustled away from that and 
our coffee, only to find that our appearance is a signal for a 
general move.

One of the older ladies rises; the next moment the whole 
circle, like a flock of frightened birds, are up and off, 
crowding each other in the hallway, calling for their 
carriages, and confusing the unfortunate servants, who are 
trying to help them into their cloaks and overshoes.

Bearing in mind that the guests come as late as they dare, 
without being absolutely uncivil, that dinners are served as 
rapidly as is physically possible, and that the circle breaks 
up as soon as the meal ends, one asks one's self in wonder 
why, if a dinner party is such a bore that it has to be 
scrambled through, COUTE QUE COUTE, we continue to dine out?

It is within the bounds of possibility that people may have 
reasons for hurrying through their days, and that dining out A 
LA LONGUE becomes a weariness.

The one place, however, where you might expect to find people 
reposeful and calm is at the theatre.  The labor of the day is 
then over; they have assembled for an hour or two of 
relaxation and amusement.  Yet it is at the play that our 
restlessness is most apparent.  Watch an audience (which, be 
it remarked in passing, has arrived late) during the last ten 
minutes of a performance.  No sooner do they discover that the 
end is drawing near than people begin to struggle into their 
wraps.  By the time the players have lined up before the 
footlights the house is full of disappearing backs.

Past, indeed, are the unruffled days when a heroine was 
expected (after the action of a play had ended) to deliver the 
closing ENVOI dear to the writers of Queen Anne's day.  
Thackeray writes:-


THE PLAY IS DONE!  THE CURTAIN DROPS,
SLOW FALLING TO THE PROMPTER'S BELL!
A MOMENT YET THE ACTOR STOPS,
AND LOOKS AROUND, TO SAY FAREWELL!


A comedian who attempted any such abuse of the situation to-
day would find himself addressing empty benches.  Before he 
had finished the first line of his epilogue, most of his 
public would be housed in the rapid transit cars.  No talent, 
no novelty holds our audiences to the end of a performance.

On the opening night of the opera season this winter, one 
third of the "boxes" and orchestra stalls were vacant before 
Romeo (who, being a foreigner, was taking his time) had 
expired.

One overworked matron of my acquaintance has perfected an 
ingenious and time-saving combination.  By signalling from a 
window near her opera box to a footman below, she is able to 
get her carriage at least two minutes sooner than her 
neighbors.

During the last act of an opera like TANN-HAUSER or FAUST, in 
which the inconsiderate composer has placed a musical gem at 
the end, this lady is worth watching.  After getting into her 
wraps and overshoes she stands, hand on the door, at the back 
of her box, listening to the singers; at a certain moment she 
hurries to the window, makes her signal, scurries back, hears 
Calve pour her soul out in ANGES PURS, ANGES RADIEUX, yet 
manages to get down the stairs and into her carriage before 
the curtain has fallen.

We deplore the prevailing habit of "slouch"; yet if you think 
of it, this universal hurry is the cause of it.  Our cities 
are left unsightly, because we cannot spare time to beautify 
them.  Nervous diseases are distressingly prevalent; still we 
hurry! hurry!! hurry!!! until, as a diplomatist recently 
remarked to me, the whole nation seemed to him to be but five 
minutes ahead of an apoplectic fit.

The curious part of the matter is that after several weeks at 
home, much that was strange at first becomes quite natural to 
the traveller, who finds himself thinking with pity of 
benighted foreigners and their humdrum ways, and would resent 
any attempts at reform.

What, for instance, would replace for enterprising souls the 
joy of taking their matutinal car at a flying leap, or the 
rapture of being first out of a theatre?  What does part of a 
last act or the "star song" matter in comparison with five 
minutes of valuable time to the good?  Like the river 
captains, we propose to run under full head of steam and get 
there, or b- explode!




Chapter 33 - The Spirit of History


BUILDINGS become tombs when the race that constructed them has 
disappeared.  Libraries and manuscripts are catacombs where 
most of us might wander in the dark forever, finding no issue.  
To know dead generations and their environments through these 
channels, to feel a love so strong that it calls the past 
forth from its winding-sheet, and gives it life again, as 
Christ did Lazarus, is the privilege only of great historians.

France is honoring the memory of such a man at this moment; 
one who for forty years sought the vital spark of his 
country's existence, striving to resuscitate what he called 
"the great soul of history," as it developed through 
successive acts of the vast drama.  This employment of his 
genius is Michelet's title to fame.

In a sombre structure, the tall windows of which look across 
the Luxembourg trees to the Pantheon, where her husband's bust 
has recently been placed, a widow preserves with religious 
care the souvenirs of this great historian.  Nothing that can 
recall either his life or his labor is changed.

Madame Michelet's life is in strange contrast with the ways of 
the modern spouse who, under pretext of grief, discards and 
displaces every reminder of the dead.  In our day, when the 
great art is to forget, an existence consecrated to a memory 
is so rare that the world might be the better for knowing that 
a woman lives who, young and beautiful, was happy in the 
society of an old man, whose genius she appreciated and 
cherished, who loves him dead as she loved him living.  By her 
care the apartment remains as it stood when he left it, to die 
at Hyeres, - the furniture, the paintings, the writing-table.  
No stranger has sat in his chair, no acquaintance has drunk 
from his cup.  This woman, who was a perfect wife and now 
fills one's ideal of what a widow's life should be, has 
constituted herself the vigilant guardian of her husband's 
memory.  She loves to talk of the illustrious dead, and tell 
how he was fond of saying that Virgil and Vico were his 
parents.  Any one who reads the GEORGICS or THE BIRD will see 
the truth of this, for he loved all created things, his ardent 
spiritism perceiving that the essence which moved the ocean's 
tides was the same that sang in the robin at the window during 
his last illness, which he called his "little captive soul."

The author of LA BIBLE DE L'HUMANITE had to a supreme degree 
the love of country, and possessed the power of reincarnating 
with each succeeding cycle of its history.  So luminous was 
his mind, so profound and far-reaching his sympathy, that he 
understood the obscure workings of the mediaeval mind as 
clearly as he appreciated Mirabeau's transcendent genius.  He 
believed that humanity, like Prometheus, was self-made; that 
nations modelled their own destiny during the actions and 
reactions of history, as each one of us acquires a personality 
through the struggles and temptations of existence, by the 
evolving power every soul carries within itself.

Michelet taught that each nation was the hero of its own 
drama; that great men have not been different from the rest of 
their race - on the contrary, being the condensation of an 
epoch, that, no matter what the apparent eccentricities of a 
leader may have been, he was the expression of a people's 
spirit.  This discovery that a race is transformed by its 
action upon itself and upon the elements it absorbs from 
without, wipes away at a stroke the popular belief in 
"predestined races" or providential "great men" appearing at 
crucial moments and riding victorious across the world.

An historian, if what he writes is to have any value, must 
know the people, the one great historical factor.  Radicalism 
in history is the beginning of truth.  Guided by this light of 
his own, Michelet discovered a fresh factor heretofore 
unnoticed, that vast fermentation which in France transforms 
all foreign elements into an integral part of the country's 
being.  After studying his own land through the thirteen 
centuries of her growth, from the chart of Childebert to the 
will of Louis XVI., Michelet declared that while England is a 
composite empire and Germany a region, France is a 
personality.  In consequence he regarded the history of his 
country as a long dramatic poem.  Here we reach the inner 
thought of the historian, the secret impulse that guided his 
majestic pen.

The veritable hero of his splendid Iliad is at first ignorant 
and obscure, seeking passionately like OEdipus to know 
himself.  The interest of the piece is absorbing.  We can 
follow the gradual development of his nature as it becomes 
more attractive and sympathetic with each advancing age, 
until, through the hundred acts of the tragedy, he achieves a 
soul.  For Michelet to write the history of his country was to 
describe the long evolution of a hero.  He was fond of telling 
his friends that during the Revolution of July, while he was 
making his translation of Vico, this great fact was revealed 
to him in the blazing vision of a people in revolt.  At that 
moment the young and unknown author resolved to devote his 
life, his talents, his gift of clairvoyance, the magic of his 
inimitable style and creative genius, to fixing on paper the 
features seen in his vision.

Conceived and executed in this spirit, his history could be 
but a stupendous epic, and proves once again the truth of 
Aristotle's assertion that there is often greater truth in 
poetry than in prose.

Seeking in the remote past for the origin of his hero, 
Michelet pauses first before THE CATHEDRAL.  The poem begins 
like some mediaeval tale.  The first years of his youthful 
country are devoted to a mystic religion.  Under his ardent 
hands vast naves rise and belfries touch the clouds.  It is 
but a sad and cramped development, however; statutes restrain 
his young ardor and chill his blood.  It is not until the boy 
is behind the plough in the fields and sunlight that his real 
life begins - a poor, brutish existence, if you will, but 
still life.  The "Jacques," half man and half beast, of the 
Middle Ages is the result of a thousand years of suffering.

A woman's voice calls this brute to arms.  An enemy is 
overrunning the land.  Joan the virgin - "my Joan," Michelet 
calls her - whose heart bleeds when blood is shed, frees her 
country.  A shadow, however, soon obscures this gracious 
vision from Jacques's eyes.  The vast monarchical incubus 
rises between the people and their ideal.  Our historian turns 
in disgust from the later French kings.  He has neither time 
nor heart to write their history, so passes quickly from Louis 
XI. to the great climax of his drama - the Revolution.  There 
we find his hero, emerging at last from tyranny and 
oppression.  Freedom and happiness are before him.  Alas! his 
eyes, accustomed to the dim light of dungeons, are dazzled by 
the sun of liberty; he strikes friend and foe alike.

In the solitary galleries of the "Archives" Michelet communes 
with the great spirits of that day, Desaix, Marceau, Kleber, - 
elder sons of the Republic, who whisper many secrets to their 
pupil as he turns over faded pages tied with tri-colored 
ribbons, where the cities of France have written their 
affection for liberty, love-letters from Jacques to his 
mistress.  Michelet is happy.  His long labor is drawing to an 
end.  The great epic which he has followed as it developed 
through the centuries is complete.  His hero stands hand in 
hand before the altar with the spouse of his choice, for whose 
smile he has toiled and struggled.  The poet-historian sees 
again in the FETE DE LA FEDERATION the radiant face of his 
vision, the true face of France, LA DULCE.

Through all the lyricism of this master's work one feels that 
he has "lived" history as he wrote it, following his subject 
from its obscure genesis to a radiant apotheosis.  The 
faithful companion of Michelet's age has borne witness to this 
power which he possessed of projecting himself into another 
age and living with his subject.  She repeats to those who 
know her how he trembled in passion and burned with patriotic 
emotion in transcribing the crucial pages of his country's 
history, rejoicing in her successes and depressed by her 
faults, like the classic historian who refused with horror to 
tell the story of his compatriots' defeat at Cannae, saying, 
"I could not survive the recital."

"Do you remember," a friend once asked Madame Michelet, "how, 
when your husband was writing his chapters on the Reign of 
Terror, he ended by falling ill?"

"Ah, yes!" she replied.  "That was the week he executed 
Danton.  We were living in the country near Nantes.  The 
ground was covered with snow.  I can see him now, hurrying to 
and fro under the bare trees, gesticulating and crying as he 
walked, `How can I judge them, those great men?  How can I 
judge them?'  It was in this way that he threw his `thousand 
souls' into the past and lived in sympathy with all men, an 
apostle of universal love.  After one of these fecund hours he 
would drop into his chair and murmur, `I am crushed by this 
work.  I have been writing with my blood!'"

Alas, his aged eyes were destined to read sadder pages than he 
had ever written, to see years as tragic as the "Terror."  He 
lived to hear the recital of (having refused to witness) his 
country's humiliation, and fell one April morning, in his 
retirement near Pisa, unconscious under the double shock of 
invasion and civil war.  Though he recovered later, his 
horizon remained dark.  The patriot suffered to see party 
spirit and warring factions rending the nation he had so often 
called the pilot of humanity's bark, which seemed now to be 
going straight on the rocks.  "FINIS GALLIAE," murmured the 
historian, who to the end lived and died with his native land.

Thousands yearly mount the broad steps of the Pantheon to lay 
their wreaths upon his tomb, and thousands more in every 
Gallic schoolroom are daily learning, in the pages of his 
history, to love FRANCE LA DULCE.





End of the Project Gutenberg eText The Ways Of Men

